2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Design of Visualization tool for Grid Based Parametric Study

Eva Pajorová and Ladislav Hluchý
Institute of Informatics
Slovak Academy of Sciences
Bratislava, Slovakia
utrrepaj@savba.sk
visualization tool. In our access, all client’s requirements are
considered. The procedure consists of a new way of
adaptive visualization to Grid environment. Specifically,
new grid applications and visualization tool are included in
the GRID computing as an additional application activated
as a second.

Abstract - On-line visualization tool for Grid-based Parametric
Studies as a sequence application in Grid environment was
designed. The design is tested actually on the second
applications those have the character as a Parametric studies.
Examples are from simulation of the Oort-cloud formation in a
complete Solar system. The dynamical evolution of the O-ort
cloud and the Protoplanetary disk is tested and controled by
using the 3D Visualization tool in time when the Grid
application is still running.

II. PARAMETRIC STUDY IN GRID
Parametric studies execute one application many times
with different sets of input parameters. Parameter describes
sets of input values. Each set of input values specifies values
for one application execution, which is referred to as a one
job. The Parametric studies create one of bigger group of
applications computing in grid environment.

Keywords-Grid, 3D_visualization, Solar system

I. INTRODUCTION
Astronomical simulations on which is the On-line
visualization tool actual test are the simulations in the scope
of collaboration between Astronomical Institute of SAS,
Catania Observatory and Adam Mickiewicz University in
Poznan. The simulation was ported to EGEE by Institute of
Informatics SAS [2] and [3].
For a long time computing of Intensive Parametric
Studies one of a main problem is to control if executions
converge to the correct way. Client naturally wants to see
the intermediate results. Such problem calls for correct way
of submission representing a reduction of the number of
jobs as a visual control of the results in time while the
application is running. The described tool is able to visualize
the partial results of the application. The user can
completely control the job during execution, and can change
the input parameters while execution is still running. Both
tools - tool for submission, designed before and continued
sequence visualization tool provided complete solution of
the specific main problem in Grid environment.
There are some related works concerned with the
problems to visualize the applications in Grid environment
in which computations are exceedingly long. One of them is
GRID visualization Kernel developed in the Johannes.
Kepler Univ. Linz in Austria [6],[9]. There is an efforts to
provide a grid-based parallel visualization environment to
visualize a massive dataset in parallel. The visualization
environment is implemented as a visualization service on
the Grid. For example the Proxy-Based Parallel
Visualization in a Grid Environment with PC Clusters
solved by Zhengge Huang; Guanghua Song and Yao Zheng
[4],[5]. With respect to our experiences in the GRID
computing and visualization we aim to develop a new
978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.28

A. Astronomical simulation
One of Grid-based astronomical application is the
dynamical evolution of proto-planetary disc and formation
of Oort cloud during the period from 1 to 1000 Myr in first
phase and during 2Gyr in second phase [1].
An unsolved questions of the Solar System (SS)
cosmogony is the origin of comets and minor bodies with
the respect to the SS evolution. In the past, authors predicted
the existence of reservoirs of these objects and made an
effort for explaining the origin and the subsequent evolution
of these reservoirs. There have been developed several
partial theories for clearing this problem up. Recently, the
researchers try to bring a unified theory of theformation of
small-body reservoirs in the SS: the Kuiper Belt, the
Scattered Disc situated beyond the orbit of Neptune. We
developed in our application, a new inproved model for
explaining the formation of the Oort Cloud., one has to
assume the dynamical evolution of a high number of
particles under the gravitational influence of the giant
planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptunethe Galactic tide
and nearly passing alien stars. Before our work, there have
been performed only 2 similar simulations, by Duncan et al.
[7] in 1987 and by Dones et al. [8] in 2004. In our
application, we assumed 10 038 test particles, several times
more than in the previous simulations. Our extensive
simulation required a very large computing capacity. The
completing our model on a single 2.8GHz CPU would last
about 21 years. Using the GRID infrastructure, the whole
computation lasted 5 months. So, it was more than 40 times
faster.

175

TABLE I - Complete Submitting and Visualization

The result of our simulation is the dynamical evolution of
orbits of test particles during the first giga year of the Solar
System lifetime. The detailed study of this first giga year
evolution results in a general agreement with the results of
previously mentioned models as well as in new facts and
questions.After the using of the mentioned visualization tool
in the described three phases, we obtain the ouputs
structured for rendering in the files with VRML syntax,
which can be rendered by lot of VRML browsers. The
visualization tool consists of a lot of shell scripts, which are
activated as executable files. The tool, developed by us and
used for the astronomical application, provides the pictures
from simulation of the evolution of proto-planetary disc
from 1 to 1000 Myr. Specifically, Fig. 1 shows the evolution
of proto-planetary disc in time 1 Myr and Fig. 2 in time
1000 Myr.
On the both figures we concrete can to see that during
the time 1000 Myr the particles from inside were replaced to
outside of spheres.
III.

TABLE II. Submitting part

ON-LINE VISUALIZATION TOOL

For submission of parametric simulation the Easy-to-use
framework based on technologies available in EGEE was
designed before. The input datasets are stored in Storage
Element (SE). Pilot jobs (workers) are running the
application code in cycle with the input datasets downloaded
from the SE. After processing, workers store the output
datasets to output folder in SE; the user only needs to list the
contents of the folder to check the progress. The designed
on-line vis-framework (vis-visualization) continues as a
sequence Grid application. Output datasets in the output
folder in SE are input datasets for the following visapplication. Pilot vis-jobs (vis-workers) are running the visapplication code and the output datasets in required formats
are stored to the output folder in SE. The management of
vis-workers is done using automatic job management script
running in the background on User Interface. User can
render data on browser whose plug-in is installed, and to
make the visual control. After visual control in time 1000
Myr the execution continued. User can render data on
browser, of which plug-in is installed. It means the user can
modify the running computations to continue, stop or
change the input parameters and thus to control whether the
execution converges to the correct way. Pictures on Fig. 3
represent the simulation of Protoplanetary disk near Alfa
Proxima and Alf.Centaury A&B. Fig 4. and Fig. 5
represents Virtual model of Oort cloud during time 1. Gyr.
Fig.6 represent model of the Protoplanetary disk from
distance 30000 AU.

TABLE III. On-line visualization part

A. Submission and visualization in Grid structure
Submission and visualization as a complete process
described Table I. Submission of the bulk of the linked jobs
was emplaced on the Storage element. Storage element is a
Data server. Script started on the User Interface controlled
another script on Computing Element. Workers worked till
the inputs stored on the Storage Element are completed. See
Table II - first half part process of submission.

B.

176

On line visualization tool

Visualization is designed as a plug in module. Client
asking for visualization is as a Visualization client. Outputs
data on the Storage element are as a inputs data for
visualization jobs. Configuration file will be included by
Visualization tool for the application. Therewith can be
activated control script. Workers to modify data to the
visualize formats, but not only, workers also to prepare the
typical visualization scenes. Client can to render such scenes
on the browser and he can make the visual control and to
modify executions. See Table III.
IV.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

CONCLUSION

The presented effort is still in-progress. Computation
intensive tasks in the development version were tested with
astronomical data. We used the EGEE and its virtual
organization TRIGRID. We try to build up a practical way
for grid users they just have to put their application code and
input data into the grid, configure and start the processing,
and after the processing they can download the output data.
We plan to use the tools for porting the applications with
similar characteristics to EGEE.

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
[8]

This work was partially supported by RPEU project
GRID-tools No. 0024-06 and VEGA projects 2/0211/09.

[9]

Figure 1 Evolution of proto-planetary disk and formation Oort Cloud
- time 1 Myr

Chambers J.E. "A hybrid symplectic integrator that permits
closeencounters between massive bodies." Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society 304 (1999), 793-799
Marián Jakubík, Luboš Neslušan, Piotr A. Dybczyňski,
Guiseppe Leto, The formation of outer comet Oort cloud.
Simulation the first giga-zear of the evolution. 3rd
International Workshop on Grid Computing for Complex
Problems. Page 17 – 24.
Neslušan L., Leto G., Jakubík M., Paulech T. "The model of
the current stellar perturbations on the Oort Cloud. Second
International Workshop on Grid Computing for Complex
Problems. Nov. 27.-29., Institute of Informatics, Slovak Acad.
Sci., Bratislava, 2006, pp. 52-59.
Zhengge Huang; Guanghua Song; Yao Proxy-Based Parallel
Visualization in a Grid Environment with PC Clusters
Zheng Computer and Computational Sciences, 2006. IM
SCCS apos; 06. First International Multi-Symposiums on
Volume 1, Issue 20-24 June 2006 Page(s): 683 – 687Digital
Object Identifier 10.1109/IMSCCS.2006.107
Christoph Anthes and Jens Volkert. “inVRs - A Framework
for Building Interactive Networked Virtual Reality Systems.”
In International Conference (HPCC), pages 894-904, Munich,
Germany, September 2006
Duncan M., Quinn T., Tremaine S. "The formationand extent
of the Solar System comet cloud."Astronomical Journal 94
(1987), pp. 1330-1338
Dones L., Levison H.F., Duncan M.J., Weisssman
P.R."Simulations of the formation of the Oort Cloud. I. The
reference model.“, Icarus (2005), in press
Heinzlreiter Paul, Kranzmuller Dieter,The Visualization
services on the Grid. The Grid visualization kernel. Clusters
and Computational Grids for Scientific Computing. Workshop
N 4, Faverges-de-laTour, France.

Figure 2 Evolution of proto-planetary disk and Oort Cloud - time:
1000 Myr

177

Figure 3. Alfa CenA&B and Alfa Proxima

Figure 4. Virtual models of the formation Oort Cloud time: 1000 Myr

178

Figure 5. Virtual model of the asteroids - formation Oort Cloud time: 1000 Myr

Figure 6. Protoplanetary disk from distance 30000 AU

179

