2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

TagReel: A Visualization of Tag Relations among User Interests
in the Social Tagging System

Joohee Bae

Kyungwon Lee

Integrated Design Laboratory, Department of Media
Graduate School of Ajou University
Suwon, Korea
jooaya0211@ajou.ac.kr

Division of Digital Media
Ajou University
Suwon, Korea
kwlee@ajou.ac.kr
are used to describing resources of interest by means of one
or more freely chosen keywords and exploring every user
and tags with the purpose of discovering various resources of
interest [5]. Accordingly, tags are considered as user interests
and collecting a new resource also thought as user activities
of interests.

Abstract— Social tagging systems provide users with the ability
to share information and extend their field of knowledge. The
purpose of this paper is to explore the tag relations of user
interest in these systems and examine the semantic relations of
tag usage in terms of user interests. To do this, a classifying
method was used to characterize words into seven classes.
Experiments were limited to the five areas of interests: music,
photography, games, books and videos. Samples were taken
from 50 English-language web pages in the social bookmarking
service Delicious. The top 7 tags were extracted from each web
page that was tagged as music, photography, games, books and
videos. Via the results of the tag analysis of this study,
relationship between tags and user interests were
demonstrated. TagReel employed a radial visualization method,
which has the advantage of giving an overview of the whole
cluster of connection among tags. TagReel can represent the
semantic concept of connection between tags and between
interests. It can contribute to raising the cognitive power and
awareness of tag usage in various categories and show the
relative weight of tags.

The first part of this paper investigates the structure of
social tagging system and illustrates relationships among
users, tags, and resources. After ascertaining the major
patterns, the second section identifies the classification of
tags and conducts a qualitative study of the distribution of
tag types. In the last section, the visualization of tags in the
social tagging system is demonstrated and summarizes the
overall discussion.
II.

A. Social Tagging
Social tagging refers to the tags people use to collect the
various keywords to organize a subject. Tagging makes it
possible to annotate freely various resources such as images,
videos and web pages. Although there is no rule to making
words, users become used to sharing and organizing in an
unauthorized way in the social tagging system. The
importance of social tagging is that it is a reliable way to
perceive participatory behavior. This is because users tag
proper words to the documents even when no one is looking,
for the purpose of sharing with other users and for their own
retrieval.
Weinberger (2005) insists that tagging causes people who
belong to the social community to form their interests and to
develop a similarity of view [6]. Thus, if users have the same
tags, it represents that they are sharing deep commonalities
with each other. The purpose of tagging is to manage their
own data as well as to share and understand other users’
thoughts and ideas.
Therefore, tagging is regarded as a method of
communication. For these reasons, websites based on the
social tagging system, such as Flicker, Delicious, Last.fm
and YouTube, have advantages for observing personal
interests as well as public interests, simultaneously.

Keywords-visualization; social tagging; tag; resource; user;
social bookmarking

I.

INTRODUCTION

Social tagging has received a considerable amount of
interest in recent years due to its advantages in sharing
information. Through this system, users create a collection of
items of personal interest and assign individual keywords to
each of the resources in that collection [1].
Individual keywords, referred to as tags, relate to
different types of content or to the work of a user. In contrast
to categorization, tagging represents a new approach to
organizing information. Nonhierarchical classification allows
data to be freely gathered, allows easy access, and has the
ability to move directly to other types of content. A study of
tagging by Riddle (2005) found that tagging helps to increase
personal recall and that it has beneficial social effects while
allowing for serendipity and novelty [2]. Tagging can freely
represent a user’s own ideas as keywords and can allow
users to manage information individually. Additionally,
tagging groups related URLs together [3] and the same tags
also cross over diverse fields of resources [4]. Thus, it has
the potential to connect a variety of types of content. Users
978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.69

RELATED WORK

437

therefore, this classification is applicable to the social
tagging service Delicious.
The proposed classification of tags is comprised of seven
classes, presented as shown below.

B. The Structure of the Social Tagging System
Social tagging systems have three fundamental elements:
users, tags and resources [7]. The details are shown in Table
1.
TABLE I.
Elements

•

ELEMENTS OF THE SOCIAL TAGGING SYSTEM
Define

Example value

Users

People who are tagging
on the system

Tags

Keywords that freely
annotate various contents

Resources

The subjects being tagged

•

ID
Subjects, document
types, tasks, opinions,
purposes
URLs, texts, videos,
photos

•
•

Social tagging breaks the conventional indexing that uses
one-on-one relationships, but instead provides information
on multiple relationships through tags [4].
It lets users discover new contents, and it also connects
the new users with others who have the same tags. Fig. 1
shows the relationship among users, tags, and resources.
These three elements are banded together, making it possible
to easily navigate the related topics or new contents.

•
•
•

B. The Data
For this study, samples were obtained from Delicious, a
good example of the social tagging system. Delicious is one
of the well-known sites of the social bookmarking service.
This site has the ability to manage a list of bookmarks on a
webpage and to share that list. In addition, it is possible to
add a list created by other users to an original list. Thus, it
easily catches the users’ interest, spontaneously. To discover
the relationship among interests, the datasets were limited to
five interests: music, photography, games, books and videos.
The representative tags were then determined for each
interest. The representative tags were from the popular tag of
each category. Via popular tags, a considerable amount of
tags are allowed to be gathered and have a bias towards
access to the more frequently used ones.
Resources that are known as bookmarks were collected
from April, 2009. The number of URLs was randomly
examined. They were 50 English-language web pages that
were tagged with music, photography, games, books and
videos, respectively. Samples are extracted from the top 7
tags per each webpage. The analysis of a tag frequency from
resources conducted by Kipp and Campbell (2006) found
that the top 7 tags were important parts to describe a specific
site. In his study, consensus determined the top 7 tags as
most representative of the document [3]. The extracted
samples are described in Table 2 in brief.
The number of tags from Table 2 excluded duplicate tags.
For example, if users tag a web page twice with the same
tags, it would only count as one tag. Therefore, those
samples of tags are unique.

Figure 1. Relationship among users, tags.

III.

Subject and topic: Tags that describe the main
service offered by a website such as camera, tutorial
and magazine.
Type of a website: Tags that are connected with
types of a website, for example, blog, community
and flash.
Title of a website: Tags are identical to a site title or
name. These are related to the name of company or
URLs, for instance, Nintendo, Yahoo and Stock.
Facet of a page: Tags that emphasize the
characteristic point of view and the information that
the user needs, such as reviews, history and
wallpaper.
Type of content: Tags that are connected with types
of contents such as images, audio, midi and video.
Impression: Tags that express users’ opinion,
emotion and feeling when visiting the site. For
example, nature, urban and technology.
Task: Tags for the purpose of using the collected
sites in terms of personal activities.

METHOD

A. Classification of Tags
To analyze characterized patterns of the existing tags,
classification of tags were investigated for the present study.
Golder and Huberman (2006) initially investigated tag
categorization concerning functional scheme and he found a
number of tagging patterns [8].
This study expands Golder’s concept to include the
relationship between the resources and users’ thoughts. The
new classification of the present study focuses on the
characteristics of web pages tagged by Delicious users;

438

TABLE II.

EXTRACTED SAMPLES FROM DELICIOUS

Category

Representative tag

Number of tags

Music

music

206

Photography

photography

179

Game

games

205

Book

books

215

Video

video

205

D. Distribution of Tag Types
Here are some results as follows.

C. Method of a Tag Analysis
In this section, distribution of tags was examined through
seven classes of tag classification to discover the relationship
among tags that reflected user interests. The method in this
study was classifying the data from Delicious into seven
classes by considering the characteristics of the resources.
The method was to reduce the error that is caused by an
equivocal meaning; the author visited the websites and
searched the terms. That was a laborious work and needed a
lot of care. Tags are subjective, with the consequence that the
method of a qualitative study was conducted rather than a
quantitative.
The method of a qualitative study was decided on to
identify what kinds of tags are clustered around a specific
type and to compare distribution of seven classes in the five
areas of interests. Although tags are same, it would be
possible to understand the differences by means of
characteristics of categories. For example, ‘news’ is
considered a subject and topic in the area of music, however,
in the case of games, it may be thought of as facets of a page.
TABLE III.

Figure 2. Distribution of seven classes

Fig. 2 represents the tag variation of the five areas of
interests in seven classes. Those samples of tags are
concentrated comparatively on the classes of a subject and
topic, and facet of a page. However, there are some
differences in each category which depend on the
characteristics of music, photography, games, book and
video. For example, music tends to concentrate on the
subject and topic class. And lots of tags are exposed on the
facets of a webpage in the area of photography. In the case of
the area of game tags are exposed on the facets of a page
higher than other classes as well as a type of a website class
is the lowest in the seven classes. Both book and video have
a great deal of tags in the two classes of a subject and topic,
and facet of a page. Furthermore, task class is the lowest part
in the area of video. Table 3 shows a list of example tags
from a result.

EXAMPLE OF TAGS IN SEVEN CLASSES

Seven Classes

Music

Photography

Game

Book

Video

Subject and topic

radio, reviews,
records, download

camera, tutorial,
guide, portfolio,

emulator,
abandonware

bookcovers,
library, magazine

Advertising,
converter,

Type of a website

blog,mp3blog,
community

blog, flash,
community

blog, flash

blog, catalog, wiki

screencast,
community

Title of a website

pandora, mtv,
youtube, emusic

flicker, timelapse,
candid, stock

nintendo, brain,
phonics, bitorrent

pelican, mercurial,
martinfowler

balloon, graphisme,
voki

Facet of a page

streaming, free,
discography

free, howto,
sharing, history

freeware, p2p,
crowdsourcing

encyclopedia,
literature,
bookmarking

History, parody,
tracking

Type of content

audio, mp3, video,
sound, midi

photos, images,
digital, graphics

flash, music

fantasy, pdf,
textbooks

audio, documentary,
film

Impression

vintage,
aggregator, culture

nature, urban,
inspiration

fun, interactive,
humor, funny,

charity, functional,
spirituality

inspiration, trends,
cool

Task

storage, shopping,
player

retouch, tools,
reference

reading, shopping,
benchmark

reference, research,
tools

traning, ideas, tools

439

IV.

Five dots are the maximum, and that represents that the
same tags are exposed more than 16 times in a class. It is
possible to intuitively compare the distribution of tag
frequencies in this one picture.
Starting at the 3 o'clock position in a clockwise direction,
the five areas of interests are separated by space:
photography, music, videos, games and books.
Color bars in the inner part of the circle represent the tag
distribution of seven classes. Starting at the red color in a
clockwise direction, these seven classes are situated thusly:
subjects and topics, types of a website, titles of a website,
facets of a page, types of content, impressions and tasks. The
length of each color bar indicates the proportion of the
number of tags in a specific class.
Curved lines in the circle show the connection between
tags. The color of the relation curves, connecting blue to blue
or red to red, demonstrates linking between tags in the same
class as well as in the other interest areas. For example, it
may connect ‘download’ (of the subject and topics class) in
the category of music to ‘download’ (of the facet of a page
class) in the category of game. The gradient colors of the
relation curves, connecting blue to red or orange to green,
show the linking between tags in the different classes as well
as in the different interest areas. They show the divergences
of tag usage among the five categories with connecting the
same words.

VISUALIZATION

From the results of the tag analysis of this study,
relationships between tags and user interests were
demonstrated. TagReel - the visualization of this study represents the distribution of Delicious tags in seven classes,
and shows the differences of a tag usage within the five areas
of interests: music, photography, games, books and videos.
A. An overview and comparison of visualizing tag
relations
TagReel tracks a variety of global flows in a circular
interface. First, it tries to let the users compare the variety of
distribution of seven classes in five areas of interests. Second,
it shows the differences of the same tags’ usage in different
categories. Third, frequencies of tags are represented to
distinguish how or what the popular tags are, intuitively.
Fig. 3 is a result of the visualization of tags. This
visualization is able to trace the same tags among the five
areas of music, photography, games, books and videos and
provides insight into key routes within each interest.
Words at the edge of the circle represent unique tags that
were extracted from Delicious. The dots beside the words
indicate the frequency of the tags.

Figure 3. TagReel: Visualization of tag relations in the five areas of interests

440

A curved line of gray illustrates the linking between tags in
the same category as well as in the different classes. For
example, ‘review’ belongs with the class of facets of a page
in the area of game; however, it is also included in a subject
and topic class. These relation curves demonstrate that tags
have a various meanings, even if they are in the same
category.

selected clusters will be highlighted. When users click it one
more time, it will be unselected.
2) Focus + Context: Fous + Context allows users to
show detailed information linked with the context, and it is
also beneficial to focus on other information while users are
interacting [11]. Focus + Context works under the premise
that users want to see both overview and detail view
simultaneously, and these two types of views can be
combined within a single display using a dynamic
interaction [12]. Fig. 6 is an example of the detail view.

B. Radial methods
The concept of radial has been widely applied in
visualization research. Radial visualization [9] is a newly
coined term by Hoffman et al. (1997). It arranges data in an
elliptical way and has visual effects on a variety of subject
areas. A recent study, conducted by Draper et al. (2009),
identified seven design patterns of radial visualization [10].
The present study draws on the idea of a Connected Ringbased visualization scheme, one of the seven design patterns.
The connected ring pattern [10] places nodes around the
edge of the ring and connects nodes with lines. If additional
nodes need to appear, those are optionally located in the
ring’s interior.
This has the advantage of giving an overview of the
whole pattern of connections by viewing relationships
among miscellaneous collections.

D. Visualizing techniques
Fig. 3 was developed in Action Script 3.0 with the XML
(eXtensible Markup Language) data.
1) Curves: The curves were made as parts of circles,
known as 'Arcs', for aesthetic purposes. To make the Arcs,
the Bezier Curve algorithm was used. Fig. 4 is a part of the
programming language for drawing an Arc.

C. Navigations
The visualization of this study allows simple navigation
just by clicking operations.

Figure 4. Action script for drawing an Arc

2) Gradient color: Gradient is represented by measuring
angles between two nodes. The changing point of color is at
the center of a curved line. Fig. 5 shows a detailed
examination of this.

1) Selection: Selection is for the purpose of comparing
two or more areas of categories. When users click the left
button of the mouse on a name of the five categories,

Figure 5. Comparison the two areas of books and videos

Figure 6. Detail View

441

V.

[8]

Scott A. Golder and Bernardo A. Huberman, “Usage patterns of
collaborative tagging systems,” Journal of Information Science, vol.
32, April 2006, pp. 198-208, doi:10.1177/0165551506062337.
[9] Patrick Hoffman, Georges Grinstein, Kenneth Marx, Ivo Grosse, and
Eugene Stanley, “DNA visual and analytic data mining,” In
Proceedings of the 8th IEEE Visualization '97 Conference, IEEE,
October 1997, pp. 437-441, doi:10.1109/VISUAL.1997.663916.
[10] Geoffrey M. Draper, Yarden Livnat, and Richard F. Riesenfeld, “A
survey of radial methods for information visualization,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphic, in press.
[11] Juan C. Dursteler, “Focus + Context,” The digital magazine of
InfoVis.net, April 2002.
[12] Stuart K. Card, Jock D. Mackinlay, and Ben Shneiderman, “Readings
in information visualization: using vision to think,” Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, 1999.

CONCLUSIONS

This paper has dealt with the tag relations of user
interests in the Social Tagging System. First, this paper
determined the relationships among users, tags and resources
in social tagging systems and examined the semantic
relations of tag usage in terms of user interests. Second, to
analyze the characteristics of tags when adding a new web
page to a list, experiments were conducted. Samples were
from the social bookmarking service Delicious. They were
taken from 50 English-language web pages that were tagged
as music, photography, games, books and video, respectively.
Those samples of tags were then classified into seven classes
by considering the characteristics of the resources. Third, via
the result, relationships between tags and user interests were
demonstrated. The radial method was used, and tags were
located around the edge of the ring and connected with lines.
This method easily showed the relationships among
miscellaneous collections and gave an overview of the whole
pattern of connections
TagReel has the ability to compare the variety of
distribution of seven classes in the five areas of interests and
to show the differences of the same tags’ usage in different
categories while tracing the same tags. It also gives a
perspective in which users apply a tag to a webpage and
establish the capacity of expanding a social service that
offers the opportunity to create a new business model.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to specially thank Kunhwan Park, who is
an undergraduate student in Ajou University, for
implementing the application in our study.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

Markus Heckner, Tanja Neubauer, and Christian Wolff, “Tree, funny,
to_read, google: what are tags supposed to achieve?,” In Proceedings
of the 2008 ACM Workshop on Search in Social Media (SSM 08),
ACM, October 2008, pp. 3-10, doi:10.1145/1458583.1458589.
Prentiss Riddle, “Tags: what are they good for?,” The University of
Texas at Austin, December 2005, pp. 1-12.
Margaret E.I. Kipp and D. Grant Campbell, “Patterns and
inconsistencies in collaborative tagging systems: an examination of
tagging practices,” In Proceedings of of the 2006 Annual Meeting of
the American Society for Information Science and Technology
(ASIST 06), November 2006.
Ruey-Ming Chao, Sheng-Wen Lo, and Jia-Nan Chang, “Using tags to
construct the digital resource management system,” Ninth IEEE
International Symposium on Multimedia (ISM 07), IEEE, 2007, pp.
464-469, doi:10.1109/ISM.Workshops.2007.84.
Francesco Ronzano, Andrea Marchetti, and Maurizio Tesconi,
“Tagpedia: a semantic reference to describe and search for web
resources,” Workshop on Social Web and Knowledge Management
(SWKM08), ACM, April 2008.
David Weinberger, “Taxonomies to tags: from trees to piles of
leaves,” Release 1.0, CNET Networks, February 2005.
Harry Halpin, Valentin Robu, and Hana Shepherd, “The complex
dynamics of collaborative tagging,” In Proceedings of the 16th
international conference on World Wide Web (WWW 07), ACM,
May 2007, pp. 211-220, doi:10.1145/1242572.1242602.

442

