Visual Unrolling of Network Evolution
and the Analysis of Dynamic Discourse£
Ulrik Brandes
Dept. Computer & Information Science
University of Konstanz
Ulrik.Brandes@uni-konstanz.de

Abstract
A new method for visualizing the class of incrementally
evolving networks is presented. In addition to the intermediate states of the network it conveys the nature of the
change between them by unrolling the dynamics of the network. Each modification is shown in a separate layer of a
three-dimensional representation, where the stack of layers
corresponds to a time line of the evolution. We focus on discourse networks as the driving application, but our method
extends to any type of network evolving in similar ways.

1. Introduction
Evolving networks are networks that change over time,
thus presenting a unique challenge to network visualization.
They occur in diverse areas such as Web graph analysis, social network analysis, software engineering, and so on, and
are typically visualized using methods from dynamic graph
drawing [13, 5]. These methods usually produce a sequence
of interdependent visualizations that represent intermediate
states of the network and try to preserve the user’s mental
map [15]. Graph animation (see, e.g., [11]) is often used to
lower the cognitive effort required to follow the transition
from one visualization to the next.
If the actual changes occurring between consecutive
states of an evolving network are an integral part of the
data that should be open to analysis, it is certainly not sufficient to compute interdependent layouts and animate between them. To facilitate simultaneous analysis of state and
change, we therefore propose a method in which the evolution of the network is unrolled and each step represented as
a layer in a three-dimensional network visualization.
Our method was developed with a particular application
in mind, the analysis of dynamic discourse, but it is straight£ Research supported in part by a gift from Intel Corporation and by
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under grant BR 2158/1-1.

Steven R. Corman
Hugh Downs School of Human Communication
Arizona State University
steve.corman@asu.edu

forwardly applied to any type of network that evolves in
similar ways. Discourse networks are introduced briefly in
Sect. 2. Our approach to visualizing them, and some illustrative examples, are given in Sect. 3. In Sect. 4 we demonstrate the usage of our method on real-world data. Some
conclusions are offered in Sect. 5.

2. Evolving Discourse Networks
In this section, we extend a recently introduced method
for static text analysis to dynamic discourse such as human
conversations or newsgroup archives. The method is described in some detail to emphasize the need for a visualization method that displays the nature of change that leads
to new states of an evolving network.

2.1. CRA of Static Text
Centering Resonance Analysis (CRA) [9] is a method of
network text analysis [7] that is designed for the study of
complex discourse systems. This encompasses a wide range
of phenomena, including interpersonal conversations, group
discussions, interaction in large organizations, the Internet
and other mass media, as well as even larger social groups.
Though other text analysis methods could be used for
studying discourse, CRA offers distinct advantages in that
it is a representational method that does not rely on contextspecific semantic rules, training sets, or predefined document collections [9]. It produces stand-alone, abstract representations of texts that can be analyzed alone or arbitrarily
combined or compared with other CRA representations.
Let Ì be a grammatically correct text. CRA extracts a
´Î
µ from Ì in the following way. First,
graph ´Ì µ
noun phrases that make up individual sentences are identified using linguistic analysis. Nouns1 and adjectives that
1 We here disregard pronouns because the identity of particular individuals is not especially relevant to the analysis. See [9] for more information
on this choice and its implications.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

make up these noun phrases form the set Î , so that each
vertex corresponds to a word that occurs in Ì . Words are
considered linked if they co-occur inside noun phrases or
occur on adjacent ends of consecutive noun phrases within
a sentence. Accumulating these over all the sentences in a
text yields a network of words comprising the subjects and
objects of the text and how these are related to one another.
The graph ´Ì µ is called the CRA network of text Ì . An
example is shown in Figure 2.

“One of the most essential branches of
English liberty is the freedom of one’s house. A
man’s house is his castle; and whilst he is quiet,
he is as well guarded as a prince in his castle.”
Figure 1. Sample text with highlighted noun
phrases (stemmed words in boldface).

2.2. Importance of Words
Competent writers and speakers deploy words strategically to create a sensible, coherent message. Therefore the
structural positions of words in a CRA network
´Î
µ
reflect their importance or influence in structuring the meanings of the text. While many measures of structural position
are possible, CRA uses a particular measure that reflects the
extent to which a word is involved in chains of association
between other words in the network. Define the betweenness centrality [1, 10], Ú , of a vertex Ú ¾ Î as

words linked by first sentence

´×

words linked by second sentence
×

Ú

¾

Ø

Î

Ø Úµ
´× Øµ

where
´× Øµ and
´× Ø Ú µ are the number of shortest
paths between × and Ø and those that pass through Ú , respectively. Thus, a word with high betweenness is influential because it is greatly involved in channeling flows of meaning
in the network. In the example in Figure 2 nodes are placed
at a distance from the center that reflects their betweenness
centrality, with nodes outside the outer circle having centrality equal to zero. On undirected graphs with Ò vertices
and Ñ edges, betweenness centrality is computed in time
Ç´ÒÑµ [2].

2.3. Dynamic Discourse
CRA has so far been applied to the analysis of static
texts. However, discourse is best thought of as dynamic,
involving a sequence of speaking turns or a set of timeordered written texts (e.g., e-mails, press releases). Advances in computer networking in the last decade have provided unprecedented access to sequences of texts, and advanced voice recognition promises to do the same for spoken communication [6].
The basic CRA framework can be straightforwardly applied to the analysis of dynamic discourse [9]. However,
change is a primary feature of interest, so analyzing a
CRA network of the entire discourse neglects what happens
within turns or texts and the relationship of words between
them and across sets of them. The following is an extension
of CRA to a dynamic setting and referred to as Dynamic
Centering Resonance Analysis (DCRA).

Ì

CRA network ´ µ
according to which ‘house’, ‘freedom’, and ‘castle’
are most influential (highest betweenness centralities)

Figure 2. CRA network extracted from text Ì
in Figure 1. For each sentence, edges inside
noun phrases are shown bold. When visualizing the merged (i.e., a single, static) network,
concentric circles can be used to indicate levels of centrality [3].

2

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

A discourse episode is defined as a sequence Ì
Ë µ composed of slices ËØ which represent, e.g.,
a speaking turn or a serial item of written text. Simply deriving a CRA network ´ËØ µ for each slice would ignore
another crucial feature of discourse, namely the fact that humans have conversational memory [16] for more than one
turn. A parameter is therefore used to represent the depth
of conversational memory appropriate in a given context.
Ø
, we define the
At any given point in time Ø, ½
state of the discourse to be ÌØ
´ËØ  ¼ ·½
ËØ µ where
¼ Ñ Ò Ø , i.e. the text obtained from concatenating
slices in the conversational memory. The importance of
words is relative to the conversational memory, and hence
calculated in each ´ÌØ µ. Thus importance is dynamic and
relative to the changing circumstances of the conversation.
´Ì µµ constitutes the
The sequence ´Ì µ ´ ´Ì½ µ
evolving discourse network.
´Ë½

(a) layers, colors: dynamic discourse slice-by-slice

3. Unrolling Network Evolution
Evolving networks are characterized by the (in general
gradual) change of the state of a network between consecutive points in time. Standard methods for dynamic
graph visualization generate a drawing for each such state
(taking into account the drawings of previous states) and
animate between consecutive states, thus maintaining the
user’s mental map and smoothing the transition from one
state to another. An example of such an approach is [18].
However, the nature of the change that led to a state
cannot be recognized from that state’s visualization. We
propose a visualization method that allows us to simultaneously examine the state of a network and the changes that
led to it by unrolling the sequence of events.

(b) transparency: fading from conversational memory
layout: separation of topics

3.1. Evolutionary Cross-Sections
Networks evolving in discrete steps are composed of
subnetworks that exist at particular points in time. Since
the abstract information inherent to these networks consists
of both the structure of subnetworks and changes between
them, we propose a layered visualization design in which
each newly introduced part of the network is shown in a
layer of its own, and the composition of consecutive layers represents the corresponding state of the network. In
other words, we unroll the dynamics of networks into its
constituent layers.
In dynamic discourse, each slice induces a modification
of the current state through the addition of edges, the potential creation of vertices, and the deletion of edges and
vertices that drop out of conversational memory. The layer
introduced into our visualization at time Ø therefore shows
only the new elements introduced by the corresponding
slice, i.e. ´ËØ µ. By displaying only layers for slices in

(c) column thicknesses: changing importance of words

Figure 3. Visualization design illustrated with
the quote from Figure 2, which is treated as if
sentences were from different speakers. The
sentences have almost disjoint subjects, but
are linked through the topic ‘house’. Hence,
the addition of the second sentence causes
‘house’ to become more influential while decreasing the importance of most other words
with respect to the first layer.
3

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

the current conversational memory, and by making them
semi-transparent, we obtain a visual representation that can
be viewed from the top to infer the entire state ´Ì µ of
the conversation, but also shows the contribution of slices
ËØ  ·½
ËØ with past slices slowly fading away. In Figure 3, each sentence of the quote in Figure 2 is interpreted
as a slice.

only newly introduced vertices can be placed freely, while
all others are fixed at their position in previous layers.
Since this highly constrained, serial layout results in poor
readability of later layers, we take a different approach.
At least today, dynamic discourse analysis is not carried
out in real time, so that all slices of a discourse are available from the beginning. We can therefore compute a
layout of the CRA network ´Ì µ of the entire discourse
Ì ´Ë½
Ë µ, and use its vertex positions for the layout of all states ´ÌØ µ, ½ Ø
.
As our global layout algorithm we choose a spring
embedder variant that corresponds to metric multidimensional scaling of pairwise distances [14], because the results graphically support the intuition of words being close
or distant according to the structure of the discourse. See
Figure 3(b) for an example. The objective is to minimize
the squared differences between distances in the layout and
distances in the graph, weighted by the square of that dis´Î
µ and vertex positions ´ÜÚ µÚ ¾Î
tance. For ´Ì µ
we want to minimize

3.2. Colors and Sizes
Several aspects of a layered visualization can be varied
to enrich its information content. In the context of discourse
networks, the most interesting additional information are
the speakers in each turn, and the changing importance of
words.
We therefore assign a distinct color to each speaker and
border each layer according to whose turn it represents.
Edges are colored according to the speaker inducing them.
Finally, we use the color of the speaker that introduces a
word into the conversational memory for the corresponding
vertex. This is illustrated in Figure 3(a).
As outlined in Sect. 2.2, the current importance of a word
is captured by its betweenness centrality in the current state
of the conversation. The change in centrality is conveyed
by varying the thickness of columns that represent vertices.
Let   and · be the minimum and maximum centrality
score over the entire discourse, then the radius of a vertex Ú
with centrality Ú ´Øµ at time Ø is defined as

Ö  ·

Øµ    

Ú´

·

 

 

 
Ù Ú

¾

Î

ÜÙ   ÜÚ

 
´Ì µ ´

Ù Úµ

´Ì µ ´

Ù Ú µ¾

¡¾

where ´Ì µ ´Ù Ú µ is the length of a shortest path between
Ù and Ú in ´Ì µ. This is an ÆÈ -hard task, so that gradient methods are typically used to obtain a local minimum.
A straightforward implementation runs in time Ç´Ò¾ µ per
iteration, but typically few iterations are required.
An extension in which vertices are added incrementally
is introduced in [8] and shown to have empirically better
performance. In our setting this method is particularly appropriate, because we can introduce vertices one slice at a
time and thus combine the advantages of global and incremental layout according to the evolution of the graph.

¡ ´Ö   Ö  µ
·

where Ö  and Ö· denote the minimum and maximum desired thickness of vertices, so that the entire interval is actually used. In a top-down view, this results in central words
being larger than peripheral words. Figure 3(c) shows how,
when viewed from the side, the changing thickness of a column depicts the centrality profile of a word.
To reduce the complexity of large data sets, an importance threshold can be specified to exclude less important
words from the visualization and emphasize the main structure of the discourse.

4. Application Examples
To evaluate our approach for exploratory analysis of
evolving networks, we are implementing a visualization
system using Java and the Data Structures Library in Java
(JDSL) [17]. Our prototype produces interactive visualizations through the Extended Application Interface (EAI) for
VRML, so that users can move forward and backward in
the discourse and rotate, zoom, and pan the scene to view it
from any point and orientation.
The following are examples in which the system is
used to support Dynamic Centering Resonance Analysis
(DCRA) on recorded conversational data. Any other type
of incrementally evolving networks, in which states are
defined by cross-sections, would be appropriate as well.
While the first example is crafted, the other two are extracts
of real discourses.

3.3. Layout
Any graph layout algorithm can be used to determine
the layout of each layer, and in fact the algorithm should be
chosen in close accordance with the substantive background
of the application generating the graph. In principle, there
is no look-ahead in a conversation and the layout of each
layer should be contingent only on the layout of preceding
layers [4]. However, our column-like representation of vertices prevents subsequent adjustments of positions, so that
4

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 4. Incoherent discourse.

4.1. Incoherence
Figure 5. Bin Laden initiating a topic shift.
An important feature of discourse is coherence. If we
have a sequence of random statements that make sense in
themselves but have nothing to do with one another, these
cannot form a coherent body of discourse. Visual DCRA
should be able to identify these cases, and not create a lot
of artifacts that make them appear integrated or sensible. To
test for this we created a set of five arbitrary clips from unrelated sources and treated these as slices of a discourse. The
results are shown in Figure 4. These clips clearly occupy
distinct areas in the layout and colors representing them are
mostly confined to their own slices. There are only a few
cases where the slices connect due to chance common occurrence of the same word.

4.2. Two-Party Conversation
Figure 6. “. . . we calculated in advance the
number of casualties from the enemy. . . ”

The first recorded example demonstrates the ability of
our visualizations to indicate significant interventions by
participants in a conversation. We analyzed a transcript of a
video-taped conversation between Osama bin Laden and a
man identified as “Shaykh”, which was released in December 2001.2 The conversation begins with pleasantries and
is structured almost exclusively by “Shaykh”. After several turns, bin Laden makes an abstract reference to Koranic
stories, thus marking a topic shift to reminiscing about the
World Trade Center attacks. The DCRA visualization in
Figure 5 shows this transition clearly. The red nodes introduced by “Shaykh” can still be seen on recent layers, but
the top layer has words introduced by bin Laden, shown in
yellow, that connect to only two of “Shaykh”’s words (‘allah’ and ‘people’). Otherwise, new words are introduced
and connections are mostly between them.

The examples in Figures 6 and 7 display other crucial excerpts from the conversation. While the first is probably the
most frequently cited statement in the conversation, the second is an example of how a theme is picked up and reflected
upon from a different angle.

4.3. Group Discussion
A different kind of change in discourse can be described
more as gradual movement than wholesale change. Here
we are interested in processes where an idea expressed at
one point in a conversation is linked to an idea at a subsequent point in the conversation, and so on in a chaining-out
fashion. In a DCRA visualization, such a structure appears
as a staircase-like configuration. A brief real-life example
of this form comes from a transcript of a graduate seminar discussion on group decisions support systems (GDSS).
Figure 8 shows one part of the discussion where the issue

2 The transcript has been published by CNN at http://www.cnn.
com/2001/US/12/13/tape.transcript. The first segment of the
transcript was subjected to DCRA, with small disconnected components of
the network (paths of length at most four) have been removed and evaluated separately.

5

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 7. After bin Laden has completed his account of the ‘event’, “Shaykh” reflects on coverage in
the ‘news’ and other reactions.

Figure 8. Topical movement in group discussion illustrated by a “staircase” structure: ‘technology’–
‘student’–‘quick’–‘process’.

6

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

References

was whether results from GDSS studies using students are
valid for real organizational settings.
In the slice below the surface, a student had made a
rather complicated point about how students were unlikely
to feel the same pressure to make quality decisions using the technology as in real organizations. On the top
slice the instructor draws out the point that students are
more willing to engage in quick processes to get their decisions made. This forms a small staircase, ‘technology’–
‘student’–‘quick’–‘process’, representing a movement in
the conversation from students’ relationship with the technology to their relationship with a particular kind of process.

[1] J. M. Anthonisse. The rush in a directed graph. Technical Report BN 9/71, Stichting Mathematisch Centrum, Amsterdam,
Oct. 1971.
[2] U. Brandes. A faster algorithm for betweenness centrality.
Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 25(2):163–177, 2001.
[3] U. Brandes, P. Kenis, and D. Wagner. Communicating centrality in policy network drawings. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2002. To appear.
[4] U. Brandes and D. Wagner. A Bayesian paradigm for dynamic graph layout. In Proc. 5th Intl. Symp. Graph Drawing
(GD ’97), LNCS 1353:236–247. Springer, 1997.
[5] J. Branke. Dynamic graph drawing. In M. Kaufmann and
D. Wagner, editors, Drawing Graphs: Methods and Models,
LNCS Tutorial 2025:228–246. Springer, 2001.
[6] E. W. Brown, S. Srinivasan, A. Coden, D. Ponceleon, and
J. W. Cooper. Toward speech as a knowledge resource.
Knowledge Management, 40(4), 2001.
[7] K. M. Carley. Network text analysis: The network position of concepts. In C. W. Roberts, editor, Text Analysis for
the Social Sciences: Methods for Drawing Statistical Inferences from Texts and Transcripts, pages 79–100. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 1997.
[8] J. D. Cohen. Drawing graphs to convey proximity: An
incremental arrangement method. ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction, 4(3):197–229, 1997.
[9] S. R. Corman, T. Kuhn, R. D. McPhee, and K. J. Dooley. Studying complex discursive systems: Centering resonance analysis of communication. Human Communication
Research, 28(2):157–206, 2002.
[10] L. C. Freeman. A set of measures of centrality based on
betweenness. Sociometry, 40:35–41, 1977.
[11] C. Friedrich and M. E. Houle. Graph drawing in motion II. Proc. 9th Intl. Symp. Graph Drawing (GD ’01),
LNCS 2265:220–231. Springer, 2002.
[12] S. Havre, E. Hetzler, P. Whitney, and L. Nowell. ThemeRiver: Visualizing thematic changes in large document
collections. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1):9–20, 2002.
[13] I. Herman, G. Melanc¸on, and M. S. Marshall. Graph visualization and navigation in information visualization: a survey.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
6(1):24–43, 2000.
[14] T. Kamada and S. Kawai. An algorithm for drawing general
undirected graphs. Information Processing Letters, 31:7–15,
1989.
[15] K. Misue, P. Eades, W. Lai, and K. Sugiyama. Layout adjustment and the mental map. Journal on Visual Languages
and Computing, 6(2):183–210, 1995.
[16] L. Stafford, V. R. Waldron, and L. L. Infield. Actor-observer
differences in conversational memory. Human Communication Research, 15:590–611, 1989.
[17] R. Tamassia, M. T. Goodrich, L. Vismara, M. Handy, G. Shubina, R. F. Cohen, B. Hudson, R. S. Baker, N. Gelfand, and
U. Brandes. JDSL: The data structures library in Java. Dr.
Dobb’s Journal, 323:21–31, April 2001.
[18] K.-P. Yee, D. Fisher, R. Dhamija, and M. Hearst. Animated
exploration of dynamic graphs with radial layout. Proc. IEEE
Symp. Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS ’01), pages
32–50, 2001.

5. Conclusions
We have presented a visualization approach for evolving networks and applied it to visualize networks created
by Dynamic Centering Resonance Analysis (DCRA).
Based on the above examples, we conclude that visualizations of DCRA are capable of indicating prominent
features of discourse. They can show major interventions
where a participant in a conversation changes the direction of a conversation. They can also show the more subtle
movement involved in chaining ideas across turns. Finally,
they can indicate cases where discourse is incoherent. Assessment of its potential for detecting more complex
features of discourse awaits further research. For instance, it is planned to apply visual DCRA to court-room
negotiations to identify or highlight strategies used by
lawyers in particular cases. Potential other application include newsgroup postings, organizational communication,
and press releases. The sequence of importance scores for
topics generated by DCRA can also be used as input for visualization approaches that do not depict network structure
(see, e.g., [12]).
Visual unrolling exploits a characteristic property of dynamic discourse and similar types of evolving networks,
namely that change occurs only through the addition of new
edges and vertices, and the deletion of the least recently introduced vertices and edges in the current state. It will be
interesting to extend our method to types of networks that
evolve with arbitrary deletions.
Another direction for future research is the extension to
real-time situations, e.g. by using dynamic graph layouts
methods that produce suitable layouts of layers subject to
many fixed positions inherited from earlier layers, or by relaxing the latter constraint and allowing vertex-representing
columns to bend.
Acknowledgments. We thank Odilo Oehmichen for implementing large parts of the DCRA visualization prototype.
7

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

