Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2009
H.-C. Hege, I. Hotz, and T. Munzner
(Guest Editors)

Volume 28 (2009), Number 3

Lifted Domain Coloring
Konstantin Poelke† and Konrad Polthier†
Freie Universität Berlin, Germany

Abstract
Complex-valued functions are fundamental objects in complex analysis, algebra, differential geometry and in
many other areas such as numerical mathematics and physics. Visualizing complex functions is a non-trivial
task since maps between two-dimensional spaces are involved whose graph would be an unhandy submanifold
in four-dimensional space. The present paper improves the technique of “domain coloring” in several aspects:
First, we lift domain coloring from the complex plane to branched Riemann surfaces, which are essentially the
correct domain for most complex functions. Second, we extend domain coloring to the visualization of general
2-valued maps on surfaces. As an application of such general maps we visualize the Gauss map of surfaces as
domain colored plots and establish a link to current surface parametrization techniques and texture maps. Third,
we adjust the color pattern in domain and in image space to produce higher quality domain colorings. The new
color schemes specifically enhance the display of singularities, symmetries and path integrals, and give better
qualitative measures of the complex map.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): Applications [Computer Graphics]: Visualization in
Mathematics, Illustrative Visualization, Complex Functions, Riemann Surfaces—

1. Introduction and Related Work
Even today, visualizing complex functions is a tricky task,
mostly due to dimensional reasons. In geometry and differential calculus of real variables, we are used to imagine real
valued functions as graphs over a domain, which is often part
of the Euclidean space or more general a submanifold, e.g.
a surface in R3 . Unfortunately, this does not work even for
functions f : R2 → R2 and therefore not for complex functions f : C → C, so one has to look for other techniques
visualizing these functions. The most intuitive way is probably examining separately the domain and the range of the
function, e.g. one can examine grid transformations induced
by the function. An alternative may be treating the modulus or the argument as a real valued function and plotting its
graph over a domain U ⊂ C ∼
= R2 , but this would only reflect one property, as it is kind of a dimension reduction and
does not describe the function as a whole. Farris [Far] intro-

† Supported by DFG Research Center MATHEON “Mathematics
for key technologies”
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

duced a technique known as “domain coloring”, which plots
a function right onto the domain. In this paper, we extend
this technique by the following points:
• We introduce Riemann surfaces as appropriate domains
and color them in order to get an entire understanding of
multivalued functions.
• We transfer the method of domain coloring to arbitrary
parametrized surfaces in R3 by examining their corresponding Gauss maps.
• Based on the established domain coloring techniques, we
provide a coloring holding “indicators” allowing us to get
a detailed impression of a function’s behavior and generate insightful, high-quality plots.
The term “domain coloring” has been coined by Farris
[Far], who uses simple color gradients without further features. The plots of Pergler [Per] and Lima da Silva [dS] are of
better quality, but still lack some important information, e.g.
they do not provide any information about distorsion or conformality. Lundmark [Lun04] gives a detailed introduction
and uses a color scheme revealing several important aspects
of complex functions. In particular, he plots a grid in order

736

K. Poelke & K. Polthier / Lifted Domain Coloring

to detect non-conformal points. Hlavacek [Hla] provides a
gallery of complex function plots, using color schemes similar to Lundmark’s and Pergler’s.
2. Improving Domain Coloring
To begin with, we explain briefly the established method
of domain coloring. Domain coloring, as the name suggests, makes use of a color spectrum to compensate the
missing dimension. More precisely, we discard the approach
of plotting the function somehow on an independent axis
(as we would do when we plot the modulus over the domain, for instance), but plot it right onto the domain, i.e.
we color the domain in a particular way. Now, the effectiveness and flexibility of domain coloring lies in the choice
of an adequate reference color scheme. In the general case,
we are given a function f : U → V with two sets U,V , e.g.
manifolds, and choose a coloring col : V → HSB, where
HSB denotes the HSB color space. Then, for any z ∈ U
we compute f (z), evaluate col( f (z)) and assign the resulting color to the preimage z. When we are done, we
have a colored domain where at each point the color tells
us where this point gets mapped to. Since the HSB space
is closely related to polar coordinates on the solid sphere
B1 = {r(cos ϕ cos θ, cos ϕ sin θ, sin ϕ)|0 ≤ r ≤ 1} (hue can
be easily associated with θ, saturation with r and brightness with ϕ), it makes good sense to decompose col into
col = c ◦ p with c : B1 → HSB, p : V → B1 . In classic domain
coloring, one has U ⊂ C,V ⊂ C (where C := C∪{∞} and p
can be chosen to be the inverse stereographic projection, for
instance. Using our more general setting, we cannot only extend the coloring to Riemann surfaces U, which are the true
domains of complex functions, but to arbitrary maps, e.g.
parametrized regular surfaces V ⊂ R3 . In a way, the choice
of p then determines the characteristics of f , which are carried to the color space, see section 7 for examples.

mark, it is a good idea to display some elements helping you
to keep track of the growth. This is done by blending the
color plot with semi-transparent, repeated rings whose gradients go from dark to bright, representing the direction of
growth. By taking the fractional part of the logarithm of the
modulus, we obtain a value between 0 and 1 which we use as
the ring’s brightness. Note that by taking the logarithm, we
assure a quite regular behavior of these rings around poles.
However, the exponential map counteracts the logarithm and
one surely can imagine functions whose growth is so strong
that even the logarithm cannot keep the modulus under control. This is a general problem of coloring schemes which
work pointwise and do not treat the function as a whole. At
least, the important class of meromorphic functions can be
tackled this way and one is free to choose an adequate basis
of the logarithm, depending on the maximal pole order of f .
As one of our contributions, we add k rays starting at zero
and running through the k-th unit roots in order to get a feeling of the distortion induced by f . By doing this, we divide our domain into k equally sized segments. Therefore,
by comparison with the colored range of f , we get an impression which regions get compressed or stretched by f and
which ones are reasonably maintained.

(a) Growth indicators

(b) The reference coloring

Figure 1: Indicators of our reference coloring

In the following, we want the mapping c to be such that
the south pole of B1 gets mapped to black, the equator to
fully saturated and brightened colors and the north pole to
pure white. If p is the inverse stereographic projection, this
corresponds to zero being black and infinity being white.
This gives us an idea on how to define saturation and brightness values. Furthermore, we like to preserve the canonical
hue-argument relation and obtain a continuous color gradient passing through the whole hue spectrum, as can be seen
in figures 1 and 2.

In a way, each ray is a shortest connection between zero
and infinity. Hence, following a gray line in the picture above
from a zero to a pole means following a most steeply rising path of the modulus. More precisely, if z = x + iy, then
we follow the gradient ∇ | f | |z=x+iy = (∂x | f (z)| , ∂y | f (z)|),
which points into the direction of the most steepest ascent.
Thus, we can carefully predict the relief of a function without explicitly plotting its modulus as a graph over a twodimensional domain.

So far, we are able to detect stationary points (zeros and
poles) of a given function and the qualitative distortion of
the domain: comparing the colors of the plot with the corresponding points of the reference coloring gives us a hint of
how the argument has changed. Another property of some
interest is in general the direction of growth of the function’s
modulus, as the spots denoting zeros and poles give only a
very coarse impression. (It is understood that the modulus
will grow between a zero and a pole.) Referring to Lund-

Having introduced radial lines, now it is obvious to add
concentric circles, yielding a kind of a polar grid blended
over the reference coloring, which is in a way the canonical grid one can lay onto the Riemann sphere. When circling
around such a contour (or level) line, the modulus is constant. The contour gives you another hint on how to imagine
a complex function: similarly to the circles representing the
direction of growth, the level lines tell you about the growth
behavior in every direction. If these lines are nested circles
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

K. Poelke & K. Polthier / Lifted Domain Coloring

sharing the same center, then one observes a (locally) uniform increase or decrease of the function’s modulus. Note
that if f is meromorphic, every closed contour line contains
at least one zero or pole in its interior. In particular, if many
contour lines concentrate around a point z0 , then z0 is either
a (multiple) zero or a pole. This observation is known as the
“maximum principle” and plays a decisive role in the study
of PDEs.
Keep in mind that in the reference coloring the radial lines
intersect each level line in a right angle. We will refer to this
observation below. The following plots of the next sections
use the coloring shown in figure 1b (we chose the rays to run
through the 12th unit roots). For better orientation, we have
highlighted the unit circle. This coloring now offers a rich

Figure 2: Our reference coloring on the Riemann sphere
set of characteristics we will benefit from in the following,
and we will obtain more detailed, informative plots than any
previous works provide. Yet, in some cases one may want
to emphasize certain aspects of a function by adjusting the
coloring. We will make use of this option in the section about
the reflection principle.
3. Interpreting Domain Colored Plots
In the following we provide hints how to read domain colored plots. As an example, we consider the meromorphic
function f1 : [−3, 3] × [−3i, 3i] → C defined by f1 (z) =
(z−1)(z+1)2
,
(z+i)(z−i)2

inducing the plot in figure 3.

Figure 3: Plot of the rational function f1
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

737

3.1. Deformation
Take a close look at the colors and compare them with figure 1b. Note that the center of the picture is colored in blue
and magenta colors, thus by comparison to the original color
map, this region gets mapped somewhere onto the lower left
half plane. Now, consider the margin of the plot. Except for
the upper left corner, it is mostly colored in orange or ginger,
so this region gets mapped onto the upper right plane with
the real parts of the function values dominating the imaginary parts (for it is more red then yellow-green).
3.2. Zeros and Poles
Obviously, this function has two zeros, one at +1, the other
one at −1. Due to the choice of our coloring, zeros are colored as black spots, so you can easily detect them on the plot.
More generally, a point z with |z| < 1 gets darker the more
|z| approaches zero, thus one has a continuous color gradient from points with |z| = 0 to those with |z| = 1, being black
at the stationary value |z| = 0 and reaching its full color intensity at |z| = 1. Having a multiple zero z0 means that this
gradient emphasizes the almost black regions and as a result, the dark neighborhood grows larger. Thus, the higher
the multiplicity of a zero is, the larger is the extension of the
black spot.
Consider a simple zero, e.g. z = 0 under the identity map.
You observe, that you pass through the whole color spectrum
when you circle around 0 once if your function is holomorphic in a neighborhood containing the zero. Now, have a look
at both the zeros of our example 3: The right one is a simple
zero, so when you circle around it, you get the whole spectrum once. However, the left one is a double zero and you
find that when you circle around −1, you run through the
color spectrum twice. This is just reasonable and generalizes to multiple zeros such as (z − a)k . For example, take the
monomial z → zk and consider a point w = reiφ = 0, then it
gets mapped to rk eikφ , in particular, the argument gets multiplied by k. But this represents exactly the behavior of the col2π
ored plot: All points on the line R+ · ei k get already mapped
to the positive real axis, therefore, circling once around 0
means circling k times around 0 in the complex plane—the
power k somehow “overlays” the complex plane k times with
itself.
Pretty much the same observations hold true for singularities: Consider a simple pole, e.g. z0 = 0 under z → 1z (see
figure 6a). This mapping is also known as “inversion” and
mirrors the complex plane at the real axis. This can be seen
best when considering a point w = reiφ = 0, then w1 = 1r e−iφ .
As a result, when circling around 0 counterclockwise, you
run through the color spectrum clockwise, so the “orientation” of the spectrum has switched. This behavior can be
extended to multiple poles as well and again one obtains—
besides the changed orientation—a k-times overlaying of the
plane onto itself.

738

K. Poelke & K. Polthier / Lifted Domain Coloring

reference coloring. Thus, in this point you can clearly recognize the corruption of the angle. The same observation holds
for the last non-conformal point in the lower right corner.

3.4. Essential Singularities

(a) Multiple zero

(b) Multiple pole

Figure 4: Typical pattern of a multiple zero zk and a multiple
pole z−k

More generally, let f be a function which has a pole of
order k in z0 and is holomorphic in a neighborhood of z0 ,
then its Laurent series looks like
f (z) =
=

To a certain extent, the type of singularities discussed above
possess a fairly regular behavior. That is to say, the neighborhood of such a singularity is the “very outer” ring of
the k−times overlaid, inverted complex plane. Note that
in the canonical topology of the Riemann sphere, a neighborhood of a singularity is usually defined as Bε (∞) =
z ∈ C : Abs(z) > ε−1 , so the “very outer” ring can be
informally understood to be Bε≈0 (∞). We now discuss
so-called essential singularities, whose behaviour in their
neighborhood is completely different to the “nonessential”
ones. In fact, they show a strong oscillation and seem to consistently hit the whole sphere. This lax observation has been

∞
a−k
a
+ · · · + −1 + ∑ an (z − z0 )n
k
z − z0 n=0
(z − z0 )

1
g(z)
(z − z0 )k

with a holomorphic function g(z) with g(z0 ) = a−k = 0.
With this in mind, all functions having a k−pole in z0 look
the same, up to multiplication by a constant a−k ∈ C, i.e. rotation and dilation of the surrounding region. Figure 4 compares the functions z → zk and z → z−k for k = 4.
(a) f (z) = exp(z−1 )

3.3. Conformality

Figure 5: Essential singularities

An important property of holomorphic functions is their (local) conformality in regions with non-vanishing derivative,
i.e. they preserve angles between any two curves intersecting each other (of course, holomorphic functions with nonvanishing derivative are conformal by definition, as the Jacobian, considered as a 2 × 2-matrix over R, is a scaled rotation matrix). As a result, the radial rays intersect the contour
lines in a right angle both in the domain and in the image,
except for points in which the derivative vanishes. A quick
calculation yields
d
dz

f1 (z) =

(z + 1)2 + 2(z2 − 1)
(z − i)2 (z + i)

−

2(z − 1)(z + 1)2
(z − i)3 (z + i)

(z − 1)(z + 1)2

−

(z − i)2 (z + i)2

(1)

and
d
dz

f1 (z) = 0 ⇔ z1,2,3 = −1,

(b) f (z) = z sin(z−1 )

3−

√
7

2

√
+

7−3
2

i,

3+

√
7

2

−

3+

√
7

2

i.

(2)

These are the critical points in which our function is not
conformal. It is not surprising that one point is the double
zero, for one can easily see that the number of lines leaving
the black spot has doubled. The second one is close to the
origin, at about 0.177 − 0.177i. You can detect this point as
an intersection of two reddish lines, both of them denoting
the unit circle, which of course does not intersect itself in the

made precise by C.E. Picard:
Theorem 1 (Picard) Let U ∈ C be an open set, z0 ∈ U
and let f : U \ {z0 } → C be a holomorphic function with
an essential singularity in z0 . Then, f (U \ {z0 }) = C or
f (U \ {z0 }) = C \ {w} for a single point w ∈ C.
The theorem states that every neighborhood of z0 , no matter how tiny it is, gets mapped to almost the whole complex
plane. We can recover this property in figure 5 depicting
the function f (z) := exp z−1 and the—in a sense—related
function f (z) := z sin(z−1 ), both defined on [−0.5, 0.5] ×
[−0.5i, 0.5i]. Approaching zero from the positive real axis
results in large values whereas approaching from the negative real axis results in almost zero values. The interesting
part lies in between, i.e. if we approach zero on the imaginary axis, we streak past the whole complex plane: near the
domain zero we have the functions “almost-zero” to the left
(the black blob) and infinity to the right (the white blob).
In between we circle around the complex plane again and
again (this is the “oscillation”). Hence, a function’s acting
close to an essential singularity strongly depends on the direction from which it approaches the singularity point. This
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

739

K. Poelke & K. Polthier / Lifted Domain Coloring

observation stands in stark contrast to the quite regular behavior around poles and brings out the qualitative difference
between essential and nonessential singularities.
4. Path Integrals
A frequent question in complex analysis is whether a closed
curve integral of a given function around a point z0 vanishes
or not. A fundamental answer was given by A.L. Cauchy in
his famous integral theorem giving rise to numerous other
important theorems in complex analysis. Our plots give us
some hints whether an integral might vanish or not. Therefore let us consider once more the inversion z → z−1 on
[−1, 1] × [−i, i] and discuss the path integral over the curve
γ(t) = eit defined on [0, 2π], which is
I

1
dζ = 2πi.
ζ

γ

Following the descriptive approach of Needham [Nee97], we
approximate the curve integral by a Riemann sum and obtain
Z2π

I

f (ζ)dζ =
γ

0

f (γ(t))γ (t)dt ≈ ∑ f (γ(t˜i ))(γ(ti+1 ) − γ(ti ))
i

for a partition 0 = t0 < t1 < · · · < tn = 2π with sample points
t˜i ∈ (ti ,ti+1 ). If γ is rectifiable (which holds true for our
particular γ defined above), the Riemann sum converges to
the path integral for n → ∞, i.e. dti := ti+1 − ti → 0 resp.
∆i := γ(ti+1 ) − γ(ti ) → 0 . To simplify the procedure, we
assume all dti (and hence all ∆i to be equal distant, i.e.
∀i : dt = dti . Now, recall that a multiplication of ∆i with a
complex number f (γ(t˜i )) can be interpreted as a rotation and
scaling of the vector ∆i . If we add the ∆i as oriented arrows to
the plot, we can easily imagine the transformation of them.
Figure 6a shows the sample points t˜i which were chosen,
such that γ(t˜i ) are the 8th unit roots and t˜i = (ti+1 −ti )/2 (one
has to adjust the parameter interval, here tk = (2k − 1)π/8
mod 2π for k = 0, . . . , 8), together with the corresponding
∆i -arrows. In the following, we number the ∆i counterclockwise, beginning with ∆1 being the arrow crossing the positive real axis.
The sample point for ∆1 is the intersection of the red
radial line with the unit circle denoting 1 and therefore
f (γ(t˜1 )) = 1, so ∆1 remains untouched. ∆3 has its corresponding sample point at the intersection of the unit circle
with the violet-blue radial line, which stands for −i. Thus ∆3
is rotated by 90◦ clockwise and now points upwards as well.
γ(t˜5 ) is the cyan −1 and γ(t˜7 ) is the light-green i. Hence, after multiplication ∆5 and ∆7 are pointing upwards, too. The
color gradient between these characteristic points tells us,
that finally all the arrows have no other choice than pointing
upwards and hence the sum cannot vanish, for the arrows
do not cancel each other. Figure 6b demonstrates this situation. Clearly, this observation holds true for every discretization and even for the limit n → ∞, dt → 0, where the arrows
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(a) ∆i depicted as arrows.
The small spots on the rays
denote the sample points γ(t˜i )

(b) All arrows are twisted by the
function

Figure 6: Inversion acting on “momentum”
shrink to points. We can imagine these points having somehow a “momentum” which is given by γ (t). Then, at each
point, the underlying color tells us how the momentum is
changed by the function. In our example, the function counteracts the direction of the momentum (but does not change
its value) exactly by the angle the momentum has, and we
accumulate all momenta γ pointing in the upper imaginary
direction. When we have circled around γ, we have gathered
a total amount of 2π, pointing into the direction i, and the
resulting value 2πi is understandable.
In general it is hard to tell if all arrows are pointing exactly
in the same direction and in most cases it is impossible to
predict a quantitative outcome. Nevertheless, one will often
find that they are at least all pointing in the same half-plane,
which suffices to conclude that the path integral does not
vanish.
5. Further Examples
5.1. Unit Roots
We consider the polynomials of type f2 (z) := zn − 1 resp.
f3 (z) := z−n − 1, whose zeros are exactly the n-th unit roots
exp(2πik/n) for k = 0, . . . , n − 1. (These polynomials are of
high importance in algebra, for instance in the theory of field
extensions.) For z with Abs(z) large, we expect them to behave similarly to z → zn resp. −1, since in the first case, −1
has almost no effect whereas in the second case, z−n has almost no effect. This can be seen in figure 7, using n = 5 on
[−2, 2] × [−2i, 2i].
f2 is cyan in the interior of the unit circle, which indicates complex numbers with negative real values and almost
zero imaginary part. Furthermore, outside the unit circle you
find a coloring which more and more equals the coloring of
z → z5 , the more you move away from the origin. The curves
meeting in the origin all get mapped onto the unit level line
with radius 1 (Note Abs( f2 (0)) = 1), indicating a breach of
conformality.

740

K. Poelke & K. Polthier / Lifted Domain Coloring

(a) f2

(b) f3

(a) f4 (z) =

1
2

z + 1z

(b) f5 (z) = ∑5n=1 z−n

Figure 7: Unit roots of f2 (z) = z5 − 1 (left) and f3 (z) =
z−5 − 1
The white rays pointing outwards in the plot of f3 depict exactly the negatives real axis and the complete region
outside the unit circle (which passes through the five black
spots) is colored cyan. Note that in the corners, the image
is dominated by a blurring bordered by reddish-brown lines.
These lines get mapped onto the unit circle (which in particular crosses −1), each of them circling around a zero at a
unit root; since the wide-stretched blurring indicates values
whose modulus is almost 1, this observation exactly comes
up to our expectations.
5.2. Schwarz Reflection Principle
Holomorphic functions defined on certain subsets of open
connected sets D which are symmetric with respect to the
real axis can be extended to holomorphic functions on the
entire set D. The Schwarz reflection principle states this fact
more precisely:
Theorem 2 (Schwarz Reflection Principle) Let D ⊂
C be an open, connected, non-empty set, which is
symmetric to the real axis, i.e. z ∈ D ⇒ z ∈ D
and D+ := {z ∈ D|Im(z) > 0}, D− := {z ∈ D|Im(z) < 0},
D0 := {z ∈ D|Im(z) = 0}. If f is continuous on D+ ∪ D0 ,
holomorphic on D+ and f (D0 ) ⊂ R, then it has a holomorphic continuation on D− and f (z) = f (z).
Have a look at the example functions depicted in figures 8a and 8b. The first one, also known as “Joukowski
function”, is holomorphic on C \ {±i}, the second one on
C \ {0}. Furthermore, it is clear that for both functions it
is f (R) ⊂ R resp. f (R \ {0}) ⊂ R. Thus, they satisfy the
requirements of Schwarz’ theorem and have a holomorphic
continuation onto the lower half plane (which is unique by
the identity theorem). Figures 8c and 8d show the same functions, this time using a gradient which is symmetric to the
real axis. Note, that although we are losing most information about the argument, the symmetry property is easier to
recognize. So, in general it is a good idea to choose the color
scheme according to the properties one wants to accentuate.
Nevertheless, our reference coloring in 1b does a good job
as an all-round coloring

(c) f4 with a symmetric gradient (d) f5 with a symmetric gradient

Figure 8: Visualizing the Schwarz reflection principle
5.3. Elliptic Functions
By coloring the domain of elliptic functions, we obtain patterns repeating in real and imaginary direction, which is
due to the double periodicity of these functions. Figure 9
shows the well-known Weierstrass ℘-function with parameters ω1 = 1, ω2 = τ for τ = 0.5 + 0.5i and τ = 0.2 + 0.8i.
One can clearly recognize the deformation of the underlying
grid Λ = Z + τZ.

(a) ℘-function, τ = 0.5 + 0.5i

(b) ℘-function, τ = 0.2 + 0.8i

Figure 9: Weierstrass ℘-functions
6. Lifting Domain Coloring to Riemann Surfaces Coloring of Multivalued Functions
So far, coloring the domain in C has worked properly.
Nonetheless, for many functions the method discussed above
fails in revealing essential properties; their domain somehow does not fit into the topology of the complex plane. For
√
instance, consider the functions f6 (z) := z, f7 (z) := log z
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

741

K. Poelke & K. Polthier / Lifted Domain Coloring

√

√
(the principal branch) and f8 (z) := z + 1 z − 1 defined on
[−3, 3] × [−3i, 3i]. In the first two cases, the color gradient
has a discontinuity at the positive real axis, in the third case,
it has a discontinuity between −1 and +1. Figure 10 depicts
the situation. This problem occurs in general when we con-

(a) Side view

(a) f6

(b) f7

(c) f8

(b) Front View

(d) − f6

(e) f7 − 2πi

(f) − f8

Figure 10: Discontinuity arising from square roots ( f6 , f8 )
and logarithms ( f7 )
sider inverse functions of non-injective functions, for they
are multi-valued. As a consequence, now there are several
colors, according to the multiple values, getting assigned to
a single point in the preimage. Hence we do not consider
its domain to be nested in the complex plane, but allow a
Riemann surface to serve as a domain of the function. In
particular, the domain is allowed to possess a couple of layers, the “branches”, corresponding to the number of distinct
values the function takes for a single point. Figure 11a and
11b show a model for the Riemann surface of the square root
function f6 . The advantage of having a second layer allows
to resolve the discontinuity by switching to the other layer
when passing over the branch cut.
Although the color plot of the logarithm in figure 10b
looks quite similar to the plot of the square root (the branch
cut is the positive real axis), its overall behaviour is of a different kind. Figure 10e demonstrates that the discontinuity
cannot be resolved by just introducing a second layer; of
course we could connect the reddish part of 10b with the
reddish part of 10e as we have done in 11b, but a new discontinuity would arise if we connected the green edge of 10b
with the magenta edge of 10e. Instead, the correct model is
an inifite "spiral stair" as shown in figure 11c. In fact, the
fundamental reason of roots not being injective is the periodicity of the exponential map and the resulting non-injectivity
of the logarithm. Whereas the equation z2 = w has only two
solutions, exp(z) = w has inifitely many solutions (if z0 is a
solution, so is z0 + k2πi for all k ∈ Z). As a consequence, the
surface for f6 has only two layers whereas the surface for f7
has infinitely many different layers. That is why speaking of
a “branch” of the logarithm is an illustrative formulation.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(c) 2 levels of the infinite "spiral stair”

Figure 11: Riemann surfaces for

√
z and log(z)

Figure 12 shows a more complicated example representing a Riemann surface for f8 . This time, the branch points

(a) Top view

(b) Side view

Figure 12: Riemann surface for f8
are −1 and 1. By circling around one of these points, one
ends up on the other layer in order to preserve continuity.
Another round will bring us back to the layer where we have
started. Note that it is also possible to go "downstairs” at one
point and "upstairs” at the other point, in contrast to the previous square root example, which provides only one path. In
a way, each branch point is kind of a separate gate to another
layer enabling us to walk continuously through the range of
the function.

742

K. Poelke & K. Polthier / Lifted Domain Coloring

7. Coloring Parametrized Surfaces
Finally, we extend domain coloring to general parametrized
surfaces in R3 . In the following, we require such a surface
to be regular, so that it has a well-defined Gauss map everywhere. Studying the normal vector gives in general a fairly
good aggregation of the characteristic properties of the surface, most of which are determined by curvature, e.g. principal curvature directions, so we choose p to be the Gauss
map. Probably the most easily accessible surfaces are those
which can be written as function graphs over the domain itself, i.e. surfaces of the type (u, v) → (u, v, f (u, v)). Figures
13a-13f display some exemplary function graphs and their
Gauss maps. You can easily detect stationary points as before. Note that the level lines correspond to circles of latitude on the Riemann sphere whereas the radial rays denote
the circles of longitude. Figure 13g depicts the Gauss map
of the Möbius strip parametrized as


cos(u) (2 + cos (u/2) v)
1
sin(u) (2 + cos (u/2) v) 
[0, 2π] × [−1, 1] (u, v) →
2
sin (u/2) v
Referring to our previously observated relations to Riemann
surfaces, one notices the Gauss map of the Möbius strip has
a period of 4π. In a way, this behavior is similar to the square
root discussed above, which shows a discontinuity when circling around the complex plane once (we managed this problem by switching to another layer). Here, we have a discontinuity of the normal when circling just once, and we have to
do it twice in order to restore a continuous normal transition.

(a) “Monkey Saddle”
(u, v) → (u, v, u3 − 3uv2 )

(b) Gauss map of Monkey Saddle

(c) (u, v) → (u, v, sin(u) cos(v))

(d) Gauss map of sin(u) cos(v)

(e) Scherk surface

(f) Gauss map of Scherk surface

8. Conclusion
We have generalized the technique of domain coloring to
multivalued functions, whose ambiguity can be resolved by
considering Riemann surfaces as their actual domains. However, domain coloring does not restrict to complex valued
functions, as we have seen above: by using an adequate projection onto the Riemann sphere, one can easily extend the
method in order to plot arbitrary functions defined on surfaces, e.g. the Gauss map or functions indicating force or
tension, offering various applications in science and visualization.

[Far] FARRIS F. A.: Visualizing complex-valued functions in
the plane. http://www.maa.org/pubs/amm_complements/
complex.html.

References

Complex domain coloring.
[Hla] H LAVACEK J.:
http://www6.svsu.edu/~jhlavace/Complex_Domain_
Coloring/index.html.

[Arn] A RNOLD D. N.: Graphics for complex analysis. http://
www.ima.umn.edu/~arnold/complex.html.
[Ban] BANCHOFF T. F.: Complex function graphs. http://www.
math.brown.edu/~banchoff/gc/script/CFGInd.html.
[Ben] B ENNETT A. G.: Complex function grapher. http://www.
math.ksu.edu/~bennett/jomacg/.
[dS] DA S ILVA E. L.: Reviews of functions of one complex variable graphical representation from software development for learning support. http://sorzal-df.fc.unesp.br/
~edvaldo/en/index.htm.

(g) Gauss map of Möbius strip

Figure 13: Domain colored Gauss maps

[Lun04] L UNDMARK H.: Visualizing complex analytic functions
using domain coloring. http://www.mai.liu.se/~halun/
complex/domain_coloring-unicode.html, 2004.
[Nee97] N EEDHAM T.: Visual Complex Analysis. Oxford University Press, 1997.
[Per] P ERGLER M.: Newton’s method, julia and mandelbrot sets,
and complex coloring. http://users.arczip.com/pergler/
mp/documents/ptr/.
[Tha98] T HALLER B.: Visualization of complex functions. The
Mathematica Journal 7 (1998).

c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

