Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2009
H.-C. Hege, I. Hotz, and T. Munzner
(Guest Editors)

Volume 28 (2009), Number 3

Visualisation of Sensor Data from Animal Movement
Edward Grundy1,2 , Mark W. Jones1 , Robert S. Laramee1 , Rory P. Wilson2 and Emily L.C. Shepard2
1 Visual Computing Group, Swansea University, UK
email: {csed, m.w.jones, r.s.laramee}@swansea.ac.uk
2 Institute of Environmental Sustainability, Swansea University, UK
e-mail: {r.p.wilson, 381601}@swansea.ac.uk

Abstract
A new area of biological research is identifying and grouping patterns of behaviour in wild animals by analysing
data obtained through the attachment of tri-axial accelerometers. As these recording devices become smaller and
less expensive their use has increased. Currently acceleration data are visualised as 2D time series plots, and
analyses are based on summary statistics and the application of Fourier transforms. We develop alternate visualisations of this data so as to analyse, explore and present new patterns of animal behaviour. Our visualisations
include interactive spherical scatterplots, spherical histograms, clustering methods, and feature-based state diagrams of the data. We study the application of these visualisation methods to accelerometry data from animal
movement. The reaction of biologists to these visualisations is also reported.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): Computer Graphics [I.3.8]: Applications—

1. Introduction
The use of accelerometers to gather data has been investigated for both explicit and implicit user input with the aim
of identifying user actions based upon the accelerometry signal resulting from the users motion. The visualisation of accelerometer data, as a subject, is in its infancy, and visualisations are generally limited to 2D time-series plots (e.g.
figure 1). Recently, accelerometers have been attached to individual animals by biologists in order to monitor the behaviour of the animal over longer periods, through more environments and at a higher resolution than previously possible. The quantity and interpretive complexity of this new
application area make it a prime candidate for visualisation.
Biologists at Swansea University have collected large
amounts of data relating to animal movement by attaching
sensors to individual subjects. These devices record a multiplicity of data, including acceleration and magnetic field
strength in three axes, hydrostatic pressure, light intensity
and temperature, thus recording movements of the subject
animal and details of the body environment while attached
[WSL08]. The small size, low weight and durability of the
devices mean they can be deployed on a wide range of animals in many different environments [WSL08].
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

A major focus of research for the biologists is to determine animal activity and behavioural patterns from the gathered data. The tri-axial acceleration data is of specific interest as it provides quantitative data on body posture and motion. The three axes of the accelerometer are aligned to the
dorso-ventral axis, the anterior-posterior axis and the lateral
axis of the subject animal. These are termed (in biological
parlance) heave, surge and sway respectively. These axes are
analogous to the Y , Z and X axes in cartesian co-ordinates.
Environmental attributes such as pressure, temperature and
light level, perform a supporting role in the identification of
activities. The sequences and temporal alignment of identified activities give insight into the function of behavioural
patterns [SWQ∗ 08]. Effective visualisation of this multivariate data is a challenging proposition which would greatly assist biological analysis of the data.
2. Related Work
Although we have not found any published visualisation research, there has been research in other fields on the uses of
accelerometry data. Automatic pattern recognition methods
applied to accelerometry in Pervasive Computing indicate
the meaning of components and descriptive statistics of the

816

Grundy, Jones, Laramee, Wilson, Shepard / Visualisation of Sensor Data from Animal Movement

Figure 1: Annotated acceleration data from an Imperial Cormorant. The three axes are presented as separate line graphs
showing the sway (red), heave (green) and surge (blue) data, over 33 minutes (vertical reference lines indicate minutes). Sections
of the signal have been manually identified by a biologist as (a) walking, (b) washing, (c) flying and (d) diving behaviours.
signal. We focus on providing a tool to visualise patterns in
the acceleration signal from the movement of wild animals.
The closest related areas in visualisation are concerned with
multi-variate data and vector fields (where we consider the
acceleration signal a sequence of three-dimensional vectors).
In the area of Pervasive Computing, automatic recognition of user input recorded with an accelerometer is seen as a
way to allow greater freedom of input, or obtain information
about user activity. Kela et al. [KKM∗ 06] and Schlömer et
al [SPHB08] both describe the use of an accelerometer as an
input device. These methods have been studied in an attempt
to recognise general activities performed by humans and
provide behavioural context information for devices worn by
users [DSGP03]. Generally, methods improve upon an early
description of feature extraction proposed by Van Laerhoven
and Cakmakci [VLC00], which involves creating descriptive
statistics for windowed regions of the acceleration signal.
The unbiased study of the wild animal behaviour has always been problematic because (i) animals may behave differently in the presence of humans [WCS∗ 89], (ii) they generally cannot be observed all the time (and sometimes hardly
observed at all) and because, (iii) even if the animal is visible, it is often difficult to quantify behaviour, particularly
with respect to intensity [DSA∗ 90]. Remarkable progress in
solid-state technology, however, has led to a recent proliferation in animal-attached technologies which record may aspects of animal biology even when there is no visible contact
between animal and researcher [RCW05]. An apparently attractive solution to solving the problem of recognising and
quantifying behaviour in this domain uses accelerometers
[YSN∗ 99]. Since accelerometers give information on static
acceleration [SWQ∗ 08], which is derived from animal posture with respect to the gravitational field [YNS∗ 01], and
dynamic acceleration, which is derived from animal movement [SNK∗ 02], examination of accelerometer data should
enable workers to determine behaviour [SWQ∗ 08]. However, the process of allocating accelerometer signals to be-

haviours is complex because the recording frequency has to
be high enough to provide at least 5 data points per repetitive
behaviour cycle (e.g. per wing-beat or stride [RCW05]) and
this should ideally be collected in all three dimensional axes
[WSL08] so that large amounts of data are collected over a
very short time.
The difficulties in determining behaviours by simple visual inspection of three time-lines in acceleration where diverse and temporally-variable patterns may occur over a
wide breadth of scales (ranging from single repetitive movements in e.g. a limb beat, to many hours of immobility during rest) have led workers to propose complex statistical approaches [WBS∗ 06] that are difficult to grasp and do not
enhance intuition because they are not linked to any visual
representation of the signal which might help identify informative patterns.
The favoured method to present data and results in pervasive computing and biology publications is typically based
on a separate line graph for each component of the signal, as in figure 1, or the more stylised presentation given
in figure 2, (commonly used to convey the principles to
non-experts). An intensity versus time plot effectively describes the temporal relation between “behaviour signatures”, recognised as different intensity readings, and identification of the dominant axis (which represents orientation).
However, this visualisation does not provide easy insight
into the tri-axial nature of the data, as correlation between
the axes has to be consciously observed. Both the pervasive
computing and biology applications rely on statistics derived
from the acceleration data. Many derived values are calculated over windowed regions and become difficult to comprehend because of the different temporal scaling. In biological research, comparing directly measured attributes (such
as pressure or temperature) as well as derived attributes is
also valuable. Currently, this is achieved by producing a new
2D time-series graph for the attribute plot, where the x-axes
of all the graphs are aligned. The many related line graphs rec 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Grundy, Jones, Laramee, Wilson, Shepard / Visualisation of Sensor Data from Animal Movement

Figure 2: Surge, sway and heave acceleration during a
single cormorant dive. Changes in posture during descent,
swimming, and ascent are evident as shifts in the baseline
values of the surge and heave axes. Dynamic acceleration
resulting from individual foot-kicks are identifiable as regular deviations from the static value, as shown in the insert.

quire extra interpretive effort and expert knowledge from the
user and can be very time-consuming. Commonly, at least
five separate graphs are used to identify a behaviour.
3. Acceleration Data
The acceleration data contains static and dynamic components. A stationary device records its’ orientation in the
gravitational field (the static component). When the device
is moving, local acceleration forces distort the reference
axis according to the acceleration vector (the dynamic component). Due to the Principle of Equivalence, acceleration
forces and gravitational forces are indistinguishable, and
therefore recorded by the same sensor. Accurately separating
the two components is an active area of research. Assuming
the static component is low-frequency and the dynamic is
high-frequency, the static component can be approximated
by applying smoothing filters to the raw data, and thus the
dynamic component can be inferred.
Biologists have proposed that dominant behavioural patterns may be identified from acceleration data using a hierarchical approach [SWQ∗ 08]. The static component is first
used to identify animal posture, a step that immediately
reduces the number of behaviours the animal could have
been performing. Patterns in the dynamic component provide further insight. The main axis in which movement is
recorded describes the type of motion (e.g. bird flight is characterised predominantly by dynamic changes in the heave
axis, whereas a swimming fish produces regular changes in
sway acceleration), whereas the frequency and amplitude of
changes describe the “vigour”. An example of these observations are shown in figure 2.
Biologists explore the data by viewing three line graphs
(one for each channel of the tri-axial sensors) using environmental data, such as pressure and temperature, to support
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

817

the decision making process. After a long search process,
periods of data can be manually identified and labelled as a
specific activity. In practice, interpretation of even basic signals can be time consuming, difficult, and error-prone due to
(a) three components of two acceleration sources present in a
single signal, (b) the signal being presented in the temporaldomain (which can be long), (c) no simple visualisation of
body orientation to assist the deductive process, (d) signal
noise, and (e) slight variances in animal behaviour. We propose methods to visualise accelerometry data which effectively portray postures and variances, reducing the time required to infer behaviours. We develop these visualisations
to include environmental and derived attributes.
4. Visualisations
This section presents visualisations of Daily Dairy data
[WSL08] for a single device attached to an Imperial Cormorant in South America during December 2006. The data
was captured at 8Hz for 8 hours and 40 minutes resulting
in 249,988 measurements. Each measurement contains triaxial acceleration, tri-axial local magnetic field intensity, hydrostatic pressure, infra-red levels, and temperature, resulting in nine channels of data. The data are recorded at 22-bit
resolution onto 128Mb flash RA memory attached to the device. The accelerometer has an accuracy of ±0.06g, with a
sensitivity range of ±2.21g. Note that recorded data pertain
only to motions undergone by the device, and may be offset
by a fixed angle due to the attachment to the subject animal.
The static component of a datum is computed by normalising a windowed mean of surrounding data. The size of this
window is a user-option, but typically accounts for 32 data.
4.1. Spherical Scatterplots
Established vector field visualisations [LHD∗ 04] generally
rely on the topology of the underlying sample grid (usually
two or three dimensional) and encode the vector value as a
colour or glyph in a two or three dimensional space. The one
dimensional space afforded by sampling over time is a limits
the applicability of these methods to these data.
By discarding the time-series and considering each vector as an offset from the origin, a three dimensional scatterplot of the acceleration vectors can be produced (figures 3(a)
and 3(b)). For normalised three dimensional vectors this
method is equivalent to projecting the points onto the surface of a sphere. When the static component is visualised
(figure 3(c)), this performs an implicit conversion to spherical co-ordinates, (φ, θ, r) (where φ and θ are rotations about
the central axes, and r is the radial distance from the origin).
A scatterplot makes geometric distribution of the data
more apparent, providing an intuitive summary of the acceleration signal. In this case, “features” are deemed any
sequence of interest to the biologists. However, this loose
definition can be made more robust by noting that biologists

818

Grundy, Jones, Laramee, Wilson, Shepard / Visualisation of Sensor Data from Animal Movement

(a)

(c)

(b)
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(d)

Figure 3: Scatterplots of 9 hours of cormorant activity data.
(a) a raw data, (b) Savitzky-Golay filtered (window size is
32), (c) normalised windowed mean, (i.e. orientation vectors), and (d) time based colouring of the filtered data, with
the colour changing from red to yellow with time. In all images the three axes of the scatterplot relate to the three axes
of the accelerometer, and are colour coded to agree with figure 1.
infer a great deal from the body posture of an animal (which
translates to the static component of the signal). Postures can
be associated with certain behaviours (as demonstrated in
figures 1 and 2), and in this respect the scatterplot visualisation effectively depicts the major postures which occur in
the data. The strong trends visible in figure 3 are due to the
primary postures of the animal being captured by the acceleration sensor and visualised effectively. The location of the
dense point clusters, relative to the reference sphere, provide
an intuitive representation of features previously identified
by an arduous manual search of line-graphs. Furthermore,
the size of a feature is indicative of the variance around a
posture, which relates to the dynamic component of the signal caused by behaviour. Activities with a large amount of
variance, or strong dynamic components, were the most difficult to recognise manually, but are easily discernable in the
scatterplot as less dense regions.
A drawback of this visualisation is the lack of temporal information. Colour may be used to represent time in a fourth
dimension, as shown in figure 3(d) where time is presented
via the “redness” of the data. However, it is not easy to discern small periods of time when the sequence is long. Even
with a large colour space, the perceptibility of small colour
gradients remain restrictive.

Figure 4: Multi-attribute visualisation of 9 hours of cormorant behaviour. (a) windowed mean of acceleration data,
(b) normalised acceleration projected from the surface according to pressure (an overlay) with pressure also mapped
to colour, (c) pressure replaced with signal energy, and (d)
orientation, pressure (overlay) and signal energy (colour)
visualised together. Note, successive points are connected
with line segments to indicate temporal relation.
4.2. Multi-variate Visualisation of Sensor Attributes
As the orientation vector can be reduced to two polar dimensions (even if implicitly) a scalar attribute (mapped to
[0, 1]) can be added to the radial distance to find a new distance from the origin, thereby elevating data points from the
surface of the sphere and replacing the magnitude of acceleration with another attribute of the data. As the direction of
acceleration remains, features of the orientation data are preserved with respect to angular distance. We term this method
an overlay of the scalar attribute onto the orientation vector
data. Overlays of the pressure attributes and derived signal
energy attributes are shown in figures 4(b) and 4(c), where
the underlaying acceleration data is shown in figure 4(a). The
intention of this method is to demonstrate that other components of the data can be used to further differentiate and
identify behaviour, using the acceleration data as a common
reference point for the many attributes.
The benefit of spatially separating data points according
to pressure is best illustrated by figure 4(b). The visual depiction of diving behaviour in the overlay presents a new set
of visual features. Ascents and descents of dives are represented as lines near the poles connecting the surface of the
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

819

Grundy, Jones, Laramee, Wilson, Shepard / Visualisation of Sensor Data from Animal Movement

Figure 5: Using attributed data to isolate activities. Orientation and pressure (overlay and colour) illustrate a single
dive performed by the cormorant over four minutes, along
with the 2D time-series.
sphere to the elevated data. The large mass elevated from the
sphere and below the equator represent underwater activity
with the major arcs representing changes in body orientation
as the animal moves from one major posture to another.
Correlations with attributes can be found by mapping different attributes to colour and overlay. For example, correlations between pressure and signal energy can be observed
during descent, ascent and swimming phases of the dives by
overlaying the pressure data and mapping signal energy to
colour (figure 4(d)). Signal energy is higher as the animal
descends the water column (south pole), while ascent (north
pole) is relatively passive. This is explained by the fact that
cormorants have to actively descend due to air trapped in
their feathers, while ascent is assisted by this buoyancy. In
this visualisation, four dimensions of the data (acceleration
direction, pressure and signal energy) are presented while
remaining coherent, intelligible and informative.
Individual occurrences of behaviours can be isolated by
reducing the length of the sequence. A single dive, isolated
from the many dives performed by the cormorant (shown in
figure 4(b) and figure 4(d)), is illustrated by figure 5. The 2D
time-series plot of this sequence is also given for comparison. Detailed views of the overlay show the orientation to
be presented without distortion, allowing the method to be
used for analysis as well as exploration. In figure 5, high frequency components of the orientation signal during descent
(caused by flipper beats as the bird actively descends the wac 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 6: Spherical histogram of orientation data. (a) underlying acceleration vector data (b) large, (c) medium, and
(d) small bin sizes. Intervals on the bars denote a minute of
data, height and colour indicates bin-count.
ter column) are preserved in the overlay. The complexity of
the underwater swimming period is also more completely realised in the spherical scatterplot than the 2D plot. An indication of the speed of a movement is given by rendering the
location of measured data points along with connecting line
segments. However, temporal relations of the measurements
are only presented by the connectivity of the line segments.

4.3. Visualisation of Derived Data
The distribution of the orientation data can be visualised by
constructing a histogram over a sub-division of the sphere. In
the spherical histogram, the orientation data density is represented by the height of the bins, the “footprint” of which
is controlled by the user (figures 6(b-d)). The height of each
bin visually indicates time spent in a particular orientation.
In evaluating the scatterplot (fig. 3) we have confirmed
that features presented to the user correspond to postures manually identified by the expert. Applying a density
based clustering method allows the discovery of frequently
adopted orientations (see Jain et al. [JMF99] and Xu and
Wunsch [XW05] for a review of data clustering methods).
Given K clusters, fuzzy c-means results in each datum pi
having an associated vector ui = {ui1 , ui2 , ...uik }, which describe the degrees of membership to each cluster [Bez81].

820

Grundy, Jones, Laramee, Wilson, Shepard / Visualisation of Sensor Data from Animal Movement

The closest (or major) cluster mi of a point is pi is given by:
K

mi = arg max(uik )
k=1

Clusters can be visualised by colouring each point, using
the major cluster mi to determine hue (i.e. hue = mKi × 360)
and indicating membership degree uimi via saturation (figure 7(a)).
4.4. Posture States and Transitions

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

It is attractive to consider a datum with a high uimi value as
indicating the animal was “in” posture mi at that time. From
this, we can introduce a threshold τ to act as a discriminant
between “in-posture” and “non-posture” measurements:
INPOST (pi , τ) =

true
f alse

if uimi > τ
otherwise

Observe that when INPOS(pi , τ) = f alse, pi will be outside
all postures in K due to:
K

max(uik ) < τ → (∀v ∈ ui (v < τ))
1

In the time-series, sequences of non-posture data will be delimited by either (a) the end of the sample, or (b) a datum
which is in a discovered posture. A non-posture sequence
can be considered a transition when it is terminated by inposture data. Automatic discovery of postures, and transitions, allow us to describe the sample with a state machine,
where each state corresponds to a posture, and sequences
of non-posture data correspond to transitions. Allowing for
some fuzziness in the classification, the behaviour of many
animals can be discretely classified, as demonstrated by the
labelling of the data shown in figure 1.
Each identified posture can be visualised in the scatterplot space by drawing a sphere located at the centroid of
the cluster, where a sphere at µk encloses all points with
uimi > τ. Connectivity between those states represent transitions which correspond to sequences of non-posture data,
as defined earlier (figure 7(b)).
Behavioural tortuosity is a measure defined as the Euclidean distance between two points in the accelerometer
time-series:
t

BHV T (t,t ) = ∑ f (i + 1) − f (i)

Figure 7: Utilising data clustering methods. (a) Data are
coloured according to c-means clustering of acceleration
and signal energy values, (b) The posture transition graph
for 9 hours of cormorant behaviour, (c) average behavioural
tortuosity of transitions depicted with a helix, and (d) abstract transitions replaced with the actual transitions in the
data, with an overlay of pressure data (figure 4(b)).
periodicity of the helix indicates the tortuosity, (figure 7(c)).
The number of transistions can also be visualised using this
method. In both cases, the higher period of the helix indicates regions of interest to the biologists, as a large number
of transitions indicates a common movement, and or a high
tortuosity indicates greater energy output (a relation between
energy expenditure and accelerometry readings was shown
by Halsey et al. [HSH∗ 08] and further investigated by Wilson et al. [WWQ∗ 06]).
Actual transitions in the data can also be viewed by brushing the posture graph to display transitions to and from a
state. These transitions can be viewed with attribute overlays
or colouring, as illustrated by figure 7(d) where the graph is
combined with the pressure overlay (e.g. figure 4(b)).

2

i=t

where f (i) gives the heave, surge and sway readings for the
measurement at time i. This can be interpreted in a similar
way to geographical tortuosity as it relates to the complexity of the motion. The tortuosity of a transition is the length
of the transition between two states, k and k . With n transitions of a known length from k to k , the average transition
can be found by summing the length of all the paths from k
to k , and dividing by n. To visualise this statistic, we introduce a helix around the edge in the posture graph, where the

5. Domain Expert Review
From a biologist’s perspective, the scatterplot serves the critical function of presenting multidimensional data in an intuitive manner. Typically for biologists, analyses of multiple
parallel-logged transducer data (figure 1) require complex
statistics where trends are identified via numbers which need
detailed systematic inspection.
Acceleration data are particularly intractable in this rec 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Grundy, Jones, Laramee, Wilson, Shepard / Visualisation of Sensor Data from Animal Movement

gard since axes covary and patterns are exceedingly intricate.
One recent suggestion for the identification of behaviours using tri-axial accelerometry data was to adopt a hierarchical
approach [SWQ∗ 08]. However, these authors made no suggestion as to how this should be done and others following
this approach appear to have simply worked their way manually through the data (e.g. Gomez-Laich et al. [LWQS08]).
In fact, the scatterplot abides by exactly the suggestion of
Shepard et al. [SWQ∗ 08] but actually shows the frequency
and extent of the posture groupings (either by the histogram
function, figure 6, or by point density, figure 3) and is able
to do so as an obvious function of other recorded parameters
(e.g. figure 4) for any selected subsets of the data incorporating hugely different time periods (figure 4(b), figure 5).
Further, the approach shows precisely the importance of
animal posture in different behaviours and forces workers
to consider body attitude more thoughtfully. This has consequences for biological insights that go beyond simple recognition of particular behaviours such as ‘flying’, ‘sitting on
the water surface’, ‘diving’ (see figure 7). For example,
figures 4(b) & 4(d), which treat Imperial Cormorant diving behaviour, immediately show the consistency of the descent angle over multiple dives (the ‘rod’ extending from
the sphere’s South pole) and the sinusoidal variance in the
return-to-the-surface angle (the ‘diffuse cloud’ emanating
from the sphere’s North pole), suggesting the birds may
be slowing their ascent to the surface, possibly to reduce
the likelihood of the bends (directly answering the open research question posed by Sato et al. [SNK∗ 02]). The pattern
is made clear by consideration of a single dive in figure 5,
which also highlights how the body angle of the bird during the bottom phase of the dive (dark red region to the left
of the sphere) is much more variable and not as horizontal
as it is at the surface (small blue area on the left hand side
of the sphere’s equator). This variance in body posture during the bottom of the dive presumably reflects the complexities of prey search and pursuit. Here, the sphere describes
posture changes over time precisely, which immediately encourages an analysis of the tortuosity of the ’track’ to see
how patterns may relate to prey search and capture. To our
knowledge, this has never even been considered before in
the wealth of literature of body acceleration in diving animals (e.g. Yoda et al. [YSN∗ 99], Lovvorn et al. [LWK∗ 04],
Sato et al. [SWT∗ 07]).
It is thus with great excitement that these visualisations
have been adopted by the Swansea University Smart Tag research group, and we fully expect fundamental new insights
into the way animals operate that we could not have conceived before.
6. Conclusion
This work has presented and explored a new approach for the
treatment of animal-acquired tri-axial acceleration data that
encodes all three acceleration lines into a single point whose
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

821

position in space moves according to acceleration. Other,
simultaneously-recorded or derived parameters can be incorporated into the visualisation by colour mapping or by
increasing the distance of the normalised acceleration vector
from the sphere. Previously, visualisation was generally limited to multiple 2D time-series plots of the data. Our methods add increasing ability to first detect postures (spherical
scatterplot), then behaviours (overlays) and finally, statistics
of behaviours (spherical histogram and posture state graph),
directly mirroring the methodology of the biologists and
greatly simplifying data exploration, analysis and hypothesis generation through effective visualisation. Additional examples are shown in figure 8 and an accompanying video.
These methods afford biologists a facility to examine up to
six dimensions simultaneously and provides a powerful and
intuitive representation that has already revealed hitherto unconsidered insight into animal behaviour. Furthermore, we
have incorporated very positive domain expert feedback.
Despite this rapid progression we feel this application
of accelerometry has far more to offer and we have only
scratched the surface of understanding the challenges of its
visualisation. The future direction is to try out more visualisation techniques and continue improving animal behaviour
identification with a goal to achieving a higher level description of animal motion.
Acknowledgments Thanks to Niko Liebsch for 8(a).
Ed Grundy was initially funded by an ESF grant number
061021WA1 arranged by IT Wales, and later by a donation to the IES by Wildlife Computing. Emily Shepard is
funded by a Natural Environment Research Council (NERC)
studentship (award no. NER/S/A/2005/13416A). Device development was supported by a Rolex Award for Enterprise
awarded to Rory Wilson.
References
[Bez81] B EZDEK J. C.: Pattern Recognition with Fuzzy Objective Function Algorithms. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA, 1981. 5
[DSA∗ 90] DAWKINS M. S., S INGER P., A RCHER J., A RLUKE
A., B ROOM D. M., B URGHARDT G. M., B YRNE R. W.,
C HAPMAN C. R., DANTZER R., D EGRAZIA D., D ONNEL LEY S., D UPRE J., F OX M. A., F RASER A. F., F REY R. G.,
G RAY J. A., H UGHES B. O., P ETHERICK J. C., JACKSON F.,
JAMIESON D.: From an animal’s point of view: motivation, fitness, and animal welfare. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 13
(1990), 1–61. 2
[DSGP03] D E VAUL R., S UNG M., G IPS J., P ENTLAND A. S.:
Mithril 2003: Applications and architecture. In Proc. 7th IEEE
Symposium on Wearable Computers (2003), p. 4. 2
[HSH∗ 08] H ALSEY L. G., S HEPARD E. L. C., H ULSTON C. J.,
V ENABLES M. C., W HITE C. R., J EUKENDRUP A. E., W IL SON R. P.: Acceleration versus heart rate for estimating energy
expenditure and speed during locomotion in animals: Tests with
an easy model species, homo sapiens. Zoology 111, 1 (2008),
231–241. 6
[JMF99] JAIN A. K., M URTY M. N., F LYNN P. J.: Data clustering: a review. ACM Comput. Surv. 31, 3 (1999), 264–323. 5

822

Grundy, Jones, Laramee, Wilson, Shepard / Visualisation of Sensor Data from Animal Movement

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 8: Visualisations of accelerometry from other animals. (a) A Leatherback Turtle with a Daily Diary device attached to
the carapace, (b) Four hours of the turtles’ behaviour visualised with our method. Two minutes of rolling behaviour can be seen
as deviations from the vertical column. (c) Nineteen hours of albatross data showing soaring behaviour. the bird rolls its’ body
to fly efficiently for long periods, resulting in an arc across the top of the sphere. (d) Pressure overlay and colouring of 16 hours
of penguin data containing diving behaviour. This can be compared with figure 4(b), to observe similarities in diving depiction,
and dissimilarities in behaviour (e.g. angles of descent and ascent).
[KKM∗ 06] K ELA J., KORPIPÄÄ P., M ÄNTYJÄRVI J., K ALLIO
S., S AVINO G., J OZZO L., M ARCA D.: Accelerometer-based
gesture control for a design environment. Personal Ubiquitous
Computing 10, 5 (2006), 285–299. 2

cetaceans. Proceedings of the Royal Society B:Biological Sciences 274, 1609 (2007), 471–477. 7
[VLC00] VAN L AERHOVEN K., C AKMAKCI O.: What shall we
teach our pants? The 4th International Symposium on Wearable
Computers (2000), 77–83. 2

[LHD∗ 04] L ARAMEE R. S., H AUSER H., D OLEISCH H.,
V ROLIJK B., P OST F. H., W EISKOPF D.: The state of the art
in flow visualization: Dense and texture-based techniques. Computer Graphics Forum 23 (2004), 203–221. 3

[WBS∗ 06] WATANABE Y., BARANOV E. A., S ATO K., NAITO
Y., M IYAZAKI N.: Body density affects stroke patterns in baikal
seals. Journal of Exp. Biol. 209, 17 (2006), 3269–3280. 2

[LWK∗ 04] L OVVORN J. R., WATANUKI Y., K ATO A., NAITO
Y., L IGGINS G. A.: Stroke patterns and regulation of swim speed
and energy cost in free-ranging brunnich’s guillemots. Journal of
Exp. Biol. 207, 26 (2004), 4679–4695. 7

[WCS∗ 89] W ILSON R. P., C ORIA N. R., S PAIRANI H. J.,
A DELUNG D., C ULIK B.: Human-induced behaviour in adélie
penguins pygoscelis adeliae. Polar Biology 10, 1 (1989), 77–80.
2

[LWQS08] L AICH A. G., W ILSON R. P., Q UINTANA F., S HEP ARD E. L. C.: Identification of imperial cormorant phalacrocorax atriceps behaviour using accelerometers. Endangered
Species Research (in press) (Apr 2008). Pre-print available at
http://www.int-res.com/journals/esr/esr-specials/. 7

[WSL08] W ILSON R. P., S HEPARD E. L. C., L IEBSCH N.: Prying into the intimate details of animal lives: use of a daily diary on
animals. Endangered Species Research 4 (Jan 2008), 123–137.
1, 2, 3

[RCW05] ROPERT-C OUDERT Y., W ILSON R. P.: Trends and
perspectives in animal-attached remote sensing. Frontiers in
Ecology and the Environment 3 (2005), 437–444. 2
[SNK∗ 02] S ATO K., NAITO Y., K ATO A., N IIZUMA Y.,
WATANUKI Y., C HARRASSIN J. B., B OST C.-A., H ANDRICH
Y., M AHO Y. L.: Buoyancy and maximal diving depth in penguins: do they control inhaling air volume? Journal of Exp. Biol.
205, 9 (2002), 1189–1197. 2, 7
[SPHB08] S CHLÖMER T., P OPPINGA B., H ENZE N., B OLL S.:
Gesture recognition with a wii controller. In TEI ’08: Proc. 2nd
Conference on Tangible and Embedded interaction (New York,
NY, USA, 2008), ACM, pp. 11–14. 2
[SWQ∗ 08] S HEPARD E. L. C., W ILSON R. P., Q UINTANA F.,
L AICH A. G., L IEBSCH N., A LBAREDA D. A., H ALSEY L. G.,
G LEISS A., M ORGAN D. T., M YERS A. E., N EWMAN C.,
M ACDONALD D. W.: Identification of animal movement patterns using tri-axial accelerometry. Endangered Species Research
(in press) (Apr 2008). Pre-print available at http://www.intres.com/journals/esr/esr-specials/. 1, 2, 3, 7

[WWQ∗ 06] W ILSON R. P., W HITE C. R., Q UINTANA F.,
H ALSEY L. G., L IEBSCH N., M ARTIN G. R., B UTLER P. J.:
Moving towards acceleration for estimates of activity-specific
metabolic rate in free-living animals: the case of the cormorant.
Journal of Animal Ecology 75, 5 (2006), 1081–1090. 6
[XW05] X U R., W UNSCH D. I.: Survey of clustering algorithms.
IEEE Trans. on Neural Networks 16, 3 (2005), 645–678. 5
[YNS∗ 01] YODA K., NAITO Y., S ATO K., TAKAHASHI A.,
N ISHIKAWA J., ROPERT-C OUDERT Y., K URITA M., M AHO
Y. L.: A new technique for monitoring the behaviour of freeranging adelie penguins. Journal of Exp. Biol. 204, 4 (2001),
685–690. 2
[YSN∗ 99] YODA K., S ATO K., N IIZUMA Y., K URITA M., B OST
C., M AHO Y. L., NAITO Y.: Precise monitoring of porpoising
behaviour of adelie penguins determined using acceleration data
loggers. Journal of Exp. Biol. 202, 22 (1999), 3121–3126. 2, 7

[SWT∗ 07] S ATO K., WATANUKI Y., TAKAHASHI A., M ILLER
P. J., TANAKA H., K AWABE R., P ONGANIS P. J., H ANDRICH
Y., A KAMATSU T., WATANABE Y., M ITANI Y., C OSTA D. P.,
B OST C. A., AOKI K., A MANO M., T RATHAN P., S HAPIRO
A., NAITO Y.: Stroke frequency, but not swimming speed,
is related to body size in free-ranging seabirds, pinnipeds and

c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

