Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2009
H.-C. Hege, I. Hotz, and T. Munzner
(Guest Editors)

Volume 28 (2009), Number 3

A Visualization Based Approach for
Digital Signature Authentication
Songhua Xu♮,‡,§†
♮

Wenxia Yang§

Francis C.M. Lau§

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, P.R. China, 310027
‡ Department of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut, USA, 06520
§ Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, P.R. China

Abstract
We propose a visualization based approach for digital signature authentication. Using our method, the speed
and pressure aspects of a digital signature process can be clearly and intuitively conveyed to the user for digital
signature authentication. Our design takes into account both the expressiveness and aesthetics of the derived visual
patterns. With the visual aid provided by our method, digital signatures can be authenticated with better accuracy
than using existing methods—even novices can examine the authenticity of a digital signature in most situations
using our method. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we conducted a comprehensive user study which
confirms positively the advantages of our approach. Our method can be employed as a new security enhancement
measure for a range of business and legal applications in reality which involve digital signature authorization and
authentication.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image
Generation—Viewing algorithms; I.3.m [Computer Graphics]: Miscellaneous—Visualization; H.1.2 [Information
Systems]: User/Machine Systems—Human factors, Human information processing

1. Introduction
We are in a digital era where there is an increasing trend
to digitize any object in reality. Human signature is one such
object. It is now common in many supermarkets where credit
card payment can be digitally signed using a tablet pen. Digital signatures however, like conventional signatures, can be
unsafe; once a digital signature is revealed to the public, it
is subject to being forged. For example, the signatures of
Fig. 7(I-O1 ) and Fig. 7(I-F1 ) are extremely similar but the
latter is in fact an imitation of the former. Nevertheless, digital signatures have added features which are not present in
conventional signatures. These features include the speed
and pressure of the signing when the signature was recorded.
These additional information can be used to strengthen the
signature authentication procedure, which motivates this paper.

† Contact him at songhua DOT xu AT yale DOT edu.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

Over the past several decades, researchers have proposed
many automatic signature authentication and writer verification algorithms. Despite the efforts, these intelligent algorithms still tend to fail to perform satisfactorily for the complicated cases. Deviating from the approaches taken by these
previous efforts, in this paper, we pursue a visualizationbased approach to digital signature authentication. The study
reported in [BNPH02] suggests that one’s writing habit can
be largely considered a distinctive mark of the person; and
statistically, the writing speed and pressure of a person’s digital handwriting are sufficient to uniquely represent the person’s writing habit. In this paper, we propose a visualization
metaphor for illustrating personal handwriting pattern in a
digital signature process. The notable feature of our method
is its ability to visually convey the speed and pressure of the
digital handwriting process. Our metaphor for visualizing
digital signature presents an easy-to-examine visual pattern
to enable even the untrained eyes to conveniently authenticate digital signatures with a high degree of accuracy. Our
approach should be able to improve the accuracy and relia-

936

Songhua Xu, Wenxia Yang, and Francis C.M. Lau / A Visualization Based Approach for Digital Signature Authentication

bility of digital signature authentication as it is significantly
more challenging to forge a signature matching not just the
shape of a signature but also the writing habit of a person.

lily to visually reveal the characteristic information on the
writing speed and pressure aspects of a handwriting process.

The rest of our paper is organized as follows. We first survey some closely related work in Sec. 2. Next, we explain
the design of our signature visualization method in Sec. 3,
which is followed by some selected experiment results in
Sec. 4. After that, we report a comprehensive user study in
Sec. 5, which validates our approach. Finally we conclude
the work in Sec. 6.

3.1. Data Collection from Digital Handwriting
Processes

2. Related Work
We first look at some most related work to our studies
here. Bensefia et al. [BNPH02] introduced the concept of
inter-writer invariant which is detected using an automatic
classification procedure. Schomaker and Bulacu suggested
using connected components and edge-based features for
writer identification and verification [SB04]. Bensefia et al.
[BPH05] suggested the use of graphemes extracted from
segmentation of cursive handwritings and other local features. Schlapbach and Bunke [SB07] employed HMM based
recognizers. Bulacu and Schomaker [BS07] proposed a text
independent writer identification and verification technique
based on textural and allographic features. Also related to
our study is prior studies on using pen dynamic information for writer verification. Kikuchi and Akamatsu [KA01]
studied a hardware-based approach for writer identification
based on writing pressure. Schimke et al. [SVD04] proposed
an online signature authentication method based on an eventstring model to represent the features derived from the signature process, and they used Levenshtien distance for comparing signatures.
3. Our Visualization Method
In this paper, we rely on the statistical distribution of
three features—writing speed, writing direction and pen
pressure—during digital signature to visualize the writing
habit of a person. The challenge of our visualization design
is that we need to present the distribution of the three features in a single graph such that it is easy to read and compare. Traditional statistical graphs, e.g., histogram, pie chart
and statistical curve, are not suitable choices because they
are not designed for visualizing multi-features in a single
graph. We introduce the idea of a “digital lily” (as shown in
Fig. 1(a)), which consists of a petal, several pistils and an
anther, to represent the digital signature habit of a person.
The merits of a digital lily include not only its attractive appearance but also its expressiveness—we can use the shape
and texture of the petal, pistils and the anther to convey the
key characteristics of a person’s digital handwriting process.
In the remainder of this section, we will first look at how
to collect and pre-process data from a digital signature process. After that, we examine our design of using the digital

We sample two types of information in a digital handwriting process: the writing speed and pen pressure as expressed
by a user during his handwriting process. The acquired signals come in a data stream. Assume t0 is the starting moment of a digital signature process. We periodically read signals from our digital pen in the form of a triplet (xt , yt , pt )
where (xt , yt ) specifies the location of the pen tip at time
t, and pt is the pen tip pressure at the time. We normalize the sampled pressure values to the range of [0, 1]. From
two adjacent time moments and their pen tip locations, we
can derive the velocity of the pen vt =(vx,t , vy,t ) through fiy
−y
x
−x
nite difference, i.e., vx,t = t+∆t2∆t t−∆t and vy,t = t+∆t2∆t t−∆t
where ∆t is our device’s signal sampling period. Given
vt , we can calculate its magnitude, |vt | = v2x,t + v2y,t , and
its direction, dir(vt ) = atan2(vx,t , vy,t ) where atan2(x, y)
computes the angle in radians between the positive segment of the X axis and the point given by the coordinates
(x, y) on the plane. atan2(x, y)’s range is between [0, 2π)
(see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atan2 for more explanations on this function definition). The derived triplets in the
form of (|vt |, dir(vt ), pt ) are used in our visualization.
3.2. Digital Lily Design for Handwriting Visualization
An example digital lily is shown in Fig. 1(a) where we use
the petal and pistils of the lily to show the statistical distributions of the writing speed and pressure respectively. The
anther of a digital lily, which is mounted on the end of the
longest pistil, shows the distribution of writing direction during the digital signature process. We use these elements of
our digital lily to visualize a person’s writing habit for signature authentication.
3.2.1. Petal of a Digital Lily
A digital lily in our design has one petal (see Fig. 1(a)).
We use the texture of the petal to represent the range within
which the magnitude of the writing speed (or just magnitude
from now on) of all the writing samples in a digital signature
process would vary, and we use the contour of the petal to
visualize the statistical distribution of the magnitude. A petal
has the following visual properties:
Contour of the petal Fig. 1(b) illustrates the procedure for
deriving the contour of a petal. First, we set up a Cartesian coordinate system, whose origin O is the center of
the displaying window. Second, we equally divide the
range of the magnitude of all the writing samples [0, vmax ]
into γ subranges, Q1 , · · · , Qγ , where Qi =[(i−1)·vmax /γ, i·
vmax /γ) (i = 1, · · · , γ − 1) and Qi =[(i − 1) · vmax /γ, i ·
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Songhua Xu, Wenxia Yang, and Francis C.M. Lau / A Visualization Based Approach for Digital Signature Authentication

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: The composition of a digital lily. (a) shows the digital lily derived from the handwriting in Fig. 7(I-O1 ). (b) illustrates the procedure to determine the contour of the petal
in (a).

vmax /γ] (i = γ). For simplicity and ease of reading, in
Fig.1(b), we set γ to be 8. In all our actual experiments,
we set γ to be 18. For practical deployment, users can optimally tune the γ value to match different displaying devices. We also equally split the entire screen space into
−−→
−−→
γ regions using γ radical lines, OL1 , · · ·, OLγ as shown
−→
in Fig. 1(b). The region spanned by the radical lines OLi
−−−→
and OLi+1 corresponds to the subrange Qi of writing samples as derived earlier. Thirdly, we count the number of
writing samples whose handwriting speed’s magnitude is
within Qi . We denote this number as li . We also calculate
the mean magnitude of the writing samples belonging to
. Fourthly, we map |v|mean
into an
the region Qi as |v|mean
i
i
|v|mean
i
⌋.
This
linear
)
=
⌊360
·
angle according to θ(|v|mean
i
vmax
from
the
range
mapping transforms the magnitude |v|mean
i
of [0, vmax ] into the range of [0, 360]. Next, we draw a rad) with the
ical line ιi , which spans an angle of θ(|v|mean
i
positive segment of the X axis. After that, we find a point
Di on ιi , where |ODi |=κ petal · γ li , in which κ petal is
Σi=1 li
a tunable parameter adaptive to the size of the displaying
window. Here we use ODi to represent the statistical distribution of the magnitude of writing speed samples in the
region Qi . Note that for each region Qi , we can thus obtain an end point position Di . Since we have γ regions
in a petal, this leads to γ such position points, one for
each magnitude region Qi . All these points form an ordered discrete curve P = D1 , D2 , · · · , Dγ , D1 . Finally, we
fit a degree-3 piecewise Bezier curve in the least squares
optimal sense to get a smooth curve representation for P
(see Fig. 1(b)). The resultant Bezier curve forms the contour of the petal.
Texture inside a petal We derive the texture inside a petal
as follows. The brightness of the color is always set to
0.5. The changing components are the hue and the saturation. For an arbitrary point Pt inside the petal whose
polar angle is θt , its hue value is also set as θt . To determine the saturation value for Pt , we first draw a line OPt
(see Fig. 2(b)). Assuming that this line or the extension of
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(a)

937

(b)

Figure 2: Deriving the texture for a petal in a digital lily. (a)
gives a standard HSB color circle. (b) shows how to deriving
the texture for the petal in Fig. 1.(a) by mapping the texture
of the circle shown in (a) to the petal shape.

this line intersects with the contour of the petal at point
Pj , then Pt ’s saturation is set as the relative distance of Pt
to the origin of the coordinate system O with respect to
Pj ’s distance to the origin, i.e., |OPt |/|OPj |. This amounts
to distorting the standard HSB color circle (see Fig. 2(a))
to fit the shape of the petal (see Fig. 2(b)). The resultant
texture mapped petal can be seen in Fig. 1(a).
3.2.2. Pistils of a Digital Lily
Similar to the case of a petal visualizing the distribution of
handwriting magnitude for a group of writing samples as explained in Sec. 3.2.1, we use each pistil of a digital lily to visualize the distribution of handwriting pressure for a group
of writing samples. Analogous to the generation of a petal,
we first uniformly divide the range of all the possible pressure values into β equal sized regions, R1 , R2 , · · · , Rβ . We
also equally divide the whole displaying region into β parts
−−→
−−→ −−→
using β radical lines, OL1 , OL2 , · · ·, OLβ (see Fig. 3). Here
β is a user tunable parameter controlling the complexity of
the visualization pattern. Users can tune the value to best fit
their displaying devices. In all the experiments reported in
this paper, β is set to 6. We denote the number of writing
samples falling into the region of Ri as mi . A pistil has the
following visual properties:
Shape of a pistil The shape of a pistil is an arc, which has
a constant span angle. In this paper, the angle is fixed
as 120 degrees all the time (see Fig. 3). To determine

Figure 3: Determining the shape of a pistil.

938

Songhua Xu, Wenxia Yang, and Francis C.M. Lau / A Visualization Based Approach for Digital Signature Authentication

the shape for the i-th pistil, we first draw a line segment
−→
OPi , whose direction aligns with the boundary line OLi .
The length of OPi is determined according to the percentage of writing samples falling into the region of Ri , i.e.,
β
|OPi | = κ pistil · mi / ∑ j=1 m j where κ pistil is user tunable
whose default value is set as half of the height or width
of the resultant digital lily image, whichever is smaller.
Given the line segment OPi , we can draw a circle Ci whose
circumference passes through both end points of OPi and
whose central angle spanned by OPi is 120 degrees (see
Fig. 3). In general, the minor arc of OPi forms the shape
of the i-th pistil.
Color of a pistil Every pistil has a uniform color. The hue
of every pistil is set to purple, i.e., 270.0; its saturation
is always set to 1.0. The only changing component in the
color composition is its brightness term, which indicates
the average pressure of the writing samples represented
by a pistil—the higher the average pressure, the darker the
color of the pistil. Assuming that the average pressure of
the writing samples in the pistil is pre and the maximum
of all the writing samples acquired throughout the entire
handwriting process is premax , then the brightness of the
pistil is set to pre/premax .
3.2.3. Anther of a Digital Lily
A digital lily has one anther, which consists of multiple
flakes. We use the anther to visualize the statistical distribution of the writing directions during a signature process.
To do this, we first equally divide the angle range of all the
possible handwriting directions [0, 360) into α sub-ranges,
denoted as S1 , S2 , · · · , Sα . And then we classify all the writing samples of a signature process into α groups according
to their writing directions. That is, a given writing example
vt will be assigned to a range Si according to its writing direction dir(vt ), where i=⌊dir(vt ) · α/(2π)⌋. Each Si is represented by an anther flake. More concretely, we denote the
number of writing samples falling into the range of Si as ni .
Here α is a user tunable variable depending on the resolution
of the displaying devices. In all the experiments reported in
this paper, α is always set to 10. The anther and its flakes
have the following visual properties:
Location of the anther The anther of a digital lily always
lies at the end of the longest pistil of the digital lily. Such
a design decision is purposely made to draw the viewer’s
attention to the longest pistil. Recall that the longest pistil corresponds to the group of writing samples whose
handwriting directions are predominant. In case two pistils have the same length, which in practice would almost
never happen, we randomly select one of them to grow the
anther.
Orientation of an anther flake The orientation of the i-th
anther flake, φi , is aligned with the mean handwriting direction of the writing samples represented by the anther
flake. Recall that each anther flake represents all the writing samples belonging to a certain Si .

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Determining the shape of an anther flake (a) and
its interior texture (b).

Contour of an anther flake The contour of an anther flake
consists of two arcs. The process of how to derive the contour of an anther flake is explained below, and illustrated
in Fig. 4(a). First we equally divide the whole plane into
α sectors S1 , · · · , Sα using α boundary lines L1 , L2 , · · · , Lα .
For simplicity and ease of reading, in Fig. 4(a) we show
the situation when α is 6. Each sector Si allocates the
space for drawing an anther flake. Without loss of generality, we look at how to draw an anther flake in the sector
of S2 below. Accordingly, in our following discussion, the
subscript i always equals to 2. Given the orientation φi of
the i-th anther flake as determined by the procedure above,
we first draw a line segment OA following the direction
of φi . The length of the line segment is proportional to
the number of writing samples that the anther flake represents, i.e., ni . In case ni = 0, the anther flake will disappear
and nothing will be drawn. Once the line segment OA has
been plotted, we can draw two circles Ci,i and Ci,i+1 . In
our context, these two circles are C2,2 and C2,3 . The circle of Ci,i+1 (C2,3 ) has its circumference passing through
the two end points of OA, which is also tangent to the
line Li+1 (L3 ). Similarly, the circle of Ci,i (C2,2 ) has its circumference passing through the two end points of OA and
tangent to the line Li (L2 ). The overlapping area between
Ci,i and Ci,i+1 , i.e. C2,2 and C2,3 , forms the interior area of
the second anther flake.
Texture of an anther flake The texture inside an anther
flake is used to indicate the distribution of handwriting
directions of the writing samples that an anther flake represents. For any place u inside the anther flake, its color is
determined as follows. We fix the color’s brightness and
saturation components to be 0.5 and 1.0 respectively; the
color’s hue value is taken as the angle spanned by the line
segment Ou and the positive segment of the X axis (see
Fig. 4(b)).
4. Experimental Results
We implemented and tested our visualization method on a
desktop PC equipped with 2 GB memory, an Intel Core 2
Duo CPU E6750 @ 2.66GHz, and a Wacom PTZ-431W
tablet. For all the experimental results reported here, realtime response has been achieved.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Songhua Xu, Wenxia Yang, and Francis C.M. Lau / A Visualization Based Approach for Digital Signature Authentication

(I-original) (I-facsimiled) (II-original) (II-facsimiled)

(I-original) (I-facsimiled) (II-original) (II-facsimiled)
Figure 5: Two pairs of simple handwriting pieces by two
persons, where the second person tries to facsimile the writing of the first one. The first row shows their handwritings,
which look very similar; the second row shows their corresponding digital lilies, which appear very different.

939

ing both the handwriting pieces and their digital lilies. (IO1 )–(I-O6 ) are six authentic digital signatures by a person
collected at six different times in a week. (I-F1 )–(I-F6 ) are
some carefully created facsimileing results by other people
in the subject group. Notice how similar and stable the signatures by the same person are through our visualization
method, and how those facsimiled signatures vary in the visualization. Even though the facsimiled handwritings look
very similar to the authentic ones, our visualization very
clearly reveals that they are faked. In this figure, we also
show the results of two more sets of similar experiments
where two other individuals’ digital signatures are facsimiled by other subjects. The shapes of the facsimiled signatures
appear highly similar to those of the authentic ones while our
digital lilies clearly tell the fake ones from the real ones.
5. User Study
To more objectively evaluate the effectiveness of our
method, we carried out the following user study.
5.1. Collecting Authentic Signatures and Faked Ones

(I-a)

(I-b)

(II-a)

(II-b)

Figure 6: Two pairs of digital handwritings and their corresponding digital lilies. (I-a) is written with higher pressure
than (I-b) and (II-a) is written in a faster speed than (II-b).

We first show some experimental results demonstrating
that our visualization method can help bring out and reveal
the characteristics of writers’ individual signaturing habits.
Fig. 5 shows an example where deliberate effort is made to
facsimile the original handwriting, as in a forgery case. Despite the fact that the original and the facsimiled handwriting
patterns are highly similar, their digital lilies look vastly different. Fig. 6 gives some comparison results which show that
for similar digital signatures, their digital lilies could differ significantly as long as there is some difference in either
the writing speed or the writing pressure. Specifically, even
though the petals of Fig. 6(I-a) and (I-b), are quite similar,
we can still easily distinguish them by observing their pistil
shapes and anther locations. Thus, minute differences in the
original shapes of the signature are amplified and augmented
in our digital lily visualization. This facilitates signature authentication with much less user identification effort.
Now we show an experiment to demonstrate that the same
person’s signature will remain highly stable while different
people’s signatures will differ drastically. We asked forty individuals to sign their names and also to facsimile others’
signatures. Fig. 7 shows some selected experiment results.
Three groups of experiment results are reported here includc 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

We invited 40 students (18 females and 22 males) to form
our user study subject group. We built a digital signature and
its corresponding digital lily collection with the help of this
user group. Every time when a participant used our system
to create a handwriting sample, we also asked him/her to imitate a randomly selected existing handwriting sample in our
collection. This way we also gathered a collection of forged
handwritings. Visualization result for each signature was immediately generated after the handwriting process and was
also stored in our collection. Once these data were collected,
we used them in a survey to explore the effectiveness of our
method.
5.2. Online Questionnaire
We used an online questionnaire to evaluate the effectiveness
of our visualization results, which consists of the following
questions.
1. Given eight signatures, please select all the handwritings
which you think are written by the person who created
the first signature.
2. Given eight signatures and their corresponding digital
lilies, please select all the handwritings which you think
are written by the person who created the first signature.
3. Given eight pieces of handwritings, we know in advance
there is one and only one person who wrote more than
one piece. Please select all the handwritings which you
think are written by that person.
4. Given eight pieces of handwriting and their corresponding digital lilies. We know in advance there is one and
only one person who wrote more than one piece. Please
select all the handwritings which you think are written by
that person.

940

Songhua Xu, Wenxia Yang, and Francis C.M. Lau / A Visualization Based Approach for Digital Signature Authentication

Table 1: Question answering accuracy for Q1 and Q2 where Q1 studies the signature authentication accuracy without using our
visualization method and Q2 studies the signature authentication accuracy with our visualization. Here we report the subjects’
performance over six groups of questions as well as the overall performance on all the ten groups of questions.
Group1
Group2
Group3
Group4
Group5
Group6
Total
Q1
Q2
Q1
Q2
Q1
Q2
Q1
Q2
Q1
Q2
Q1
Q2
Q1
Q2
Min
0.0% 85.0% 0.0% 75.0% 0.0% 86.4% 0.0% 79.8 0.0% 84.3% 0.0% 76.6% 0.0% 81.4%
Lower Quartile 2.7% 97.4% 0.4% 97.1% 2.4% 94.4% 5.6% 94.5% 3.4% 96.5% 4.7% 95.4% 8.4% 96.7%
Median
10.1% 98.5% 14.5% 98.2% 11.2% 98.4% 12.1% 96.5% 13.2% 97.4% 11.9% 97.3% 12.4% 98.4%
Higher Quartile 25.5% 99.6% 31.8% 99.9% 24.7% 98.7% 24.4% 99.5% 19.9% 99.2% 23.8% 98.7% 32.4% 99.8%
Max
51.3% 100.0% 54.9% 100.0% 50.0% 100.0% 54.2% 100.0% 44.3% 100.0% 54.1% 100.0% 52.3% 100.0%
Average
14.8% 97.9% 23.9% 96.9% 16.2% 97.6% 23.8% 98.1% 26.7% 97.5% 10.6% 98.2% 20.4% 97.7%
Table 2: Question answering accuracy for Q3 and Q4 where Q3 explores writer verification accuracy without the assistance
of our visualization method and Q4 studies the writer verification accuracy with the assistance of our visualization method.
We report here all the subjects’ performance over the first six groups of questions and their overall performance on all the ten
groups of questions.
Group1
Group2
Group3
Group4
Group5
Group6
Total
Q3
Q4
Q3
Q4
Q3
Q4
Q3
Q4
Q3
Q4
Q3
Q4
Q3
Q4
Min
0.0% 86.0% 0.0% 85.8% 0.0% 83.2% 0.0% 74.9 0.0% 84.6% 0.0% 72.6% 0.0% 82.8%
Lower Quartile 5.6% 96.8% 7.6% 97.3% 2.6% 95.1% 3.7% 93.5% 4.4% 95.5% 10.7% 96.1% 6.4% 97.2%
Median
10.6% 98.1% 13.8% 98.5% 5.3% 98.4% 6.1% 98.5% 13.6% 97.5% 15.6% 97.4% 11.4% 97.9%
Higher Quartile 26.3% 99.7% 32.6% 99.6% 16.8% 98.7% 28.2% 99.3% 21.3% 98.2% 22.7% 98.7% 24.6% 99.5%
Max
42.3% 100.0% 46.7% 100.0% 50.0% 100.0% 54.6% 100.0% 42.7% 100.0% 56.3% 100.0% 42.3% 100.0%
Average
15.7% 97.1% 15.2% 98.3% 14.1% 97.7% 10.8% 96.5% 13.8% 96.8% 18.7% 98.2% 12.4% 97.3%

5. What is your age?
6. What is your major?
7. Are you familiar with digital handwriting or digital signature before participating in this study? [0–5]: 0, Never
encountered; 5, Yes, very familiar.
8. Do you feel our digital lily is easy to perceive? [0–5]: 0,
No, too overwhelming; 5, Yes, very clear.
9. How do you feel about the visual appearance of our visualization? Are you interested in looking at them? [0–5]:
0, Not interested at all; 5, Highly interested.
10. Do you wish to apply our current visualization method
to assist handwriting authentication in real life? [0–5]: 0,
Strongly object; 5, Strongly support.
In the above, Questions 1 to 2 evaluate the effectiveness of
our visualization method for signature authentication. Questions 3 to 4 evaluate the effectiveness of our visualization
method for handwriting writer identification. Both pairs of
questions intend to show the effectiveness of our method
through the improvement of the correct human recognition
rate after employing our visualization method, as opposed
to relying on only the digital signatures. Questions 5–7 survey the user’s background. Question 8 studies whether the
user feels our visualization method is easy to use. Question
9 is on the aesthetics and visual attraction of our visualization results. Question 10 surveys people’s judgement on the
maturity and readiness of our technology for practical deployment. The above questions can be broadly classified into

two parts where Questions 1–4 form the first part and Questions 5–10 form the second part. To generate a questionnaire,
questions in the second part will only occur once while questions in the first part can be repeated for multiple times; of
course each time the digital handwriting and its digital lilies
will be changed.
5.3. User Study Results
We invited another 100 individuals to participate in our online user survey using the questionnaire shown above. These
individuals were newly invited and none of them were in our
signature acquisition group (see Sec. 5.1). We randomly selected 10 groups of handwriting pieces and their corresponding digital lilies to form Questions 1–4. In each group, there
are eight handwriting pieces where x pieces are the authentic handwriting pieces by the same person and (8 − x) are
forged handwriting pieces by other people whom were also
randomly selected from our collection. Here x is a random
integer between 2 and 6. In this way, each time when a participant accessed our online questionnaire, the survey server
will randomly select a group of digital handwritings and
their digital lilies to dynamically generate the survey webpage. After the participant answered a question, his/her result will be automatically saved and evaluated on our server.
Due to space limit, we report here the accuracy achieved
by 6 out of 10 survey groups along with the overall accuc 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Songhua Xu, Wenxia Yang, and Francis C.M. Lau / A Visualization Based Approach for Digital Signature Authentication

Table 3: Performance comparison between the accuracies
of automatic signature authentication methods as reported
in the literature and the accuracy of our method.
[KA01] [SVD04] [SB07] [BNPH02] Our Method
93.2%
96.0% 96.56%
95.3%
97.7%

racy achieved by all the 10 groups. Table 1 reports the answering accuracy for Questions 1 and 2. Table 2 reports the
answering accuracy for Questions 3 and 4. According to the
data reported in Table 1, we can see that without the help
of our visualization method, the average accuracy of signature authentication as measured by Question 1 is 20.4%,
while the average accuracy of signature authentication with
the help of our visualization method as measured by Question 2 is 97.7%. This result is better than the result reported
in [SB07], where the recognition accuracy is 96.56%. For
Questions 3 and 4 whose results are reported at Table 2,
without the assistance of our visualization method, the average accuracy as measured by Question 3 is 12.4%, while
with our visualization assistance, the average accuracy as
measured by Question 4 is 97.3%. In addition, we also compare the performance of other automatic signature identification algorithms to the average performance of our method,
whose results are reported in Table 3. These data confirm
the superiority of our method with respect to the state-of-art
automatic signature authentication algorithms. Note that according to Table 1, the question answering quality for Question 2, i.e., the signature authentication accuracy with the
assistance of our visualization method, has an average of
97.7%, a lower quartile value of 96.7% and a higher quartile value of 99.8%. Recall this is the performance of all the
100 subjects participating in our study. We can therefore arrive at a statistically robust conclusion that our method outperforms these existing automatic signature authentication
methods in the literature. Similarly, according to Table 2, the
majority of the writer verification accuracy with the assistance of our visualization method is above 97.2% (the lower
quartile value), which is superior to existing automatic methods.
Lastly, from the statistics of Questions 7–10 as shown in
Table 4, we can see that 81% of the participants think our visualization is easy to perceive and use; 73% (= 46% + 27%)
of the participants are interested in using our visualization
method to help them authenticate signatures; and 51% of
them want to see our visualization results being applied in
reality for signature authentication. This indicates a high acceptance of our visualization method by the user group.

941

Table 4: Statistics of answers to Questions 5, 7–10.
Q5

15-20:22%
Never encouQ7
ntered: 26%
Too overwhQ8
elming: 3%
Uninterested:
Q9
12%
Reject:
Q10
8%

21-25:42% 26-30:24% >30:12%
Only heard Seldomly Familiar:
about it: 38% used: 24%
12%
Difficult:
Neutral:
Clear:
6%
10%
81%
Neural:
Interested: Highly inte15%
46%
rested: 27%
Probably
Neural:
Accept:
reject:12%
29%
51%

aesthetics of the metaphor. According to our experiment results, we find that the visual pattern generated using our
method is persistently stable for signatures created by the
same person; whereas for signatures facsimiled by others,
even though their shapes are highly similar, the generated
digital lilies reveal clearly that they are different. Through a
comprehensive user study we further confirm that our visualization method can effectively help people more intuitively
and reliably authenticate digital signatures. Our work therefore suggests that visualization can usefully enhance the security of digital signatures, which is a topic worthy of more
future work.
Acknowledgement
We thank Li Yuen Kwan for helping us recruit subjects to
participate in our user studies. This work has a patent pending.
References
[BNPH02] B ENSEFIA A., N OSARY A., PAQUET T., H EUTTE L.:
Writer identification by writer’s invariants. In Proc. of Frontiers
in Handwriting Recognition (2002), pp. 274–279.
[BPH05] B ENSEFIA A., PAQUET T., H EUTTE L.: A writer identification and verification system. Pattern Recognition Letters 26,
13 (2005), 2080–2092.
[BS07] B ULACU M., S CHOMAKER L.: Text-independent writer
identification and verification using textural and allographic features. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 29, 4 (2007), 701–
717.
[KA01] K IKUCHI M., A KAMATSU N.: Development of speedy
and high-sensitivity pen system for writing pressure and writer
identification. Systems and Computers in Japan 32, 6 (2001),
1763–1772.
[SB04] S CHOMAKER L., B ULACU M.: Automatic writer identification using connected-component contours and edge-based
features of uppercase western script. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 26, 6 (2004), 787–798.

6. Conclusion

[SB07] S CHLAPBACH A., B UNKE H.: A writer identification and
verification system using hmm based recognizers. Pattern Analysis and Applications 10, 1 (2007), 33–43.

In this paper, we introduce a new metaphor called “digital lily” for visualizing human handwriting characteristics
in a digital signature process. In designing our visualization method, we consider both the expressiveness and the

[SVD04] S CHIMKE S., V IELHAUER C., D ITTMANN J.: Using adapted levenshtein distance for on-line signature authentication. In Proc. of International Conference on Pattern Recognition
(2004), pp. 931–934.

c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

942

Songhua Xu, Wenxia Yang, and Francis C.M. Lau / A Visualization Based Approach for Digital Signature Authentication

(I-O1 )

(I-O2 )

(I-O3 )

(I-O4 )

(I-O5 )

(I-O6 )

(I-F1 )

(I-F2 )

(I-F3 )

(I-F4 )

(I-F5 )

(I-F6 )

(II-O1 )

(II-O2 )

(II-O3 )

(II-O4 )

(II-O5 )

(II-O6 )

(II-F1 )

(II-F2 )

(II-F3 )

(II-F4 )

(II-F5 )

(II-F6 )

(III-O1 )

(III-O2 )

(III-O3 )

(III-O4 )

(III-O5 )

(III-O6 )

(III-F1 )

(III-F2 )

(III-F3 )

(III-F4 )

(III-F5 )

(III-F6 )

Figure 7: Three groups of authentic digital signatures and their facsimiles. (O) stands for the authentic signatures by the
original person and (F) stands for facsimiled results by others.

c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

