2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Oncology Lifeline – A Timeline Tool for the Interdisciplinary
Management of Breast Cancer Patients in a Surgical Clinic.
Brian Drohan PhD2, Georges Grinstein PhD1, Kevin Hughes MD2
1
University of Massachusetts, Lowell MA
2
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston MA
Abstract

The resulting visualization uses each of the
various specialties in the comprehensive clinic as
timeline dimensions. The primary data that are
mapped to each dimension include patient medical
information generated by clinical encounters with
that specialty. Metadata for each dimension is also
included as information such as alerts and
recommendations are identified by clinical decision
support functionality from any of the included
dimensions.
The implementation platform for the tool is
the RiskApps software package developed by the
collaboration
between
the
University
of
Massachusetts Lowell and the Massachusetts General
Hospital for identifying patients at high risk of
developing breast cancer [5]. The RiskApps package
is built to be consistent with a modular approach in
developing niche solutions with international
standards-based interfaces for compatibility [6].
With the screening mammography, high risk
genetics, and surgical clinic modules already
incorporated, we needed to develop this central hub
for interpreting a patient history for the purposes of
managing their care.
At the lowest level, the data used in the
timeline is a mixture of clinical research data, patient
self reported health history, and clinician entered
medical knowledge. Processed data and analysis
results from previous patient encounters such as
structured documents, risk model computations, and
management recommendations are also included in
the timeline.
The visualization also supports
interactions for summarizing the current known
status for each dimension and its tracking over time.
Ultimately the timeline is meant to support
the decision making process surrounding patient care
by helping clinicians access the right information
when they need it.

The multidisciplinary approach to breast
cancer treatment in a comprehensive breast center
model can deliver a high standard of care for the
patient, but it also generates a wide range of patient
data that are typically left as disparate silos, and not
organized or analyzed for any clinician to help with
patient care. We have developed a method for the
synthesis of radiology, surgery, pathology, medical
oncology, and genetics information from a patient
medical history in a timeline paradigm with elements
of clinical decision support and quality indicators to
help with decision making. A model for structuring
data from the many disparate sources was developed
to support enriched probing interactions. Summary
views of the current knowledge from each discipline
were also tightly integrated. To support the surgical
management workflow, the prototype lifelines were
integrated
into
existing
clinical
software,
incorporating all the relevant events, decisions, and
data elements.
KEYWORDS: Patient timeline, Electronic Health
Records, Clinical Decision Support
1. Introduction
As the advances in cancer therapy exploit
the ever more focused areas of scientific research,
clinical specialists have had to develop a
multidisciplinary approach to patient care that
integrates their efforts in order to realize the benefits
[1]. The increasing use of Electronic Health Record
(EHR) systems among these centers represents an
opportunity to develop visualizations and clinical
decision support (CDS) algorithms to help clinicians
deliver the standard of care for their patients [2]. In
this work we develop a unifying framework for the
analysis and presentation of the data collected by the
various disciplines at work at a comprehensive cancer
center. The visual paradigm we use is that of the
patient timeline, called Lifelines, developed by
Plaisant et al [3]. We also worked with ideas
developed for the querying and presentation of
temporal patient data from the work of Wang et al
[4].
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.106

2. Methods
The fundamental metaphor of the
visualization, like that of Lifelines, is a horizontal
timeline. We describe the layout and the data used to
provide full patient information across each aspect of
233

the patients cancer treatment (see Figure 1). The goal
is to provide access to all related information in a
time-sensitive manner.

Each dimension has a different data model that it uses
to track information and therefore has different
content for the timeline and a unique structure for
drilling down for additional information.
The documents produced at any given
encounter represent an important summary of the
current thinking of the clinician at the time, and are
very meaningful when trying to understand what has
been communicated to the various care givers over
the course of a patient’s treatment. For example, the
system includes a patient survey summary for
clinician review in order to summarize the current
information provided by the patient as part of an
exam, as well as letters meant for the patient’s
relatives at high risk of BRCA mutation who might
want to consider genetic testing. All are available by
probing each of the associated icons on the
corresponding axis.

2.1 Cancer disciplines as dimensions and
icons as encounters
The data dimensions used in the
visualizations correspond to the various disciplines of
cancer therapy, each represent by a parallel timeline.
Data points are represented as icons that are placed
on each axis at the time of occurrence. Icons
represent patient encounters with a provider of that
specialty. For selected dimensions first tier labels
provide a high level description for each encounter
appearing on the axis. The specific icons used for
each dimension reflect the particular encounter type.
For instance, surgery has both consultation and exam
icons, while radiology has X-ray and MRI icons for
both screening and diagnostic imaging. The border
of the icon is used to color encode the significance of
findings from an encounter. For example, a red
outline around a surgery icon represents a invasive
cancer finding, while a green outline around a
genetics icon represents a negative genetic test.

Figure 2.
The approach to providing
additional data through probing follows a
structure for each dimension.

2.3 Anchored axes windows
The timeline visualization also supports a
novel interaction with dimensions. When the user
places a “tag” icon at a given point in time on an axis,
a summary window appears which contains
aggregated data with the most important information
known at that time. The specific rules for data
aggregation and visualization choice for results are
left for dimension specific implementations, but the
framework for executing the temporal queries and
window placement are provided by the timeline.
For the surgical dimension this summary is
an instance of a preexisting form that was developed
in the surgical scheduling module that displays the

Figure 1. Probing can be used to explore
structured documents with key findings
highlighted.

2.2 Structured documents and encounter data
The bulk of data content used in the
visualization is either patient data collected at an
encounter, or a structured document used to report
the associated findings. The mechanisms used to
probe for additional information reflect this pattern.
Each of the clinical encounters modeled in
the system has structured data associated with it.

234

definitive surgeries and findings for an episode of
care. In the case of the pathology dimension, the
summary is a newly developed table indicating the
major and minor findings as determined by the
natural language processing methods. The genetics
dimension has two options for the summary, one is a
pedigree showing the risk of a DNA mutation for
everyone in the family, the other is a view of the
future risk of cancer and the associated management
recommendations for various genetic testing
outcomes. When an alert or recommendation is
encountered by a summary window the information
is presented highlighted at the top of the screen.
The window of displayed events on the
timeline is set by pan and zoom sliders. There is also
an axis marker that denotes the point in time for
current view for the summary windows. This marker
can be positioned manually or animated with PlayPause controls so that the summary of each
dimension can be observed over time. Additional
controls can be provided.

from two main categories of patient encounter, the
preoperative examination, and the actual surgical
visit. It is the surgical visit that provides the physical
specimen for the subsequent pathology data. It is
often in the examination encounter that family history
information is collected, and therefore we often see
alerts for genetic testing. For examination encounters
we track data for the following major categories: the
patient’s chief complaint, a history ofresent illness,
summary of imaging results, vital signs, medications,
allergies, and ultimately what the examination’s
findings and impressions are. For the surgical
encounter we track data such as the date of service,
all procedures and codes, and anesthesia.
Techniques to consolidate a prior history of
surgeries within an episode of care provide useful
data when deciding in the next step in care,
automatically staging the cancer for example. Here
we identify what the definitive breast and axilla
surgeries have been, and what the final histology is
along with the extent of nodal involvement and
available tumor characteristics.

2.4.2 Pathology
The data from the pathology domain is
entirely based on textual reports, and unlike other
disciplines there are no patient encounters. The most
important aspect of the underlying data is that it is
semi-structured. As a result, much information can
be easily extracted relatively simply by parsing using
regular expressions.
This is a benefit when presenting this data
via a probing mechanism because the nested sections
of the report are easily parsed and naturally support a
drill-down presentation. When the report contains a
table of pathological findings consistent with modern
synoptic reporting techniques, this parsing approach
can also extract the significance of the report.
However, a vast majority of the time the structured
data falls short of summarizing a reports meaning,
leaving much of the interpretation to come from the
nuanced language. This problem has largely been
solved to by our previous work with natural language
processing. We can therefore easily extract the
ultimate significance of each pathology report
programmatically and expose this knowledge through
probing on a pathology icon and drilling down
through the structured elements with the areas of text
giving rise to significant interpretation highlighted.
The axis window on the pathology discipline
shows a table of the summary findings across
multiple path reports within the current episode of
care. The most important feature is the ability for

Figure 3. Dimension windows show
summary of knowledge of a discipline.

2.4 Data elements
As the data used in this visualization is
drawn from multiple clinical specialties, it is
naturally heterogeneous. This led to the creation of a
structured approach to providing additional
information through user interaction that can applied
to each dimension (Figure 3). A summary of the
corresponding relevant data for the surgical
dimension is seen in Table 1.

2.4.1 Surgery
The most robust dimension we have
modeled is the surgical timeline. Here we use data

235

this view to summarize a collection of multiple
pathology reports within an episode of care and
illustrate whether this patient has had an invasive
diagnosis, a prior finding of a pre-cancerous lesion,
or simply a benign finding. In essence, these rules
for data aggregation are concerned with synthesizing
evidence supporting the presence or absence of a
group of major diagnosis types, and subsequently
implement a trumping order of diagnoses in which
the major findings are reported by order of
significance

documents include letters to relatives that discuss
why they should consider genetic testing.
Placing an axis window on the genetics
dimension shows a summary of the family history
known to that point as a pedigree with the risk of
being a mutation carrier for each individual. This
presentation represents the first time a pedigree
drawing application has been used to illustrate the
results of quantitative models for the entire family in
a clinical tool. Placing this presentation on a timeline
can let the user appreciate how these emerging
patterns of hereditary risk change over time as family
history information is collected and refined.
A graph of the future risk of invasive cancer
given various genetic testing outcomes is also
available. This approach supports the idea of
assessing various potential health outcomes given a
set of potential decisions about case management. In
this context we extend this utility by illustrating the
connections these outcomes have for the other
dimensions under consideration. An example would
be how without genetic testing we might consider
enhanced screening, but in the case of a positive
genetic testing, surgery is strongly recommended.

2.4.3 Genetics
The genetics discipline, specifically the
identification and case management of those at high
risk for hereditary cancer, was the first piece of the
RiskApps platform to use rich visualizations as
clinical decision support. As a result, there are many
connections between the information tracked here
and the connections with the other dimensions. In
terms of surgery we find recommendations are made
for high risk individuals in terms of prophylactic
mastectomy and oophorectomy.
In terms of
pathology, we find that the tumor staining data made
available from the laboratory reports can help us
refine our estimates of mutation risk. In terms of
radiology, we will make recommendations for
enhanced screening with traditional x-ray and MRI
for high risk individuals. All of these data are
represented as callouts on the timeline and as
additional data available from the summary view.
The most clinically significant patient
information used in this genetics is typically a family
health history. This can be an encounter with a
genetics professional, or more commonly a
mammography technician in a screening center or
nurse practitioner in a surgical clinic that actually
collects the data. Probing on these encounters can
provide many structured documents to explore. The
most basic is the survey summary that shows what
data was provided by the patient and what
quantitative analysis has been done. More interesting

2.4.4 Radiology
The RiskApps software doesn’t currently
manage raw digital image data, and therefore
radiology is very similar to pathology in that the bulk
of the data used here is from textual reports. There is
much structured data that can easily be extracted and
correlated with the other dimensions. The first major
characteristic is typically whether the encounter is a
screening or diagnostic mammogram. A major
decision factor from these data is the Breast ImagingReporting and Data System classification value. This
scale is used by radiologists to differentiate a normal
mammogram from those with suspicious findings.
As MRI use increases for both diagnostic and high
risk screening protocols, there will be more data to
manage.

Table 1. Example data elements for the surgical timeline dimension

236

Figure 4. A graph of the future risk of cancer and the various recommendations for the potential
outcomes of genetic testing can be selected instead of the pedigree as a genetics summary view.

3. Discussion and future directions
Ultimately, tools that provide timely and
relevant information to clinicians can help provide
high standards of care for patients. A single vendor
of electronic health record systems will likely never
capture all of the nuances of each of the many
disciplines that are involved in a comprehensive
cancer center. Instead, it is likely that each domain
will be represented by experts that develop novel
approaches to solving their niche challenges. This
work is meant to help bring these solutions together
in a unified visualization.
One promising extension of this work would
be the ability to aggregate multiple patient timelines
for a population wide view. This could have
potential benefit from both individual patient care
and institutional capacity for meeting the standards of
care for all patients. An early attempt at visualizing
our entire research database of surgical and imaging
procedures as a table can be seen in Figure 5. This
work was entirely based on our research database of
surgical and imaging encounters database.
The first challenge this work points out is
the need to aggregate a single patient’s history as
well as multiple individuals. Another notion shown
here is the normalization of the timeline by reporting
events as a series of procedure without using their
dates for positioning. These two views are both used
in epidemiology to describe different types of patient
cohorts and should be significant when used to
present population wide outcomes data.

Figure 5. A population wide view of all
surgical and imaging procedures as a table.
This paper described a visual integration of
a multidisciplinary care plan at a comprehensive
cancer center.
We aimed to highlight the
interdependence of decisions on timely data and
interpretations. Focusing on developing practical
tools for rapid clinical deployment, the RiskApps
infrastructure was valuable for use as a
comprehensive research database to populate
prototype displays.
As a general approach we have aimed at
deploying new technology rapidly into the clinic as
patient care and not clinical research. For that reason
we tend to develop new functionality and abandon
early failures as a direct result of clinician feedback,
not structured user studies. As this tool now moves
from the research and development phase into
clinical deployment we expect to make many changes
to support workflow integration. The timeline itself
should ultimately act as a portal to all of this

237

information, and provides additional perspectives on
the data as a whole.

4. References
[1] Taghian, Smith, Erban, Thomas. Breast Cancer, A
Multidisciplinary Approach to Diagnosis and Management.
2010 Demos Publishing
[2] 2009 Second International Conference in Visualization.
Visual Analytic Methods for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian
Cancer Risk Assessment. Barcelona, Spain. July 15-July 17
.Brian Drohan, Georges Grinstein, "Visual Analytic
Methods for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Risk
Assessment," Visualization, International Conference in,
pp. 171-176, 2009 Second International Conference in
Visualization, 2009.
[3] Plaisant, C., Mushlin, R., Snyder, A., Li, J., Heller, D.,
Shneiderman, B. LifeLines: Using Visualization to
Enhance Navigation and Analysis of Patient Records
Revised version in 1998 American Medical Informatic
Association Annual Fall Symposium (Orlando, Nov. 9-11,
1998), p. 76-80, AMIA, Bethesda MD.
[4] Taowei David Wang, Catherine Plaisant, Ben
Shneiderman, Neil Spring, David Roseman, Greg
Marchand, Vikramjit Mukherjee, and Mark Smith.
Temporal Summaries: Supporting Temporal Categorical
Searching, Aggregation and Comparison. HCIL technical
report(HCIL 2009-09). March, 2009.
[5] Ozanne EM, Loberg A, Hughes S, Lawrence C, Drohan
B, Semine A, Jellinek M, Cronin C, Milham F, Dowd D,
Block C, Lockhart D, Sharko J, Grinstein G, Hughes KS.
Identiﬁcation and Management of Women at High Risk For
Hereditary Breast⁄Ovarian Cancer Syndrome. The Breast
Journal, Volume 15 Number2, 2009 155–162
[6] Electronic Health Records and the Management of
Women at High Risk of Hereditary Breast and Ovarian
Cancer Brian Drohan, Elissa M. Ozanne, Kevin S. Hughes
Volume 15 Issue s1, p S46-S55 (September/October 2009)

238

