2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

GeoVisualisation of SAPO search activity
Ana Veloso, Rui Raposo, João Costa, Óscar Mealha
Department of Communication and Art
University of Aveiro, UA
Aveiro, Portugal
aiv@ua.pt, raposo@ua.pt, jveoc@ua.pt, oem@ua.pt

simultaneously supply interaction tools based on direct
manipulation.
This paper describes research developed in the field of
Information Visualization (IV) with the use of data collected
from SAPO's Broker for SAPO internal editorial use and
which consisted of portal search engine content data and its
georeferencing in Portugal. The main goal of this
contribution is to the improve SAPO’s internal editorial
work. The purpose of the research done was to work on new
ways to: i) visualize data according to a infographic
metaphor conceptualized and implemented based on the data
collected; ii) communicate, in a more intuitively form,
information derived from the data collected iii) design data
analysis and interaction tools suitable for i) and ii). These
goals, set to solve the research problem supra mentioned,
keep in constant thought that the metaphor would have to be
appropriate for the target audience, SAPO's editorial staff.
Work done started off with a careful and detailed
construction of a theoretical framework capable of aiding the
team in future efforts, but also enabling the understanding of
what was the state-of-the art at that time in that context.

Abstract—The objective of this paper is to report on the
research inherent to the conceptualisation and prototyping of
an Information Visualisation system centred on the task of
conveying meaning to user interaction data collected by the
SAPO Broker web service. SAPO Broker, a real-time
monitoring application that collects data regarding activity
within the SAPO Web Portal, collects a large set of data with
the main purpose of assisting visualisation and analysis of tasks
linked to georeferenced web searches performed on the portal.
The research and its results where guided according to two
major challenges: i) design an appropriate visual metaphor
capable of appropriately integrating the collected data for a
specific target audience, technology set and context of use; ii)
design intuitive and relevant interaction tools able to assist this
particular data analysis.
Keywords- Information Visualisation, Geovisualisation,
Georeferencing, Web search, SAPO Portal, SAPO Broker

I.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES

SAPO Broker is a SAPOi web service which monitors in
real time a large number of variables related to events that
happen within SAPO’s Web Portal, such as: i) the number of
clicks made in different areas of portal; ii) search content; iii)
geographical point of access; among others. The type of data
collected represents great potential as indicators of users
preferences and, if market dynamics are considered, resulting
information may be of great importance for augmenting the
portal’s various information sections and services.
The problems identified were: only a small fraction of all
information provided through Broker was presented in a
solely text based visualization system; and at the same time
there was a need for a less technical and more intuitive data
and information analysis tool.
The other daily problem is that experts are usually
required for these tasks and, in some cases if not all, cannot
easily and completely transmit the information to other staff
in a friendly, engaging and/or easy to read format, often
resulting in superficial information reading or setting it aside
altogether [1].
This problem can be avoided in many situations through
the use of visual data analysis systems, such as spatial
metaphors, more familiar and intuitive to the human eye.
These systems are able to help embody abstract data and
i

II.

With the growth of computer's processing capacity and
memory it’s possible to store and retrieve large amounts of
data of different types, and also perform more complex
analyses in comparison to 10 or 20 years ago. The interesting
fact is that despite this intense technical growth, very few
significant evolutions took place regarding the use of
visualisation paradigms, in order to make all this information
understandable and interesting for the general public, and
also to facilitate the discovery of new meaning for data and
information in a clear, accurate, and useful way [2].
Information Design (ID) helps to shed some light on
classic data format presentations by creating solutions for
dealing with the information resulting from these data
analysis systems. Infographics and IV may both be
considered disciplines of ID. Though both seek new ways to
process and organize visual information, Infographics
doesn’t address issues related with interactivity. On the other
hand IV’s main aim is “to use computer-supported,
interactive, visual representations of abstract data in order to
amplify cognition” [3] and optimize the use of our visual
thinking ability in dealing with this type of information [4].

Largest Portuguese Web Portal (http://www.SAPO.pt)

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.42

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK AND STATE-OF-THE-ART

225

A concept also worth mentioning, in the context of this
paper, is Geovisualisation, which may be linked to both IV
and SV [5]. Geovisualisation, also known as Geographic
View, centres its’ concerns in representing data according to
real spatial references, namely geographic references. Its
paradigms are always map based and usually represent a
specific geographic area, always dependent on a pre-existent
spatial context. The maps are constructed with information
supplied from satellite images and georeferenced databases
[6]. These projects normally have three types of variables
associated to them: i) the places on the surface of the Earth
(geographic coordinates: latitude and longitude); ii) its
attributes (abstract data: population, index, pollution) and iii)
their relationships (comparing attributes: proximity,
connectivity).
When comparing concepts it is interesting to see that
while some authors argue that Geovisualisation is IV’s main
influence [7], others argue that Geovisualisation adopts
concepts from several areas, including IV [8]. The
perspective adopted within the work developed emphasizes a
concern with merging widely used concepts in IV and ID
with our core goals and their georeferenced component.

B. Design Patterns
Shneiderman [3] states that data exploration tends to
follow the following path: i) Overview first; ii) zoom and
filter and iii) details-on-demand, in a sort of Mantra of
Information Search. A possible overview of the entire data
set is very important because it: i) reduces the search to be
carried out; ii) detects general problems and iii) helps the
user to choose the next step to be taken [3].
Behrens [12] proposes a taxonomy for categorizing ID
applied to the field of IV. This taxonomy was particularly
relevant in the context of this research due to its recentness
and due to the fact that it is based on the development of
popular types proposed by Shneiderman [3] and presented in
an objective and structured set of solutions for current
visualisation systems. The patterns are: i) Display Patterns;
ii) Behaviour Patterns and iii) Interaction Patterns [12].
i) Display Patterns related with the area of information
visualisation, aim to create new knowledge and show how
data is presented and organized and, therefore, closely
related to how data will be consumed and analyzed.
According to Behrens [12] display pattern characteristics can
be divided into:
a) correlations - show a direct relationship between two or
more sets of quantitative data, through the existence of direct
correspondence in each pair of variables [12] (ex.
Scatterplots and BubbleCharts).
b) continuous quantities - typically represent the evolution of
certain groups of data through time such as, Simple Line
Charts; Multiset Line Charts multiple sets of data). [12]);
c) discrete quantities - represent discrete items of quantitative
values with special emphasis on the highlighting of the
differences between the value through representations such
as: Simple Bar Charts; Multiset Bar Charts; Stacked Bar
Charts [12].
d) data proportions - highlight the numeric comparison of
different characteristics, taking into account the whole set of
data - usually with a percentage (ex: Nightingale's Polar Area
Diagrams; Pie Charts; Ring Charts, among others) [12].
e) flow diagrams - represent dynamic changes that occur
sequentially in a given system focusing on the elements’
evolution and how they fit into the system as a whole,
usually supported by their percentages and used in: a)
‪Sankey's Diagrams; and b) Thread Arcs [12].
f) hierarchies - represent complex relational structures,
usually with heterogeneous components interconnected.
These tools present an overview of the system, with different
hierarchies, but also reflecting the individual characteristics
of the elements (ex: Tree Diagrams and Treemaps) [12].
Cases like the Botanical Viewer application present the tree
metaphor in a 3D representation in a complex approach [13].
g) networks - represent elements linked together when
apparently there’s no hierarchal relationship among them.
Examples of these are: a) Diagram Maps; b) Relation Circles
(social networks, geography) [12].
h) spatial configurations - commonly use the map paradigm
to represent spatial configurations and is considered the best

A. Perception and cognition
Understanding how the brain interprets the result of
cognitive activities triggered by IV is essential in order to
understand how data and information, or packages of data or
clusters of information, should be highlighted or correlated
with other items.
According to [9] symbols represent real units,
rationalizing abstract information into conventional
information. They can be divided into two categories Arbitrary and Sensory, despite the difficult and subjective
process of categorization [9]. Arbitrary symbols need prior
learning due to their subjective relationship with the real
object. Sensory symbols, on the contrary, depend on the
perceptual processing of the brain, do not require prior
learning and are free from individual cultural contexts [9].
Pre-Conscious perception, which is very important when
working with IV and ID, occurs before any conscious
attention takes place and determines which objects catch our
immediate attention. Ware [9] divides Pre-Conscious
elements into the following dimensions: Colour, Shape,
Position and Spatial Movement [9]. The colour dimension
categories (hue, saturation and brightness) can function
independently as differentiating factors in the environment
[9]. The shape dimension includes elements such as: size,
orientation, shape, focus and blur, spatial distribution and
curvature [9]. Aside from these dimension 3D virtual
representation may use visual representation of depth as an
additional representation variable. When no native third
dimension is used the elements may resort to perspective
representation, which can create the illusion of the three
dimensional imagery space, by overlapping different
elements [9], contrasting sharp elements versus blurred
elements [10] and shadow projection of elements [11].

226

C. Usability and evaluation techniques
Considering Behrens’s [12] design patterns or
Shneiderman’s [3] Visual Information-Seeking Mantra, both
need continuous usability concerns associated to methods
and techniques inherent to their representation and
interaction mechanisms.
The usability evaluation model proposed by Freitas [17] is
based on a set of previously existing guidelines for the
usability evaluation of a visualisation application. It divides
the IV tools into two sets of criteria: visual representations
and interaction mechanisms. The visual representations have
several subcategories, such as: i) limitations; ii) cognitive
complexity; iii) spatial organization; iv) information
encoding and v) state transition. Interaction mechanisms are
separated into three distinct categories: i) Help and
Guidance; ii) Navigation and Query and iii) Data Reduction.
This model seemed suited for our research because it
provided an objective structure, with a set of guidelines for
the usability evaluation of our visualisation system.

strategy to represent geo-referenced data and can be found in
Topographic Maps and Thematic Maps [12].
ii) Behaviour Patterns are related with the different actions
commonly used to interact with the visualisations, vary
according to the type of visual representation, and focus on
the user’s objectives towards the data and the information.
Behaviour patterns may be grouped into five different
categories:
a) Navigation - these tools are used to guide/promote user
navigation in a visualisation system (ex: Simple Zoom;
Local Zoom; Panning; Timeline; Linked multiples and
Overview plus detail) [12] [3].
b) Filtering - mechanisms that help to customize available
information presented to the user are usually direct
manipulation of input parameters (ex: Layering; Active
Objects; Boundary Filters; Facet Browsing and Dynamic
Query) [12].
c) Disposal - information disposal helps the user to highlight
different points of view of the same data set (ex: Selective
Arrangement; Sortable Columns; Custom Dimensions;
Isolated Comparisons) [12].
d) Exploration - concept associated with the degree of detail
the user can have access to information anytime, anywhere
variable according to user interest in the data and
information and the degree of familiarity with the system
[12]. "Details on Demand" [3] help when it is impossible to
show all data specific to each element of the display
simultaneously. The choice of these details should be simple
and direct, only available when needed thus avoiding
interference with visualisation and the creation of visual
noise (DataTips) [2] [12].
e) Transition - consists of dynamic aspects of the application
and gives the user the necessary feedback on his performed
actions. The easiest transition strategy is to change element’s
colour or size, while the most complex and detailed include
element animation.

III.

EMPIRICAL RESEARCH AND APPLICATION
DEVELOPMENT

Our research focused on SAPO Broker ii , a service
platform of distributed messaging (a program of Message
Broker), which allows the subscription of many topics
(through its public component). These topics represent
SAPO Portal real time interaction (or interaction related)
data. It is written in Java, but has several clients in various
languages (Perl, Python, PHP, etc.).
The sets of data where worked on using Processing, an
open source project, originally created in 2001 by Ben Fry
and Casey Reas [18].
As for our target public, it was confined to a profile
encompassing teams responsible for streamlining and
updating of a product / service / activity, where the Web
survey data may be useful for decision making, through the
identification and analysis of user trends. In our case this
meant that our target audience was the internal SAPO Newsiii
editorial team that needed to have access to detailed
information about generic external user web searches
performed in the SAPO portal with the support of such an
application fed by SAPO Broker data. This target audience
included journalists, editors, technical and advertising staff.
The initial phase started with an exploratory interview
with the SAPO chief-editor, in order to collect the general
needs of the team by taking into account their daily routine
and usual relationship with the information broker already
available. The existent passive SAPO Broker based display
system was also analyzed in order to identify its advantages
and limitations.
Considering the initial problems mentioned, the target
audience and the different relevant data for the project
development, the process of selecting a visual metaphor was
divided into two main research aims: 1) focused on the
visual search metaphor, concerning visual information
correlation versus number of occurrences, and how to

iii) Interaction Patterns represent the functional
components of the interaction between the user and machine.
They consist of a practical interface tool through which the
user will communicate his options to the system, and
incorporate his behaviour in further interactions with the
application. Can be divided into the three categories:
Boolean selection; linear adjust and spatial navigation (Drag
and Drop and Selection Masks). These interaction patterns
also reflect the different form of tasks user can perform for
data analysis [12].
Further research reviewed [14,15] showed that good
aesthetic quality in these interaction contexts reduces the
time and number of errors in performing tasks, improving
efficiency and effectiveness. According to the measures
reported in [16], effectiveness in three-dimensional
structures were considerably lower than in two-dimensional
structures, which show that the use of 3D solutions is not
always recommendable.

ii
iii

227

Accessed 2010/02/26: http://softwarelivre.SAPO.pt/broker
Accessed 2009/01/26: http://noticias.SAPO.pt/

To help with the perception of height differences
between the different eggs a colour gradient was added. This
consists of rectangular bands, regular size and colour fades
with a vertical scale. This background intentionally creates
guidelines that will serve as a ruler for the human eye and, at
the same time, it seeks to enhance the focus on eggs which
are at higher altitudes, the lighter egg border, in contrast with
a darker background colour, creates the illusion of greater
prominence.
Initially the only interaction with the frog egg was
achieved by clicking directly on one of them, and getting
associated information feedback on the bottom of the screen,
with keyword information and the number of instances
associated to it. Subsequently a caption was added with the
values of the corresponding number of searches per time
interval. This information was incorporated into the left side
of the display, like a two-dimensional graph legend.

translate the change of states within a time window; 2)
focused on the Georeferenced visual metaphor related to the
conceptualization of a geographical reference, based on a
country’s map, capable of integrating global search activity
and distributing it by region and searched keyword.
A. Visual search metaphor
The final interface proposal was achieved after a rigorous
process of concept and graphic design where some initial
studies were done based on preliminary experiments
incorporating textual display paradigms suited for our goals.
One of the simpler proposals consisted of a list of cities
aligned with the corresponding number of searches and
where the font size, of each city, was directly proportional to
the number of searches conducted. The list was animated
dynamically, moving vertically according to the number of
searches with a random factor in the speed variable. In this
case a greater amount of searches resulted in a slower
animation of the list item. However, it was agreed that in this
interface solution, cities with more search activity would
have an advantage because they had lower speed and
therefore the cities would be more easily perceived and
highlighted. The disadvantage is that cities with fewer
searches would move with greater speed, therefore less
readable thus creating some difficulty in the visualisation
overview. In addition, the fact that there are only two major
cities in Portugal with significant search levels, this model
would not be able to give a clear holistic view of the national
scene.
Research developed further on regarding the
visualization metaphor was much more visually and task
oriented, with an interactive profile to complement the lower
level of underlying detail. Inspired by the 43Things’s portal
concept (February 2009) iv , it was decided to adapt the
“bubbling bubbles” idea to represent the search words.
In our case, the most searched words, with a greater
number of search instances, are represented with
proportionally larger bubbles. In order to create a connection
to SAPO's corporate image, the idea of adapting the visual
theme of the SAPO laboratories logov to frog’s eggsvi was
followed and represented with floating frog eggs (bubbles) in
a water tank.
The movement of the eggs, initially vertically and
horizontally random, was afterwards corrected, in order to
control the chaotic motion of the initial visualization
solution, and thus making it easier to perceive information
representation and dynamic fluidity of the data input. Sought
to establish a tadpole’s vertical balance, to distribute and
remain at different heights. This vertical balance is the
indicator of the number of searches, where most frequently
searched words appear to be over each other. The main
mechanisms of pre-consciousness used to highlight and
differentiate the elements in this view were: i) movement; ii)
position and iii) shape (size).

B. Georeferenced visual metaphor
The actual system represents the geo-referenced data for
Portugal divided into districts, where each district has a text
indication of search percentage, within the last predetermined time interval.
Adding a visual representative element of the percentage
of searches made the previous model improvement. The
proposed research model is the result of several influences
applied to new contexts. Influenced by the "New York
Times" model “world consumption habits”vii ,, the idea of a
visualisation map and the colour scale to display the
percentage values was introduced in the visualisation
schemes. From the visualisation model for poverty rate
measuring in the United States from 1980 to 2007viii two
main ideas were adopted: i) the circle and ii) colouring scale.
Instead of using a circle over each state, a big circle is used
with Portugal inside; adopting a specific colour for each
district, but changing the brightness as a discrete scale
influenced by search values. The green colour was adapted
to strengthen and highlight the SAPO institutional context.
The integration of the various visual influences was
considered a correct approach and the geographic
distribution was subsequently integrated with word search
within the visual frame information resulting from direct
click on the interaction elements (eggs).
C. Prototype application interface
The state of the art review regarding interaction tools
pointed our work towards the development of a more
intuitive interface which still used the egg's direct click, as a
mean to keep the concept of data analysis with direct
manipulation. The “click and see” solution implemented led
to the supplying of the extra information as a pop-up visual
instance that overlaps the corresponding egg (keyword) and
shows additional details (Figure 1), namely geographical
and statistical information.

iv

Accessed 2009/01/26: http://www.43things.com/
Accessed 2010/02/26: http://labs.SAPO.pt/ua/
vi
SAPO is the Portuguese word for frog. The name was adopted as a
acronym for Servidor de Apontadores Portugueses Online. The company
logo is a frog.
v

vii

Accessed 2010/02/26: http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2008/09/04/bu
siness/20080907-metrics-graphic.html
Accessed 2010/02/26: http://projects.flowingdata.com/poverty/

viii

228

This “click and see” rule had to be adjusted to peripheral
eggs that, at first, originated pop-up windows with off screen
clipped information. In these cases additional position
criteria adjustments were necessary in order to keep pop-up
info readable in the visual field. The fade-in visual feedback
mechanism was also implemented to enhance user
perception of state change and pop-up window origin.
The other implemented interaction tools involved data
filtering, clustering and direct manipulation operations and
are located in the rectangular region at the bottom of the
display interface (Figure 1). This region has a neutral
background colour (gray) and was placed at the bottom of
the interface to avoid interference with main display
feedback.
The interaction tool "top search" is a double slider which
indicates the maximum number of items to display (the top
search). The double slider was also chosen as an interaction
tool for the "selection range search", where a minimum and
absolute maximum number of searches define the range for
data processing and visualisation. This procedure will only
show the keyword(s) and its number of occurrences within
the predetermined slider range. The visual feedback used in
the double slider to indicate whether the defined range
returned or not valid occurrences, is done with colour (red
for an empty interval and green for a valid set of
occurrences).

the screen. This search tool is completed with a set of
buttons, represented by rectangles of gradually increasing
size used to show the time scale (from minutes to years)
correlated at that moment with the searched keyword
occurrence (Figure 3).

Figure 3. Keyword search interface

If the searched word is found in the gathered data set, the
system will mark the egg corresponding to the word and fill
it with a highlighted colour. This quickly marks and points
out an egg for an efficient visual user ID and to permit a
click for more details.
IV.

EVALUATION RESULTS

The evaluation phase was held at SAPO headquarters in
Lisbon, Portugal. The evaluation sample was a nonprobabilistic and convenience sample of subjects [20] and
consisted of 7 members of SAPO editorial team, aged
between 22 and 52 years, 2 male members and 5 female
members. According to their professional expertise, the
sample included 4 Journalists, 2 Editorial Managers and 1
Editor.
The data collection technique used was Think-Out-Loud
[20] complemented with a semi-structured interview. The
data collection instruments used were the interviews with
audio recording support. The interview included both
questions with a multi-point rating scale [19] and open-ended
questions [20]. The interview to evaluate the prototype was
structured into 4 distinct sections: i) sample’s
characterization; ii) Visual Representation; iii) Interaction
Tools and iv) Future Perspectives. The visualization and
interaction issues were considered because they are often
interpreted differently [17].
The evaluation’s major concerns were confined to the
application's visual qualities and interactive functionalities
including: i) its resolution; ii) range of colours; iii) aesthetics
of visual metaphor; iv) data representativeness of the visual
metaphor; v) density of element representation (number
elements / unit scale); vi) resolution of element size; vii)
visualization mode of pop-up circles; viii) the information
relevance in pop-up circles; ix) difficulty finding interaction
elements and x) difficulty in finding searched keywords.
The evaluation’s main concern regarding the
application's interaction tools, was to assess both the
interaction tool feedback and its degree of relevance,
namely: i) the pop-up circle; ii) the time interval buttons; iii)
button time scale; iv) word-search filter (text box); v) double
slider-range search and vi) search top slider.
The evaluation results revealed that most users classified
as appropriate (4 out of 5): the application’s resolution, data
representativeness of the visual metaphor, density of element
representation (number elements/scale unit) and visualization

Figure 1. Prototype application interface.

These two tools are alternatives to one another and their
activation is done through two radio buttons placed next to
the tools. The text boxes placed on the right provide the
visual slider feedback (Figure 2) and also allow the user to
input accurate values.

Figure 2. “selection range search” and “top search” tool

The user can also query a specific keyword occurrence
directly in the text box added on the bottom right corner of

229

[4]

elements size (resolution). Most users classified it: i) as easy,
finding interaction elements; ii) very appropriate, regarding
aesthetics of the visual metaphor; iii) very intuitive, as to the
pop-up circle's visualisation mode; and iv) difficult to locate
the area of searched words. All users classified as very good
(5 out of 5) the colours range and very relevant (5 out of 5)
the pop-up circle information.
Most users classify as very appropriate the feedback
received from all the interaction tools except from the
temporal “button intervals”. Most users consider the
proposed interaction tools as very important for their
professional role-play in SAPO institution.
V.

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

CONCLUSIONS

[10]

Research done in the context presented in this paper
has produced an information visualization system prototype
with a graphical metaphor that gives meaning to some data
gathered from a web portal search engine interaction. The
first analytic evaluation shows evidence of its relevance in
generating important information for the target audience.
Evaluation results also reveal that this information
visualization system calls for future work improvements
such as: i) exploring new modes of visual representations; ii)
improving the correlation of two visualisation instruments
(combining visualisation and interaction mode); iii)
combining of two data type in one visualisation scheme; iv)
applying the geo-referenced data to cultural contexts; v)
exploring this information visualisation system on other
portals.

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Our acknowledgement to SAPO and SAPO's editorial
team at Lisbon for the support provided during the
development of this work.

[16]
[17]

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

Hans Rosling, Anna Rönnlund and Ola Rosling. New
software brings statistics beyond the eye. Statistics,
Knowledge and Policy. Palermo: OECD World Forum on
Key Indicators. 2004.
S. Few. The Surest Path to Visual Discovery. Perceptual
Edge. 2006.
S. K. Card, J. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman. Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. San
Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.1999.

[18]
[19]

[20]

230

C. Chen. Information Visualization. Palgrave Macmillan.
2002.
R. Spence. Information Visualization: Design for
Interaction. Harlow: Pearson Education Limited. 2007.
M. F. Goodchild. Geographic Information Systems. Santa
Barbara: University of California. 2006.
C. Chen. Information Visualization: Beyond the Horizon
Second Edition. Springer-Verlag: London. 2006.
M. MacEachren and M.-J. Kraak. Research Challenges in
Geovisualization. In Cartography and Geographic
Information Systems , 3-12. 2001.
C. Ware. Information Visualization: Perception for Design.
San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann. 2004.
Robert Kosara, Silvia Miksch and Helwing Hauser. Focus
and Context Taken Literally. In Computer Graphics and
Applications, IEEE vol. 22 , 22-29. 2002.
D. Kersten, P. Mamassian and D. Knill. Moving Cast
Shadows Induce Apparent Motion in Depth. In Perception
vol.26 , 171-192. 1997.
C. Behrens. The Form of Facts and Figures. Potsdam:
University of Applied Sciences. 2008.
E. Kleiberg, H. Wetering and J. Wijk. Botanical
Visualization of Huge Hierarchies. Eindhoven: Department
of Mathematics and Computer Science - University of
Technology. 2001.
J. Stasko, R. Catrambone, M. Guzdial and K. McDonald. An
Evalutation of Space-Filling Information Visualizations of
Depicting Hierarchical Structure. Atlanta: Georgia Institute
of Technology. 2000.
D. C. Ngo and J. G. Byrne. Another Look at a Model for
Evaluating Interface Aesthetics. In Int. J. Appl. Math.
Comput. Science vol. 11 , 515-535. 2001.
N. Cawthon and A. V. Moere. The Effect of Aesthetic on the
Usability of Data Visualization. Sydney: University of
Sydney. 2007.
C. M. Freitas, P. R. Luzzardi, R. A. Cava, M. A. Winckler,
M. S. Pimenta and L. P. Nede. Evaluating Usability of
Information Visualization Techniques. Porto Alegre:
Instituto de Informática - Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul. 2002.
Ben Fry and Casey Reas, url:http://processing.org/
A. Dix, J. Finlay, G. D. Abowd and R. Beale . Human
computer interaction. Pearson Education Limited Press. 3rd
edition. 2004.
J. Preece, Y. Rogers and H. Sharp. Interaction design:
beyond human-computer interaction. Jonh Wiley and sons
Press. 2007.

