2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Information visualization in facility location and vehicle routing decisions
Rui Borges Lopes1,2, Beatriz Sousa Santos3, Paulo Dias3, Carlos Ferreira1,2
1
DEGEI, University of Aveiro 2CIO, University of Lisbon 3IEETA/DETI, University of Aveiro
{rui.borges@ua.pt, bss@ua.pt, paulo.dias@ua.pt, carlosf@ua.pt}
Abstract

measure, while guaranteeing a predetermined service
level [3].
The management of a fleet of vehicles used to serve
depots and/or clients is addressed by vehicle routing
problems [4]. In order to control the costs of operating a
fleet and meet the required level of service, it is
necessary to continuously make decisions on how much
to load on each vehicle and (from) where to send it.
These are operational activities that often require daily
analysis and thus are one of the most studied in OR.
Both these problems are NP-hard and often tackled
separately, still they are intimately related [5,6] and, in
some cases, should be addressed by an integrated
approach [7,8]. The integrated approach has been named
location-routing problems (LRP) and aims to model and
solve facility location problems, while creating
distribution routes; thus leading to an NP-hard problem.
The aforementioned problems share the same
elements (and corresponding information), namely,
depots, clients and vehicles and thus may be studied
using the same visualization approach. Moreover, by
addressing them simultaneously, it becomes possible to
analyse the logistics system and determine which
model(s) correspond to a better approach for a specific
scenario with respect to location and routing activities.
Traditionally, in order to obtain a (set of) solution(s)
for a real case of the problems addressed here, several
steps must be performed by OR experts; steps which can
be very time consuming and error prone [9]. Some even
demand a lot of expertise in the used models as well as
OR methods in general. This prompts the use of
visualization and human-computer interaction methods,
in order to facilitate the complete process and eventually
foster greater insight of the problem at hand [10,11].
Moreover, by presenting approaches easy to work with
and understand, the general public may have easier
access and further understanding of the decision process
involved in many of the current depot installation
decisions.
This paper presents visualization and interaction
issues and proposes solutions concerning facility
location, vehicle routing and location-routing problems.
All the presented visualization solutions have been
studied through the use of prototypes developed for
Windows platforms (and incorporated in a decision

Facility location and vehicle routing are amongst
the most important logistic decisions in today’s
organizations. These aspects are intertwined and, in
some cases, should be addressed in an integrated way
(giving rise to the location-routing approach). A decision
support tool that can make easier the visualization (and
editing) of information regarding these problems is
becoming increasingly important as: it enables to further
understand the problem at hand; and, at the same time, it
fosters better communication of the decisions in a way
easier to understand by the general public. This paper
presents some concepts for information visualization on
the problems arisen by the aforementioned decisions,
which have been incorporated in a decision support tool
and tested using usability evaluation methods.
Keywords- visualization; facility location; vehicle
routing; location-routing; decision support tool.

1. Introduction
Logistic activities regarding facility location (taking
or not routing into consideration) and vehicle routing,
have been acquiring increased importance in a great
number of companies and institutions. Optimization of
these activities is no short than mandatory in order for
companies to succeed. Moreover, energy costs and social
pressure have been rising, pushing companies to
continuously trying to achieve greater energy efficiency
levels (with the additional perk of allowing cost
reduction). For this to be possible, objective and
understandable procedures are needed. In Operational
Research (OR) several methods have already been
developed and applied to real cases, namely, location(routing) and vehicle routing models [1,2].
Facility location problems can be defined as
intended to determine the optimal location of a fixed or
variable number of equipments (factories, distribution
centers, warehouses, retail stores, etc.) or services
(hospitals, health centers, landfills, post offices, etc.),
both henceforth addressed as depots, to achieve
optimality with respect to some economical or social
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.25

110

associating graphical representations to the elements,
changing the visualization scale, etc. Finally, solution(s)
can be obtained (with possible additional information
from the user), allowing to be visualized and compared
with other solutions.
The next sections will address, for each of these
steps, the most interesting issues raised and proposed
solutions to make them easier to understand.

support tool), and tested using usability evaluation
methods.

2. Visualization issues in location, routing
and location-routing
Several of the procedures involved in addressing the
mentioned problems can be made much easier by using
simple visualization and interaction techniques.
All the adopted visualization solutions were
developed to be integrated into a decision support tool
and took into consideration the profile of the target user.
This user will be in general someone with higher
education (not necessarily an OR expert), having a good
knowledge of the problem at hand, at least reasonable
computer literacy, knowledge of (web) map applications,
and which may use these methods infrequently.
According to this user profile, interaction and
information visualization methods were developed
having as main concern the easy and efficient access to
solutions (results-oriented) and the ease to learn and
remember [12,13].
To that extent, the graphical user interface (GUI) of
our prototype has as main feature a single window which
allows access to all functionalities [11]. The GUI (Figure
1) is composed of: (1) a toolbar with buttons allowing a
quick access to the functionalities (Area A); (2) an
extendable panel to edit/display the information
regarding the problems elements (Area B); (3) a
visualization area displaying information regarding the
maps (Area C); and (4) a status bar with data regarding
the used algorithm and objective function(s) value(s), if a
solution was obtained (Area D).

2.1. Inputting and visualizing data
The information which is supported (and will allow
defining the problem at hand) is the following:
• data regarding the clients to be served
(coordinates, demand and/or service);
• data of the depots (coordinates, capacity and
costs) (already installed or to be determined)
which will serve the clients;
• available vehicles and related data, namely,
capacity, cost and where they operate;
• distance matrix between clients and depots (by
default Euclidean distances are assumed).
Obtaining (or maintaining) this information can be
done using a data grid (more suitable to insert/edit large
quantities of data), or directly on the map, where
coordinates are directly obtained and a form appears to
edit the remaining data. In all methods (seen in Figure 2)
numerical feedback and visual representation are
provided.

Area A

Area B

Area C
Area D

Figure 1. General aspect of the GUI and the four
different visualization areas.
In order to obtain solutions, firstly, it is required to
input all the data needed to specify and solve the
problem. This step can be complemented with
information obtained from interaction with Web Map
Services (WMS).
After the data has been obtained, several changes
can be made from a visualization point of view, namely,

Figure 2. Data input using the data grid (topleft), the map (top-right) and the form (bottom).

111

In the last two cases (vehicle and distance matrix
data), visual data input is not possible. It can be done
using the data grid or specific forms (Figure 3),
providing numerical feedback only, until a solution is
obtained and (vehicle) routes are drawn.

Figure 4. GUI interacting with Demis®.
By fully interacting with WMS, the user can zoom
in and out of any area of the world map and obtain the
required geographical information.

2.3. Graphical representations
Several representations for the elements (map,
clients, depots and vehicle routes) involved in the
process
can
be
imported.
However,
since
superimposition of elements to the map may result
confusing, transparency and size of their representation
can be changed, allowing seeing the map underneath
them; moreover, it is possible to define which are to be
displayed simultaneously using a set of controls. Users
can also change the colour associated with the graphical
representation of the elements, further distinguishing
them from the map, as well as hide the map.
Another useful view is the service-based map, where
the radius of the circle representing the client is directly
proportional to its required service (Figure 5).

Figure 3. Vehicle (top) and distance matrix
(bottom) forms.

2.2. Interacting with web map service
Geographical data is currently available online from
many servers. When the servers follow the OpenGIS web
map service (WMS) protocol [14], maps and requested
information layers are made available in geo-referenced
images (with standard formats: JPEG, PNG, etc.). Taking
advantage of interaction with WMS, users can quickly
obtain correct coordinates and distances regarding clients
and depots. Moreover, additional information can be
made available in layers (i.e. demography, road network,
etc.).
Figure 4 depicts the GUI interacting with Demis®,
an OpenGIS WMS compliant.

Figure 5. Map view displaying the service
required by clients.

112

Finally, zoom in/out, zoom to fit, and pan allow
fully evaluating the location of the elements in the map
by changing the scale.

2.4. Obtaining and visualizing solutions
Solution(s) can be obtained by:
• importing a solution file;
• executing the algorithms.
Allowing importing solutions from files, makes
possible to obtain the solution data from other
(optimization) software packages, using the proposed
decision support tool to insert, edit or visualize the
problem data. On the other hand, the possibility of
directly executing one of the supported algorithms
enables the quick test of alternative scenarios.
An overview of the solution(s) data (algorithm
name, time, objective function name and value) is
displayed in a control panel (Figure 6). This allows the
user to, at any given point, restore (or compare with) a
solution previously obtained. Additionally, a solution
data panel displays all the data of the selected solution,
namely, the total objective function value, depots to
install and the vehicle routes data (capacity, assigned
colour and tracing). Both options (control and solution
data panels) use modeless dialog boxes [15] allowing a
quick change between them and the main window. This
type of windows is most useful when performing
frequent, repetitive and pending tasks (as obtaining a
solution or comparing several ones, since a continuous
analysis needs to be performed).

Figure 7. Visually comparing three different
solutions.
Finally, users can contribute to the process of
obtaining the solution (eventually capitalizing on their
experience in the case under study or reflecting
constraints not considered in the model). In order to do
so, they have to define the links that must appear in the
final solution and, henceforth, all obtained solutions will
include them (i.e. some clients will be serviced in a
predetermined order).

3. Usability evaluation
The GUI and all the visualizations were developed
taking into consideration usability principles and
guidelines, as well as feedback from several users.
Usability tests were also performed in order to
understand its potential and limitations. Initially,
heuristic evaluation [13] was made by two evaluators
with knowledge in usability (producing a list of possible
usability problems), then, usability tests were made with
the collaboration of 18 users. Users were Computer
Engineering students attending an introductory course on
Human-Computer Interaction.
In the usability tests, observation techniques and
questionnaires [16,17] were used to evaluate some of the
adopted interface objects, ease of navigation, some of the
proposed visualizations, and data input. A set of 16 tasks
was defined for users to perform. The tasks were
relatively simple, yet regarded representative of the
operations to be performed by target users.
Users had to complete each task in a given time
window. Some of the tasks are the following:
• loading and saving given files.
• changing visibility of graphical representations
of the elements.
• inserting data regarding a single client or depot;

Figure 6. Control panel displaying currently
obtained solutions.
A solution can also be graphically visualized on the
map, where lines with different colours (for different
routes) link clients and depots, representing the vehicle
routes. Moreover, more than one solution can be
displayed on the map, allowing visual comparison
(Figure 7). This may also help to identify links common
to all “good” solutions, and that may be removed from
the problem, reducing its size and difficulty.

113

•

Looking at the data obtained from user performance
in each of the 16 tasks (Table 2) and the box plots of the
time taken by users to perform them (Figure 8), we can
conclude that the most difficult tasks were related to the
first contact with the different data input options (tasks 2
to 6). This may be due to the difficulty to understand
some concepts regarding the addressed problem which
led to some misunderstanding about the data do be
inserted (mainly in task 4).
On the other hand, on the massive input of data
(task 12), very few users had difficulty completing it
(although time to completion somewhat varies, mainly
due to the users’ different ability to quickly insert data
using the keyboard), meaning the previous data input
experience helped significantly.
Accessing menu and toolbar options was considered
trivial (tasks 1, 7, 8 and 9). Tasks 10 and 11 were related
with interaction with the WMS where slow server
responsiveness led to significant time variations. Tasks
13 to 15 aimed at testing the ability of identifying
information on the map while task 16 regarded visibility
options, which performed slightly worse due to the icons
used to identify the functionality.

inserting/editing data regarding several clients
and depots;
• importing a client, depot or map graphical
representation;
• hiding and displaying information on the map;
• identifying and deleting clients and depots.
The firstly mentioned two tasks were directed at
evaluating some interface features (e.g. using menu and
toolbar options, change viewing conditions); the
following two tasks aimed at testing data input for both
unitary and massive data insertion (thus testing data
input using data grids and forms, as well as directly on
the map); the last three intended to test ease of use of the
interaction with WMS and to identify information on the
map.
Users were observed concerning the following data
in each task:
• time required to perform the task;
• whether completion of the task was successful;
• if mistakes were made;
• if the user felt lost;
• if the user requested help from the observer;
• difficulty to complete the task (both judged by
the user and observed).
After completion of all tasks, users were asked about
age, gender, and previous experience with map
applications; and to evaluate several features using a
qualitative scale:
1 2 3 4 5

Table 2. Data concerning user performance in
each task (required time, correct completeness,
completeness with errors, number of users who
felt lost or requested help and median values
for easiness felt and observed).

N

Task
where “1” is complete disagreement, “5” is complete
agreement and “N” corresponds to not having an opinion
or not wanting to express it. Moreover, users were
encouraged to provide comments or suggestions.
Results regarding users’ opinion, as well as the list
of tested features can be found in Table 1 from where a
general positive opinion can be inferred.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Table 1. Users’ opinion on general and specific
aspects of the GUI (scale: 1 – complete
disagreement to 5 – complete agreement).
Feature
Is easy to learn
Organization is understandable
Response time is reasonable
Is easy to use
Is easy to insert large amount of data
Information layout is adequate
Help is needed using some functionalities
Further specific knowledge or tool usage
experience is required
Text is easy to read
Amount of visible information is adequate
Icons used are easily understandable

Median
4.4
4.3
3.6
3.9
3.2
4.1
1.9

Comp.
Time Corr.
Felt
with
(s) Comp.
lost
errors
10
17
0
3
37
17
1
2
19
16
1
5
88
10
5
6
47
14
4
3
33
18
0
0
6
18
0
0
40
17
1
2
11
17
1
2
60
15
3
2
66
15
3
3
124
16
2
4
33
18
0
2
45
17
1
2
9
18
0
1
24
14
3
6

Req. Easi. Easi.
help felt obs.
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1

4.7
4.8
4.2
3.9
4.5
4.8
4.9
4.8
4.7
4.5
4.5
4.3
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.5

4.7
4.6
4.3
3.7
4.3
4.7
5.0
4.7
4.8
4.2
4.2
4.5
4.6
4.6
4.7
4.2

Additional conclusions can also be drawn, namely,
for massive input of clients or depots data, the preferred
method was the data grid (used by around 88% of the
users). To identify and delete clients and depots data,
users chose, invariantly, the data grid as opposed to the
map (probably due to being easier and faster to identify).
Still, the data input directly on the map was considered
valuable since it is easier to obtain coordinates of a
specific location.

2.6
4.4
3.7
3.8

114

Aveiro, that have graciously collaborated in the usability
evaluation.

Median
25%-75%
Non-outlier range
Outliers
Extremes

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

Figure 8. Box plots of time spent in each task.
[6]

A limitation of this evaluation is the fact that users
had high computer literacy, and some experience with
map applications, yet little knowledge of the problem at
hand, and thus only partially fitting the target user
profile.
Test results allowed identifying usability problems,
obtaining new ideas, and, at the same time, attesting the
ease of use and learnability of the adopted visualization
solutions. Results were generally positive in the three
dimensions of usability: ease of learning, ease of use and
satisfaction.

[7]
[8]
[9]

4. Conclusions

[10]

This paper presents information visualization and
user interaction issues, relevant to a decision support
tool, for logistic decisions of location and routing. The
profile of the target users (who may not have specific
knowledge on OR methods) as well as the tasks they
have to perform were taken into consideration in the
development of visualization and interaction solutions .
Usability evaluation was performed which allowed
finding usability problems and gather new ideas, which
helped improve the proposal.
Although the proposed visualization solutions for
the information needed to support the decisions are
specific to particular models, the addressed issues and
many of the solutions proposed are relevant to other
decision making scenarios where interaction with map
data is required and large quantities of information need
to be presented to the user.
A decision support tool including the proposed
visualization and interaction solutions was developed for
Windows platforms is currently available for academic
use at the following url: http://lore.web.ua.pt/.

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

Acknowledgements
Authors wish to express their gratitude to Dr.
Leonor Teixeira, and the students of the HumanComputer Interaction course (2008/2009), University of

115

Trevor Hale’s Location Science References, University
of Houston, 2010, url: http://gator.dt.uh.edu/~halet/.
The VRP Web, Networking and Emerging Optimization,
University of Malaga, 2010, url: http://neo.lcc.uma.es/
radi-aeb/WebVRP/.
Farahani, R. Z. and Hekmatfar M., Facility Location:
Concepts, Models, Algorithms and Case Studies,
Springer-Verlag, 2009.
Toth, P. and Vigo, D., The Vehicle Routing Problem,
SIAM, 2002.
Salhi, S. and Rand, G. K., “The effect of ignoring routes
when locating depots”, European Journal of Operational
Research, vol. 39, 1989, pp. 150-156.
Laporte, G., “Location-routing problems”, in B. L.
Golden, and A. A. Assad (Eds.), Vehicle Routing:
Methods and Studies, North-Holland, 1988, pp. 163-198.
Nagy, G. and Salhi, S., “Location-routing: issues, models
and methods”, European Journal of Operational
Research, vol. 177, 2007, pp. 649-672.
Albareda-Sambola, M., Models and algorithms for
location-routing and related problems, PhD thesis,
Polytechnic University of Catalonia, 2003.
Ferreira, C. and Santos, B. S., “Information visualization
in locating obnoxious facility: some examples with mono
and bicriteria models” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Information Visualization 2000, IV 2000,
July 2000, pp. 439-444.
Barreto, S., Ferreira, C., Paixão, J. and Santos, B. S.,
“Using clustering analysis in a capacitated locationrouting problem”, European Journal of Operational
Research, vol. 179, 2007, pp. 968-977.
Lopes, R. B., Barreto, S., Ferreira, C. and Santos, B. S.,
“A decision-support tool for a capacitated locationrouting problem”, Decision Support Systems, vol. 46,
2009, pp. 366-375.
Mayhew, D. J., Principles and Guidelines in Software
User Interface Design, Prentice Hall, 1992.
Dix, A., Finlay, J., Abowd, G. and Beale, R., HumanComputer Interaction, Prentice Hall, 1993.
Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc., OpenGIS Web Map
Service (WMS) Implementation Specification, 2009, url:
http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wms.
Microsoft Corporation, Windows User Experience
Interaction Guidelines, 2009, url: http://msdn.microsoft.
com/en-us/library/aa511258.aspx.
Ware, C., Information Visualization – Perception for
Design, Morgan Kaufmann, 2000.
Mitchell, P. P., A Step-by-step Guide to Usability
Testing, iUniverse, 2007.

