2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

AmbientNEWS: Augmenting Information Discovery in Complex Settings Through
Aesthetic Design

Nina Valkanova, Ayman Moghnieh, Ernesto Arroyo and Josep Blat
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
C/Tanger 122-140, E-08018
Barcelona, Spain
{nina.valkanova,ayman.moghnie,ernesto.arroyo,josep.blat}@upf.edu
programs. Inside the broadcasting network office building,
these journalists work in busy production rooms where many
screens and televisions are positioned, each for visualizing a
given source of information. In essence, they stand on the
avant-garde of an ever-growing convergence between
different genres and types of information mediums [24].
Journalists follow up constantly on unfolding stories
through the television screens situated in their working
environment, and then search and query for more
information on recent developments in order to compose
their stories. On their desks, they frequently consult external
news agencies, and research historical materials related to
the developing stories from the local archives. Despite the
disposition of a large number of information systems and
visualizations, a detailed contextual inquiry conducted with a
team of journalists [15] revealed that they still find
challenging to maintain awareness of the geopolitical picture
of events developing in the areas they cover.
In such a highly information-overloaded environment, an
ambient display may have the potential to increase
awareness about the evolution of geopolitical events and
topics of interests. Through the use of peripheral attention as
an alternative medium of communication, raising such
awareness can potentially complement the activities that the
journalists are performing and increase the quality and
efficiency of their work. In this context, the ambient
visualization of information relies on a connection with
visualization art and creative design to augment the user
experience and facilitate the integration of the visualization
in the surroundings of its users.
In this paper we present AmbientNEWS, an ambient
display conceived to study how information aesthetics design
can be grounded in requirements, and subsequently engaged
to augment the awareness of people in its proximity on
topics of their interest. The display tries to convey in a subtle
manner the interrelations between the journalists’ topics of
interest and the constantly evolving news information space
of the World Wide Web. This work was carried out within
the framework of the SEMEDIA project [18], whose overall
objective is to develop user-driven information systems to
support professional media production.

Abstract—Nowadays professional journalists create and
edit broadcasting materials inside newsrooms that are
characterized by an intense and multivariate flux of
information. Within these settings, the journalists have
difficulties keeping up with the evolving geopolitical picture of
events developing in the world and how it relates to the topics
of their interest. In this paper we present AmbientNEWS, an
ambient display that visualizes dynamic news content and
informs professional journalists on the global picture of events.
We argue that the conceptualization and design of its
information aesthetics criteria can be grounded in user
requirements, and subsequently engaged to augment the
awareness of professionals in an environment that is highly
crowded with information. We also discuss the evaluation
process of ambient information visualization with a focus on
aesthetic design aspects. We conclude by summarizing our
findings and discuss future work.
information
ambient display

aesthetics;

design;

information

discovery;

I.
INTRODUCTION
With the proliferation of ubiquitous technologies, the
visualization of information takes on several new challenges
as it tries to capitalize on the potentials of our peripheral
attention and integrate inside complex human settings. In
particular, peripheral displays offer new grounds for the
visualization of information and the creation of new ambient,
aesthetically appealing, informative mediums that maintain
awareness on particular sources of information.
These displays are nowadays gaining in popularity as
pioneers of information aesthetics design and peripheral
transmitters of information in public and semi-public spaces.
In such environments, information needs to be presented in a
less interactive but yet visually attractive and meaningful
manner, and at the same time be seamlessly integrated with
the usual activities of people [4][21][7].
This tradeoff increases in the field of media production
where professional users constantly manipulate large
amounts of information from various channels. During their
working hours, TV journalists relentlessly interact with
complex collections of multimedia and information while
they prepare the due materials for the daily network
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.67

433
439

Journalists prepare the broadcast video defined in the
ESCALETA by finding and editing related media materials.
They spend a large amount of time navigating through media
content – both in their in-house repositories as well as online
– consulting numerous news feeds of information agencies
of their interest. Consequently, their central attention is
almost completely absorbed by various screens situated in
their desktops environments.
In these settings, a flexible but aesthetic and unobtrusive
visualization can increase awareness of the dynamic
information flow, and subsequently alleviate the time-critical
and attention-demanding process of content creation and
editing. A successfully designed peripheral visualization has
the potential to reveal patterns in the topic creation at the
newsroom and simultaneously expose emerging trends in the
evolution of online generated news content.
In order to reach these challenging goals, the design of
the visualization should tightly merge aspects of aesthetics,
data, and interaction. We believe, that by treating aesthetics
as an integral part of the design process, it will be easier to
gain long-term user acceptance, increase awareness, and
promote further exploration [6][13]. Following the identified
design criteria, we have first built a conceptual base for the
design in terms of data, intent and mechanics of the
visualization. To this end, we used the information aesthetics
model proposed by [9] as the base for determining the
techniques, which best serves our visualization purposes.
Based on the conceptual design decisions we developed
several iterations, which lead to the final visualization
design.

In the following, we first discuss the related works. Then,
we explain the design process of the AmbientNEWS, which
starts by defining the display’s requirements upon which the
design decisions that determine the aesthetic features are
drafted.
II. RELATED WORK
Ambient displays are devices designed to carry
information to their observers via their peripheral attention
and draw information away from their already-crowded
focus of concentration. They rely on serendipity as a viable
resource for information discovery, and its occurrence can be
increased through proper design [14]. Plaue et al evaluated
the ability of ambient displays to communicate information
at a glance and found that they help people recall more
information [16]. Informative art, introduced by Redström et
al., capitalizes on the potential of ambient technology and
uses information aesthetics to lower the cognitive effort for
maintain awareness about a given information source [17].
The complexity of such information displays grows with the
number of variables they want to visualize and several
projects have aimed to combine multivariate information in
abstract visual patterns with limited success [19][12].
Lau and Moere introduced a model of information
aesthetics that considers the context in which information is
visualized, basing on both intrinsic and extrinsic data
meaning, and the use of artistically-enhanced but effective
mapping techniques [9]. An aesthetical pleasing or intriguing
design can initiate personal reflections on the represented
information as well catalyze social interaction around it. It
can further promote exploration of the underlying trends and
patterns in the visualized datasets [11][13].

B. Conceptualizing the design
1) The dataset
As argued in the previous section, the initial step in the
design process was determining the dataset that the interface
is going to visualize. The dataset should be selected in
compliance the major requirements we adopt in the design
process: present an unobtrusive visualization of the
information flow of the environment, and concurrently
provide means for peripheral discovery of trends or
tendencies related to the underlying dataset that make up this
flow.
Since our goal is to create an interface, which integrates
seamlessly with the workflow and dynamically updates
according to it, a natural choice was to make use of the
dynamic content created by the journalists on a daily basis –
the ESCALETA keywords. Furthermore, we decided to
aggregate online news constantly produced and published
online to be able to juxtapose internal vs. external news
making. In order to maximize the usefulness of this data and
at the same time avoid overloading the created information
space, we restricted the aggregated news to only RSS feeds
that the journalists explicitly use in their every day
information searches. Fig. 1 illustrates complex information
space, which the visualization uses as an underlying dataset.
It has internal and external information layers: topics
scheduled for broadcasting and news available online.

III. DESIGN PROCESS
We initiated the design process by investigating and
studying the news making workflow of a leading Catalonian
media-production company. The purpose of this study aimed
at understanding the characteristics of the complex relation
that binds humans and information in this semi-public
environment housing a multidimensional and highly active
flux of information – the newsroom. By analyzing the needs
and constraints of this environment we were able to identify
the user requirements for search and retrieval methods
employed in professional media workflow. These
requirements in turn served as base for establishing the
criteria for the design of a peripheral visualization interface.
A. Identifying design criteria
Currently, news editors and journalists use a combination
of sophisticated content management systems to coordinate
the production of TV news. In particular, software internally
called ESCALETA (cat. staircase) helps news editors create
folders for all news topics to be issued in each news edition.
These topics are defined as combinations of keywords and
possibly some additional metadata and links.

440
434

C. The Visualization
Three major design iterations have been conducted in
order to produce the most suitable design that conforms to
the previously established conceptual base and aesthetic
criteria (Fig. 2). In the following we explain in detail the
evolution of the design decisions concerning the layout,
color-coding, size-coding, visual metaphor, dynamics, and
other aesthetic aspects.

Figure 1: The information space used as underlying dataset by
AmbientNEWS

2) Data mapping and data focus
After determining the dataset we identified the
properties, which need to be mapped in the visualization so
that it achieves its objectives. The table shows these
properties and how they relate to the two principal
information layers:
Relevance of topics
Relationship among
topics
Relationship among
topics and online news
Relevance of online
news to topics
Source of online news

Internal layer
√
√

External layer

√

√

√

√
√

The model for information aesthetics we use is defined
by two characteristics – the data focus and the mapping
technique, which highlight the relationship between what the
visualization facilitates and the means by which it achieves
this.
In terms of data focus, we decided to deploy a
typographic “tag-cloud” like design solution, which maps the
topic keywords used by the journalists to word tags. This
direct and straightforward mapping technique supports the
discovery of intrinsic patterns and clusters in news topics and
has two major advantages in our context: first of all, the
professional users are able to directly relate the presented
information to their work, since they are trained to identify
headlines through keywords at a glance. Moreover, the “tag
cloud” visualization technique of concepts has proven to be
an efficient method for conveying a meaning of importance
among a uniform set of information entities [5][23].
In contrast, we decided to develop an abstract, more
metaphorical and interpretative visualization for the
properties related to the external information space (online
news). One important factor for this decision is the fact that
the information space is of a much greater magnitude
(constitutes of much greater number of news entities). A
direct mapping would run the risk of overloading the yet
limited screen space thus becoming a cognitive burden for
the viewer, rather than a alleviating it. Furthermore, a more
abstract mapping allows for high-level interpretation of the
complex dataset at hand, thus achieving an extrinsic data
focus - communicating tendencies, revealing underlying
patterns and/or invoking personal reflection on the newsmaking process.

Figure 2: Sketches from the design iterations of AmbientNEWS: (a) In the
first iteration, the set of online news related to a given topic is represented
as a circle; (b) In the second iteration, this set is visualized as a flower, each
petal of which represents a single piece of news. (c) Final design of the
display.

441
435

Figure 3: Design aspects of AmbientNEWS: (a) screen layout; (b) categorization through color-coding; (c) related topics to online news production through a
flower-like visual metaphor

conceptual terms that they already know, appealing to both
familiarity and experience [13]. It is a challenging task to
craft an adequate metaphor, which is able to expose relevant
meaning, increasing dimensionality without overloading
density [2] Our goal was to find a representation, which
visually encodes in the same time the number of news
related to a given topic, their relevance and development
over time. In the course of the design iterations described
above, we chose the metaphor of a flower, dangling on a
string to represent this dynamic information space. It is a
well-known and appealing shape from nature, which
incorporates intrinsically the notion of change over time. We
also expected that the usage of this metaphor could impel the
users to interpret the display by themselves, and
consequently establish deeper, more personal connection
with the interface [3].

1) Layout
The visualization follows a grid layout consisting of four
parts, each assigned to a different information layer: two
major ones visualize the internal and external news space,
and two auxiliary – show a timeline and a legend with the
external online sources used for aggregating news (Fig. 3-a).
A grid layout provides a visually structured “place-holder”
for the content and is a widely used technique in print and
web design. Maintaining the visual elements of the different
information layers in an implicit grid reduces the
disorientation. Besides, the juxtaposition between the
internal and external information layers is already visually
established.
2) Color-coding
An important aspect, which evolved in the iteration
process, is the categorization of the information entities
through color-coding. With the help of professional users we
have identified several major news categories and have
created a corresponding color mapping (Fig. 3–b). Even
though the choice of colors is a rather subjective aesthetical
decision, we based the choice of our color palette on
principles of color harmony [1]and used a free web tool
specifically designed to help artists in the creation of
harmonic color schemes [8]. We recompiled the internal
layer of news topics by categorizing and ordering them by
color according to their semantic category (sports,
international, etc). In this way, the viewer can visually
establish a contextual relationship among the topics
developed in the newsroom.

5) Dynamics
Information visualization relies upon the visual
abstraction of data, and the gradual revelation of patterns
within the displayed dimensions [2]. We have incorporated
several dynamic behaviors, which play an essential role in
conveying the underlying meaning:
A piece of online news is visualized as an animated
particle (fig. 5). Whenever the engine identifies a piece of
news related to a given, a particle pops up and starts
“floating” towards the corresponding tag. Apart from the
usage size-coding (the more relevant the news, the bigger the
particle), the particles with a higher relevance move with
higher velocity, thus subtly encoding the importance of the
emerging news in its movement pattern. Upon reaching the
end of the string, dangling from the target topic, the particle
transforms smoothly into a flower petal. Simultaneously, the
topic tag pulsates for a tiny period of time, emphasizing the
event of “news growing”.
The more news emerge for a given topic, the more petals
would its flower grow. The overall size of the flower is also
dynamically influenced by the relevance of the news, as each
petal grows proportionally. Additionally, the flowers slightly
rotate around their centers with a pace corresponding to how
recent the news are. Once a topic trespasses a given time
threshold, it is marked by the system as inactive and slowly
degenerates and disappears from the screen together with its
flower. These features add to the informative value of the
display by subtly incorporating time as a crucial
characteristic of the evolution of the news landscape.

3) Size-coding
Already in the conceptual design phase (translating the
requirements to information aesthetics decisions) we chose a
tag-cloud technique for mapping the frequency of use of a
given topic to font size. This very straightforward manner of
encoding “importance” through size is maintained for both
internal and external information layers.
4) Visual metaphor
As we already stated the conceptual design phase, our
aesthetic approach to representing the external information
space is a metaphoric, interpretive one. Metaphors in
visualization are used to help users understand systems in

442
436

Since dynamics forms an important part of the aesthetic
concept, readers are encouraged to view a short video clip of
the display that is available on the web at:
http://thinktank.upf.edu/ambientnews/visuals.html.

it, and act as its liaisons. Approximately 20 professional
journalists informally reviewed the display at a
dissemination workshop, and articulated ideas on how the
tool might aid or complement their working practices. The
visual design of the interface was positively ranked as
pleasant and even intriguing. At first, some participants
expressed concern in requiring an explanation of the visual
concepts in order to be able to understand the visualization.
However, once the mapping was explained participants were
able to understand the concepts behind the interface (topic
clusters, emerging news, related information spaces). The
abstract characteristics of similar displays have been known
to generate the same phenomenon [13].
The third stage focuses on evaluating the aesthetics of the
final visual design, its unobtrusiveness, conceptual gap, and
the generated user awareness, and identifying possible
usability problems. From the heuristics for evaluating
ambient displays proposed in [10]we have chosen those
relevant for the AmbientNEWS design, refined them
accordingly [14]and conducted semi-structured interviews
with three journalists working in the newsroom. All three
correctly identified the role of the primary visual elements
without prior knowledge about the interface. The journalists’
comments indicated that information sources should be dealt
with care, since an unbalanced choice might lead to
ambiguity of the representation and endanger the
trustworthiness of the display.
The fourth step introduces the display gradually in the
work environment, allowing users to familiarize themselves
and see the display as part of their environment, thus
eliminating some of the novelty effects as described in [20].
The process includes several iterations on steps 3 and 4 until
users perceive the display as seamlessly integrated in their
work environment. This loop provides a continuous feedback
channel about the use of the system, acceptance, and
increases user awareness.
To initiate the process, the display was installed at a well
visible place of the newsroom for one workday. We
deliberately chose to give a broad description about the
project without describing the visual mapping and limited
ourselves to observe how users responded to the display.
People showed curiosity and interests about the display and
its functions despite of their busy schedule. Groups formed
around the display discussing the meaning of the
visualization and intuitively relating the displayed keywords
to ongoing news topics. Two employees willingly described
the visualization to anyone who expressed interest. People
expressed opinions regarding the final location of the display
and inquired about when the display would be permanently
installed.

6) Other aesthetic aspects
There are several secondary yet important aesthetic
aspects, which we considered in creating the visualization.
For each external information source the engine
consults, we have designed a different abstract shape. An
emerging news particle obtains the shape of the
corresponding source the news item has been crawled from.
A legend with icons indicating the source is situated at the
bottom right corner, and gives a subtle visual hint about the
origin of the news while they are popping up.
Additionally, there is an unobtrusive timeline at the
bottom part of the screen, which shows the current hour.
Crawled news particles always pop up close to the hour
display and start floating from there towards the screen, thus
establishing the sensation of the dynamic nature of news
development process. We also selected a black background
as it achieves a higher visual contrast (Fig. 4).

Figure 4: Some visual elements of AmbientNEWS

IV.
DEPLOYMENT AND EVALUATION
This project aims to have the display permanently
installed inside the newsroom and its success can only be
evaluated onsite; through user acceptance and use in the
short and long terms. The design process described in section
3 is complemented by a four stages deployment plan that
includes continuous evaluation and monitoring in order to
gradually introduce and validate the display.
The first step requires user involvement in the design
process, allowing them to influence the conceptualization of
the display to their needs and workflows. We followed this
process in AmbientNEWS and three other novel interfaces
conceived to augment the interaction with multimedia
repositories as part of the European SEMEDIA project [15].
These prototypes have been extensively evaluated through
two workshops where a total of 46 journalists, researchers,
and producers participated. In addition to informal
conversations and observations collected through walkthrough and thinking-aloud sessions, 28 questionnaires
investigating information flows and user needs filled in by
the participants. The results are discussed in details in [15].
The second step involves users evaluating preliminary
design sketches and ideas. This user-centered approach
encourages users to adopt the display as their own, advocate

V. CONCLUSIONS
During the course of this work, a novel concept for an
ambient visualization of dynamic and complex information
spaces was introduced. The conceptualization and aesthetic
design of this visualization were rooted in the results of a
detailed analysis of the people and workflows inside the
professional environment where the resulting display is
subsequently installed. In particular, we show how the

443
437

design of five major aspects of information aesthetics: the
layout, color coding, size coding, visual metaphor, and
dynamics, draws on the characteristics of the requirements
collected by formal human centered design practices.
An extensive ongoing evaluation plan that comprises of
four stages was discussed. The preliminary evaluation steps
conducted showed a great acceptance and interest among
users. It strengthened our initial opinion that applying
aesthetically sound visualization techniques improves the
design of information interfaces in complex human settings.
Furthermore, it provides a feedback loop for introducing
further improvements, so that the display can be fully
integrated in the sophisticated workflow of a media
production environment. One step of major importance, for
example, is the integration of the visualization with real-time
data generated during the news-making process. Further
enhanced topic extraction and clustering techniques would
also provide a greater credibility for the visualized data and
support the trustworthiness of the display.
We are currently planning the execution of the fourth and
final stage of the evaluation plan where the display is
deployed in the newsroom for a larger period of time and
consequently studied through observations, contextual
inquiries, and post-interviews with the professional users.
The results from the evaluation will be used to revise the
design and be incorporated in guidelines for future designs.
Our long-term goal would be to identify a generic set of
visual and interaction design criteria, which can be used in
different public and semi-public environments.

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

Boyle. C. Color Harmony for the Web: A Guide for Creating Great
Color Schemes On-Line. Rockport Publishers. 2001
Cawthon N. and Moere A. V. A Conceptual Model for Evaluating
Aesthetic Effect within the User Experience of IV. In Proc. of
Information Visualization, 2006, IEEE (2006), 374-382.
Gaver, W. W., Beaver, J., and Benford, S. Ambiguity as a resource
for design. In Proc. of CHI '03 (2003), 233-240. ACM, New York
Hallnäs, L., Redström, J. Slow Technology-Designing for Reflection.
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 5, 3 (2001), 201-212.
Hearst, M., & Rosner, D. Tag Clouds: Data Analysis Tool or Social
Signaler? In Proc. of HICSS 41, 2008.
Heiner, J. M., Hudson, S. E., and Tanaka, K. 1999. The information
percolator: ambient information display in a decorative object. In
Proc. of UIST '99, NY,141-148.
Ishii, H., Dahley, A., Gorbet, M., Brave, S., Ullmer, B. and Yarin, P.
Ambient Displays: Turning Architectural Space into an Interface

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

444
438

between People and Digital Information. In Proc. of CoBuild 1998,
22-32.
Kuler. Website http://kuler.adobe.com/
Lau A. and Vande Moere A. (2007), ‘Towards a Model of
Information Aesthetic Visualization’, IEEE Int. Conference on
Information Visualization (IV'07), Zürich, Switzerland, 87-92.
Mankoff, J., Dey, A. K., Hsieh, et al., Heuristic evaluation of ambient
displays. In Proc. of the SIGCHI 2003. ACM Press (2003), 169-176
Manovich, L. (2000), Info-Aesthetics. URL (25.12.2007):
http://www.manovich.net/IA/.
Marti, S., Seetharam D. and Ishii H. WeatherTank: Tangible Interface
using Weather Metaphors. Technical Report (2000).
Moere, A. V., Form follows Data: the Symbiosis between Design and
Information Visualization. In Proc. of International Conference on
Computer-Aided Architectural Design (CAADfutures'05) pages: 3140
Moghnieh, A. Arroyo, E. Blat, J. The News Wall: Serendipitous
discoveries in dynamic information spaces. In proceedings of IUI’08.
(2008).
Moghnieh, A., Sayago, S., Arroyo, E., Sopi, G. and Blat, J.
Parameterized User-Centered Design for Interacting with Multimedia
Repositories. In Proc. of MMEDIA 2009. IEEE Computer Society
(2009), 130-135.
Plaue, C., Miller, T., and Stasko J. Is a picture worth a thousand
words?: an evaluation of information awareness displays. In Proc. of
GI 2004, (2004), 117-126.
Redström, J., Skog, T., and Hallnäs, L. Informative art: using
amplified artworks as information displays. In Proc. of DARE 2000.
ACM, 103-114. 2000
SEMEDIA Project web site: www.semedia.org
Shen, X. and Eades, P. Using MoneyColor to represent financial data.
In Proc. of APVis 2005, Australian Computer Society (2005), 125—
129.
Shen, X., Moere, A. V., et al. Issues for the Evaluation of Ambient
Displays. International Journal of Ambient Computing and
Intelligence, 1(2), 59-69, April (2009).
Streitz, N., et al. Ambient displays and mobile devices for the
creation of social architectural spaces. In Journal of Public and
Situated Displays, (2003), 387-409.
Sutcliffe, A. and Namoune, A. Getting the message across: visual
attention, aesthetic design and what users remember. In Proc. of ACM
DIS 2008, ACM, 11-20.
Viegas, F. B., Wattenberg, et al. Participatory Visualization with
Wordle. IEEE Visualization and Computer Graphics 15, 6 (Nov.
2009), 1137-1144.
Zavoina, Susan and Reichert, Tom. Media Convergence Change: The
Evolving Workflow for Visual Journalists”. Journal of Media
Ecomics, 13: 2, 143-151. 2000

