2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Affective qualities of an urban environment on a desktop computer

Joske M. Houtkamp

Mike L.A. Junger

Department of Information and Computer Science
Utrecht University
Utrecht, The Netherlands
Joske.Houtkamp@cs.uu.nl

Utrecht, The Netherlands
MikeJunger@hotmail.com

determinants may result in similar assessments, especially if
the measurement scale used is little differentiated, for
instance when preference is measured. In their study,
Wergles and Muhar therefore focus on revealing which
elements determine the observers’ evaluation; ‘whether it is
indeed the same that they like or dislike in the depicted and
the real environment’. In their study, participants either
walked through a renovated urban area in Vienna, or were
shown a series of visualizations of the project proposal.
Qualitative questionnaires were used to elicit responses,
which were content analyzed for similarities and differences
in their cognitive, affective and evaluative aspects.
In the field experiment discussed in this chapter, we
compared the affective appraisal of an interactive
visualization of an area in Venlo, with that of the area in
reality. Despite the objections mentioned above, a scale was
used to quantitatively assess the affective qualities of the
environment. The SMB-scale by R. Küller [6], (Semantic
Environmental Scale) contains many adjectives that relate
directly to characteristics of the environment, so is expected
to reveal more of the motives for appraisal than for instance
the scale of Russell and Pratt [7] used in other experiments
[8]. Open questions were added to the questionnaire for this
purpose as well. The scale has been used in earlier
experiments, comparing virtual environments [9], [10], and a
static 3D model with a virtual environment [11].

Abstract—For communication of design plans, city councils
and other local governments require that 3D models are
developed quickly, at minimum expense, and they can be made
available online. Users, generally citizens, increasingly expect
that the models are a photorealistic and truthful representation
of the future situation. Despite the advancements in graphics in
recent years, the budget, the platform available, and the
requirements of use are restraining factors for the visual
quality of a 3D model. The question of the validity of models
for assessment of urban development plans is therefore
increasingly relevant [1].
In this empirical field study we compared the affective
qualities of a 3D model designed for online assessment and
communication of urban development, with those of the urban
environment in reality. The model was considered more
pleasant, more modern and more uniform than the area in
reality. This can be explained by specific characteristics of this
type of model, such as the lively colours and the clean surfaces.
Keywords---3D models, virtual environments, visualization,
affective qualities, urban development.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The validity of visualizations as representations of
landscapes and urban environments, has been topic of
research since over 40 years, e.g. [2], [3]. Most empirical
studies either compared the response to real environments
with different types of static visualizations, such as
photographs, slides, and screenshots of 3D models, or
compared different types of visualizations, showing different
levels of detail, or presentation modes [4]. Only few studies
have compared viewers’ responses between a real (urban)
environment and a 3D model. Most often cited is the study
by Bishop and Rohrmann [5], who have used an animated
(non-interactive) walk through a modelled urban park to
compare perceptual responses to the model and the real
environment. They found that although on main aspects the
viewers’ response to the virtual and real environments were
similar, the appreciation of the study area was less positive,
and retention was less detailed.
Wergles and Muhar [1] raise an objection to these
studies, which are restricted to evaluating preference or other
visual perceptual responses to the environment and its
representation. Their argument is that similar ratings for an
environment or its surrogate, do not necessarily mean that
the motivation for the assessment is the same. Different
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.87

Visual quality and ‘realism’ in online virtual
environments for urban planning
According to Pietsch [12] the attention of researchers has
focused on achieving highly realistic models, and the
potential of simpler forms of representation are not receiving
the attention they deserve. The quality of graphics in games
and simulations has increased rapidly over the last years, and
raised the expectations of users of visualizations of urban
planning. In the development of 3D models for visualization,
an underlying assumption is generally that the highest
possible level of photorealism, which means realistic and
dynamic lighting, perfectly anti-aliased graphics, and moviequality motion would ensure a valid representation; that is, it
would produce a cognitive, affective and behavioural
response in the observer equivalent to the response produced
by the real environment. Smallman and St John [13] have
labeled this tendency ‘Naïve Realism’.
It is generally recognized that the desire to obtain realism
is unobtainable in most desktop applications (as well as on
587
597

other platforms). Low-end models are developed to quickly
visualize proposals, with an ‘acceptable’ level of realism,
accuracy and abstraction. Also, the requirement that these
models are available online, puts severe restraints on the size
of the files, and has a negative effect on the perceived quality
of the models.
The degradations that occur as a result of the restraints in
development and representation are considered undesirable
but inevitable, and uncontrollable as to the effect on the
viewer; developers cannot predict how the response of the
viewer will deviate when for instance the lighting quality or
resolution is not optimal. In literature on geovisualization the
perceived quality of 3D models is often related to the level of
detail (LoD), in which 4 stages are distinguished, from
volumetric block models without roofing and textures, to
very high detailed models that are even useful for visualizing
interiors [14]. These levels determine the user’s perception
of the verisimilarity of the visualized environment when used
in planning: low levels of detail are understood as drafts,
whereas increase in detail levels suggest an increase in
finalizing of the designs. Other aspects of the perceived
quality of the graphics are more difficult to group in classes.
The process by which visualizations are designed, or
built is not at all straightforward [15]. There are many
decisions which visualization developers need to take
besides level of detail and degree of generalisation, such as
colour, lighting, atmospheric circumstances, texture, and
type of vegetation, which can influence the affective
qualities of the scenes created, and give them different
meanings to different individuals and groups. Decisions in
the development process on abstraction, accuracy, and
realism are made on vague consensus of ‘sufficient realism’
[16].
Although in literature and practice the use of the concept
realism is confusing, usually a distinction is made between
‘realistic’ images that ‘look real’ (but are not necessarily
valid representations of existing environments) and valid
representations, that show ‘actual realism’ [17]. In the
development of visualizations for urban planning, these
aspects of realism are often not distinguished. Although
models should primarily be valid representations of the area
considered, unintentionally or by custom, the models are also
made to be convincing, to ‘look real’.
Since a number of years, several Dutch cities, for
instance Helmond, Apeldoorn, Tilburg, and Venlo, have
used online models for communication and assessment of
(future) urban environments in the Netherlands. They are
multi-user 3D environments using the VirtuoCityEngine
developed by Cebra (www.cebra.eu). VirtuoCity is based on
a central client-server architecture, with a client of limited
size, requiring only a small download. In a VirtuoCity
environment users navigate by using their mouse and/or
keyboard as input device. The controls are simple, to allow
users with little experience in 3D applications to use the
application without instruction.
The 3D models in the example used in this study are
created for VirtuoCity by Engineering agency Movares
Nederland BV, based on a large-scale base map of the
Netherlands in combination with aerial photographs. Both

are used to define the project outlines and boundaries. The
base plate, containing basic information such as curbs,
housing and, roads, and the models placed on it, are created
in 3DStudioMax. Facades are photographed with as few
visual disturbances as possible, as are other surrounding
features such as lampposts, traffic signs, street furniture etc.
CycloMedia 360° panoramic pictures are used as textures
where possible. A small number of static cars and persons
(avatars) are included in the environment. The photographic
textures provide details and improve the perceived quality of
the model. However, the geometric level of detail is low to
allow interactivity and online use, the textures are crude
when seen from a short distance, and the models therefore
belong to the category of low-end models.
II.

HYPOTHESIS

The visualization presents a more coherent and
comprehensible view of the area as a result of the
simplification of geometric shapes of the buildings, the photo
textures applied on the facades, the similarity of the textures
for the other surfaces (pavement, road etc.), and the
reduction of elements in the street, such as people, traffic and
street furniture. The absence of people and sounds makes the
environment less lively, and more static. Negative elements
like dirt, litter and indications of dilapidation and vandalism
are not modelled.
The appraisals are therefore expected to show higher
scores for the SMB-factors Pleasantness (the environmental
quality of being pleasant, beautiful and secure), Unity (how
well all the various parts of the environment fit together into
a coherent and functional whole), Affection (the quality of
recognition, giving rise to a sense of familiarity, often related
to the age of the environment and an indication of how
modern the area is perceived), and Social Status (an
evaluation of the built environment in socio-economic terms,
but also in terms of maintenance).
Prior knowledge of an environment and associated
appraisals may interfere with judgments of this environment,
or of the representation of the environment, in an
experimental setup. In the design of this study, participants
with prior knowledge of Venlo were equally divided over the
conditions. No hypothesis was composed on the influence of
prior knowledge on the appraisal of the environment.
III.

METHOD

Participants
32 persons participated in the experiment, 20 male and
12 female. The average age was 32.5 years (minimum 18,
maximum 59, SD= 11.8). Half of them had prior knowledge
of Venlo. All participants but three were students in higher
education institutions or were local government officials,
with at least a bachelor degree.
The participants with prior knowledge of Venlo were
divided equally over the two conditions.

598
588

Materials

means more modern. Results for the versions are listed in
Table 1.

Model and selected area
An area of Venlo was selected that met the requirements
for a tour in real life as well as in the model, for instance, not
subject to changes or building activities at the time of
experiments.
The area is known as the ‘Keulse Poort’, a gateway to the
centre of Venlo, which comprises a number of landmark
buildings like the large post-office, a monumental filling
station (both about 70 years old) and the modern ‘Limburgs
Museum’ (Figure 1.a,b,c). Visitors are attracted by shops and
cafes. The route to be traversed by participants was chosen to
show a diversity of views available in the model.
The 3D model was installed at two locations, in similar
settings, and on similar computers, with 19” flat screen
monitors. Participants who made the walk through real
Venlo, were welcomed in a separate room in the Limburgs
museum. The route started in front of the museum.

Pleasantness *
Complexity
Unity *
Enclosedness
Potency
Social Status
Affection *
Originality

Real
Mean
SD
3.30
0.74
3.50
0.82
3.19
0.83
3.56
0.75
4.58
0.59
3.75
0.91
2.80
1.05
3.05
1.05

Table 1 Scores on the SMB-factors. Factors with an asterisk show
significant differences between versions.

No main effect of prior knowledge was found. An
interaction effect was found for factors Enclosedness
(F(1,28)= 6.12, p=0.020) and Social Status (F(1,28)=4.69,
p=0.039). Participants without prior knowledge judged the
real environment as more enclosed than the virtual
environment, whereas the participants who were familiar
with Venlo, judged the virtual environment as more enclosed
(so less open).
Participants without prior knowledge gave higher scores
on Social Status to the virtual environment than to the real
environment; for the participants who were familiar with
Venlo this was opposite.

Questionnaires and scale
Participants in both conditions first received a short
instruction and a questionnaire with general questions on
education, computer experience, etc. All participants were
then provided with a map (Figure 2) of the area on which the
required route was indicated. At each of the 5 numbered
locations the participant was asked to estimate a distance to
or between buildings, or height or width of a building.
After the (virtual) walk a set of questionnaires was
presented, adapted to the conditions. To assess the affective
appraisal of Venlo and Virtual Venlo the SMB-scale was
used. The SMB-scale does not contain items that reflect the
use of an area, and the ambience as a result of presence of
people. Three adjectives were added for this purpose (busy,
quiet, cosy/lively).
Open questions were added about characteristics of the
environments like sound, colours, weather, and season. For
Virtual Venlo questions on immersion, navigation, and the
representation of the environment were added.
IV.

Virtual
Mean
SD
4.59
0.56
3.98
1.13
4.63
0.81
3.47
1.06
4.15
0.83
3.54
0.71
4.46
1.02
3.72
0.84

Other appraisals of the environment
The virtual environment was considered significantly
more quiet and less busy than the real environment, as
expected. More interestingly, the virtual area was considered
more ‘cosy’ (pleasantly lively) than the real environment,
despite the absence of people.
On the item ‘busy’ a main effect was also found for prior
knowledge (F(1,28)= 4.24), and an interaction effect (F1,28)
= 5.77, p=0.023). Participants with prior knowledge judged
the virtual environment as more busy than the other groups
(Table 2)

RESULTS

SMB-scale
First the internal consistency of the 8 factors of the SMBscale was checked. Cronbach’s alpha for the factor
Complexity was improved to α = .53 by removing the item
‘subdued’; for the factor Affection to α = .77, the adjective
removed was ‘timeless’. The reliability for the factor
Potency and Social Status was adjusted by removing one
single item (fragile, resp. well-kept), but Cronbach’s alpha
remained below 0.6. Results should be considered with
some care.
A two-way Anova with the factors environment (virtual vs.
real) and prior knowledge (high vs. low) resulted in a main
effect of environment, for Pleasantness, Unity and
Affection, that received higher scores in the virtual
condition. The factor Affection is used to indicate how
modern or aged an environment is judged; a higher score

Virtual Venlo
Quiet
Busy
Cosy

Mean
4.25
3.19
4.63

SD
1.53
1.33
1.31

Real
Mean
2.69
4.56
3.19

SD
1.40
0.96
1.33

Main effect
environment
F(1,28)
10.20
p=.003
14.24
p<.001
8.53
p=.007

Table 2 Scores for items quiet, busy and cosy, on a scale from 1-7.

Participants considered the colours in the virtual
environment more beautiful and lively than those in the real
environment (Table 3). Also a main effect of prior
knowledge was found: participants with prior knowledge
thought the colours were more beautiful, than other

599
589

participants (mean 4.54, SD 1.89, versus 3.57, SD 1.89,
F(1,28)= 4.16, p=0.05.)
Colours

Virtual
Mean SD

uglybeautiful
gloomylively

Real
Mean SD

other ambient sounds , to make the environment ‘more
realistic’. The sounds in real Venlo were considered as
normal to pleasant by the participants who walked through
real Venlo.
To the question what was remarkable in the environment,
8 participants answered with negative comments on the
impression of the real area, such as unpleasant, oldfashioned, incoherent, and unclean. The virtual environment
did not receive any negative comments, only positive or
neutral.
To the question what could be improved in the virtual
environment, 10 participants answered more liveliness,
people or movement in the streets.
The experiments were conducted in spring, during dry
sunny to cloudy weather. The virtual environment shows
blue skies with light clouds, and green leaved trees; 10
participants concluded it was spring. As we noticed before in
experiments [9], participants very easily draw conclusions on
the time of day in the virtual environment: 11 participants
thought it was afternoon, although the model does not
contain evidence for this.

Main effect
environment
F(1,28)

5.38

1.81

2.73

.82

30.71

p<0.001

4.01

1.79

2.36

.98

10.45

p=0.003

Table 3 Scores for items ugly-beautiful and gloomy-lively; (Visual
Analogue Scale, from 1-10)

Distances
Estimates of dimensions of buildings (height and width)
were very similar in both conditions, and close to the real
dimensions. As we established in earlier experiments, people
were able to judge (or calculate) dimensions using objects of
familiar sizes as reference [9],[10]. Estimates of egocentric
distances and traversed distances were higher in both
conditions than the actual distances. In the virtual
environment, they were overestimated by more than 50%.
Most people find it hard to accurately estimate distances
in reality, as well as in virtual environments. As a result, the
range in answers is large. Table 4 lists the results of the
estimations of egocentric distances and traversed distance in
both conditions.
These results do not provide an explanation for the
difference that was found in the factor Enclosedness of the
SMB-scale. Although the experience of openness or
enclosedness is expected to be directly related to the
perceived distances and dimensions of buildings, in the
distance estimations we did not find a similar interaction
effect.

V.

DISCUSSION

The area of Venlo represented in the 3D model, was
considered more pleasant, more uniform, and more modern
than the area in reality, in agreement with our hypothesis.
The higher scores on the SMB-factors Pleasantness and
Affection are probably affected by the cleanliness of the
area, the absence of negative elements like litter and
vandalism, and the colours, that were considered prettier and
livelier in the model. No difference was found for the factor
Social Status, although participants commented on negative
aspects of the area in reality, for instance labeling it
unpleasant and unclean.
The factor Complexity, that reflects the perceived
vivaciousness and colourfulness of an area, was not
significantly different between the two groups. Although the
colours in the model were considered lively, the area is more
empty and contains less movement and visual variation, and
no sounds, which may have countered the effect. Here a
problem occurs that is noted by Wergles and Muhar [1], and
discussed in the introduction of this paper: although the
appraisal is similar, the reasons may be very different.
An aspect often mentioned is the (too) quiet, static or
lifeless ambience of 3D models, because traffic and people,
are absent, and dynamic elements in general. Also in this
experiment a significant difference was noted between the
conditions in the perceived quietness of the area.
Nevertheless the participants considered the real
environment more ‘cosy’ (pleasantly lively) than the real
environment. An obvious difference between the
environments, is the terrace with chairs and tables on the
otherwise rather empty square near the end of the walk, only
in the virtual environment, suggesting the use of the area for
social activities. Again the colours, that in the real
environment are mostly grey and brown, may have given the
area a more lively ambience. The absence of people and
movement may thus, to some extent, be compensated by
lively colours and indications of pleasant activities.

Immersion
The participants in the virtual environment were asked
whether (1) they had felt immersed, (2) felt they were
walking through real Venlo, and (3) were unaware of their
surroundings, on a 7 point bipolar scale (from ‘do not agree
at all” to “agree completely”). The first two questions were
answered positively; mean 5.44, SD .63, mean 4.94, SD
1.18. The score for the third question was mean 3.38, SD
1.36. A score of 4 was neutral. From this we conclude that
the environment was convincing at a satisfactory level, and
that the quality of the representation and interaction was
sufficient.
Other items, and open questions
Open questions were added to elicit response from
participants on elements of the environment that they had
noticed, and to find reasons for their appraisals. The number
of participants was too small to perform a full content
analysis but the unambiguous and relevant results are
mentioned here.
When prompted, 12 of the 16 participants in the virtual
environment answered that they had missed sounds,
especially common sounds such as traffic, people talking, or

600
590

To our knowledge, no attempts have been made to assess
the affective qualities of the other VirtuoCity models. If
results of similar experiments were combined, it would allow
general conclusions and predictions on the effect of these
representations on the affective qualities of an urban
environment. In the absence of these results, a comparison
will be made with other experiments.
In a similar study, Bishop and Rohrmann assessed
differences between cognitive and affective reactions of
participants to an environment and its 3D representation,
including impressions of the area, content retention and
comprehension, and their evaluation of the simulations’
realism [5]. Participants made a short walk through a
suburban park, with views on a building and the street, and
were shown an animated version of the same walk through
the virtual environment. In contrast to our results, the virtual
environment was considered less pleasant than the real
environment. It is likely, that this is related to the type of
environment, as well as the quality of the representation. The
environment was a park, a relatively quiet and green area
with trees and shrubs; a stroll in such an area in reality is
generally considered as a quite pleasant experience, and
offers more sources for pleasure than only the visual
information [18]. In Virtual Venlo vegetation is only a small
element in the environment, and a walk through an urban
area is not per se pleasurable. Secondly, the visualization of
the vegetation in the virtual park in Bishop and Rohrmann’s
experiment was not very detailed, and participants’ scores on
perceived naturalness were quite low; the virtual vegetation
did not offer the same pleasing qualities as the real
vegetation. This is a common problem in 3D visualization
software [19].
Wergles and Muhar found that a real environment in
Vienna elicited more negative comments than its virtual
representation, in agreement with the negative comments in
this study, and the lower score on Pleasantness in real Venlo.
In the real Vienna environment negative elements were
traffic and noise, and the predominance of asphalt and
concrete; this is comparable with our findings that colours
are strong determinants of the pleasantness of an area.
In the Vienna visualization, negative aspects were the
monotony and dullness of the area, directly related to
restraints of the representation. The viewers of Virtual Venlo
commented on the absence of traffic and people which
makes the environment static; however, the use of
photographic textures and the lively colours increased the
visual variety of this area, and presence of people is
suggested by a terrace.
The results of the experiment in Vienna indicated that the
visualization medium was limited in communicating aspects
such as texture, movement, interaction and specific sensory
qualities related to the design. They were however superior
in communicating some other aspects of the design, mainly
related to structure and colour. This was partly the result of
the use of screenshots, in which viewpoints confined the
scenes and directed the attention of the viewer. In the Venlo
visualization, participants could move freely through the
environment. The buildings mentioned as characteristic were
similar in both conditions, which indicates that interaction

and navigation are important for the validity of the
representation.
By comparing the results of the studies of Venlo and
Vienna, we tentatively drew some general conclusions on the
effect of this type of visualization on the appraisal of urban
environments, for instance about the elements that increase
the pleasantness of an area. With more experiments, a pattern
will undoubtedly emerge of the relation between
characteristics of the environment, of the representation, and
the affective qualities of the environments.
In many projects involving non design professionals, for
instance (local) politicians and members of the public, there
is a demand for a type of visualization modelling that is
flexible, simple, quickly rendered, and to a degree of detail
accepted by the participants in the planning process. The
remark of Pietsch [12] is still valid: ” As yet that balance of
abstraction, accuracy, and realism in visualization modelling
has not been achieved.”
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been supported by the GATE project,
funded by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific
Research (NWO) and the Netherlands ICT Research and
Innovation Authority (ICT Regie).
We are grateful to Movares, Cebra BV and employees of
the City of Venlo and the ‘Limburgs Museum’ for their help
and hospitality

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

601
591

N. Wergles and A. Muhar, “The role of computer visualization in the
communication of urban design—A comparison of viewer responses
to visualizations versus on-site visits,” Landscape and Urban
Planning, 91(4), 2009, 171-182.
E. Lange, “The limits of realism: perceptions of virtual landscapes,”
Landscape and Urban Planning, 54, 2001, 163-182.
I.D. Bishop and E. Lange (Eds), Visualization in Landscape and
Environmental Planning: Technology and Applications. London:
Taylor & Francis, 2005.
S.L. Huang, “The Validity of Visual Surrogates for Representing
Waterscapes,” Landscape Research, 34 (3), 2009, 323–335.
I.D. Bishop and B. Rohrmann, “Subjective responses to simulated
and real environments: A comparison,” Landscape & Urban Planning,
65, 2003, 261-277.
R. Küller, A semantic model for describing perceived environment.
Document No. 12:1972, National Swedish Institute for Building
Research, 1972, Stockholm, Sweden.
J.A. Russell and G. Pratt, “A description of the affective quality
attributed to environments,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 38(2), 1980, 311-322.
J. Houtkamp, E. Schuurink, and A. Toet, “Thunderstorms in my
Computer: The Effect of Visual Dynamics and Sound in a 3D
Environment,” Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference
Information Visualization (IV08), IEEE Computer Society, 2008,
Washington DC, 11-17.
J. Houtkamp and H. Van Oostendorp, “Virtual Vandalism: The Effect
of Physical Incivilities on the Affective Appraisal of 3D Urban
Models,” Proceedings of the 11th international Conference

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

information Visualization (IV07), IEEE Computer Society, 2007,
Washington DC, 559-566.
J.M. Houtkamp, E.D. van der Spek, and A. Toet, “The influence of
lighting on the affective qualities of a virtual theater,” Predicting the
Future, 25th eCAADe Conference Proceedings, 2007, Frankfurt am
Main, 77-84.
T.K. Koramaz and N. Zeren Gulersoy, “Comparison between users’
responses for static 3D model and VR application in Zeyruk urban
historic site,” 22nd CIPA Symposium, October 11-15, 2009, Kyoto,
Japan.
S.M. Pietsch, “Computer visualisation in the design control of urban
environments: a literature review,” Environmental Planning, B 27,
2000, 521–536.
H.S. Smallman and M. St.John, “Naïve Realism: Misplaced Faith in
Realistic Displays,” Ergonomics in Design, 13, 2005, 14-19.
M.S. Kibria, S. Zlatanova, I. Laure and M. van Dorst, “Overdaad zet
mens op het verkeerde been,” Geo in Business, Feb. 2009.

[15] R. MacFarlane, H. Stagg, K. Turner and M. Lievesley, “Peering
through the smoke? Tensions in landscape visualisation,” Computers,
Environment and Urban Systems, 29, (3), 2005, 341-359.
[16] K.J. Appleton and A.A. Lovett, “GIS-based visualisation of rural
landscapes: defining 'sufficient' realism for environmental decisionmaking,” Landscape & Urban Planning, 65, 2003, 117-131.
[17] S.R.J. Sheppard, “Validity, reliability and ethics in visualization,” In:
I.D. Bishop and E. Lange (Eds.), Visualization in Landscape and
Environmental Planning, London: Taylor & Francis, 2005, 79–97.
[18] I.M. Mambretti, Urban Parks between Safety and Aesthetics.
Exploring urban green space using Visualisation and Conjoint
Analysis methods. Dissertation, Zürich: ETH, 2007.
[19] P. Paar, “Landscape visualizations: Applications and requirements of
3D visualization software for environmental planning.” Computers,
Environments and Urban Systems, 30, 2006, 815-839.

1a

1b

1c
Figure 1 1a. post office; 1.b filling station; 1.c, museum. Left: photo, right: 3D model.

602
592

Figure 2 Map of the area showing the route for the participants.

Virtual environment
Egocentric
distances:
Distance 1
Distance 2
Distance 3
Traversed
distance:
Distance 4

Mean

SD

124.69
95.31
175.63

77.64
60.76
104.43

1037.50

673.18

Difference
with real
distance
p

Real environment

Difference
with real
distance
p

Actual (real)
distance

Mean

SD

.022
.064
.024

89.25
78.75
126.56

45.06
44.44
52.78

.225
.235
.229

75
65
110

.020

889.31

385.48

.009

600

Table 4 Estimated distances in the virtual and real environment (meters).

603
593

Meters

