2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Embodying Affect: the Stolen Generations, the History Wars and PolesApart by
Indigenous New Media Artist r e a
Christine Nicholls
Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia
{christine.nicholls@flinders.edu.au}
Abstract

1. Introduction

In her 2009 new media artwork PolesApart,
Australian Aboriginal artist r e a, 1 of the Gamilaraay
people in northern New South Wales, explores issues
relating to the Stolen Generations of Aboriginal
children. Based on the personal experiences of her
grandmother and great aunt as ‘stolen children’, r e a
amplifies the work’s familial dimension by enacting the
role of the protagonist fleeing from forced servitude. This
paper looks at PolesApart in the broader context of the
interrelated phenomena of the stolen generations and the
so-called ‘history wars’. It is posited that the power,
immediacy and affective dimensions of (moving) visual
imagery have been instrumental in shifting Australians’
knowledge about the stolen generations from the margins
into the mainstream. The capacity of the moving image
to ‘embody affect’ [13], it is argued, has enabled many
more Australians than previously to appreciate the
historical implications and continuing ramifications of
this prolonged episode in Australian history. This has in
turn led to the development of a more sympathetic public
understanding of the phenomenon of the stolen
generations as ‘lived experience’. In turn this broader
social knowledge, and its integration into our shared
cultural heritage, has contributed to Australians’ general
receptiveness to the official Apology issued to members
of the stolen generations by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd
in Federal Parliament (13th February 2008). It is also
the case that the popular reception of mainstream stolen
generation-themed movies has influenced Australians’
openness to the themes and issues explored in
contemporary non-mainstream new media work such as
r e a's PolesApart. In the latter work, through the use of
the vehicle of her own body, r e a demonstrates that the
personal is inescapably political, and vice versa.

In her 2009 video artwork PolesApart, Australian
Aboriginal artist r e a, of the Gamilaraay people in
northern New South Wales, explores issues relating to
the Stolen Generations of Aboriginal children.
R e a’s work, based on the experiences of her
grandmother and great aunt, has a strongly personal,
familial dimension. This paper looks at PolesApart in the
broader context of the stolen generations (the forcible
removal of Australian Aboriginal children from their
families) and the so-called ‘history wars’ (continuing
ideological disagreements about the precise nature of the
facts about and effects of ‘contact history’). 2
Before discussing PolesApart in greater depth, the
work needs to be situated within a broader historical
framework. Of great significance is the fact that, in little
more than the last decade, there has been a discernible
shift in mainstream Australian thinking about the
veracity of the phenomenon known as the stolen
generations, and greater public appreciation of the
seriousness of its flow-on effects. Underpinning this
change was the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission’s 1997 release of Bringing Them Home:
Report of the National Enquiry into the separation of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their
families [15].
Since the release of the report, the increasingly
popular reception of mainstream stolen generationthemed Hollywood style Australian movies has
heightened audiences’ receptiveness to non-mainstream
new media works such as r e a’s PolesApart. Key to this
shift in mainstream thinking would appear to be three
films: the unexpectedly popular Radiance (1998),
followed by Rabbit Proof Fence (2002), loosely based on

Keywords---Australian Aboriginal history, stolen
generations, history wars, r e a, PolesApart (hd. video).

2
‘Contact history’ is the term widely used in Australia to refer to the
historical relationships between Australian Aboriginal peoples and
members of colonising migrant groups, from post- initial contact with
the British in the late eighteenth century, and continuing into the
present. The unresolved nature of ‘contact history’ has become deeply
imbricated with the ‘history wars’, in which the actual facts of the case
and the legacy of colonial policies and practices remain subject to bitter
dispute.

1

Please note that r e a spells her name entirely in lower case, with a
space between each letter, which she explains as ‘a rejection of
imposed identity’ and does not use a surname (pers. com, r e a to the
author, June 2009).

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 Crown Copyright
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.64

409
415

a true story, and more recently, the fictional Australia
(2008). All experienced box office success, but
particularly the latter two. The popular culture and
successively populist cinematic representations of the
stolen generations, Rabbit Proof Fence and Australia,
attracted mass audiences nationally and internationally.
A number of documentaries about the stolen generations
that were screened during the same period, including Cry
from the Heart (1999), and Land of the Little Kings
(2000) also elicited largely compassionate responses.
It is argued that the power and immediacy of the
(moving) visual image have been instrumental in shifting
Australians’ knowledge and sympathetic understanding
of the historical implications of the stolen generations
into the mainstream. The latter development has, it
would seem, in turn contributed to Australians’ readiness
for The Apology, offered to members of the stolen
generation by Prime Minister Kevin Rudd in Federal
Parliament, 13th February 2008.
Pertinent to this argument, but in a different context,
Anne Rutherford has argued that the “materialities of
cinematic experience” can be “understood as
intrinsically linked with the affective power of cinema”
[12]. Central to this is what she describes in another
article and in a forthcoming book as ‘embodied affect’
[13].
While detailed discussion about the affective power
of visual representations and of cinematic identification
is beyond the scope of this article, it is clear that while
the Bringing Them Home...Report may have been the
initial catalyst for further understanding of the prolonged
chapter in Australian history known as the stolen
generations, the aforementioned films and documentaries
enabled the subject to be taken to a far wider audience
than previously. In addition, there has been a flow-on
effect from these mainstream works that has shaped the
reception of works such as r e a’s PolesApart.
These mainstream films’ capacity to show rather
than simply to tell meant that Australians became
educated en masse about the embodied existence of
individual members of the stolen generations in ways
that written reports and even live dramatic performances
cannot. 3 The unique capacity of the moving image to
embody and to personalise social and political
phenomena has led predominantly non-Aboriginal
audiences to envision the phenomenon and its affective
dimensions in ways that were not possible earlier. Prior
to the release of these films, only considerably smaller,
mostly scholarly, audiences had been aware of the
phenomenon.
Therefore it is argued that these cinematic
predecessors prepared the path for r e a’s PolesApart, a
non-populist new media work created and screened early

in what could be described as the current ‘post apology’
era of Australian politics. This locates PolesApart along
an historical continuum. At the same time, as a new
media work shown almost exclusively in art gallery
settings to art house audiences, PolesApart is to be
understood as a new, divergent branch of an older tree.
Notwithstanding, and while Rutherford’s argument may
not be applicable to all contemporary new media works,
especially those situated outside of a humanist paradigm,
insofar as r e a herself enacts the central role in
PolesApart, thereby re-creating the experiences of a
family member, it can be validly argued that this nonmainstream work is equally premised on the
‘embodiment of affect’.
Before examining the specifics of PolesApart, it is
necessary to contextualise the discussion by providing
more background. The interconnected phenomena
known in Australia as the ‘Stolen Generations’, ‘The
Apology’, and ‘The History Wars’ are all relevant here.
In order to develop a fuller and deeper understanding of
the significance of PolesApart this background
knowledge needs be mapped onto the details of r e a’s
own family history. In the sections that follow such
broader context is provided to equip the reader in
connecting the general with the particular as a means of
illuminating r e a’s artwork.

2. The Stolen Generations: an Overview
The practice of pastoralists, Government officials or
Church authorities in forcibly removing large numbers of
Australian Aboriginal children began in the late 19th
century and was only halted in the mid-late 1970s. Often
children were removed from their families for no other
reason than their Aboriginality. Racialized notions of
‘genetic arithmetic’ played an important part in this
process, with the so-called ‘half-caste’ children routinely
removed from what substantial numbers of nonIndigenous Australians believed to be the noxious,
corrupting influence of the children’s immediate,
biological families. Some of the children were placed in
orphanages, while others were sent out to work as
domestic servants for wealthy whites, and others were
adopted or fostered out to white couples. In some
instances the latter were told lies by the authorities, and
informed that the child's parents had died, or had
voluntarily relinquished their children, or had even
outright rejected their children. The children themselves
were often fed similar stories, only to find out years later
that their parents were still alive and grieving for their
irredeemable loss [15].
The Australian Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission was set up to identify and
examine the laws, practices, and policies which resulted
in the separation of thousands of Aboriginal children
from their families by ‘compulsion, duress, or undue
influence’ [15]. When the report was released to the
public in 1997, Australians became more aware of the
details of this phenomenon. The report revealed that
frequently the authorities did not disclose to either the

3
Several stolen generation-themed plays were staged during the same
period, most notably Jane Harrison’s successful Stolen, which
premiered in Melbourne in 1998 and then toured extensively. While
live dramatic performances ‘embody affect’ to the same degree as
cinematic representations, the fact remains that the former rarely reach
mass audiences and do not have the capacity to be repeated in the same
way as cinematic works.

416
410

adoptive parents or to the children the facts about their
Aboriginal identity.
The children have become known collectively as
‘the Stolen Children’, or ‘The Stolen Generations’. The
practice itself, which appears to have been premised on
the notion of ‘breeding out’ Indigenous Australians and
creating an all-White monoculture and a monolingual
English speaking nation of predominantly Anglo-Celtic
Australians, could be described as genocidal in intent,
and tragic in its consequences. Today many Australian
Aboriginal people are still reeling in its aftermath,
suffering from what could be described as collective
post-traumatic stress disorder. Central to this process was
the rupture in the intergenerational link provided by a
common language [15]. Compounding this is the fact
that, up until relatively recently, collective erasure of this
grim chapter in Australia's recent past by many members
of the dominant culture has been the norm, rather than
the exception.
The anthropologist Stanner (1968), who for many
years worked with Aboriginal people, coined the phrase
‘The Great Australian Silence’ to describe nonAboriginal Australians’ inability or unwillingness to
engage with Aboriginal people in resolving the
‘unfinished business’ of non-Indigenous and Indigenous
contact history [14]. By definition, such ‘silence’ also
involved ‘silencing’. This continued to be the case with
respect to the stolen generations at both individual and
governmental levels until recently.
This changed on the 26th May 1997 when the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission’s
‘Bringing Them Home’, Report of the National Enquiry
into the separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander children from their families, was tabled in the
Australian Parliament and released [15]. While initially
the report was fiercely contested, since then, thousands
of copies have been bought and read by ordinary
Australians, and the media has continued to bring its
findings to the attention of the public.
On the 13th February 2008 Prime Minister Rudd
delivered a carefully scripted apology to the stolen
generations, in Federal Parliament, Canberra, in a
nationally televised event attended by many surviving
members of the stolen generations. By and large ‘The
Apology’ was well received by Australians, Indigenous
and non-Indigenous.

scientists and others writing about post-contact
Aboriginal history [3].
In Blainey's view ‘black armband’ intellectuals and
other commentators focussed in an unbalanced way on a
largely negative portrayal of Australian history.
Blainey’s remarks were specifically directed at
historians’ accounts of the historical oppression and ill
treatment of Aboriginal people, which, in his view, were
factually incorrect and ideologically based. Instead
Blainey adopted an equally ideological ‘Three Cheers
View’ of Australian history, in which Indigenous
massacres, dispossession, loss of land, near cultural
genocide, the Stolen Generations, racism and so forth
were radically downplayed and Australia's virtues,
including ‘mateship’ and our putatively ‘fair go for all’
egalitarianism, were foregrounded [3].
Claims and counterclaims continue from different
sides of the political divide. Although originally such
debates largely took place in academic circles, they were
soon taken up as a populist cause, aided by the
Australian media and largely supported by the
government of the day. The counter tendency, in which
cases for a less positive reading of Australia's Indigenous
and non-Indigenous contact history have been presented,
was originally spearheaded by academic historians
including Henry Reynolds, Robert Manne, Lyndall Ryan,
Stuart Macintyre, Bain Attwood, and later taken up by
others, including Clark in 2003 [9].
The matter of the stolen generations has been a
resilient theme in the history wars. The major
contestation centres on the veracity of the notion of
whether the children were actually ‘stolen’. The question
of the precise reasons for the separation of children from
their Aboriginal families and the exact numbers involved
continues to be debated forcefully. Windshuttle is one
historian who has attracted a great deal of media
publicity by depicting the people responsible for these
separations as, by and large, non-racist humanitarians
acting in the best interests of their ‘charges’ (see, inter
alia, Windshuttle 2010) [16]. The oral testimonies of the
vast majority of Aboriginal people who were either
removed as children, or had their children taken away
from them, as well as certain written accounts by white
officials directly responsible for child removals
challenge such a view - notwithstanding the fact that
reasons for child removals were at times more complex
than those advanced by Aboriginal activists and their
supporters.

3. The History Wars
The variant interpretations, views and often heated
exchanges between historians of various political hues
(and calibres) about the nature of Indigenous and nonIndigenous Australian contact history that have
continued for almost two decades have come to be
known as the ‘History Wars’.
The ‘History Wars’ date back to 1993, when the
Australian historian Geoffrey Blainey used the term ‘the
Black Armband view of Australian history’ to describe
and deride the ideological positionings expressed in the
scholarly work of certain Australian historians, social

4. The Stolen Generations, the History Wars,
and r e a’s PolesApart
R e a, born into the Gamilaraay Australian
Aboriginal people of northern New South Wales, is a
new media artist working in photography, digital media
and moving images, who also explores creative
environments through installation. Born in 1962 in the
predominantly Aboriginal town of Coonabarabran in
northern N. S. W., r e a’s work in digital media dates
back to 1992.

417
411

PolesApart, her most recent work, comprises a
silent, high definition video, four photographic triptychs,
and a Victorian morning/mourning gown created
collaboratively with Melbourne dress designer Amanda
Fairbanks. Complementing the moving image
component of PolesApart are the four large triptych
photographs, printed as C-type prints. These too record
the central character's flight from undetectable, but
nevertheless real and powerful external forces.
In the video the protagonist, played by r e a, is an
apparently ageless, androgynous Aboriginal woman, runs
through a bushfire-devastated forest. The woman wears a
full-length black gown that places her in an earlier era.
The fire-blackened trees through which this nameless
woman silently weaves her way are tall, stark and
forbidding. To this poetic, lyrical artwork r e a brings the
qualities and virtues of silent film.
Darkness, and the colour black, and their conflictual
cultural significance, 4 play important symbolic roles in
PolesApart. The blackened, burnt out forest, the charred
tree stumps, the protagonist’s black dress, her shortcropped dark hair and the darkness that periodically
envelops the entire landscape, engulfing the woman,
working synergistically to create an atmosphere of
psychological entrapment, compelling viewers to ask,
who is this desperate, hunted, woman, this woman of
shadows? From whom or from what is she fleeing?
The answer lies in r e a’s own family history, a
history that mirrors the larger history of the Stolen
Generations outlined in earlier sections of this article.
Ruby, r e a’s grandmother, and her grandmother’s sister
Sophie, were forcibly removed from their family and
taken to the Cootamundra Girls’ Home 5 (N.S.W.) circa
1916, soon after their mother died. At that time Ruby
was just five years old, and she was to remain under the
strictures of the Aboriginal Protection Board until
approximately 1934. 6 There, at the Cootamundra Girls’
Home, the children were trained to be maidservants,
before being sent out as virtually unpaid labour for
wealthy white people. As historian Peter Read has
written,
As the children approached the age of fourteen or
fifteen the question arose of their employment. The
girls at Cootamundra were better prepared for the
work – described by one of them as ‘slavery’ – for
their training in the home [had] coincided with
exactly what needed to be done anyway. It consisted
of the scrubbing, washing, ironing, and sewing that
the Board did not want to pay anyone to do. [11]

Figure 1 Photograph taken circa 1914, of r e a’s
grandmother, Ruby Pearl Leslie, née Williams,
sitting on her father's lap (r e a’s great
grandfather, Thomas Henry Williams); r e a's
great grandmother, Agnes Madden (standing)
and r e a’s great aunt, Sophie Lavern Williams.
Photograph courtesy of r e a.
Following this enforced ‘education’ Ruby was
dispatched to work as a maidservant for a General, who
lived in Victoria, close to the N. S. W. border. One of the
military man’s great friends was the celebrated
Australian (and internationally renowned) operatic diva
Dame Nellie Melba. The Dame took a shine to young
Ruby, as a result of which the General permitted Melba
to ‘borrow’ the child for a protracted period. So it
happened that Ruby accompanied Nellie Melba around
Australia on one of her all-Australian tours, working as
her personal maidservant. This story has entered the
annals of r e a’s extended family history, living on in the
collective memory. 7
Ruby returned to the General where she remained in
service until years later when she was allowed to leave,

4
See, for example, Michel Pastoureau’s 2008 book Black: the History
of a Colour, Princeton University Press (originally published in French
in 2008 as Noir: Histoire d'une couleur, Editions du Seuil, Paris), for a
fascinating historical overview of the colour black in the European
context. One important point made by Pastoureau relates to the
ambivalence of the colour black within that socio-cultural framework.
The question of the very different symbolic values associated with the
colour black in Indigenous Australian communities is beyond the scope
of this paper.
5
The Cootamundra Girls’ Home was opened in 1911 and closed in
1957.
6
r e a: April 3rd 2009: email correspondence with the author.

7
r e a: April/May 2009: telephone conversations and email
correspondence with the author. For more on collective memory see
Halbwachs (1992), who posits that human memory is invariably
collective and also selective.

418
412

although she was never to return home. By contrast,
Sophie, like the protagonist in PolesApart, absconded
from the family for whom she worked as a domestic
servant, successfully making it back home, which she
was never again to leave.

political consciousness and an identity politics of a type
foreclosed to her grandmother and great aunt.
In her 2008 book entitled Nation, Race & History in
Asian American Literature: Re-membering the Body,
Maria Zamora states that her major focus is on how
certain bodies pose a challenge to the project of nation
building. Bodies that are in some way different, or
‘Other’, Zamora claims, challenge the very categories of
‘nation’. [17]
Building on Zamora’s ideas, one could say that such
‘different’ bodies collectively represent a conceptual
blockage to the idea of nation as ‘imagined community’
because they exist outside of that idealized ‘imagined
community’. 8 So, by casting herself as the fugitive
woman in PolesApart and drawing on personal bodyknowledge, r e a rehearses similarly complex ideas to
those of Zamora. In this respect r e a’s flight through the
forest is simultaneously actual and symbolic. Through
linking Zamora’s ideas with those of Rutherford, who
has emphasised the moving image’s capacity to ‘embody
affect’, the significance of r e a’s performance in
PolesApart becomes more sharply defined.
R e a made the conscious political choice to film the
work near Daylesford in Victoria, close to where the
artists of the Heidelberg School lived and worked.
I conducted my underlying research into the
Heidelberg painters, in particular looking at ‘The
Pioneer’ and ‘The Wallaby Track’ by McCubbin.”
writes r e a. “The Heidelberg artists chose not to
‘see’ the Indigenous presence in that country Indigenous people were simply invisible to them.
R e a elaborates on this by conceptualizing such
colonial blindness in an international perspective:
The random paint splatter of the colours red, white
and blue signify the 'brand' of Empire...At the end of
the single-channel video, my body is sprayed with
those imperial colours, representing the blotting out
of the black (female) body from the landscape...
...In this work I also make historical reference to
American pop art and to Jackson Pollock's Blue
Poles. 9

Figure 2 Photograph of Sophie Lavern Williams
as an adult, date unknown. Photograph
courtesy of r e a.

The endgame is the woman's gradual, successive
disappearance into the landscape, following her
metamorphosis into an ever-tinier fuzzy black shape,
until she is no longer recognizable as a sentient, living,
breathing human being. The conclusion of the video
PolesApart, where this brave, fugitive Aboriginal woman
is obliterated by the viscous red, white and blue paint,
shows that from r e a’s perspective, collective memory
has its own evil twin - collective annihilation.

The fact that r e a plays the role of the runaway in
PolesApart is of utmost importance. To some extent in
PolesApart r e a has conflated the connected, though
different, histories of her grandmother and great aunt, her
matrilineal kin and direct forebears. R e a’s performance
is thus imbued with what could be described as ‘bodymemory’, or the ‘embodied affect’ identified by
Rutherford [13]. By using her own body to chart her
great-aunt’s imagined flight through the forest, r e a
asserts her present-day self as existing within an
historical continuum. While r e a herself was not a
‘stolen child’, nevertheless, as a result of this family
history, she perceives herself as being ‘beyond the pale’
with respect to contemporary mainstream Australian
society. PolesApart is thus infused with a contemporary

8

Cf Carter 2006, 14 (after Benedict Anderson): “Australia as a nation
is both gendered and racialised. It has been imagined predominantly as
masculine and white...Both terms imply power relations of exclusion
and subordination.”

9
This and the previous quote by r e a are personal communications to
the author via email during March 2009.

419
413

Figure 3 r e a, 2009, PolesApart, four x triptychs, C-Type prints, medium format negative, width 3.2
metres x height 1.1 metres each, photographs courtesy of the artist and BREENSPACE, Sydney.

420
414

[4]

5. Conclusion
PolesApart, by r e a, is not only a finely realised
new media artwork, but represents a contemporary
intervention into the Australian ‘history wars’ that have
now been playing themselves out for almost two
decades. Figuring prominently in the history wars has
been the hotly debated issue of the stolen generations, in
which Aboriginal individuals and groups have had the
veracity of their predominantly oral, intergenerationally
transmitted accounts of the forcible removal of children
from families not only questioned, but attacked. After
Rutherford [13], I have argued that the affective power
of the moving image has contributed in important ways
to a shift of popular understanding among Australians
about the impact of the stolen generations, and that this
paradigm shift now extends beyond mainstream media to
embrace new media works on the same subject. I would
further argue that as a result of this shift in affect the
newly sympathetic understanding will not be easy to
dislodge. The affective - and counteroffensive dimensions of PolesApart are evident insofar as the artist
has put her family's cultural heritage on display through
the medium of her own body. By drawing on her ‘body
knowledge’, and that of her forebears, and by expertly
deploying what Rutherford [13] has succinctly described
as ‘embodied affect’, r e a, in PolesApart, extends the
parameters of the ongoing debate about the nature of
Australian contact history.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

6. Acknowledgements
The author would like to acknowledge the
invaluable advice and assistance of Theodor Wyeld,
especially with respect to various technical aspects of
this paper. She would also like to thank the artist r e a,
who is represented by BREENSPACE in Sydney:
http://www.breenspace.com

[13]
[14]

7. References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[15]

Anderson, Benedict, 1983. (revised edition 1991),
Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and
Spread of Nationalism, Verso, London & New York.
Bird, Carmel, (ed.) 1998, the stolen children, their
stories, Including extracts from the Report of the
National Enquiry into the separation of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander children from their families,
Random House, Australia.
Blainey, Geoffrey, 1993, Sir John Latham Memorial
Lecture, Victoria (unpublished but widely quoted
thereafter in the media and other contexts).

[16]

[17]

421
415

Carter, David, 2006, Dispossession, Dreams and
Diversity: Issues in Australian Studies, Pearson
Education, New South Wales.
Halbwachs, Maurice, 1992, On Collective Memory,
edited, translated and with an Introduction by Lewis A.
Croser, Heritage of Sociology series, University of
Chicago Press, U.S.A.
Hall, Andrew, 1997, A Brief History of the Laws,
Policies and Practices in South Australia which Led to
the Removal of Many Aboriginal Children, report
commissioned by Family and Community Services,
South Australia, South Australian Government,
Adelaide.
Howard, The Hon. John, 18 November 1996, 'The
Liberal Tradition: The Beliefs and Values which Guide
the Federal Government', Sir Robert Menzies Lecture,
http://www.nla.gov.au/pmc/pressrel/menzies.html,
accessed January 11th 2008.
Johnston, Elliott, 1991, Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, National Report, AGPS,
Canberra.
Macintyre, Stuart, and Clark Anna, 2003, The History
Wars, Melbourne University Press, Melbourne.
Pastoureau, Michel 2008, Black: the History of a Colour,
Princeton University Press, New Jersey (originally
published in French in 2008 as Noir: Histoire d'une
couleur, Editions du Seuil, Paris).
Read, Peter, n.d., The Stolen Generations, The removal
of Aboriginal children in New South Wales, 1883-1969,
www.daa.nsw.gov.au/publications/StolenGenerations.p
df, p 14, accessed 2/4/09
Rutherford, Anne, 2002, ‘Precarious boundaries: affect,
mise-en-scène, and the senses’, in Art and the
Performance of Memory: Sounds and Gestures of
Recollection, ed. Richard Candida Smith ('Memory and
Narrative' Series), Routledge, New York & London, 6384.
Rutherford, Anne, 2003, ‘Cinema and Embodied Affect’,
in Senses of Cinema, no. 25.
Stanner, W. E. H. 1968, After the Dreaming, Boyer
Lectures,
A.B.C.
Radio
National,
http://www.abc.net.au/rn/boyerlectures/default.htm
(accessed 26/03/10)
Wilson, Ronald, 1997, ‘Bringing Them Home’, Report of
the National Enquiry into the separation of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander children from their families,
Australian Government Printer, Canberra.
Windshuttle, Keith, 2010, The Fabrication of Australian
History, Volume Three: The Stolen Generations, 1881 to
2006, Macleay Press, Sydney.
Zamora, Maria, 2008, Nation, Race & History in Asian
American Literature: Re-membering the Body, Modern
American Literature Series, New Approaches, Vol. 50,
Peter Lang Publishing Group, New York, Bern, Berlin,
Bruxelles, Frankfurt am Main, Oxford, Wien.

