2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Associating Avatars with Musical Genres

Jukka Holm

Harri Siirtola

Human-Centered Technology
Tampere University of Technology
Tampere, Finland
jukka.holm@tut.fi

TAUCHI
University of Tampere
Tampere, Finland
harri.siirtola@cs.uta.fi

Lauri Laaksonen
Idean Enterprises, Inc.
Espoo, Finland
lauri.laaksonen@idean.com
online music libraries and thus ease in the music selection.
Examples include networks [5], “geographic” maps [6],
rainbows [7], 3D spirals [8], and discs [4]. Another novel
idea is to access music collections using an adaptive avatar,
the looks of which could reflect the contents of user’s music
collection, listening history, current playlist, or other musical
parameters. The user could listen to music for example by
clicking on different parts of the avatar or by changing its
posture. The avatar could also dance or move to music, and
be used in games, virtual worlds, and social networks.
To study the idea further, we arranged an online
questionnaire consisting of 52 avatars and avatar parts
(heads, bodies and backgrounds). In the case of each avatar
or avatar part, the participants were asked which musical
genre (from a predefined list of 17 genres) comes to their
mind when looking at the picture. This paper discusses the
design of the avatars in more detail, explains which genres
were selected for the study and why, and presents the results
of the online questionnaire.

Abstract— Accessing personal and online music libraries with
thousands of songs has become an everyday activity. Instead of
textual lists, the libraries can also be accessed using graphical
visualizations such as adaptive avatars. To develop the idea
further, we designed 17 stereotypical avatars representing
different musical genres. To study how well the avatars were
recognized, an online questionnaire with 71 participants was
arranged. This paper discusses the design of the avatars in
more detail, explains which musical genres were selected for
the study and why, and presents the results of the
questionnaire.
Keywords – avatar; musical genre; visualization; playlist;
questionnaire

I.

INTRODUCTION

The music business is in a transition. While the sales of
physical CDs are going down, alternative ways to consume
and acquire music are emerging at a rapid rate. Many users
are willing to share their playlists, tag and rate songs, try out
recommendations, and actively search for new music to
listen to. Applications with this type of functionality include
for example Last.fm [1] and Pandora [2]. With Spotify [3],
on the other hand, the user can listen to millions of songs at
no cost.
Accessing personal and online music libraries with
thousands of songs has become an everyday activity. Despite
this, most applications are still based on (hierarchical) textual
lists where the users may, e.g., browse, navigate, search, and
arrange the music collection according to some metadata
attributes such as artist and song names, genre, tempo, and
release year. However, as stated in [4], “…a huge volume of
music easily overwhelms users when selecting the music to
listen or when organizing their collections. Music player
software with visualizations based on textual lists and
organizing features such as smart playlists are not really
enough for helping users to efficiently manage their
libraries.”
An interesting alternative to textual lists is graphical
visualizations that allow the users to better use large local or
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.36

II.

SELECTING MUSICAL GENRES

There are numerous ways to divide songs into genres,
subgenres, meta-genres, and other type of human-created
categories. For example, Wikipedia [12] defines hundreds of
different musical genres, while ID3v2 [13] uses only 79 (or
147 if existing WinAmp extensions are taken into account).
In the year 2000, AMG [14] had five “meta-genres” with 531
genres; Amazon had 18 & 719, and MP3.com 16 & 430.
Only 70 words were common in the three taxonomies [15].
There has been a lot of debate about the feasibility of
using genres to classify music. In fact, the current trend
seems to be using other approaches such as audio similarity
(as used by e.g. [16]), collaborative filtering (e.g. Last.fm
[1]), and manually annotated data (e.g. Pandora [2]) to
categorize songs. We acknowledge that categorizing songs to
different genres may be difficult and imprecise, but also
consider them to be suitable for our purposes. The majority
of music can quite easily be listed under a couple of main
genres. As an example, in most cases there are clear
differences between jazz, classical, metal, etc. songs. By
186

using such well-known main genres, the avatars can rely on
stereotypes and be designed to be more entertaining for the
users.
To find a smaller but representative set of genres for the
questionnaire, we listed the categories used in 14 online
music stores, recommendation services, music guides, radio
stations, and related literature. The list included, for example,
Amazon, Nokia, iTunes, All Music Guide, Virgin, and [17].
Only the most common genres were selected for further
analysis, and some genres were also combined together. The
criteria for selecting the final set of genres were based on, for
instance, the target user group of our visualizations, current
market trends (e.g. “Metal” sells more albums than
“Soundtracks” so “Soundtracks” was left out), and various
genre definitions and lists [13, 14, 17]. After analyzing the
genres and finding the commonalities with a good coverage,
we selected the following 17 genres for our questionnaire:
1. Alternative & Indie
2. Blues
3. Classical
4. Country
5. Electronica & Dance
6. Folk
7. Gospel
8. Hip-Hop & Rap
9. Jazz

selected with American and European audiences in mind, the
avatars were also designed from this perspective. We tried
to make the avatars as stereotypical as possible and
recognized that this approach may not please everybody.
However, as the avatars were designed for a playful music
player prototype targeted at young people instead of narrowminded purists or people without any sense of humor, we did
not consider this to be a problem.
Designing an avatar to represent alternative & indie
music took a lot of time, and it was also the most difficult
task of the questionnaire. For our design purposes, we
considered alternative & indie to be rock type of music that
somehow differs from the mainstream. Many influences
were also taken from other genres and subgenres such as
emo. The final avatar had spiky and striped hair, a t-shirt
with The Smiths misspelled, and cuts on the left wrist (Fig.
6.16).
Blues was another tricky genre to design an avatar for.
We first sketched an avatar with the “Blues Brothers” look
but found out that surprisingly many people were not
familiar with the movie. We also studied the history of the
genre and some album covers [21] where common elements
included for example guitar and harmonica. In our previous
questionnaires, blues has sometimes been mixed up with
jazz. Therefore, we decided to give the blues avatar rural
looks while the jazz avatar got strictly urban looks. The final
blues design consisted of a poor-looking black man with an
acoustic guitar and cotton fields in the background (Fig.
6.14). While this approach may not please everybody, we
felt that it represented the origins of blues music well.
In the case of classical music, we relied on pictures of old
composers and the results of one of our previous studies
[10], where 53% of the participants associated piano keys
with classical music. The final design included a white male
with a toupee, a monocle, and baroque clothing (Fig. 6.15).
The background image included a grand piano and a red
curtain.
Selecting the cowboy theme for country music was an
obvious choice. In [10], 96% of the participants associated a
brown cowboy hat with country music, and cowboys are also
commonly used in country album cover art [22]. The final
avatar included a cowboy with a hat, a fringe jacket, and a
sheriff’s star, while the background was a rural landscape
with cows and clouds (Fig. 6.17).
We had already used robots to represent electronica &
dance in [23], and thus, they were an obvious choice for this
questionnaire as well. In techno album cover art [23],
common elements include, e.g., robots, space, radar, grids,
bar codes, and abstract shapes. The final background image
included some circuit boards and light rays (Fig. 6.1), and
cyan color was used as it is often associated with electronica
& dance music [9].
While all traditional western music can be called folk
music, people often equate it with the American hippie era
and folk artists such as Bob Dylan and Joan Baez. Due to the
large number of musical styles that folk may contain, we
spent a lot of time thinking about how to design the avatar.
As our earlier questionnaires have relied on the hippie
association, we finally decided to continue with the same

10. Latin
11. Metal
12. New Age
13. Pop
14. Reggae
15. Rock
16. Soul, RnB & Funk
17. World Music

The selected set of genres was strongly biased towards
the musical taste of American and European listeners. All
Eastern, African, and other “ethnic” music were placed under
the World Music category, despite the large variety of
different musical styles that they contain. We felt that this
was justifiable due to questionnaire demographics and the
planned target group of our forthcoming prototype
application. In the case of a commercial application, one
should consider localizing the genre list, and thus, also
design different avatars for the different markets.
III.

DESIGNING AVATARS

After selecting the musical genres, we designed 17
distinct avatars that somehow emphasized the characteristics
of each genre.
When designing graphics for an international audience,
one has to usually take into account the differences between
the target cultures and try to ensure usability across cultural
boundaries. The graphic language and metaphors should be
kept global, accepted around the world, and the graphics
should not contain themes or objects that may be
discriminating or found offensive in some cultures. For
example, religious and political symbols, animals, flags, and
hand signs should be avoided. The designer should also
“avoid cultural stereotypes”, “dress people modestly”,
“draw people with who the user can identify”, and be
cautious when using colors [18].
While references like [18], [19], and [20] include useful
advice on cross-cultural design and internalization, we
decided to neglect most of them. As the genres were mainly

187

idea. The design included a longhaired hippie with a peace
mark necklace, flowers, etc. (Fig. 6.4).
While in general religious symbols should be avoided
[20], they were an obvious choice to represent gospel music.
In [10], we found out that 89% of the participants associated
a cross with gospel music. Another important influence for
the design was actress Whoopi Goldberg in the Sister Act
movie. The final design included a black nun with a large
cross and religious mosaics in the background (Fig. 6.7).
Designing the hip-hop & rap avatar was straightforward
and one of the easiest tasks of the questionnaire. As the four
cornerstones of hip-hop culture are rapping, deejaying,
breakdance, and graffiti [24], selecting a wall with graffiti
for the background image was a natural choice. The final
avatar was a black male with a cap and a bandana, golden
jewelry, and a clock hanging from the neck (Fig. 6.10). The
looks can be verified by looking at hip-hop music videos, our
previous studies [10], or hip-hop album covers [24].
In the case of jazz music, we first studied [25] and other
album cover art where common elements included, e.g.,
rectangles, art, artist holding an instrument, and artist in
urban surroundings. In [10], we learned that 79% of the
participants associated jazz music with a saxophone.
Therefore, the final design included a cool looking black
man with a saxophone, a hat, small moustache, and a
pinstripe suit (Fig. 6.11). The background image resembled a
smoky American jazz club.
Designing the avatar to represent Latin music was
surprisingly difficult. The optimal solution would have been
the Rio de Janeiro samba carnival, but we had to drop this
idea due to some time, money, and technical constraints. Our
second choice was a dark male with curly hair, “Zorro
moustache”, a hairy chest, maracas decorated with Brazilian
flags, and a white shirt (Fig. 6.2). The background image
included a sun, flowers, palm trees, and the Brazilian Christ
statue.
Designing the metal avatar was straightforward and one
of the easiest tasks. The final design had long black hair, an
angry painted face, and a skull decorated t-shirt (Fig. 6.3).
According to our previous studies, angry looks, black color,
and skulls are mostly associated with metal music [9, 10,
11]. The background image consisted of flames, a burning
graveyard, pentagrams, and monsters. These types of
elements are often used in metal album covers [26].
As none of the authors were very familiar with new age
music, we had to rely on online music stores and the Internet
in general. Fortunately, our previous study [10] had shown
that roughly 40% of the participants associated a picture of
Saturn with new age music. Thus, we decided to go for a
weird-looking white male with a Saturn shirt (Fig. 6.8). The
background image consisted of planets, clouds, rainbow, and
constellations.
The main problem with pop music is that it may refer to
basically any genre that is popular at the moment. Some
people also associate the term with guitar-oriented music that
is slightly lighter than rock (e.g. British pop). To avoid
associating the avatar with rock music, our design included a
teenage girl with huge lollipops and soap bubbles in the
background (Fig. 6.9). The selection of pink color was based

on [9], where 48% of the participants associated it with pop
music. As the majority of pop fans (64%) often listen to it
when feeling happy [11], the avatar had a slight smile.
In [10], 77% of the participants associated the Jamaican
flag with reggae music. For cannabis leaf the similar number
was 68%. In reggae album covers [27], commonly used
elements include for example Jamaica, cannabis, nature,
dreadlocks, and a lion. As reggae is so strongly connected
with Jamaica, rastafarism and cannabis, we decided to base
our design on them. The final avatar was a Jamaican, ganjaloving rastaman in tropical surroundings (Fig. 6.5).
The main difficulty with the rock avatar was that it
shared many common elements with metal and alternative &
indie music. The final avatar was motivated by Slash from
the band Guns N’ Roses (Fig. 6.12), and the background
image consisted of a rock band performing a soundcheck.
For soul, rnb & funk music, we selected a black male
with an afro haircut and funky sunglasses (Fig. 6.13). The
decision was based on album cover art, music videos, and
history of the genre. Also, in [10] this idea had worked well
as 65% of the participants associated a similar type of icon
with soul. The background image consisted of a disco ball
and a group of dancers with afro haircuts.
Term world music is mainly used in Europe and
Northern America to refer to traditional music outside of
these countries. Therefore, our final design included a pan
flute playing male with Mayan pyramids in the background
(Fig. 6.6). Another (and on second thought, maybe a better)
approach would have been to design a Japanese or a Chinese
looking character.
IV.

ONLINE QUESTIONNAIRE

To study how well the avatars were recognized, we
arranged an online questionnaire consisting of 52 complete
avatars and avatar parts (heads, bodies and backgrounds).
The questionnaire tool was open 24/7 for two weeks, and
answers were mainly given by clicking on radio buttons and
check boxes.
In the case of each avatar and avatar part, the participants
were asked the question “Which musical genre comes to
your mind when you are looking at picture X?” ‘X’ was
replaced with the number of the corresponding avatar (part).
Only one genre per picture could be selected, and the genres
had to be selected from our predefined list. If a participant
did not associate a picture with any genre, he/she could also
select from “None” or “No opinion.”
Due to confidentiality issues, the call for participation
was sent to circa 200 employees of a large international
company. Out of 71 persons answering the questionnaire,
73% were male and 27% female. We received replies mainly
from the Finnish employees of the company (85%), but there
were also a couple of replies from other countries such as
US, UK, and France. 97% of participants were 25-45 years
old, and the majority had a background in engineering. On
the average, the participants listened to six of the listed
musical genres. The most popular ones were rock (listened to
by 96% of the participants), pop (66%), metal (56%), soul,
rnb & funk (49%), and jazz (48%). The least popular genre
was gospel (3%).

188

V.

RESULTS

We will next discuss the questionnaire results in a
detailed manner. As the Finnish participants dominate the
results, the findings are only indicative for other European
countries, US, and other regions where the same set of
genres could potentially be used.
The questionnaire result is basically a collection of
associations between the 17 musical genres and the 17
complete avatar designs or parts of them. The total number
of these associations is 4899, of which 4327 are other than
“None” or “No opinion”.
In Section A, the associations are represented as
heatmaps that are augmented with dendrograms. We will
first present results for the individual parts of the designs
(head, body, background) and then for the complete
representations. As Miller [28] observed in his classic work,
the addition of dimensions to visualization does not
necessarily “add up” as expected. In Section B, the
associations are represented using a bar diagram.
A. Heatmaps
A heatmap is a visual representation for a matrix (in this
case, a contingency table) where the smallest value is
depicted by a black rectangle, the largest value by a white
rectangle, and the values in-between with a respective grayscale shade. In a dendrogram, the dissimilarity of two multidimensional cases can be read from the height at which they
join a single group. Heatmaps have dendrograms both for
rows and columns, which depict avatars (or parts of them)
and musical genres. The heatmap is also rearranged (both
row and column wise) in such way that the similar rows and
columns appear together.
In the first part of the questionnaire, the participants were
shown 17 avatar head designs (i.e. the heads of Fig. 6) and
asked which musical genres they associated with them. Fig.
1 shows the associations between heads and genres. The
designs appear on the rows of the heatmap, and the musical
genres on the columns. A design for a certain musical genre
has the same name as the genre.
The lower left quadrant of the heatmap shows that the
head designs for reggae, country, classical, gospel, metal,
electronica & dance, hip-hop & rap, soul et al., and world
music were associated reliably to their respective genres
according to the head designs. The blues avatar was
associated significantly to the jazz avatar and somewhat to
the soul avatar. The inverse association is clearly weaker.
Another duplet with cross-associations is pop and new age.
In addition, the designs of new age, pop, Latin, and rock
have relatively high non-association counts.

Figure 1. A heatmap for the associations between avatar head designs and
musical genres. The designs are on the rows and the musical genres on the
columns.

The next task was to map 18 avatar bodies to genres. In
addition to the bodies shown in Fig. 6, the list included a
second body for alternative & indie music. Fig. 2 shows the
associations between the avatar body designs and musical
genres. The set of designs that have a strong association to a
musical genre is now different: the body designs for new
age, pop, and jazz are now reliably associated to their genres,
the design for soul et al. is confused with new age, and the
“No opinion” rate is relatively high as well. The rest of the
well-associated set remains the same. The association
profiles for the two competing alternative & indie designs
have the most similar profiles (left dendrogram).
The participants also had to map 17 avatar background
designs (see Fig. 6) to genres. The association by a
background is the most challenging one, as the row
dendrogram of Fig. 3 reveals. There are several design
duplets with ambiguous associations: both blues and country
are associated to the country design, both soul and
electronica are associated to electronica, both rock and
alternative & indie are associated to rock, and finally, both
gospel and Latin are associated to gospel. At the same time,
the associations are quite firm (fewer gray cells), which is
unfortunate in this case.

189

rate as a whole. This is evident from the comparison of row
dendrograms: in Fig. 4, the rows connect higher, indicating
better discrimination between avatar designs. The same
phenomenon can be seen in the column dendrograms as well:
improved avatar design makes it easier to distinguish the
genres.

Figure 2. A heatmap for the associations between avatar body designs and
musical genres.

Figure 4. A heatmap for the associations between complete avatar designs
and musical genres.

B. Bar Diagrams
Another useful way to visualize the results is bar
diagrams.
As seen from the diagram in Fig. 5, the overall winner
was the classical avatar, all designs of which were
recognized by ≥93% of the participants. Other successful
avatars in the questionnaire included electronica & dance,
gospel, hip-hop & rap, metal, and reggae.
In the case of alternative & indie, only the most
successful body (version shown in Fig. 6) has been included
in the diagram. The percentages for all designs were ≤49%,
and the avatar was sometimes mixed up with rock (head 10%
of participants, body 25%, background 34%, and complete
avatar 27%). However, as alternative & indie has always
been a tricky genre to visualize, we were satisfied with the
results and find it quite difficult to improve the design.
Blues was another tricky genre to design an avatar for,
and this was also reflected in the results. While the complete
avatar was mostly associated with blues, the head was also
mixed up with jazz (32%) and soul (14%), body with country
(21%), and background with country (37%). As people seem
to always associate rural landscapes with country music, the
next step could be to try the Blues Brothers look or
something entirely new. That said, it was interesting to note
that the least successful design for the country avatar was the
background (61%). To improve the result, the landscape

Figure 3. A heatmap for the associations between avatar background
designs and musical genres.

In addition to the individual avatar parts, the participants
were also asked to map complete avatar designs (Fig. 6) to
genres. The reason for this was that we wanted to study how
much better (if any) they were recognized than the individual
parts.
The heatmap in Fig. 4 shows how the complete avatar
designs were mapped to musical genres. In this case, the
avatar parts do “sum up” and produce a better association

190

should be redesigned and new elements such as tractors, a
cornfield, etc. could be added. The body (73%) could also be
modified slightly.
Just like in our earlier studies, using hippie elements to
represent folk music did not work well enough (all designs
≤ 38%). Our approach should obviously be changed
completely. Unfortunately, there are differing opinions on
what the genre name actually means, and thus finding the
right type of visualization may be quite difficult.
All the jazz designs except the head (44%) worked well.
Some participants associated it with blues (13%) or soul, rnb
& funk, (18%), while option “None” received 13% of the
votes.
The Latin avatar failed completely, and the designs were
often mixed up with the other genres. 21% of the participants
did not associate the head with any genre, 27% associated
the body with reggae music despite the Brazilian flag
decorated maracas, and the background was mixed up with
gospel (39%). The cross seems to be so strongly associated
with religion, that participants did not connect the Christ
statue with Brazil and thus Latin music. While we had to
drop the carnival idea this time, our next design should
obviously rely on it.
New age has always been another tricky genre to
visualize, and very few people seem to actually listen to it.
Therefore, the results were a positive surprise and the only
component requiring serious redesign was the head (25%).
While 34% of participants did not associate it with any
musical genre, 20% voted for pop.
In the case of pop, the head (47%) and background (58%)
elements require some further work. One of the main
problems with the head could have been the facial
expression, which did not look happy enough. Concerning
the background, one interesting possibility could be to add
elements from pop art and see how this affects the results. A
major problem with the pop genre is the genre name itself, as
it may refer to basically any music that is popular at the
moment.
In the case of rock, our head and body designs were
recognized correctly by only 41% of the participants. Instead
of mix-ups with some other genre, the problem was that the
participants did not associate the designs with any genre. In
case of head, 31% voted for “None” and for body the
number was 21%. While all designs used in the
questionnaire had to have quite short hair due to the layering
implementation of the prototype, the hair of the rock avatar
could have been a little longer. The body, on the other hand,
could be modified by adding flames or other rock related
elements to the vest (in [17], 34% of the participants
associated flames with rock music).
In the case of soul, rnb & funk, the only successful
design was the afro head (76%). This also affected the
moderate success (54%) of the complete avatar. Most likely
due to the star-decorated shirt, 24% of the participants
associated the body with new age music. In the case of the
background image, most participants did not pay attention to
dancers’ afro haircuts, but made their decision based on the
dancing aspect. As a result, 59% of the participants
associated the background with electronica & dance music.

The world music avatar worked reasonably well. The
least successful component was the background image
(61%), which was mixed up with new age music by 14% of
the participants. Some commented that this happened due to
the use of pyramids. For the next version, we should modify
the background or take a different approach and design an
Eastern looking character.

Figure 5. The correct association percentages of heads, bodies,
backgrounds, and complete avatars.

191

VI.

SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK

[9]

We presented the results of our online questionnaire that
focused on mapping avatars to musical genres. The results
were dominated by the Finnish participants, but suggest that
the basic idea works well when a good, representative avatar
has been found.
The overall winner was the classical avatar, all designs of
which were recognized correctly by ≥ 93% of the
participants. Other successful avatars included electronica &
dance, gospel, hip-hop & rap, metal, and reggae (each avatar
part ≥79%). The least successful avatars were blues, folk,
and Latin. These avatars would require a completely new
approach and should be redesigned from scratch. Avatars
requiring some modifications included alternative & indie,
country, jazz, new age, pop, rock, soul, rnb & funk, and
world music.
In the near future, we will continue our work on music
visualizations. A user study on six novel music
recommendation user interfaces (including one based on
avatars) will be conducted. A prototype and user study based
on colors and different graphical shapes has been planned,
and the use of glyphs in playlists is considered.

[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]

[19]

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]

[20]

Last.fm: http://www.last.fm
Pandora: http://www.pandora.com
Spotify: http://www.spotify.com
M. Torrens, P. Hertzog, and J-L. Arcos, “Visualizing and exploring
personal music libraries,” Proc. International Conference on Music
Information Retrieval, Oct. 2004.
Musicovery: http://musicovery.com
P. Knees, M. Schedl, T. Pohle, and G. Widmer, “An innovative threedimensional user interface for exploring music collections enriched
with meta-information from the web,” Proc. ACM Multimedia
Conference, Oct. 2006.
E. Pampalk and M. Goto, “MusicRainbow: a new user interface to
discover artists using audio-based similarity and web-based labeling,”
Proc. International Conference on Music Information Retrieval, Jul.
2006.
P. Lamere and D. Eck, “Using 3D visualizations to explore and
discover music,” Proc. International Conference on Music
Information Retrieval, Sep. 2007.

[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

192

J. Holm, A. Aaltonen, and H. Siirtola, ”Associating colours with
musical genres,” Journal of New Music Research, Vol. 38, No. 1,
2009, pp. 87-100.
J. Holm and H. Holm, “Associating icons with musical genres,” Proc.
International Conference on Internet and Multimedia Systems and
Applications, Aug. 2008.
J. Holm, H. Holm, and J. Seppänen, “Associating emoticons with
musical genres,” Proc. International Conference on New Interfaces
for Musical Expression, Jun. 2010.
List of Music Genres:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_music_genres
ID3v2: http://www.id3.org
All Music Guide: http://www.allmusicguide.com
F. Pachet and D. Cazaly, “A taxonomy of musical genres,” Proc.
Content-Based Multimedia Information Access Conference, Apr.
2000.
E. Pampalk, T. Pohle, and G. Widmer, “Dynamic playlist generation
based on skipping behavior, “ Proc. International Conference on
Music Information Retrieval, Sep. 2005.
T. Heittola, Automatic Classification of Music Signals, M.Sc. Thesis,
Tampere University of Technology, 2003.
W. Horton, “Graphics: the not quite universal language,” in Usability
and Internalization of Information Technology, N. Aykin, Ed.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc, New Jersey, USA, 2005.
N. Aykin, Usability and Internalization of Information Technology.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc, New Jersey, USA. 2005.
W. Horton, The Icon Book: Visual Symbols for Computer Systems
and Documentation, John Wiley & Sons, New York, USA, 1994.
G. Marsh, The Blues: Album Cover Art, Chronicle Books, San
Francisco, USA, 1996.
P. Kingsbury, Vinyl Hayride: Country Music Album Covers 19471989, Chronicle Books, San Francisco, USA, 2003.
M. Pesch, Techno Style: Album Cover Art, Edition Olms, Zurich,
Switzerland, 1998.
A. Emery, The Book of Hip Hop Cover Art, Mitchell Beazley,
London, UK, 2004.
G. Marsh, Blue Note: The Ultimate Collection, Chronicle Books, San
Francisco, USA, 2002.
N. Aldis and J. Sherry, Heavy Metal Thunder: Album Covers That
Rocked the World, Mitchell Beazley, London, UK, 2006.
C. Morrow, Stir It Up! Reggae Album Cover Art, Thames & Hudson
Ltd, London, UK, 1999.
G. A. Miller, “The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some
limits on our capacity for processing information,” The Psychological
Review, 63, 1956, pp. 81–97.

Figure 6. Complete avatars used in the questionnaire (© Nokia Research Center 2009, used with permission).

193

