2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Ancestral Forces in Contemporary Indigenous Australian Women’s Art: 3 Case
Studies of Multi-Dimensional Cultural Heritage Knowledge
Jenefer Marquis and Theodor Wyeld
Flinders University of South Australia, Australia
{theodor.wyeld@flinders.edu.au}
The recording of this transition is only recently
being understood. Historically, the majority of
Indigenous Australian cultural heritage information has
focussed on the male artist’s knowledge interpreted by
non-indigenous male anthropologists [2, p53; 14]. More
recently, however, Indigenous Australian women’s
knowledge has been made accessible through
intercultural collaborative research by non-indigenous
female anthropologists and ethnographers in Australia
([25; 5; 19; 18; 4]. This research is revealing that the
production of women’s art is not only influenced by their
strict adherence to Indigenous Australian Cultural Law,
but also the importance of other visceral sensibilities
such as the sonic and affective dimensions of their
interactions with the Dreamings and Country within
which it is produced [25; 4]. It is through these studies of
the affective dimensions of Indigenous Australian
women’s art that non-indigenous people are becoming
more aware of the cultural significance of Ancestral
power within Indigenous Australian art.

Abstract
The transition from ephemeral, ceremonial art to
more permanent acrylic-on-board paintings has made
Australian Aboriginal art more accessible to the public
than ever before. However, early examples contained
secret/sacred motifs and stories - knowledge recorded in
the paintings that was normally only made available to
initiates. In turn, this prompted contemporary Australian
Aboriginal artists to hide, camouflage or remove the
sensitive material from their work. It is only recently,
through inter-gender and inter-cultural collaborations
between contemporary Indigenous Australian artists and
non-indigenous ethnographers and anthropologists, that
the full ramifications of this transition is becoming
apparent. This paper discusses 3 case studies where the
traditional expression of Kuruwarri, or Ancestral power,
has been transformed through contemporary Australian
Aboriginal women’s art.
Keywords
secret/sacred

--

culture,

heritage,

knowledge,

Intercultural gendered knowledge sharing

Introduction

Anthropologist Vivien Johnson’s [7] work in the
1980’s with one of the first Indigenous Australian art
ambassador’s to the world, Clifford Possum Tjapaljarri
(now deceased), focused on the artist’s ‘mapping the
Dreaming’ and its evocative ethnography [6]. It should
be noted Johnson is a young non-indigenous woman
working closely with an initiated Indigenous Lawman. It
is an example of the recent intercultural reciprocity now
occurring in Australia. It heralds a move towards better
understanding the knowledge embedded in Australian
Aboriginal art works.
Johnson’s work reflects upon the transition, in the
1970s, of traditional forms of ethereal performative art to
a more permanent acrylic on board (amongst other
media). Its more permanent form meant traditional
owners of the knowledge contained had less control over
its dissemination. The boards inadvertently allowed
many secret/sacred motifs and stories to enter the public
domain. Once detected, it caused outrage amongst the
community Elders whose knowledge it was and should
remain so. In time, it became practice to veil

Indigenous Australian culture is based on gendered,
revelatory systems of knowledge. Men’s and women’s
knowledge is complementary and often shared in
ceremonial ritual situations [8]. However, in many
instances male and female knowledge is kept separate
and is considered ‘dangerous’ to the uninitiated, to the
young, or those of opposite gender [5]. The problem of
gendered and secret/sacred knowledge being revealed
within paintings in the public domain has influenced
their contemporary expression [20].
The emergence of more permanent art forms, in
particular acrylic on board, meant that initially, and
naively, many secret/sacred motifs were exposed to
public viewing, prompting outrage from other
communities involved in the same Dreamings. In place
of culturally sensitive icons, paintings began to be
infilled with dots, lines and other designs specific to
clans. These clan designs invariably refer back to the
original sand, ground and body paintings of traditional
cultural teaching methods [18].
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 Crown Copyright
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.60

385
391

secret/sacred knowledge in artworks for public display
by removing or camouflaging it.
Johnson explains how the transformation to painting
at Papunya [6] in the 1970’s, and the inadvertent
revelation of secret knowledge to the public led to the
camouflage or removal of much of the secret/sacred
knowledge contained. She provides an important insight
into the changes wrought upon what were once thought
of as traditional styles of Indigenous Australian art and
the development of contemporary artistic styles in
general.
To avoid public scrutiny: “painting boards were
initially kept wrapped in the men’s camps in case women
or uninitiated young men were inadvertently exposed to
knowledge which they were not entitled to know: “The
dangers of improper disclosure of knowledge from those
painters who should know better were punishable” [6,
p60] in extremis under Indigenous Law.
Johnson [6] discusses how, as paintings were being
sold outside the Papunya community, neighbouring
communities - who also shared the Dreamings depicted
in the paintings - complained about the public display of
imagery drawn from ceremonial contexts. As a result, the
artists changed the way they painted and the content of
the paintings. They “began to reduce and camouflage the
references to the ceremonial secret/sacred knowledge in
their work, leaving out the potentially dangerous images
and infilling or disguising ‘deeper’ levels of knowledge
using dots, circles and lines as a background… thus a
new, secularised painting language was introduced that
became known as the ‘Papunya’ style” [6, p60].

reconnects their art with their more traditional
storytelling performances.
The dimensions of the secret/sacredness of the
recent artworks were Johnson’s focus and, more recently,
Biddle [4] also a non-indigenous female anthropologist.
Their research and experiences living and working with
the women of Western and Central Desert communities
supports their understanding of how Indigenous
Australian peoples engage with their art [6; 4]. Biddle [4]
explores the concept of affect, within the cultural context
of Indigenous Australian art, in her research on body
painting in ‘breasts, bodies, canvas: Central Desert Art as
Experience’.

Affective (or Responsive) Art
The concept of ‘affect’ in Indigenous Australian art
is not new. It has been reported by other anthropologists
and ethnographers. In the 1970s, Papunya facilitator,
Geoffrey Bardon [1, p79] claims “Aboriginal
temperament has a predilection to the sensitivity of
touch. This is a haptic sensation, a physical quality and
tactile, different entirely from the visual sensation in
eyesight.”
Biddle and Johnson also refer to the sensitivity of
touch as an affective physical effect. But this is not the
only type of sensation that they refer to explicitly. It is
also the sensibility of “touching and being touched by”
[4, p15] Indigenous Australian art that is the focus of
their research - a considerably more ineffable and
perceptual experience. Within Indigenous Australian
societies affect is embodied through the peoples’
connection to Country in their ceremonial rituals,
Dreaming stories and art [4; 25; 18; 5; 14]. Biddle [4]
explains how her research and lived experience with
Central Desert women artists helps her understand how
the adherence to Law (Tjukurrpa) dictated the
development of women’s art, in particular, over the last
50 years. Moreover, the haptic or affective dimensions of
their paintings are a vital aspect of their cultural
responsibilities as they evoke the powers and forces of
the Dreaming to emerge through the paintings.
Biddle [4, p15] defines ‘affect’ as “a capacity to
engender response”. She sees Central Desert
contemporary women’s art not as representative of
emotion or as depictions of feelings or transmissions of
senses or sensibilities alone, but as agents that generate a
capacity to engender response to Tjukurrpa: “Central
Desert art commands our attention in explicit ways. An
energy emanates from contemporary artworks by
women, a life force that is irreducibly bodily, palpably
visceral, mesmerizing in its effects.” [4, p12].
The affectiveness of Indigenous art is most
pronounced in the performative storytelling of the
Dreamings. In turn, Dreaming as Law is dependent on a
stable form that is repeatable and ritualized. Paintings
enact a marking of canvas that is a part of and re-presents
Dreaming as Law. In a female-only dreaming ceremony
that the Central Desert Warlpiri call ‘yawulyu,’ women’s
bodies are painted to invoke the Law. Paintings now

Secret/sacred Knowledge
To the uninitiated, non-indigenous viewer of the
early Papunya art, it would be reasonable to question
what it is within imagery from an Indigenous Australian
ceremonial context that would make it ‘dangerous’?
Even if the viewer were constrained to ask out of respect
for cultural appropriateness, there would still be a natural
curiosity to understand the meaning behind such a
statement. Is the danger due to the exposure of initiatory
knowledge being inappropriate and thus disrespectful?
And, are the Ancestral powers or Kuruwarri (or
Ancestral forces) emanating from paintings that reveal
the deeper, secret levels of initiatory knowledge
dangerous to the uninitiated (and therefore unprotected)
viewer?
A partial answer to the question of the dilemma of
the unprotected viewer might be found within the
knowledge of the lesser known ‘affective’(haptic)
dimensions of Australian Aboriginal art that are
consummately expressed on traditional barks by male
Kununjku artist, John Mawurndjul, [11; 10; 20] and on
modern canvasses by contemporary women artists such
as Dorothy Napangardi, Kathleen and Gloria Petyarre,
and Rosie Napurrurla Tasman [18; 4; 17]. Their affective
art is more than a visual experience alone. The paintings
are textured in a way that invites touching, physically,
emotionally, and spiritually. It is this affectiveness that

392
386

reproduce many of the same marks as the Ancestors
themselves first did - as bodily imprints, corporeal traces
on an unmade landscape. The painting’s surface is as a
surrogate ‘skin’ both literally and metaphorically. This
skin of Country is a “somatic surface that feels, that
imprints, that scars; boundary and border of what is
essentially an animate being” [4, p56]. The forms,
features, marks and named places that make up Country
hold precise affiliations and identifications as well as
powerful and potentially dangerous forces. Marks, and
the practice of mark-making, invokes a force that has the
potential, for example, to rejuvenate Country and its
inhabitants; to control fertility; regulate social relations
and heal illness [4].

to kankarlu (that which is seen in the world ‘above’ and
in the ‘public domain’) [4, p72].
In simplistic terms, when the ‘skin’ is penetrated –
whether by a stick drawing on sand, or a finger ‘painting
up’ a person’s body, or a paintbrush tapping a painting to
create dots – the vibrations attract kuruwarri to the
surface (or interface), which emerges through the skin.
Combined with the sonic resonance of ritual and
narrative (which acts as a sonic waveguide of sorts),
Ancestral force can be released and safely channelled to
emerge, nourish and revitalise Country and its
inhabitants within, for example, yawulyu [4].

Kuruwarri in Contemporary Women’s Art:
3 Case Studies

Kuruwarri (or Ancestral Forces)

The rhythmic striking necessary to invoke the
kuruwarri is particularly resonant in the work of women
Indigenous artists: Rosie Napurrurla Tasman and
Dorothy Napangardi, yet more muted in Kathleen
Kemarre Wallace’s work. Their work is within the
constraints of the Dreaming as ‘Law’. It repeats a
materiality that dictates how marks can and must be
made [4; 25]. However, their interpretations of those
responsibilities have produced paintings with vastly
differing and unique results as exemplified by the
following case studies.
Rosie Napurrurla Tasman is a Warlpiri woman from
the Central Desert Lajamanu region in the Northern
Territory. She began painting in her 50’s in the mid1980’s. Her major Dreaming is Ngurlu (Mulga Seed) and
Kurlukuku (Diamond Dove) [4]. Napurrurla’s artistic
development over a decade of painting the Ngurlu series
exemplifies the transformations cultivated in both the
type and methodology of Central Desert women’s art.
Napurrurla’s canvasses are prepared and painted
whilst laid out on the ground. Early examples are prepainted (Maparni) in the burnt sienna colours of the local
Country. Throughout the series kuruwarri marks are
strictly in black, painted and re-painted so thickly that it
is possible to see the raised ridges in the brushstrokes as
the kuruwarri is continuously re-emphasised. The white
and ochre coloured dots surrounding the kuruwarri marks
are not mere embellishment but are carefully used to
direct the gaze to the black lines and circles in a manner
that emphasizes the spaces of the kuruwarri (See Figure
1) [4].
The crucial reiteration of the kuruwarri marks is
described by Biddle [4, p71] as “a mnemonic
meditation” on their production. A painting can take
weeks or even months to complete. The women often
sing the associated ceremonial (Yawulyu) songs and may
stop to elaborate on narratives or make corrections,
dance part of the song cycle, or recount incidents related
to the Country or Dreaming. The canvas stretched out on
the ground brings the Country and Dreaming close;
proximate and immediate to daily life [4].
More generally, the texturing characteristic of
Central Desert women’s art creates a 3 dimensional
effect that assists in the shimmering vibrancy of the

Prior to Biddle [4] and Johnson’s [6; 7] study of the
affective dimensions of contemporary female indigenous
art much of this art was popularly understood as a
cartography of Country. It has been used in inter-cultural
negotiations over native title, land rights and royalty
negotiations. Acrylic paintings by Central Desert women
have been used as evidence in land hearings. But, it is
much more than this. Kuruwarri are designs that are also
put directly onto the body. The techniques of painting
turn canvas to skin to Country. In the same way that skin
of the women’s bodies is prepared or ‘anointed’
(maparni in Warlpiri) with oil or fat before being marked
or painted, so too, the canvas is prepared; primed for the
imprinting of the bodily traces of the Ancestors [16]. Fat
or oil is a significant material in itself. It creates a skin
that is lustrous or shining. It glistens, shimmering with
Ancestral potency. It is also drawn into the skin - taking
the kuruwarri into the body. Following the ceremony, the
marks of yawulyu are left on by women for days because
they retain their potency and health-promoting potential
[4]. Placing marks upon the chosen medium are also
tactile and sonic acts through the well known chanting or
singing of the narrative that accompanies the image
making but also through the action of poking or striking,
stamping or beating; dependent on the media used.
Watson [25] describes how the action of striking, or
poking, whether in sand painting or in ceremonial
dancing, “impacts on the sentient land, setting up
vibrations in it, and calls on Ancestral presences within
the Country to witness what is happening” [25, p24].
These strikings have their corollary in painting, in the
action of painting on the skin or on canvas.
“The rhythmic, repetitious, marking and remarking
of the design until the background becomes saturated
ensures that the kuruwarri, the Ancestral force, enters the
body” [4, p70]. Similarly, the penetrative imprinting of
‘dots’ in Desert acrylic painting enacts kuruwarri: “What
is ‘inside is brought out – penetration effects emergence
– and it is this that creates the quivering, the
shimmering…of texture” [4, p72] - the emergence from
kanunju (Warlpiri term translated as that which is secret,
‘underneath’ or ‘below’ – i.e. from the Ancestral realm)

393
387

shimmering effects are far more evocative. Viscerally
present in the associations and possibilities of dots as
groups, dots as lines and geometrical grids, or dots
emphasizing spaces is their allusion to the movement or
actions of Ancestors along paths through Country or
resting places along mythical trails [4].
In a Gestalt sense, an experience of optical and
cortical ambiguity can occur when viewing Napangardi’s
paintings. The effects of white dots on black occupies the
conscious optical processes in the brain in trying to
discern recognizable patterns [28]. The intermittent
disunity of grids and lines draws the viewer into the dark
spaces upon which the dots are suspended. ‘Where’ we
are viewing from and ‘what’ we are viewing provides
intense interest. Whether the macro view of the skin of a
reptile such as a snake or lizard (that are both found in
Country at Mina Mina), or lines made by digging sticks
across the clay pan, or the Dreaming tracks of Ancestors,
the lack of scale makes for a visual ambiguity that is
simultaneously enthralling and disquieting in the absence
of a discernible perspective. ‘Inhabiting’ [12]
Napangardi’s paintings is not an easy experience – a
displacement effect that the artist exemplifies throughout
her artworks.

painting as light is reflected and shadows created from
the raised marks – re-animating its spiritual potency. The
two dimensional horizontal plane transforms into a three
dimensional verticality, producing layers of depth
through texture and emphasizing the movement between
the two realms of Ancestral and human agency.

Figure 1 Rosie Napurrula Tasman, Ngurlu 1991
[4, plate 15]
The repetitious outlining of the design ensures that
the background becomes saturated with the kuruwarri –
the Ancestral force – and enters the body, feeding the
woman. The dots and lines poke or pierce the surface of
the canvas. The penetration of the marks on the canvas
effects emergence of the Ancestral sentience from
‘inside’ the skin of Country [4].
In contrast to Napurrurla’s work, Dorothy
Napangardi’s artworks depart from the traditional
iconographic kuruwarri making, into more figurative
patterning. A younger Warlpiri woman, born in the
1950’s in the Mina Mina area west of Yuendumu,
Northern Territory, Napangardi has received many
awards for her art that expresses her deference to the
greater authority of her women elders. By omitting
traditional signs and marks of particular Dreamings that
she may not have the authority to paint, her titles – such
as, Karlangu (Digging Sticks) – refer instead to sitespecific place and Dreaming (Ancestral totems) [4].
The rigorous preparation of the background canvas
follows the same strict Laws as Napurrurla observes in
her paintings. The meticulous care taken in the
imprinting of marks of the women’s digging sticks upon
the clay pans of Mina Mina shows a meditative repetition
of the kuruwarri practise (see Figure 2). Napangardi’s
use of white dots on a black background has excited nonindigenous commentators to describe comparisons with
cartographic or topographic representations of Country.
However, the sense of imprinting of kuruwarri and the

Figure 2 Dorothy Napangardi Robinson,
Karlangu (Digging Sticks) 2001 [4, plate 20]
Kathleen Kemarre Wallace’s (known as Mrs
Wallace) work, is an example of contemporary Central
Desert art that marks a departure from the ceremonial
context of Napurrurla and Napangardi’s work. While still
utilizing the traditional iconographic patterning and
colouring that is based upon the rock art and sand
drawings of Mrs Wallace’s Arrente Country, there is a
marked absence of the repetitive kuruwarri imprinting –
more apparent in Napurrurla and Napangardi’s work.

394
388

Mrs Wallace’s [26] ‘Mother Tree’ is a complex
arrangement of mandala-like shapes, floating circles and
thin figures that seem at once ethereal and embedded
within the landscape. The use of swirling lines creates
multiple spaces and overlapping focal planes. The
figures are Ancestral Spirits moving through and
interacting with Mrs Wallace’s Country [21]. However
the painting seems to be designed to veil the kuruwarri,
or Ancestral force, and present instead a very public and
safe generalization of the Dreaming. There is an
understanding that the kuruwarri is withdrawn and
dormant within the deeper layers of this painting (see
Figure 3).

practices.. The grief felt by the families prompted the
withdrawal of the traditional teachings; the culture,
stories, songs and dances: “They wanted to forget what
we had all lost” [26]. Mrs Wallace’s paintings and
testimony begin from this null point - the moment when
the old ceremonies ended. However, her paintings not
only record past times but are also the beginning of a
movement to share culture and Country inter-culturally
[21].
Continuing the spirit of transcultural collaborations
between non-indigenous white women and Indigenous
Australian artists, researcher, Judy Lovell [26], a nonIndigenous artist and Mrs Wallace have recently
produced a multi-media art project in book form with an
accompanying CD of song cycles and stories [27]. The
stories, songs and dances were all recorded in Country
with images of the rock carvings that inspire Mrs
Wallace’s paintings, and anecdotes of local bush foods
and weather cycles. Lovell was motivated to create a
means by which non-Indigenous people could experience
and learn from Indigenous people - not just through
viewing their art, but also by learning about the Country,
Dreamings and stories that accompany each painting.
Preserving knowledge and sharing the gift of
Country are two aspects of Tjukurrpa (Culture) that
better enable non-Indigenous people to understand
Australian Aboriginal art and worldviews. Through her
artwork, Mrs Wallace invites the viewer into her Country
in an experience that offers more understanding of the
full context of art and its relationship to Country and yet
a more distant and tamed viewpoint. She says:
“Come…listen to us, we will tell you our culture. Learn
from us. That way we will all survive. We share this
country. We need to work together and learn from each
other” [27].The question remains, however, whether this
more tamed and understandable expression of Australian
Aboriginal cultural heritage has come at a high a price
and what we are witnessing is the last generation of art
from traditional holders of the Law as the Ancestral
forces recede from the human realm.

Figure 3 Kathleen Kemarre Wallace, Mother Tree
(2009) [21]
The intricacy of Mrs Wallace’s use of patterning
reduces the spaces through which the ‘inner’ Ancestral
force can emerge into the ‘outer’ human realm. While
the black background hints at the underlying presence of
the kuruwarri, it is not dominant as in the previous
examples. This effect reduces the feeling of ambiguous
disquiet evoked within the art of Napurrurla and
Napangardi. There is a sense of familiarity and
recognition for non-Indigenous viewers. In other words it
feels safer.
Mrs Wallace was born in a Todd River camp in
Alice Springs in 1948 and experienced the rapid and
pressurized cultural changes brought about by the
missionising of her Country in the early 1950’s. Wallace
describes how, with the passing of the eldest elder in
1984, it felt to the senior men and women of her
community as if a line had been drawn. They felt that the
death of the last Law holder representing the old ways
symbolized the end of the knowledge and cultural

Conclusions
Indigenous Australian Central Desert women’s art of
the last half century has recorded the development of
paintings through a series of transformations. These
adaptations have resulted from an ongoing dialogue
between genders and communities concerning the
authority to paint images and icons that are secret/sacred
and therefore subject to initiatory Laws and
responsibilities.
It is possible to track the changes in style through
the initial camouflaging and ultimately the complete
omission (or total covering) of kuruwarri marks or
imprints. Kuruwarri marks are strictly regulated by
community elders according to Cultural Law (tjukurrpa)
as an expression of Indigenous Australian revelatory
knowledge systems.

395
389

[8]

Dots, lines and infills are increasingly used, first to
accentuate the raised kuruwarri marks or spaces, and
then later to obscure them as increasing cultural
sensitivities dictated. Kuruwarri marks are the physical
imprint of Ancestral force and agency in Country. The
repetitive, meditative strokes penetrate the skin (or
surface) of Country, skin of a person, or skin of a canvas
to imprint the Dreaming story or song. The action of
poking or penetrating the skin also enables the
emergence of the kuruwarri (Ancestral power) from
underneath or inside (i.e. the Ancestral realm is regarded
to be under or inside the skin). Together with the sonic
resonance of the accompanying repetitious songs &
stories and the stamping of dancing feet, kuruwarri is
successfully released into the human realm in a focussed
and safe manner. Ceremonies of renewal, healing and
increase all invoke the emergence of Ancestral forces in
ways that will protect the uninitiated and enable the
kuruwarri to feed the land and the bodies of the dancers
and artists - thus benefiting the whole community and
nurturing Country.
Recent intercultural collaborations between nonindigenous women researchers and indigenous women
artists are bringing about an increase in non-indigenous
understanding of the affective dimensions of Central
Desert art and the importance of sensibilities other than
just the visual in the making of Australian Aboriginal art.
It is becoming apparent that Indigenous Australian
art communities are also choosing (or have been forced
into) the veiling or omission of secret/sacred images as
part of their movement away from traditional cultural
practices. The loss of traditional Law and language
holders is having a major impact upon the artistic
development of contemporary Indigenous Australian
paintings. Despite receding, the kuruwarri can still be felt
in their contemporary artworks. As such, their culture
continues to be revitalised and non-indigenous people
can gain a greater appreciation of this life-force
expressed through an ancient haptic-visual medium,
albeit in a contemporary form.

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]

[21]

References
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]

Bardon, G. (1979) Aboriginal Art of the Western Desert,
Rigby, Adelaide.
Bardon, G. and Bardon, J. (2005) Papunya, A Place
Made After the Story: The Beginnings of the Western
Desert Art Movement, Mieugunyah Press, Melbourne.
Bell, D. (1983) Daughters of the Dreaming. McPhee
Gribble, Melbourne
Biddle, J. (2007) Breasts, Bodies, Canvas: Central Desert
Art as Experience, University of New South Wales Press,
Sydney.
Bird-Rose, D. (1998) Nourishing Terrains. Fremantle
Arts Centre Press, Fremantle.
Johnson, V. (2004) Clifford Possum Tjapaltjarri,
Craftsman House, Sydney in association with Gordon &
Breach Arts International.
Johnson, V. (2008) Lives of the Papunya Tula Artists,
IAD Press, Alice Springs

[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

396
390

Langton, M. (2000) Papunya Tula: Genesis and Genius,
Art Gallery of New South Wales, Sydney.
Langton, M. (2003) Dreaming art in Papastergiadis (ed.)
Complex Entanglements: Art, Globalisation and Cultural
Difference, Rivers Oram Press, London, Sydney,
Chicago.
Marquis, J. and Wyeld, T., 2009, “‘Seeing Mardayin’:
Instability and Ambiguity in the Art of John
Mawurndjul, Kuninjku, Arnhem Land, Northern
Australia”, in proc. of the 4th Cultural Heritage
Knowledge Visualisation Symposium in the 13th
European Conference, Information Visualisation, IV09,
Barcelona, Spain, July 14-17.
Mawurndjul, J. (2005) <<rarrk>> Journey Through Time
In Northern Australia Tinguely Museum and Schwabe
Verlag: Basel
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962) Phenomenology of
Perception, trans. Colin Smith, Routledge and
Humanities Press, London and New Jersey.
Morphy, H. (1998) Aboriginal Art Phaidon Press Ltd.,
London.
Morphy, H. (2007) Becoming Art: Exploring CrossCultural Categories UNSW Press, Sydney.
Morwood, M. (2002) Visions from the Past: The
Archaeology of Australian Aboriginal Art Smithsonian
Institution Press, Washington.
Munn N. (1986) Walbiri Iconography: Graphic
representation and cultural symbolism in a Central
Australian Society, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Napangardi,D. (2003) Dancing Up Country: The Art of
Dorothy Napangardi, Museum of Contemporary Art,
Sydney.
Nicholls, C. (2001) Genius of Place: The life and art of
Kathleen Petyarre. In Christine Nicholls & Ian North
(Essayists) Kathleen Petyarre, Genius of Place,
Wakefield Press, Adelaide.
Ryan, J. (1990) Paint Up Big: Warlpiri Women’s Art of
Lajamuna, National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne
Ryan, J. (2010) Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara
and Ngaanyatjarra art of a new millennium in Tregenza,
E. (ed.) “Tjkurpa Pulkatjara: The Power of The Law”,
Wakefield Press, Kent Town.
Rothwell, N. (2010) Dotted layers of tradition, in The
Australian, March 16 2010, www.theaustralian.com.au/
news/arts/dotted-layers-of-tradition/story-e6frg8n61225841075285, accessed 27-03-10.
Tregenza, E. (ed.) Tjkurpa Pulkatjara: The Power of The
Law Wakefield Press, Kent Town.
Ryan, J. (2005) Reverberation of image and essence in
John Mawurndjul’s bark painting, Crawford House
Publishing.
Mawurndjul, D. (2005) <<Rarrk>> Journey Through
Time in Northern Australia Schwabe Verlag, Basel.
Watson, C. (2003) Piercing the Ground Fremantle Arts
Centre Press, Fremantle.
Wallace, K. and Lovell, J. (2009) Listen Deeply, let these
stories in IAD Press, Alice Springs
Wallace, K. (2010) in Rothwell, N. Dotted layers of
Tradition, The Australian 16 March 2010
Zeki, S. (2006) The Neurology of Ambiguity. In The
Artful Mind: Neurology and the Riddle of Human
Creativity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

