2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Interactive Patient Records
Heimo Müller, Stefan Sauer, Kurt Zatloukal, Thomas Bauernhofer
Medical University of Graz

Abstract
Researches in humanities and social sciences indicate
that people using more visual information would be
more creative and benefit from the power of the human
mind to a higher degree. Therefore information should
not only be recorded as static text. It is rather
conceivable to construct new visual languages that are
not based on letters but on icons. We developed a set of
medical symbols that can be used in visual
representations of medical records and that may also
be used to build complex medical statements. Each of
the basic symbols is available in 4 abstraction levels,
which can be combined in a ‘visual sentence’. Complex
visual representations are recognized more easily than
simplified versions, while on the other hand the simple
version can be perceived and memorized in a faster
way than complex signs. To prove this hypothesis and
to evaluate the perception of the symbols in a medical
context we created a web-based evaluation tool
covering two perception tests. With the help of the
symbol library we developed a visual language for
patient records and an interactive browser.

work of medicine has changed in recent centuries. Next
to the classic diagnostic approach the importance of
analysis and interpretation of medical data increased,
in some areas it even developed into a vital element.
Until recently, statistic methods and simple
diagrams have processed the analysis of large medical
datasets. This approach, however, does not make it
possible to gain an overall overview or to recognize
patterns and correlations in these big datasets. With
methods of data visualisation and visual data mining
we are able to overview a large quantity of elements
and discover unpredicted patterns [2]. These innovative
data representations need basic visual elements that
display medical base knowledge like organs and
diseases. The same also applies in the area of hospital
information systems: most of the user interfaces are
purely textual. Using visual symbols is far more
effective – visual elements can be decoded faster – and
an enhanced visual communication channel can
decrease the error ratio.
For both application fields we developed a
common validated set of symbols that can aid in the
representation of medical data.

1. Introduction

2. Related Work

Research in humanities and social sciences
(psychology, linguistics, philosophy) indicates that
people using visual information more than today would
be more creative, better exploit the power of the human
mind and could probably overcome language-borders
in a more intuitive way than is possibly achieved by
conventional text and natural language [1]. Computer
technology (information systems, telecommunication,
visual tools) in turn promises to provide a wide range
of highly effective tools to support visual, dynamic
communication.
In medicine the sighting and recognition of certain
factors are crucial factors. Therefore there is also a
long tradition in scientific illustration, like for instance
anatomical drawings or medical info graphics. The

Kosara and Miksch [3] give an overview of
visualisation methods for data analysis and planning in
medical applications They mainly focus on time series
and give an introduction to an extensive set of
visualisation methods, e.g. graphical patient record
summary by Powsner [4], VIE-VISU by Horn 2001
[5], time lines and life lines by Plaisant 1996 [6] and
time tubes by Konchady 1998 [7]. Ropinski and Preim
[8] investigate glyph-based visualisation techniques in
medical visualisation. They build a glyph taxonomy
based on the way information is processed when
interpreted and propose guidelines for the usage of
glyphs. Ward [9] gives a general introduction to
multivariate glyphs and describes taxonomy of glyph
placement strategies. He distinguishes between datadriven and structure-driven approaches and introduces

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.45

246
252

improved the symbols and provide a validated set for
public use. An overview of the glyphs can be seen at
http://www.caleydo.org/iconbrowser [11].

strategies to avoid the overlapping problem and a novel
space-filling layout of hierarchically structured data.

3. Medical Symbol Library
We developed a set of medical symbols, which can be
used in visual representations of medical records, e.g.
representing ICD 10 classifications [10] and for
building complex medical glyphs. Each of the basic
symbols is available in four abstraction levels. Our
working hypothesis is that, on the one hand, detailed
visual representations are recognized more easily than
simplified versions and, on the other hand, the simple
version can be perceived and memorized in a faster
way than complex signs.

Figure 2 – Evaluation of the Symbol Library
The web-based evaluation of the symbols has been
conducted with participants with different level of
medical knowledge. All attendees were given the same
series of the two surveys. The first test (recognition of
symbols) displays a random picture of a glyph in one
of the four different abstraction levels. Underneath the
picture are 16 different possible answers from which
the participant needs to pick the correct one. After 10
symbols the first test is completed.
Figure 1 - Example of basic symbols in
different level of details
Figure 1 shows exemplarily four organs of the
symbol library, which consists of 117 symbols (organs
and diseases), each given in four abstraction levels.
Level 1, the most detailed abstraction uses an
illustrative approach. A medical expert is able to
recognize symbols in this abstraction level without any
training. Level 2 reduces the complexity, however the
symbols in this level are still self-explanatory. In level
3 and 4 the symbols are iconic, therefore the user has
to learn the meaning in order to decode these symbols.
In level 3 and 4 symbols use a colour coding of organs
according to the real colour of the organs. This colour
coding was developed in cooperation with medical
experts.
For the evaluation of the symbol library in a
medical context we created a web-based evaluation
tool covering two perception tests. The first test
measures whether the meaning of the symbol is
recognized while the second test measures the (short
time) memory duration. Based on the results we

Figure 3 – Recognition Rate
In the second test four glyphs are displayed in a quick
series of flashes, whereas one picture is displayed for
half a second with an interval between the pictures of
one second. After that, all possible images are
displayed and the user has to recognize the symbols
that were shown before. Again, this process gets
repeated ten times.

253
247

Figure 3 shows the evaluation results with almost
60 participants, which prove our hypothesis. The
recognition of the most detailed symbols (level 1) is
the highest (79%), while the recognition is decreasing
with the level of abstraction. Level 2 to 72%, level 3
to 66% and the most abstract glyphs (level 4) have
recognition of 59%.

Figure 5 – A Medical Event
We use a consistent colour-coding together with a
small iconic symbol to visualize an event type. As
colour is a very strong visual variable, experts can
easily conceive the chronology of medical events and
compare patient histories in an intuitive and visual
way.

Figure 4 – Short Time Memory Rate
Figure 4 shows, that the short time memory duration is
the lowest with the most detailed glyphs with only
46% of the participants recognising the symbol again.
This value stays almost constant for level 2 with 45%
and increases to 54% in level 3 and to 67% at level 4.

4. Visual Patient Records
Information surfaces (monitors, touch screens) have
steadily increased in recent years and have become
more and more mobile. This development requires new
concepts in terms of user interaction and data input.
We use the visual glyphs as amplifying elements in
disease records and statistical evaluations. This
approach shows that the efficiency and effectiveness of
the information reception can be increased by using
validated visual symbols.

Figure 6 – Visual Codes
Our colour-coding scheme was optimised for the usage
in an oncology department. It reserves two colours for
the patient sex (used only in mixed gender cancer
cases) and two brownish colours to indicate cancer
diagnosis (tumour, metastasis). All other colours can
be used for event types as the initial diagnosis, surgery,
histology, and therapeutic intervention. In Figure 6
examples of most commonly used localisation icons
and colour codes can be seen.

4.1 Building Blocks

4.2 Visual Patient Record

The basic element of a case history is a medical event.
The attributes of an event are the event type, together
with a short description, the localisation and a date or
optionally a temporal range.

A patient record consists of a series of events. In order
to visualize such a record we provide three levels of
semantic zoom: Iconic Overview, Compressed View,
Expanded View.
Figure 7 shows an example of a breast cancer
diagnosis. In Figures 8, 9 and 10 the visual

254
248

representation with different levels of details can be
seen.
N. mammae dext. 1989 (09/89),
C50I.9;SLokalrezidiv 1996
Knochenmetastasen LWK 3 (04/97), C79.5;
susp. Fil oss. HWS/LWS/Rippen 06/09
Operatione(n) und Histologie(n):
kurative TE, axilläre Dissek- tion,
(**.**.89 Prof. ****); Histo: IDC Stad.:
pT1bN0(0/14) G1; Rez.: ER gering pos; PR
mittel pos; TE, SS, (**.**.96 Prof.
****)Histo: IDC Stad.: rpT1b G3 R0 ;
Rez.: ER gering pos; PR hoch pos;
Bestrahlung(en):RTX Mamma dext. (10/1989
- 12/1989) RTX LWS (36GY) (4/1997 5/1997)

Figure 8 – Iconic Overview of a Diagnosis
In the compressed view (Figure 9) we add to the iconic
overview single events which are halfway covered.
With the help of this space-saving layout we can
visualise up to 25 events in a single row. If the number
of events does not fit into the space available the user
can interactively determine the visible range of events
(see also Figure 11).

Figure 7 – Textual Diagnosis
In the iconic overview the whole case history is shown
in a single glyph. The main diagnosis is visualized by
the colour together with an icon of the ICD 10 code
and the localisation is shown in the main icon. In
addition, the last events are shown as small symbols in
the lower part of the glyph. If the case history consists
of more than 4 events, a number indicates invisible
events, which can be seen in the compressed and
expanded view.
The main facts as shown in Figure 8 are: The
patient is suffering from breast cancer (ICD10 Code
C50.9) located on the right side. The last three events
are the diagnosis of bone metastases followed by a
gamma ray treatment and again a diagnosis of bone
metastases. Finally the overview visualisation indicates
that there are five additional events in the past. With
the help of the overview representation a medical
expert can get a quick visual summary of the current
health condition of a single patient or compare and
group up to hundred records.

Figure 9 –Compressed View
In the expanded view (Figure 10) all details of a case
history are shown. In addition, each event is decorated
with a date stamp and a text field, which is shown
when the user moves the mouse over an event.
Together with medical expert we evaluated several
layout strategies. The best solution was a simple
temporal order in comparison to the visualisation of the
event duration and the placement of events at the
absolute position on a timeline.

Figure 10 – Complete View of a Diagnosis

255
249

Figure 11 – The Disease Analyzer

5. Application Example
With the help of the Disease Analyser (figure 10)
medical experts can browse a database of about
800.000 case histories. Out of this huge number of
cases they can define subgroups with the help of a
query. The queries can be organised in the explorer
window of the Disease Viewer and can later be edited
or refined. The results of a query are shown either in a
table view (using textual items), in a grid view (using
iconic overviews) or in a list view (using compressed
views).
In addition to the visual browsing we can compare
the attributes of record groups with the help of
statistical diagrams. The Disease Analyser supports
line chats, bar charts, box plots, scatter plots and
Kaplan Meier survival curves.
Figure 12 compares the survival curves of breast
cancer cases groups by their grading. Group A
represents 622 cases with grading 1, group B 4.715
cases with grading 2 und group C 4.417 cases with
grading 3. The grading of cancer cells indicates how
cultured cells behave after biopsy. The closer to normal
cancer cells are, the slower their growth and the better
the prognosis. If cells are not well differentiated, they
will appear immature, will divide more rapidly, and
tend to spread. Well-differentiated cells have a grade of
1, moderate cells a grade of 2, and poor or
undifferentiated higher grade of 3 or 4. [12]

Figure 12 – Comparison of three grading
groups of breast cancer with Kaplan Meier
Survival Curves.

6. Conclusion
We developed a library of medical symbols. The
distinctive feature of this library is the provision of
symbols in 4 abstraction levels. Higher abstraction
levels are self-explanatory and used in applications
where a low number of objects is presented at the same
time. Low abstraction levels are typically used in data
visualisation applications showing several hundred
elements. In such a scenario it is important that the
symbols can be arranged in a grid and are characterised
by very simple graphical attributes (colour, simple
geometric shapes) The symbol library is used in
several data visualisation applications, e.g. as basic
components for multilevel data glyphs [13][14] and in
256
250

the visualisation of patient records in the Disease
Analyser. With the help of the Disease Analyser we
can communicate complex medical statements in a
visual patient record summary.
We prospectively plan to widen our focus to
application areas as day-to-day tasks in hospitals and
the administration of medical facilities. Based on their
demands we intend to utilise out visualisation methods
in a task based user interface with state-of-the-art
features like multitouch, gesture recognition and selfexplaining symbols.

[5]

[6]

[7]

7. Acknowledgments

[8]

This work was funded by the FIT-IT programme (813
398) and by the Austrian Fonds zur Förderung der
wissenschaftlichen Forschung (FWF, L427-N15).
Medical data were provided in the context of the
Austrian Genome Programme GEN-AU and the CRIP
project. Our thanks are due to all partners projects,
especially Marc Streit, Alexander Lex, Dieter
Schmalstieg, and Robert Reihs for their contributions,
critical reviews and various discussions. The study has
been approved by the Ethical Committee of the
Medical University of Graz.

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

8. References
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[13]

Neurath O., International picture language, University
of Reading, 1978.
Thomas J., Cook K. A., (eds.), Illuminating the Path:
The Research and Development Agenda for Visual
Analytics, J. J. , IEEE CS Press, 2005.
Kosara R., Miksch S., Hauser H.Focus and Context
Taken Literally, IEEE Computer Graphics and its
Applications, Special Issue: Information Visualization,
pp. 22-29, 22(1), Jan.-Feb., 2002.
Powsner S.M., Tufte E.R., Graphical summary of
patient status. The Lancet 334, 1994, pp. 386-389.

[14]

257
251

Horn W, Popow C. Unterasinger L. Support for fast
comprehension of ICU data: visualization using
methaper graphics. Methods of Information in
Medicine 40, 2001, pp. 421-424.
Plaisant
C., Milash B., Rose A, Widoff S.
Shneiderman B., LifeLines: visualizing personal
histories. Proceedings of the ACM CHI 96 conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1996, pp.
221-227.
Konchady M., D’Amore R., Valley G., A web based
visualization fpr documents. In: Proceddings of the
workshop on new paradigms in information
visualization and manipuation, ACM press, 1998, pp.
13-19
Ropinski T., Preim B., Taxonomy and Usage
Guidelines for Glyph-based Medical Visualization,
Proc. of Simulation and Visualization, pp. 121-138,
2008.
Ward M. O., Multivariate Data Glyphs, Principles and
Practice, in Chun-Houh Chen, Wolfgang Härdle and
Antony Unwin, Handbook of Data Visualization,
Springer, 2008.
ICD-10: international statistical classification of
diseases and related health problems: tenth revision.
World Health Organization 2004.
Medical Icon Browser
http://www.caleydo.org/iconbrowser
last visited March 2010
Histologic Grades of Breast Cancer: Helping
Determine a Patient's Outcome
http://imaginis.org/breasthealth/histologic_grades.asp,
last visited February 2010.
Müller H., Zatloukal K., Streit M., Schmalstieg D.,
Interactive exploration of medical data sets,
Proceedings of the 2008 Fifth International Conference
BioMedical Visualization: Information Visualization
in Medical and Biomedical Informatics, 2008, London.
Müller H., Reihs R., Sauer S., Zatloukal K., Streit M.,
Lex A., Schlegl B., Schmalstieg D., Connecting Genes
with
Diseases.
Symposium
on
Information
Visualization in Biomedical Informatics, 13th
International Conference on Information Visualization,
2009, Barcelona.

