2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Simulation and Visualisation for Electromagnetic Nondestructive Evaluation

Anthony Simm, Ilham Zainal Abidin, Gui Yun Tian and Wai Lok Woo
School of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering
Newcastle University
England, NE1 7RU, United Kingdom
e-mail: anthony.simm@newcastle.ac.uk
of the mapping profiles and extracted features, providing
quantitative information for defect characterisation.
The advantages of the visualisation technique with
ECNDE is presented and discussed in two case studies. The
results from these case studies help to build a link between
the acquired information, i.e. magnetic field or thermal
distribution and defect information (shape, size and
location).
This paper presents: (a) the review of the state-of-the-art
of modelling, simulation and visualisation for ECNDE; (b)
the case studies of ECNDE; (c) summary and outcome of the
work and conclusions drawn from the study.

Abstract— This paper reviews the state-of-the art of modelling,
simulation and visualisation and reviews the recent
development of modelling, simulation and visualisation
software for Nondestructive Evaluation (NDE). Simulation and
visualisation can assist in the design and development of
electromagnetic sensing and imaging techniques and systems
for nondestructive testing, feature extraction and inverse
problems for quantitative nondestructive evaluation. After
reviewing the state-of-the art of electromagnetic modelling and
simulation, case studies from electromagnetic NDE research
and development for eddy current distribution and
thermography are discussed.
Keywords-modelling;
simulation;
electromagnetic sensing; nondestructive testing.

I.

visualisation;

II.

Simulation or modelling has been a part of
Nondestructive Testing (NDT) since its earliest applications.
It has been used for several of the common NDT methods
including radiography, ultrasonics, eddy current and a
variety of others. In the field of ECNDE, modelling and
simulation is useful in the design of new probes and
optimising of existing probes for required inspection
scenarios. Parameters relating to the probe, sample and type
of defect can be investigated without the requirement to
perform repeated experiments. Simulations based on either
analytical or numerical models allow the user to predict the
response of a probe when it is scanned over a defect.
Knowledge of this response is useful for the purposes of
defect characterisation through feature extraction and the
reconstruction of defects.
The application of analytical modelling for ECNDE
began with Dodd and Deeds modelling of EC inspection
applied to a coil on a conductive half-space and a layered
specimen including a rod specimen, using integral
expressions [7-8]. The Dodd and Deeds analytical models
have been proven to be very useful in predicting
experimental data from eddy current measurements and have
been widely used by the NDE community in the design of
eddy current tests [9]. Until now, many of the analytical
packages for ECNDE modelling and simulations have not
been widely commercialised, apart from CIVA, which has
had applications in aerospace [10], oil and gas [11] and the
nuclear [12] industry. The limitations of analytical packages
lies in an inability to solve complicated problems, i.e.
complex defect components and geometries, which hinders

INTRODUCTION

Modelling and simulation is a discipline for developing a
level of understanding of the interaction of the parts of a
system and of the system as a whole. As the development
and application of modelling and simulation for system
understanding [1-4], visualisation and interpretation of
simulation data [5-6] become important, extracting usable
and useful knowledge from large and complex data sets is a
difficult and challenging problem.
Modelling is often used in electromagnetic
nondestructive
evaluation
(ENDE)
to
simulate
electromagnetic phenomena. The constructed models in
ENDE are typically used to simulate an ENDE test
procedure and predict the resulting signals associated with
different defect and experimental conditions. Results
provided by the modelling and simulations can provide
useful information for sensor design, visualisation of the
interaction of electromagnetic phenomena with defects and
for defect identification, which can be used to develop signal
interpretation algorithms.
In this work, we present a review of the state-of-the-art
for modelling, simulation and visualisation in eddy current
NDE (ECNDE). Visualisation of eddy current (EC)
distribution has gained considerable research attention in
providing easier signal interpretation. Through the
visualisation and mapping of EC distribution, visual
indication of defects can be provided and information about
the condition of the sample obtained over a relatively large
area. Characteristics of defect geometries can be identified
and differentiated from simple defects through comparison
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.77

STATE-OF-THE-ART OF MODELLING, SIMULATION AND
VISUALISATION FOR ECNDE

505
515

the utilisation of this analytical approach towards solving
real industrial problems.
Numerical simulations in general are more powerful than
using analytical models. In contrast to analytical simulation,
it has the capability to model complex defect geometries,
material nonlinearity and other complexities associated with
real test scenarios, with the required accuracy [9]. At the
same time, the solution is obtained as a numerical result
rather than a closed form solution. Along with the rapid
development of computers, Finite Element Method (FEM)
simulation has moved from 2D to 3D modelling which is
more suitable in handling asymmetric problems which
cannot be simplified to a 2D problem using azimuthal
coordinates [13]. 3D FEM simulation is beneficial to the
theoretical study of ECNDE, because the geometries of
specimens and components modelled in simulations are
usually asymmetric [14]. The commercial simulation
packages, such as COMSOL, which are prevalent in
electromagnetic modelling are capable of implementing
simulations in 2D and 3D, as a result better understanding of
magnetic fields underlying the inspection systems can be
obtained and can be used to verify the experimental results.
In addition, some situations of test geometries that are
difficult, expensive or impossible to simulate experimentally
has made numerical modelling the only practical way to
provide defect characterisation parameters in eddy current
testing [9]. These software packages use numerical models to
simulate and visualise multiple physical phenomena and
allow the modelling of complex geometries but can be slow
when compared to analytical models, especially when
solving three-dimensional problems.
One of the recent trends in ECNDE is the advancement
from qualitative evaluation of a defect (is a defect present)
towards quantitative evaluation (estimate defect shape, type,
size, and position) [15]. Many methods have been proposed
by researchers working in this field for the Quantitative NDE
(QNDE) of materials using the EC technique [16-20]. To
date, the Pulsed Eddy Current (PEC) technique has been
shown to exceed the capabilities of other EC techniques in
the provision of quantitative information in the evaluation of
defects. Apart from containing a large spectrum of frequency
components in its excitation, for better eddy current
penetration compared to other EC techniques, information
about a defect such as the location, depth and defect size can
be obtained through the features present in the transient
signal. Generally, the time-to-peak and the peak height of the
PEC differential signals are the main features used to obtain
the depth information and the size of the defect [21].
However, despite significant advancements, characterisation
of deep sub-surface flaws still poses a major challenge.
Various techniques have been developed to put PEC
inspection data in the form of images for visualisation. This
has been made possible by the use of magnetic sensors for
imaging of eddy current distribution through the mapping of
magnetic field distribution using scanners or sensor arrays.
In the scanning method for PEC imaging, the PEC system is
linked to a scanning application. Positional information is
acquired using one of many different types of scanner
controlled by the scanning application software.

Figure 1. Magnetic camera.

The images are then recorded based on the amplitude of
the magnetic field distribution. A typical commercial system
is TrecScan which uses a sensor array and scanning to
visualise large areas (typically aircraft fuselages).
Sensor arrays and sensor networks have become the
focus of attention in the sensor world recently. NDE
methods, which are highly dependant on sensing and
imaging, are no exception. Sensor arrays offer many
advantages, such as the acquisition of more information
simultaneously, improved detection accuracy [22], and
maintaining the probe in close contact with the inspected
sample during the inspection. A sensor array containing 64
(8×8 array) magnetic sensors (Hall sensors) for magnetic
field visualisation is shown in Fig. 1.
This provides an image of a relatively large area (when
compared with a single sensor) simultaneously, without the
need to scan the probe over the area of the defect. The
potential of using sensor arrays provides a method to obtain
more information about defect location and geometry, in
addition to rich depth information. With the construction of
more sophisticated array arrangements, the imaging
technique can provide more reliable and faster inspection
results for defect characterisation, assessment and
reconstruction of 3D defects [23].
Even though the PEC imaging through scanning or the
use of sensor arrays has advantages in providing the solution
towards defect characterisation for QNDE, the feasibility for
real-time imaging still poses problems. PEC imaging through
scanning leads to low inspection efficiency due to the time
taken to complete the scan and the dependency on a scanning
system. Sensor arrays on the other hand, depend on the
spatial resolution of the array arrangement in providing
detection sensitivity and the resolution needed for defect
characterisation from the mapped distribution. For these
reasons, the suitability and limitations of scanning and sensor
arrays for should be taken into consideration when the PEC
imaging technique is employed for defect characterisation
and QNDE.
To overcome the limitations of the PEC technique for the
characterisation of defects, an integrative technique which
combines PEC and thermography is proposed. PEC
thermography inspection with eddy current excitation allows
the imaging of eddy current distribution with the ability to
check for defects over relatively large areas with high spatial
resolution, rather than using magnetic sensor arrays or
scanning. Using the PEC thermography technique, in the

516
506

heating process the inspected sample is heated rapidly by an
inductively generated current flow (20-200 ms pulses). The
presence of defects will disturb the flow of the induced eddy
currents and affect the temperature distribution on the sample
surface so that the defect can be visualised using suitable
thermographic camera.
III.

the defects as it increases from 0º to 40º. This shows that the
shifting of the peak distribution can be used as a feature for
quantitative estimation of angular defects. Through the
analysis, a correlation between the peak distribution shift and
the defects angle to predict the angle of the defects can be
made as shown in Fig. 3. These can be developed as
potential features for angular defect characterisation.
The results of angular defect characterisation by
numerical simulations through the visualisation and mapping
technique has shown that angular defects characterisation
can be made through extracted features from the magnetic
field mapping. Through the mapping analysis of the features,
geometrical information of the angular defects in relation to
the distribution profiles has been obtained.

CASE STUDIES OF MODELLING AND SIMULATION
APPROACHES IN ECNDE

Two modelling and simulation case studies have been
investigated and discussed; these are magnetic field
distribution for complex geometric shape and thermal
distribution for PEC thermography.
A. Visualisation and mapping of magnetic field
distribution for angular defect characterisation
Industry requirements mean that quantification of defects
such as size and length of the defect inside the investigated
sample has to be addressed as accurately as possible for
component lifetime prediction and the overall assessment of
the structure. However, since the nature of defects is that
they have complex geometries i.e. growing at an angle, the
influence of defect angular characteristic on the inspection
results posed a major problem for characterisation and
quantification. Much attention has been given to developing
techniques and inspection systems which could give the best
possible inspection sensitivity and efficiency for QNDE of
defects, but little attention has been given to the study of how
the defect shape and orientation affected the inspection
results. The study of angular defects and its influence
towards the gathered information would provide the
knowledge and the much needed solution in achieving
quantification of defects. This would benefit industry and the
NDE research communities by providing the explanation of
results and QNDE assessment of defects.
A forward approach of characterising the angular defects
has been taken based on the visualisation and extracted
features of the resultant magnetic field mapping from the
interaction between the eddy current and the defects in the
sample. FEM simulations for the 3D visualisation of
magnetic field are conducted in transient mode. The
simulation is conducted to visualise the magnetic field
distribution change with different angles of the angular
defects. Through the simulated magnetic field visualisation
analysis, features from the mapping are extracted to be used
for the angular defect discrimination and quantification. The
extracted features can help in building the inverse model for
defect identification from the acquired magnetic field
mapping. The investigation is also intended to facilitate
sensor selection and the requirement for experimental design
and its practicality for eddy current imaging through
magnetic field mapping and visualisation for defect
characterisation using PEC.
As can be seen from the maps shown in Fig. 2, the peak
of the distribution for each angular defect is shifted towards
the right which shows the defects angle direction inside the
sample. Analysing the visualisation results obtained, it is
found that the peak of the magnetic field distribution of the
angular defects will be shifted corresponding to the angle of

B. Simulation and visualisation for PEC thermography
PEC thermography inspection with eddy current
excitation is an integrative NDE method which allows the
visualisation of eddy current distribution with the ability to
inspect for defects over relatively large areas with high
spatial resolution, rather than using magnetic sensor arrays.
The resultant surface heat distribution from direct eddy
current heating and diffused heat can be obtained easily with
a thermal camera, but techniques for the determination of
heating mechanisms around a particular defect for
quantitative
defect
characterisation
are
required.
Consequently, modelling of PEC thermography is essential if
the relationship between the applied field and the resultant
temperature distribution is to be fully understood. The
modelling can also provide guidance on the experimental
specification and configuration for the PEC thermography
technique.
In this case study, numerical (FEM) modelling is used to
investigate the PEC thermography underlying phenomena on
simple discontinuity defects, including eddy current
distribution and heating propagation. Through the
visualisation provided by the numerical simulations, heating
distribution by the presence of defects can be explained and
provide the means for evaluating the proposed PEC
thermography capabilities (through eddy current heating) for
defect characterisation by the visualisation and mapping
technique.
With the intention of understanding the fundamental
behaviour of eddy current heating and heating diffusion, two
fundamental defect models are introduced:
• The slot - finite in length but extending completely
through the sample.
• The notch - infinite in length, but finite in depth.
These defect models will demonstrate the variation in the
induced eddy current distribution which is dependant on the
geometry of the defect within the inspected sample. Through
the acquired knowledge of the heating mechanism around a
particular defect, the resultant thermographic images can be
explained in relation to the encountered defect and its
geometrical parameters.
Fig. 4 shows the simulation results for the slot and notch
after 200ms of heating. The eddy current flow for the two
defects is visualised by the streamline plot in Fig. 4(a). In the
presence of a defect, eddy currents will divert to complete

517
507

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

their closed loop path which leaves a unique eddy current
distribution based on the defect geometry that can provide
useful information about a defect. Comparison of the
streamline plots for the slot and the notch shows that the
presence of the through slot causes an obvious diversion of
the eddy currents around the tip of the slot. The diversion of
the current flow for the notch is less obvious, but some
disturbance in the eddy current distribution surrounding the
notch can be identified. The streamline plots also illustrate
the large influence that sample geometry has on eddy current
distribution; where the eddy current loops encounter a
material edge, an area of higher current density is formed
e.g. at the sample edge, under the coil. Thus, defects with the
same geometry and orientation, but different positions on the
sample under inspection can interact with the induced eddy
currents in different ways and cause very different heat
distributions.
Fig. 4(b) shows the heat distribution for the slot and
notch, viewed from the top of the sample for surface heating
distribution and as a cross section directly under the
induction coil. It can be seen from the top views that for both
samples, there are hotter areas directly under the induction
coil, plus a build up of heat at the edges of the samples. In
addition to this, the slot exhibits a characteristic heat build up
at the tips of the slot and cooler areas either side of the slot.
The presence of the notch is not as obvious in the top view,
but examination of the cross sectional view shows a clear
build up of heat directly under the defect.
Based on the simulation results, the theoretical eddy
current distributions and resultant heating for the two
fundamental defects can be described and shown in Fig. 5.
The introduction of a slot in the eddy current path results in a
diversion of the eddy currents around the tips of the slot
causing an increase in eddy current density and resultant hot
spots at the slot tips coupled with a relatively cooler area at
the centre of the slot where eddy current density is
decreased. The introduction of a notch in the eddy current
path results in a diversion of the eddy current flow
underneath the notch, resulting in an increase in eddy current
density and a resultant hot spot at the bottom of the notch.
The heat distribution for real world defects can be
understood by considering the contributions from the two
modes; heating at the tips of defects due to lateral diversion
of eddy currents and heating at the bottom of the defect due
to medial diversion of eddy currents.
IV.

The authors would like to thank the Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council (EP/F023324/1 and
EP/E010458/1) for funding the work. The authors would like
to thank Liang Cheng and John Wilson both of Newcastle
University for useful discussions.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

State-of-the-art
of
modelling,
simulation
and
visualisation for non-destructive evaluation has been
reviewed. It has an important bearing to enable users to
understand the physical phenomena and to design and
optimise the sensing system. Two case studies on modelling
and simulation of electromagnetic NDE and their
investigation in visualising data have been reported. Further
research will concentrate on further visualisation and signal
processing techniques for defect characterisation and
reconstruction.

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

518
508

J. Axel Zeitler and L.F. Gladden, In-vitro tomography and nondestructive imaging at depth of pharmaceutical solid dosage forms,
European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics, Volume
71, Issue 1, Pages 2-22, January 2009.
C.D.M. Liljedahl, M.L. Tan, O. Zanellato, S. Ganguly, M.E.
Fitzpatrick and L. Edwards, Evolution of residual stresses with
fatigue loading and subsequent crack growth in a welded aluminium
alloy middle tension specimen, Engineering Fracture Mechanics,
Volume 75, Issue 13, Pages 3881-3894, September 2008.
Y. Rafiq and, C. Sui, Interactive visualisation: A support for system
identification, Advanced Engineering Informatics, In Press.
doi:10.1016/j.aei.2010.02.003
N.J. Cassidy,
Ground Penetrating Radar Data Processing in
Modelling and Analysis, Ground Penetrating Radar Theory and
Applications, H.M. Jol Eds., Elsevier, 2009, Pages 141-176
A. Siemers and D. Fritzson, Visualisation and data representation for
large scale multibody simulations with detailed contact analysis: A
case study, Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, Volume 17,
Issue 6, Pages 1130-1142, July 2009.
M. D. Mantle, A. J. Sederman and L. F. Gladden, Single- and twophase flow in fixed-bed reactors: MRI flow visualisation and latticeBoltzmann simulations, Chemical Engineering Science, Volume 56,
Issue 2, Pages 523-529, January 2001.
C.V. Dodd and W.E. Deeds, ‘Analytical solutions to eddy current
probe-coil problems’, Journal of Applied Physics, Vol. 39, No. 6, pp.
2829-2838, 1968.
J.W. Luquire, W.E. Deeds and C.V. Dodd, ‘Alternating current
distribution between planar conductors’, Journal of Applied Physics,
Vol. 41, No. 10, pp. 3983-3993, 1970.
Electromagnetic Testing, Nondestructive Testing Handbook, 3rd
Edition, Vol. 5. S.S. Upda and P.O. Moore Eds., ASNT Press, 2004.
S. Paillard, G. Pichenot, M. Lambert, H. Voillaume and N.
Dominguez, ‘Modelling of flawed riveted structures for EC
inspection in aeronautics’, Review of Quantitative Nondestructive
Evaluation, Vol. 27, pp. 579-586, 2008.
D. Premel, G. Pichenot and T. Sollier, ‘Development of a 3D
electromagnetic model for eddy current tubing inspection: application
to the simulation of probe eccentric, International Journal of Applied
Electromagnetic and Mechanics, Vol. 18, pp. 1-5, 2003.
G. Pichenot, D. Premel and G. Cattiaux, ‘Eddy current modelling for
the nuclear industry: an overview of the CIVA simulation software
features’, Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on NDE in
Relation to Structural Integrity for Nuclear and Pressurized
Components, 2006.
L. R. Turner, ‘3-D field computation: The near-triumph of
commercial codes’, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 32, No. 4,
pp. 2945-2949, 1996.
F. Al-naemi, ‘Magnetic FEM and NDT: Benefits, pitfalls and
applications’, Proceedings of Magnetics in Non-Destructive Testing,
pp. 8-14, 2005.
G.Y. Tian and A. Sophian, ‘Study of magnetic sensors for pulsed
eddy current techniques, Insight, Vol. 47, No. 5, pp. 277-279, 2005.
K. Tsukada and T. Kiwa, ‘Magnetic property mapping system for
analyzing three-dimensional magnetic components’, Review of
Scientific Instruments, Vol. 77, pp. 1-5, 2006.

[17] T. Dogaru and S. Smith, ‘Giant magnetorsistance-based eddy current
sensor’, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, Vol. 37, No.5, pp. 38313838, 2001.
[18] M.V. Kreutzbruck and K. Allweins, ‘High field resolution for
nondestructive testing using sensitivity magnetometers’, Sensors and
Actuators A, Vol. 101, pp. 85-91, 2002.
[19] A. Sophian, G.Y. Tian, D. Taylor and J. Rudlin, ‘A feature extraction
technique based on principle component analysis for pulsed eddy
current NDT’, NDT & E International, Vol. 36, pp. 37-41, 2003.
[20] J.T. Jeng, H.E. Horng and H.C. Yang, ‘Detection of small cracks
using high-Tc SQUIDSs in an unshielded environment’,
Superconductor Science and Technology, Vol. 15, pp. 416-420, 2002.

(a)

[21] A. Sophian, G.Y. Tian, D. Taylor and J. Rudlin, ‘A feature extraction
technique based on principle component analysis for pulsed eddy
current NDT’, NDT & E International, Vol. 36, pp. 37-41, 2003.
[22] A. Jeremic and A. Nehorai, ‘Design of chemical sensor arrays for
monitoring disposal sites on the ocean floor’, IEEE Journal of
Oceanic Engineering, Vol. 23, No. 4 pp. 334-343, 1998.
[23] K. Thiyagarajan, B. Maxfield, K. Balasubramaniam and C.V.
Krishnamurthy, ‘Pulsed eddy current digital imaging of corrosion
pits’, Journal of Nondestructive Testing & Evaluation, Vol. 7, No. 2,
pp. 32-36, 2008.

(b)

(c)

Figure 2. Simulated differential magnetic field visualisation at 1ms for (a) 0º angular defect (b) 20º angular defect (c) 40º angular defect.

(a)

(b)

Figure 3. (a) Differential magnetic field distribution against angular defect (b) Correlation between peak distribution shift and defect angle.

519
509

(a)

(b)

Figure 4. Simulation results of (a) eddy current and (b) heat distribution for ideal slot and notch.

(a)

(b)

Figure 5. Theorectical (a) eddy current and (b) heat distribution for ideal slot and notch.

520
510

