2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Conceptualisations of Self in Contemporary Interactive Artwork: a Case Study of
Lynette Wallworth’s Duality of Light
Christine Nicholls
Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia
{Christine.Nicholls@flinders.edu.au}

generated about the brain’s processing of animated visual
information. Bartels and Zeki [1] for example, have
conducted research into how the brain processes distinct
attributes such as motion and colour in anatomically
(largely) segregated systems and have also established
that the ‘binding’ of such attributes is subject to a
temporal hierarchy [1:2284]. These researchers write that
The attribute specific binding times are in line with
our knowledge of the organization of the visual
system, where colour and motion are processed in
largely segregated systems [1:2284].
Most tellingly Bartels and Zeki demonstrate that
such binding is asynchronous and is post-conscious (my
emphasis) [1, 8].
Based on experimentation with human subjects,
Bartels and Zeki also found that binding times are
dependent on the specific attributes to be bound. For
example, where such binding occurs within attributes,
that is, colour-colour or motion-motion, the binding
period is more rapid than it is across attributes, in colourmotion binding for instance, where perceptual delays are
longer. This is the case because different neural
pathways are associated with each attribute. In other
words, binding times are dependent on the specific
attributes to be bound [1, summarized by the author].
Further to this, in earlier research [4], Halgren et al
first identified the small, separate area in the human
posterior gyrus that responds selectively to faces. Such
new knowledge – of the segregation of areas in the brain
specifically involved in visual processing and
identification of their specific locations - adds another
level of complexity to our understanding of
contemporary visual art involving moving imagery,
colour, and faces. Thus recent neuroscientific knowledge
has become relevant well beyond what many people
involved ‘the arts’ have traditionally regarded as the
cloistered world of pure scientific research. This new
knowledge has implications for the broader cultural
arena.

Abstract
This paper, which is contextualised in terms of the
broader history of the moving image, examines new
media artist Lynette Wallworth’s installation Duality of
Light with respect to recent advances in neuroscientific
research [1,8]. These have led to greater understanding
of how the brain processes visual imagery. Of greatest
relevance to Wallworth’s work is the discovery that the
binding of the largely anatomically segregated attributes
of colour, motion and faces occurs asynchronously and
is subject to a temporal hierarchy. Moreover, such
binding is post-conscious. Further to this, following
Gansing [3], while simultaneously factoring in these
recent neuroscientific advances, the idea of
‘interactivity’ is challenged. The inadequacy of
‘interactive’ as an undifferentiated descriptor, often
uniformly applied to diverse new media works, is also
highlighted. Works such as those created by Wallworth –
whose work is informed intuitively by these recent
neuroscientific findings – reveal the shortcomings of
such homogenising terminology. Finally, this exploratory
paper, which will form the basis of further work,
demonstrates the interwoven nature of the
aforementioned subject matter and thematic concerns.

Introduction
Since the late nineteenth century, when moving
images were introduced, artists, afficionados and
entrepreneurs have experimented with the medium. In
the past three decades the so-called ‘digital revolution’
has even more dramatically altered the ways in which
human beings conceptualise, visualise and interact with
their cultural heritage. These changes have had a
profound effect on what, in 1972, John Berger described
as human beings’ diverse ‘ways of seeing’ [2].
More recently still, mostly in the past decade,
neuroscientists who specialise in how the brain processes
visual material have made a number of important
breakthroughs. Neuroscientific understanding of how the
brain processes separate attributes of visual images has
expanded exponentially. Of particular significance (inter
alia) in this context is the new knowledge recently
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 Crown Copyright
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.62

397
403

III. Where New Media Meets Neuroscience:
Lynette Wallworth’s Duality of Light

II. Implications of This Research
With respect to the brain, the fact that human beings
do not have a single site of visual consciousness, but
separate perceptual sites for facial recognition, colour
and motion, and the discovery by researchers including
Bartels and Zeki that these sites operate asynchronously
and are only resolved and unified post-consciously,
potentially alter our understanding of the contemporary
visual - and therefore cultural - landscapes. When digital
artists, gamers and others exploit this potential, whether
consciously or unconsciously, it reveals that cultural shift
is an almost inevitable consequence of scientific
advancement.

The balance of this paper is devoted to a case study
of Australian new media artist Lynette Wallworth’s
‘interactive’ work Duality of Light. Certain recent shifts
in the culture of the moving image become sharply
defined at the critical interface where the moving image,
visual art, aesthetics, technology and recent
neuroscientific findings and new knowledge meet, to
forge unexpected alliances. The cultural shifts that are
taking place at this critical junction are key to
understanding Wallworth’s Duality of Light.
Wallworth has become a major player in the field of
new media, creating works that transcend the traditional
boundaries or ‘the great divide’ that has historically
existed between the arts, sciences and technology. It also
needs to be noted that Wallworth works predominantly
within a ‘fine art’ paradigm, rather than in a commercial,
populist context.

II.i. The Moving Image and the Face
From the beginning of the history of the moving
image, the human face has occupied a pre-eminent, if not
sovereign, position. This has been the case particularly
in the western world where, in film and television closeups, human faces often figure prominently - a tendency
that has persisted into the digital era.
Susan Sontag has written about how the privileged
status of the face in Western culture over-determines our
...evaluation of physical beauty and physical ruin.
All the debunking of the Cartesian separation of
mind and body by modern philosophy and modern
science has not reduced by one iota this culture's
conviction of the separation of face and body, which
influences every aspect of manners, fashion, sexual
appreciation, aesthetic sensibility - virtually all our
notions of appropriateness. This separation is a
main point of one of European culture's principal
iconographical traditions, the depiction of Christian
martyrdom, with its astounding schism between
what is inscribed on the face and what is happening
to the body...Our very notion of the person, of
dignity, depends on the separation of face from
body, on the possibility that the face may be exempt,
or exempt itself, from what is happening to the body.
[6:39-40]

III.I. The Language Question
Art critics, (for example, Wendy Walker in 2009)
and gallery visitors alike have routinely described
Lynette Wallworth’s visual works as both ‘immersive’
and ‘interactive’ [7]. Neither term actually does
Wallworth’s work justice. ‘Interactive’ has become an
umbrella term potentially leading to loss of semantic
accuracy and depth. As Gansing suggests, animated
visual artworks and commercial games have too often
been described generically and inexactly as ‘interactive’,
whereas, as a concept, interactivity needs to be
understood as existing along a continuum [3]. Gansing
attempts to go beyond simplistic analyses of digital
media by exposing the conceptual weakness of the
entrenched binary conceptualisation of users being either
‘active’ or ‘passive’. As Gansing writes, it appears that
there is
...common agreement that technological inactivity
through new media can have an empowering effect
that takes place through a liberation of a subject –
the once passive couch potato, becoming active,
‘clicking away’ media composer. Parameters for
judging states of activity and passivity do not seem
to enter into consideration.

Sontag goes on to say that in Western cultures
...there can be no real argument against the
aristocracy of the face. [6: 40]
The historically informed - but continuing - primacy
of the face in contemporary visual media not only has
important implications for the emerging field of cultural
heritage knowledge visualisation, but also has relevance
for the previously cited neuroscientific research.
Furthermore, perhaps unsurprisingly, given its historical
prevalence in visual conceptualisations of the self, and its
continuing pervasiveness in contemporary visual media,
the human face plays a significant role in the artworks of
Lynette Wallworth.

...The criteria for interaction, including commercial
interests and power structures are seldom mapped
out and neither are ties that these structures have to
individual works and their strategies for interaction.
[3:40]
To Gansing’s analysis I would add that in any
discussion of the oeuvre of new media artists, individual
works should be examined on a case-by-case basis to
determine the level of ‘interactivity’ (if any).
‘Interactive’ is not an adequate word to describe the
complexities of viewing audiences’ relationships with
the work of any new media artist. This certainly applies
404
398

to Wallworth’s (literally) moving artworks, where rather
than playing an ‘interactive’ role, spectator/participants
often play a mutually constitutive role.
It
does
not
necessarily
follow
that
spectators/participants have the power or control to
determine the end result of a new media work, simply
because their presence is required to trigger that work, or
even when such presence is integral to the realisation of
a given work. In other words, human presence (or even
participation) alone does not ipso facto constitute (inter-)
activity. In fact the reverse is quite true with some new
media: in some instances human participants are
consigned to passivity, despite their presence being
required to initiate the moving image.

shifts that have been enabled by, have become more
pronounced as a result of, or are a byproduct of, the
introduction of so-called ‘interactive’ new media or other
forms of new media.
The preceding comments are applicable to
Wallworth’s installation Duality of Light, first exhibited
at the Samstag Museum of Art in Adelaide, South
Australia, in an eponymously named survey exhibition
(19 February – 24 April 2009), and more recently at
Carriageworks in Sydney (7 – 24 January 2010) in her
exhibition Invisible by Night, Evolution of Fearlessness
& Duality of Light.
Duality of Light is designed to be experienced,
ideally, by a single viewer at a time. As one walks along
a long, dark, narrow passageway, to the hypnotic sound
of water rhythmically dripping from cave walls, one
rather suddenly encounters a life-sized, looming figure
moving in one’s direction. It takes a moment to realize
that this portentous presence in one’s field of vision,
walking towards oneself, is in fact oneself. The
realization is disquieting and for some with whom I
discussed the experience, confronting. A short time after
one’s encounter with oneself as a unified entity, this
virtual ‘self’ explodes (or implodes), shattering into tiny
particles of shimmering light. Eventually the light
disperses and disappears, and to quote Shakespeare, the
rest is silence. [5, Act 5, Scene 2: 416]

III.ii. Discussion: Lynette Wallworth’s
Duality of Light
Notwithstanding questions about interactivity and
whether this concept has now exceeded definitional
usefulness, Wallworth’s recent work provides a example
exemplifying some aspects of the previously cited
neuroscientific research. Of particular import in this
context are the perceptual delays in binding colour,
motion, and faces into an apparently unified whole. The
recent explosion in neuroscientific knowledge has
important implications for understanding the cultural

Figure 1 Lynette Wallworth, 2009, Duality of Light, (stills), images courtesy of the artist and the Samstag
Museum of Art, Adelaide, South Australia, photographs by Grant Hancock.
For all who participated in this remarkable
experience, there was a delay in comprehending that it is
actually the self that one encounters in Duality of Light.
The initial ‘mis-recognition’ of oneself as oneself, or at
least as a virtual iteration of oneself, whilst one is still
engaged in the act of walking towards oneself, and the
consequent sense of discombobulation that this
engenders, was also generally experienced. For some,
including myself, such ‘mis-taken identity’ or lag in selfidentification, was a relatively short-lived matter.
Nevertheless the perceptual delay in self-recognition

provides an explanation for the shock that occurs when
realisation dawns.
However, a number of people (with whom I later
discussed the experience) did not realize at any point
during or afterwards that the encounter had actually been
with their own doppelgänger, or an abstracted version of
it. When, after leaving the exhibit, some people learned
this, in a number of instances there was strong resistance
to the idea that the encounter inside the Duality of Light
tunnel had in fact been with the self, or at least, with
one’s shade.

405
399

At this point it needs to be pointed out that Lynette
Wallworth is first and foremost a visual artist, and that
her primary focus is aesthetic. Along with others, I was
drawn to this work because of its beauty and honesty.
Wallworth’s artworks also exemplify, in ways that are
both embodied and abstract, the age-old struggle of light
with darkness, a theme that has inspired visual artists
(again, particularly in western art) from time
immemorial.
My intention therefore in the following analysis is
not to be reductive, nor to diminish the achievement of
Duality of Light by considering it solely in terms of its
neuroscientific constituents. Rather, the aim is to
elucidate some of the reasons for its success as an
artwork. In part this entails identifying the (for some,
powerful) subliminal effects of this artwork. As a
significant corollary, it is important to pre-empt that one
important finding of the recent neuroscientific research
cited is that the (visual) sum of what we see when we
engage with moving visual imagery - that is, what we see
after we have processed all of the separate pieces of
visual information that we receive, and eventually
synthesise these into what appears to be a unified whole is in fact significantly greater than its parts [1;8]. The
latter point is also important in terms of understanding
the power of Duality of Light as a coherent, aesthetically
pleasing artwork.
The numinous presence of Wallworth’s artworks
arises to a considerable extent from her adroit handling
of the unique properties of light, colour and motion. This
we see in Duality of Light. Nonetheless, to account for
the ‘shock factor’ and the lag in (and even, in some
circumstances, the resistance to) self-recognition
experienced by many who ventured into Duality of
Light’s darkened tunnel, it is necessary to turn to the
recent breakthroughs in neuroscience for an explanation.
To recapitulate and to expand on the most
significant aspects of these developments, in recent years
neuroscientists have identified distinct geographical
locations in the area of the brain involved in processing
visual material. These distinct sites can be mapped onto
functional specialisations in the visual cortical system.
Zeki [8] demonstrated that there are separate loci
controlling micro-consciousness for colour, for the visual
motion system, and for faces.
Each of these individual loci has an important role to
play in processing visual information, notwithstanding
their interaction with one another. As Zeki demonstrated,
each has its own “distinct, and characteristic anatomical
inputs, despite the many anatomical opportunities for
them to interact” [8:214]. There is also direct evidence
that cortical sites are perceptual sites. [8:215].
With respect to the relationship between
Wallworth’s artworks and these recent scientific findings
in the field of visual perception, Zeki et al’s most
important discovery is that these visual processing sites
are not unified. In other words, the attributes of visual
perception are not processed simultaneously, but
asynchronously. Although the time differences (or time
lags) involved in processing different aspects of visual

knowledge are very small, nevertheless they are
significant in terms of the time taken for the human brain
to process colour, motion and faces. Colour is perceived
before motion, for example. As Zeki explains, “this
perceptual asynchrony is not limited to colour and
motion, because it has also been shown that locations
are perceived before colours, which are perceived before
orientations” [8:215]. As earlier stated, it is of the utmost
significance is the fact that the ‘binding’ of these
separate elements is “distributed in time and space” and
that such binding is post-conscious. [8:215]. In other
words, there is a temporal hierarchy, in terms of
integrating the various aspects of what we call ‘seeing’.
Equally relevant in this context is that such related
research findings are “not limited to a visual precept”
[8:215]. Auditory components are also processed in
different locations of the brain and at different times.
This is also relevant in this context, and to the history of
the moving image more generally, because moving
imagery is more often than not accompanied by an
auditory component.
So, there is a demonstrable connection between the
research into how human beings process visual
information and Lynette Wallworth’s Duality of Light,
insofar as it engages viewers’ using several distinct
visual processing loci, as well as an auditory one. As one
walks towards oneself one sees a moving, white,
somewhat ghostly figure (a simulacrum of oneself)
comprising several differing visual components (motion
+ colour + face), all of which are processed separately
with small time lapses between the perception of each.
This visual material is also accompanied by an auditory
component (the sound of dripping stalactites or
stalagmites). Taken together, these elements are
perceived by the viewer as “constitut[ing] a distinct new
entity” [8:217]. The perception that a ‘new entity’ has
appeared before us is a result of that temporally
hierarchical relationship of the individual visual elements
with respect to each another - and the auditory element in
Duality of Light also needs to be factored in to this
sensory hierarchy. This accounts for the realisation, for
some unpalatable, or even shocking, that one has actually
come face to face with oneself.
As Zeki explains, these separate microconsciousnesses, as opposed to a single, sovereign
macro-consciousness (as is still commonly believed to be
the case) collectively govern human beings’ processing
of visual material, ontogenetically sitting at the apex of
the hierarchy of consciousness [to paraphrase 8:217].
In the abstract of his previously cited major article,
Disunity of Consciousness, Zeki [8:214] writes that:
Attempts to decode what has become known as the
(singular) neural correlate of consciousness (NCC)
suppose that consciousness is a single unified entity,
a belief that finds expression in the term ‘unity of
consciousness’. Here, I propose that the quest for
the NCC will remain elusive until we acknowledge
that consciousness is not a unity, and that there are
instead many consciousnesses that are distributed in
time and space.

406
400

Instinctively, Lynette Wallworth happened upon this
neuroscientific truth: that we have, in fact, a number of
visual ‘micro-consciousnesses’, rather than one, singular,
unified ‘visual consciousness”. In discussion with
Wallworth, I established that she had indeed stumbled
upon this knowledge intuitively, and was not working
from any explicit neuroscientific knowledge base in the
making of Duality of Light.
Informing Wallworth’s unique artistic signature is
her exploitation and subtle manipulation of light, colour
and motion, and the interconnections between them.
Light, and the properties of light and motion are major
foci of Lynette Wallworth’s artistic attention and
curiosity, contributing maximally to the distinctive
ambience of her visual artwork and to its mythopoeic
dimension. In addition, the human face often enters into
the equation. Many of Wallworth’s works convey an
understanding of aspects of the revolutionary concepts
that Zeki imparts in The Disunity of Consciousness.
(Maybe Duality of Light could have been subtitled
Disunity
of
Consciousness).
These
important
neuroscientific developments inform Duality of Light,
enhancing its seductive appeal and making it good ‘to
think with’.

Finally, in attempting to determine why audiences
are so deeply moved by Lynette Wallworth’s Duality of
Light, it is necessary to turn towards recent research in
neuroscience to provide some, although by no means all,
of the answers. What becomes clear is that changes in
our understanding of what constitutes cultural heritage
knowledge are to a considerable extent determined by
the ever-expanding boundaries of scientific knowledge,
which in turn is shedding new light on new media
artworks. Doubtless, this trend is set to continue. To
understand visual artworks like those created by
Wallworth as historically informed, contemporary,
aesthetic and scientific phenomena will not destroy our
appreciation of artists’ achievements, but will only
enhance them.

Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank the artist Lynette
Wallworth for permission to use images from Duality of
Light on the front cover of these proceedings and in this
article; and Theodor Wyeld for his support and
assistance, especially with technical matters associated
with this article.

Conclusion

References

With respect to the historical beginnings of the
culture of the moving image, works such as Lynette
Wallworth’s Duality of Light demonstrate just how far
things have traveled since those earliest days. With the
more recent, putative ‘digital revolution’, the pace of
change has further accelerated. An inevitable
accompaniment of the dramatic changes in the
contemporary visual landscape is the continuing
transformation of how we visualise the past, present and
future. This transformation is in part attributable to the
dissolution of some of the traditional boundaries between
the arts and the sciences, with new technologies playing
a vital, linking role. All of these factors profoundly affect
how we understand the heritage of the moving image and
its future.
Recent developments in the field demonstrate the
need to take a more nuanced approach to discussion,
whether verbal and written, about new technologies. It is
becoming increasingly necessary to clarify and refine the
language that we use in relation to new media, regardless
of whether it falls into the commercial or fine art
category. To remain content with lazy usage of ‘catchall’ terminology such as ‘interactive’ or ‘immersive’
does not do justice to the diversity and subtlety of the
attributes of many, if not most, new media works.

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

407
401

Bartels, A., and Zeki, S., 2006, ‘The Temporal Order of
Binding Visual Attributes’, in Vision Research 46, 22802286, Elsevier.
Berger, John, 2008 (first published 1972), Ways of
Seeing, Penguin Classic Series, Penguin Books, UK and
Australia.
Gansing, Kristoffer, 2003, ‘The Myth of Interactivity or
the Interactive Myth?: Interactive Film as an Imaginary
Genre’, Digital Arts and Culture, RMIT University
Melbourne, http://hypertext.rmit.edu.au/dac/papers/, 3945, accessed 16/3/10
Halgren, Eric, Anders M. Dale, Martin I. Sereno, Roger
B.H. Tootell, Ksenija Marinkovic, and Bruce R. Rosen,
1999, Location of Human Face-Selective Cortex with
Respect to Retinotopic Areas, in Human Brain Mapping
7: 29-37, Wiley-Liss Inc.
Shakespeare, William, Q. 1, 1603, (this edition first
published by Methuen and Co. Ltd. 1982), Hamlet,
edited by Harold Jenkins, The Arden Shakespeare,
London.
Sontag, Susan, 2001, Illness as Metaphor and Aids and
its Metaphors, Picador, U.S.
Walker, Wendy, May 1 2009, “Lynette Wallworth” at
Samstag Museum of Art Adelaide, Australia, Feb. 19 –
April 24, (review), in Modern Painters, New York, 6872, Louise Blouin Media.
Zeki, S., May 2003, The Disunity of Consciousness, in
Trends in Cognitive Science, Volume 7 Number 5, p
214-218, Elsevier.

