2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Re-Writing Recent History: developing a National reconciliation pedagogy using a
video game for school age children.
Belinda MacGill, Theodor Wyeld and Faye Blanch
Flinders University of South Australia, Australia
{theodor.wyeld@flinders.edu.au}
Abstract

Terra Nullius, as Aboriginal Australian people did not
appear to cultivate and therefore did not own the land.
Instead, it was argued, Australian Aboriginal people
simply roamed the land as migrating animals. A reason
the British Empire was eager to define Australia as Terra
Nullius can be found in the legal implications of the
different methods of acquiring territory. More
specifically, if Australia was conquered, the English
common Law and public international law applicable at
the time, would maintain that the conquered peoples’
laws would remain in force until such time as the
conqueror explicitly extinguished it. If, on the other
hand, Australia was settled, then the settlers bring their
law with them in order to fill a legal vacuum, as only
land defined as Terra Nullius may be settled. This was
only the first of many acts of disenfranchisement that
Australian Aboriginal people have had to endure since
1788. Aboriginal Law was not acknowledged and
Australian Aboriginal people have endured ignominy
through British policies and practices since. Australia
1
was held to be settled, and British law prevailed.
The intersection of law, property ownership,
2
scientific racism and land rights have been key factors
leading to the ongoing discrimination towards Aboriginal
people in Australia. For example, Aboriginal Australians
were excluded from the census in the Federation of the
States in Australia in 1901. This and other exclusions
demonstrate how they have been historically and socially
misrepresented on the premise of their race alone. This
paper discusses in brief the background to the separatist
practices of a colonised nation, and contemporary
attempts at reconciliation and the lack of such recent
attempts to redress past wrongs in the national
curriculum. More specifically, it outlines a game for
school-age children to play and learn about notions of

Australian Aboriginal people have suffered
ignominy through British policies and practices since the
legal conquest of their land in 1788. They have been
historically and socially misrepresented on the premise
of their race alone. Recent attempts at reconciliation
have come some way towards a shared culture.
However, the national curriculum has not been effective
in promoting reconciliation as an important part of a
student’s education. As a pedagogical tool for advancing
notions of reconciliation a game was developed. The
pedagogical goal of the game is for students to
experience notions of trust, empathy and collaboration –
core to notions of reconciliation. Initial evaluation of the
game suggests these goals are being met. The game
provides a vehicle for notions of reconciliation to be
broached in way school-age children can engage with
the concepts at a familiar level (in a game). It promotes
reflection on their own role in the reconciliation process.

reconciliation,
Keywords
-indigenous, 3D, video game

pedagogy,

Introduction
As a nation, Australia is young by European
standards. However, its youthfulness is predicated on the
accepted notions of its colonisation by the British Empire
in 1788. Initially ‘acquired’ by ‘settlement’, this could
only be achieved if the land was Terra Nullius; belonging
to no one. At the time, only land that was uninhabited
satisfied the definition of Terra Nullius. This posed a
significant problem for the British colonists, as Australia
was inhabited. As such, the colonists sought to broaden
the concept of Terra Nullius. The inhabited territory
might still be defined as Terra Nullius provided the
inhabitants could be said not to own the land. They
applied Locke’s theory of private property, ‘that one had
to mix one’s labour with common land in order to
convert it into private property’ (1690, Second Treatise,
cited in [9], p288) as interpreted by Vattel (Law of
Nations 1758). Moreover, the cultivation of land was the
only manner in which to prove this. As a result, the
British colonists were able to affect that Australia was

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 Crown Copyright
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.61

1

Even in the famous Mabo case, in which it was held
that Australia was not Terra Nullius, to acknowledge that
Australia was therefore conquered by the British was
problematic, as such acknowledgement may have
brought the entire contemporary legal system into
question.
2
Scientific racism refers to the methodologies and
systems of categorisation used to define, distinguish and
order races of people.
391
397

reconciliation, its history and implications. Preliminary
evaluations indicate some efficacy in using a game to
explore reconciliation as a concept.

Aboriginal parents on behalf of the Government and the
Australian people for taking their children during the
assimilation period.
The process of reconciliation of past wrongs that
began in 1967 with the referendum and most recently
confirmed with the ‘sorry’ speech (Rudd, 2008), has not,
however, fully entered the mainstream education
curriculum in Australia. The continued privileging of an
Anglo perspective in our contemporary history still
dominates the Australian curriculum content regarding
notions of Aboriginality.
Aboriginal
Australians
continue
to
be
misrepresented or are absent in national history. Schools
are still grounded in the values of ‘whiteness’ (Foley
2000, p. 48). To redress this, it is necessary to not only
shift students’ views, but also the majority of the views
of teachers. This is part of a larger, recent, debate on the
history curriculum in Australian schools in general (see
6
[17 on Howard; 2; 21]). Notions of racialisation can be
used to address the machinations of whiteness that
assumes and maintains the principles of Social
Darwinism. The dearth of literature addressing
misrepresentations of Aboriginal Australians through the
curriculum and education system remains largely
unchallenged.

Background
Notions of race and racialisation are not new [8; 12].
In the early days of colonisation in Australia racism
played a major role in how Aboriginal Australians were
treated. This lead to policies and laws which by and large
ignored the people they were affecting. Although, recent
attempts to reconcile past wrongs towards Aboriginal
Australians in the law, media and education system are
thwarted by misrepresentations, such as the use of
stereotypes.
The idea of ‘race’ has a history that was
3
constructed through emerging anthropologists who vied
for status in the field of science in the 19th century. The
19th century saw the rise of evolutionary anthropology
that drew from Darwin’s theories from his Origin of the
Species (1859). The Scientific Darwinist, Herbert
Spencer, developed the theoretical premise that races
were ‘fundamentally different and fixed’ [13, p20].
4
Social Darwinist principle ideas justified slavery,
dispossession and massacres of Aboriginal people in
Australia throughout the 19th century. By the early 20th
century, Spencer defined Aboriginal Australians as the
most ‘backward race extant’ (cited in [20], p41). This
sort of prejudicial misrepresentation led to the
management and control of Aboriginal Australians
through Government policies.
Much of the destruction of the prior way of life for
Aboriginal Australians is ignored in the literature and
historical records. Most of what has been written is from
a Eurocentric perspective. The ‘untold’ history of
Aboriginal people in Australia includes massacres,
poisoning,
torture,
dispossession,
internment,
enslavement and genocide [20]. In contemporary history,
the process of reconciling the past atrocities only began
with the 1967 Referendum that provided Aboriginal
Australians the right to be included in the Census.
Decades later, a Royal Commission into Aboriginal
Deaths in Custody (1991) outlined the historical and
social disadvantages that have occurred and continue to
occur as a result of the dispossession of the Aboriginal
Australians. This led to the Reconciliation movement
which culminated in the current Prime Minister, Kevin
5
Rudd’s Sorry speech (2008) where he apologised to

A Reconciliation Pedagogy
In order to address the gap in the curriculum for
Australian contemporary history the authors of this paper
proposed a new ‘reconciliation pedagogy’ (see [10]).
Reconciliation is the process of reconciling differences,
whether they be historical misrepresentations of cultural
identity or any other site of dissonance. A
‘Reconciliation Pedagogy’ aims to educate for a more
holistic, shared Australian Cultural Heritage. It is a
pedagogy that requires the building of trust and
reciprocation between students of both Aboriginal and
non-Aboriginal background that are required to work
towards a space that embodies reconciliation. A guiding
epistemological framework emerges from Aboriginal
standpoints on process orientated practices that aims to
overturn discrimination towards Aboriginal Australians;
an Aboriginal methodology that employs critical race
theory that acknowledges and deconstructs history and
calls for a recognition of Aboriginal pre-existence and
ignominy; a process of empathy, trust and collaboration;
in the Australian context, a pedagogy that attunes
students’ understandings of themselves, as raced subjects
who have a responsibility to care for others in a world

3

Construction is used here to refer to the ways in which
social theorists, anthropologists and eventually the media
represented Aboriginal people as ‘native savages’.
4
Social Darwinism was a quasi-scientific discourse that
applied Darwin’s notion of survival of the fittest in
regard to animals and transferred the concept to human
races.
5
The term ‘Sorry’ is significant as it carries symbolic
weight for many Aboriginal families. Sorry Business or
Sorry Camp occurs when someone dies. Mourners go

through a long period of remembering and mourning the
dead. After a period of time mourners are able to move
to a space of healing. In a similar way, Rudd’s ‘Sorry’
gave public recognition to the families and their children
who were taken away for over 100 years by those in
power at the time [11].
6
Racialisation is a term used in reference to the
deconstruction of theories on race and racism.
398
392

that diminishes those that are either objectified or
7
omitted as First Nations peoples .
Reconciliation pedagogy fosters collaboration
between students that directly involves them in decision
making and connections between the past and present
history and between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal
Australians. Both teachers and students are required to
engage with the questioning process regarding their own
location as raced subjects; how being one particular race
can lead to incommensurate privileges often unseen until
faced with an empathetic response of walking in
another’s shoes. Students are provided with the
opportunity to engage with emotions that emerge from
certain locations of advantage or disadvantage. The
penultimate aim is for students to navigate,
collaboratively, notions of sharing and empathy in order
to achieve the aims of reconciliation.
In line with recent advances in pedagogy using playlike activities for deep learning outcomes (see [3, 4, 6,
18]) the authors of this paper have begun developing a
game-based tool for teaching a reconciliation pedagogy
(see figure 1). The tool embodies the aims of the
reconciliation
pedagogy:
empathy,
trust
and
collaboration. The game uses the popular Torque 3D
game engine. In the game, participants are represented as
either a sheep (introduced European domestic animal) or
Kangaroo (indigenous fauna). Sheep and kangaroo
characters were chosen to abstract the roles away from
explicit race issues (ie Caucasian and Dark-skinned
characters). Participants need to cooperate to maintain a
sustainable environment. This is achieved through the
sharing of resources and empathy with the other’s plight.
Notions of superiority are replaced with cooperation and
collaboration towards common goals and overcoming
differences whilst respecting the other’s specific cultural
ideals. Comprehensive teaching notes accompany the
game. Preliminary evaluation in a school setting suggests
there is much efficacy in this approach.

in advance, which team they will be on. Kangaroos and
sheep have different healing and destructive powers or
spells they can cast (see figure 1). For example, only
kangaroos can cast the fire spell which takes away the
food source, but they can also invoke rain which puts out
the fire. Sheep can foul/poison the water holes and create
erosion pits but they can also be contained behind fences
which prevents them from spreading their damage.
A subplot of the game is to collect treasure and bring
it back to the team base. Once the maximum number of
treasure items (same as the number of players on a team)
have been collected the game is over. However, as
players’ health deteriorates quickly, much time is spent
on health preservation tasks rather than treasure
collecting alone. This provides players time to reflect
upon and discuss strategies for helping each other. The 2
different teams have different types of treasure.
Boomerang treasure is used to represent land claims and
is associated with kangaroos. Scroll treasure is used to
represent land titles and are associated with sheep. There
is no limit to how long a single session of the game can
be played before all the treasure has been returned to
base.
Once the game is complete students, gather in a
circle sitting on the classroom floor and discuss their
feelings about the game: strategies, teamwork, and when
they discovered they needed to work together to succeed
(if they did). This is then discussed in more general terms
around notions of empathy, trust and collaboration.
Finally, the history of reconciliation is revealed to bring
these notions into the context of a shared Australian
culture.

Evaluation
Six primary school students between the ages of 6
and 10 (2 male and 4 female) played the game for one
hour in a controlled lab situation. The students were not
given any information on the game or what its purpose
was. They were simply asked to play the game and find a
way to win. Their actions and conversations were
recorded. Following the game session, a discussion was
conducted where open-ended questions were asked about
feelings invoked by the game.
All six students started the game within half a
minute of each other. They spent the first 3-5 minutes
investigating the controls. They were delighted to find
they had spawned as a sheep or a kangaroo. They had no
way of knowing who the other sheep or kangaroos were
in the game. They immediately identified with the other
animals that matched their’s. By moving and shouting
out to each other they were eventually able to discover
which character was associated with which other student
in the room. However, this did not last long due to the
sameness of all the characters (sheep or kangaroo),
causing some confusion.

The Game
The game attempts to foster notions of empathy,
trust and collaboration. These underpin the core values of
reconciliation. The goal of the game is to discover the
need to work together to share resources. Events in the
game are structured to simulate the harshness of the
outback Australian environment. In the gameplay, this
harshness translates to the rapid loss of ‘health’ – players
need to constantly attend to health-giving acts to
preserve themselves. In time, they discover that they also
need help from others and to help others to achieve the
same health-preservation goal. Any number of players
can play the game at the same time from different
machines – typically, however, 12 players play, on 2
teams of 6. Players are randomly spawned in the game as
either a sheep or a kangaroo. Hence, they do not know,
7

First Nations Peoples is a generic universal term
applied by colonised people who were the original
inhabitants of their land.
399
393

Figure 1 Screengrab of ‘Aussie Recon’ reconciliation pedagogy game interface.

Fence – sheep
contained

Broken fence – sheep
escape

Grass – gives health
to all

Waterhole – gives
health to all

Erosion pit – takes
health away from all

Fire – death to all
within its reach

Water – recovery to
all from fire

Fouls waterhole –
poison to all who
drink from it

Poison – maliciously
cast by one to another

Antidote –
beneficently cast
from one to another

Figure 2 Spells available for casting by players – healing or destructive.

400
394

The first strategy to emerge was the urge to ‘kill’
their opponent – regardless of which team they were on.
Teams had not established any collective strategy at this
stage. It was not until players found being killed was
annoying that they then started to collaborate. This
required discussions outside and within the game (using
the online text chat facility). However, they also began to
notice that the reduction in health due to either inactivity
(due to chatting online or outside the game) and not
paying attention to seeking healing spells, many simply
expired. They could be instantly respawned back at their
base by clicking the LMB.
Within the first 12 minutes of gameplay one student
identified the need to assist another in protecting them
from harmful spells and thus maintain their health levels
so they could retrieve the necessary treasures and win the
game. This was the first explicit evidence of
collaboration.
Many short games were played in the first hour of
the session. This was possible as, with only 6 players,
either team only needed to retrieve 3 treasures. However,
once the notion of working together to protect each
other, thus last longer and retrieve the necessary
treasures, became apparent, the game-play shifted from
the ‘kill-em’ all’ gameplay to a more empathetic game of
role negotiations. In time, this even included members of
the other team who were willing to be co-opted for a
common good.
Following the gameplay session an open-ended
discussion was held with the students. Students were
asked about their general feelings over the time they
were playing the game and immediately after. Students
claimed not to ‘get’ the game at first, but then, when they
had played it for a while, they could see how it worked
better if they ‘worked with others’. They highlighted
those salient moments when they felt ‘hopelessly
doomed’, such as when one player was trapped in a ditch
and needed help getting out, or elation when ‘saved by
rain’ after having a fire spell cast upon them.
In general, there was a consensus that:
x the game brought players together rather
than divided them
x teams were fluid. Players could help each
other out regardless of which team they
were on, and
x winning was not the main goal (although
for at least one player it was).

their character and other similar characters/animals.
Identifying with a group is an important part of
understanding collective feelings. Although there was
some initial confusion about who a particular sheep or
kangaroo was outside the game, this fostered notions of
the collective rather than the individual player.
Individual player mode was witnessed when they were
playing the game: ‘kill ‘em all’;
once simply killing others got ‘boring’ discussion
ensued on how to work together. This was the first signs
of the sorts of empathy, trust and collaboration central to
reconciliation. Through collaboration, understanding the
other’s need, they could themselves last longer in the
game. At this stage, the object of the game had become
role negation. This was further extended to co-opting
others when needed; and,
although the students did not ‘get’ the game initially,
reflecting upon their gameplay, it became clear that the
meta goal of the game was to work with others. They
expressed feelings of ‘doom’ and elation, suggesting the
game invoked strong emotions. To fully understand the
goals of reconciliation, strong emotions are necessary.

Conclusion
Australian Aboriginal Law was extinguished in 1788
by British Law, claiming Terra Australis as a Terra
Nullius – effectively uninhabited. Australian Aboriginal
people have suffered ignominy through British policies
and practices since. The intersection of law, property
ownership, scientific racism and land rights have been
key factors leading to the ongoing discrimination
towards Aboriginal people in Australia. They have been
historically and socially misrepresented on the premise
of their race alone. Recent attempts at reconciliation have
come some way towards a greater shared culture.
However, it is the concern of the authors of this paper
and others that the national curriculum is not effective in
promoting reconciliation as an important part of a
student’s education. To this end we proposed a
reconciliation pedagogy (see [10]). As a pedagogical tool
in this reconciliation pedagogy a game was developed.
The pedagogical goal of the game is for students to
experience notions of trust, empathy and collaboration.
Following game play, these experiences are discussed in
an open forum in the context of reconciliation more
generally. Initial evaluation of the game suggests the
author’s goals are being met, at least in part.
The importance of a reconciliation pedagogy in the
national curriculum cannot be understated. A shared
Australian culture without prejudice is only possible
when empathy, trust and collaboration towards a
common future is assured. The game provides a vehicle
for these notions to be broached. It does so in way that
provides a risk-free, non-threatening, environment for
school-age children to engage with the concepts at a
level with which they are familiar – video games. It
promotes reflection on their own role as a part of a
collective rather than focussing on the individual.
Whether this proves to be sustainable remains to be

Discussion
From the evaluation it appears that the author’s
goals of using a game to approach the question of a
reconciliation pedagogy was being facilitated, at least in
part. The pedagogical goal of the game is for the students
to develop empathy, trust and collaborate – the core
values of reconciliation. These goals can be seen to have
been met by the way the students interacted with the
game and their comments after the game. For example:
students were delighted with their characterisation as
a sheep or kangaroo. This helped them to identify with

401
395

tested. After further evaluation and improvements, the
authors of this paper propose to introduce the game as
part of a National reconciliation pedagogy and monitor
its effectiveness over the next 24 months.

[15] Moreton-Robinson 2002, Talkin’ up to the white woman:
Indigenous women and feminism, University of
Queensland Press, St Lucia.
[16] Racismnoway.com.au
[17] Salusinszky, I 2007, ‘Howard rewrites nation's history’,
in The Australian October 11, 2007, viewed October 30,
2009,
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/nation/howardrewrites-nations-history/story-e6frg6nf-1111114616364>
[18] Schon, D. A., 1995, The Reflective Practitioner: How
Professionals Think in Action, Ashgate Publishing.
[19] Smitz, P, Ashworth, S, Bain, C & Bedford, N 2004,
Lonely Planet Australia, Lonely Planet Publication.
[20] Tannoch-Bland, J 1997, 'Identifying white race
privilege', viewed 11 February 2007, <www.mailarchive.com/recoznet2@paradigm4.com.au/msg02617.ht
ml>
[21] Taylor, T & Clark, A 2006, ‘An Overview of the
Teaching and Learning of Australian History in Schools’,
prepared for the Australian History Summit, Canberra,
August 17th 2006.

Acknowledgment
The Torque game engine application used as a
prototype for the ‘Aussie Recon’ reconciliation
pedagogy game interface is based on the game engine
developed by the Canadian-based i-mmersion
organisation, Stacey Spiegel CEO and his team in 2004
called Mystic Maze. A joint workshop was held at the
Brisbane Institute of Modern Art in 2005. Many of the
scenes and assets created at that workshop have been
used in this game.

References
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

Armitage, A 1995, Comparing the policy of Aboriginal
Assimilation: Australia and New Zealand, UBC Press,
Vancouver.
Blainey, G, 1982, Triumph of the Nomads: A History of
Aboriginal Australia, Overlook TP.
Bourdieu, P 1990, The Logic of Practice, (trans.) Nice,
R., Polity Press, Cambridge.
Caillois, R, 2001, Man, Play and Games, University of
Illinois Press.
Connelly, J 2002, ‘Investigating whiteness: whiteness
processes: enigma or reality disguise?’, viewed 3 April
2009, http://www.aare.edu.au/02pap/con02196.htm
Dewey, J 1997, Experience and Education, Free Press.
Foley, D 2000, 'Too white to be black, too black to be
white', Social Alternatives, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 44-49.
Groome, H 1994, ‘Education: the search for relevance’,
Aboriginal Studies: Windows on Indigenous Australia,
Reader, The University of South Australia Press,
Adelaide, pp. 161-177.
Laslett, P 1988, Locke, The Two Treatises of
Government, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
MacGill, B & Wyeld, T 2009 ‘The need for a
reconciliation pedagogy: educating for a more holistic,
shared Australian cultural heritage’, in Proceedings of
the 4th Cultural Heritage Knowledge Visualisation
Symposium in the 13th European Conference,
Information Visualisation, IV09, Barcelona, Spain, July
14-17.
MacGill, B 2008, Apology to the stolen generationexperts response, Australian science media centre,
<www.aussmc.org/ApologytoAboriginalAustralia.php>.
McConaghy, C 2000, Rethinking Indigenous Education:
Culturalism, Colonialism and the politics of knowing,
Post Pressed, Flaxton.
McGregor, R 1997, ‘The creation and annihilation of the
primitive man’, Imagined destinies: Aboriginal
Australians and the doomed race theory, 1880-1939,
Melbourne University Press, Melbourne, pp. 19-58.
McGregor, R 2000, ‘Breed out the colour’: reproductive
management for white Australia’, A Race for a place:
proceedings of the history and Sociology of Eugenics
conference, University of New Castle, NSW, pp. 61-70.

402
396

