VirtuAL project: Developing a Prototype for Web based Historic
Collection
Nada Bates-Brkljac
Faculty of the Built Environment,
University of the West of England, Bristol, England
Telephone: 0117 9656261 ext 3902

Nadezda.Brkljac@uwe.ac.uk
Abstract
In January 2001 the Faculty of the Built Environment at
UWE Bristol won European Commission funding for a
Virtual Archive and Library for Cathedrals project
(VirtuAL). The project will trial novel computer
technologies in order to create a methodological
framework which once evaluated can be utilised for
recording, managing and presenting similar historic
collections. The VirtuAL is a part of wider investigation
which is both an attempt to understand the effective design
of web-based historic records, as well as to set up a
methodology for creating multimedia recording of historic
collections. This paper represents the work in progress
describing the process undertaken and techniques used to
date.

1. Introduction
For the past five years the University of the West of
England (UWE) has been using CAD and GIS systems to
generate 3D models of urban areas and integrate them
with interventions from various sources into an overall
navigable interactive whole. Further research continued to
develop an effective approach to historic building
maintenance management, “visitors” management and
interpretation of historic sites.
With the meteoric development of the Internet, the World
Wide Web is changing from a static, text filled 2D space
into a shared three dimensional, interactive space in which
is possible to meet and collaborate with people. Map
images with limited interactivity [1] have been surpassed
by and replaced with GIS as a critical component in the
development of virtual cities [2]. Geographic Information
Systems (GIS) have been recognised [3] as a critical
component in the development of virtual historic
collections, archives, libraries and museums. It has
allowed visual access, aided visual communication, and

yet preserved the complexity of valuable and fragile
collections of heritage and culture in networked reality.
As heritage conservation becomes more holistic and
where historic sites are increasingly becoming integrated
with the surrounding landscapes, an even more profound
integration is becoming possible, the integration with the
records held about the buildings and sites and their
functions.
Whilst this paper concentrates on the visual record it is
worth reminding ourselves of the purpose of historic
collections and how important is the concept of storing
information for the purpose of culture and heritage
presentation. The Venice Charter [4] illustrates the value
that organisations such as ICOMOS, UNESCO and
WCMC place on the dissemination of information. Some
historic collections held in archives and libraries are
worthy of protection because of the cultural value they
represent to society. The importance of recording is
emphasised in both national and international guidelines
(for example the various ICOMOS Charter guidelines for
world heritage sites, the management of world heritage
sites and British Standard 7913:1998.) Indeed the Burra
Charter [5] implies that for places of cultural significance
recording is not simply a management process but is
rather an aim and principle in itself. The Charter further
states that the cultural significance of a place is embodied
in its fabric, its setting and its contents; in the associated
documents; in its use; and in people's memory and
association with the place.

2.Background and prior research
Staff in the Faculty of the Built Environment at the UWE,
Bristol has been exploring, for the past five years, the
potential for associating 3D models with a variety of the
other information using multimedia tools. The interactive
interface offered by WWW browsers enhances previous

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

computer aided design (CAD) based models of buildings
and landscape. At the same time multimedia tools enable
multiple different presentations of real-world objects to
be viewed on screen at once and explored interactively by
their recipients without the overhead costs of an expensive
CAD system and the skills needed to use it. In order to
convey urban experience on the Web we started looking at
multimedia applications, which may provide a credible
sense of presence without additional 3D modelling in
CAD sense. Although 3D models in VRML are not quite
as complex or as detailed as their predecessors made in
the CAD systems, they can be interactively experienced,
and that experience can be scripted.

1.1 The CAD based urban area models
In 1995 and 1996 FBE/UWE was commissioned to
produce two 3D urban models.
The first in 1995 was to model part of the Bristol to create
VR experience to demonstrate the millennium proposal to
the Commissioners. The model was based on a
combination of UK Ordnance Survey 2D maps, 3D street
survey data and drawings and bespoke photographic
surveys. The resulting models were too large area and too
complex to achieve an acceptable frame rate on Division’s
own state of the art VR equipment. Because the model is
so complex and so proprietary Bristol City staff operate it
as a specialist visualisation bureau service.
The second, Tower of London model (Figure 1) was
produced in 1996 to create illustrative material to support
bids for funding to the Heritage Lottery Commission. All
structures, hard landscape and trees were modelled in 3D
down to the street furniture, railings and kerbs.

due to their size, each having approximately 100 Mbytes
of geometry and 300 Mbytes of bitmaps, can not be
published on the Web and they are mainly used for
presentations and teaching at UWE.

1.2 Millennial web site for historic city
During the year 2000 FBE/UWE was engaged with other
agencies in a collaborative process to create a millennial
web site (Figure 2) for citizens and the city of Wells
(Somerset, UK). One of the primary goals of the project
was to create a web site with an interactive 3D model of
the city as a getaway to a wide range of information. The
pilot had offered a variety of techniques and media
including VRML based hyper-linked modeling and both
synchronous and asynchronous means of participation.
Apart form the genuine interactivity the inclusion of
existing research and background information provided
educational elements that served as an introduction to the
built environment and history of the community and
beyond. Our experience showed that increasingly complex
web-sites require an underpinning database management
system to manage pages and links based on metadata.

Figure 2. Home page of the Wells 2000 Record
web site

3.Web based technologies for heritage
preservation
Figure 1. 3D CAD model of the Tower of London
These models were used to generate video from a
renderfarm and still images for presentation material. At
the time both models were too large with a high polygon
count to be easily viewed in VR on a high-end Silicon
Graphics installation. Recent developments in 3D Max, in
processor speed and graphic cards have still not enabled
models of this size and complexity to be engaged with in
real-time without sacrificing the photo-realistic detail that
provides a credible sense of presence. Both CAD models

Heritage organisations perceive a need to entertain visitors
but at the same time to convince them of the value of the
conservation of that heritage, to sustain the case for
conservation in the minds of the public who directly or
indirectly fund it. While originally cultural heritage sites
were shrines, needing no interpretation for their educated
or informed visitors, now that oral tradition has
diminished and as there is not a preponderance of
informed fellow visitors, interpretation needs to be
formalised [5].

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

On the other hand the interpretation of heritage sites is
seen as a specialised form of education. Interpretation is
revelation based upon information, ’not what you can do
with history but what history does to you’ [5]. Machin [6]
adds “The dimensions of discovery are the ways by which
we measure the world around us, testing one against
another. ’Interpretation’ is a process involved in every
dimension, and it is arguable that it is not the
communication process that we take it to be, but the
activity of opinion-making.'
At present on the WWW various instances of digital
archives and libraries and numerous repositories of 3D
model of famous historic buildings and sites can be found.
The first, digital libraries and archives projects, are
numerous and diverse in their approach to the problem as
well as in the technology they use. Some of the most
successful digital library research and development
projects are the Library 2000 project of the MIT
Laboratory for Computer Science
or the Advanced
Papyrological Information systems APIS (hosted on
Berkeley’s Digital Library SunSITE [8]). These projects
investigated a broad spectrum of technical, social and
legal issues related to the development and
implementation of a very large heterogeneous, digital
library. The intention was to “build a sophisticated digital
library services while presenting the enduring values of a
traditional library”[9]. The projects provided useful
conceptual frameworks for further research by other
digital library developers.
The second, 3D models of historic buildings are often
graphical presentation of the buildings or cities with little
or no information attached to them. Models such as
Virtual Paris [10] or Virtual Toronto [11] have been
created with various levels of details while Virtual old
Prague [12] for example has a scalable data structure and
an complex interface where exploration of the model is
possible as well as real time walk through.
The advent of the WWW has provided an ideal forum for
publishing and accessing this information through
innovative means ranging from 3D exhibits to searchable
bodies of text that can be queried directly by the user with
the potential for obtaining the result that closely matches
the searcher’s information needs. With computerisation
and public access big traditional data holders such as
archives, libraries, museums and historic collections in
general are called upon to provide information drawn
from a great deal of heterogeneous material.
These considerations led UWE to start investigating the
possibility of creating a multimedia heritage web site with
an interface that is intuitive and easy to use through which
to retrieve information or to experience a narrative.
Binks et al [13] state that for non-specialist visitors to
museums and galleries, the aim is to give them an overall
picture, to explain what is happening, what is being
revealed, and what its significance is. Research has shown
that animated and interactive exhibits are more valuable

than static presentations. 'Above-expected interest was
shown in the dynamic, animated, or changing
presentations represented by movies, changing lighting,
and audio sequences.... all the sequences with less-thanexpected interest involved flatwork, suggesting a greater
preference
for
three-dimensional
presentations'
[11].Sharpe uses this research to argue that an
interpretative audience prefers those interpretative media
who are most closely associated with entertainment, and
that the dichotomy of education and entertainment
parallels that of inertness and animation. He also records
that participation increases retention and that multimedia
is necessary to cater for a variety of levels of information.
Visitors in fact are discouraged by reading while looking
at objects and prefer an audio commentary [12]. The
HMSO guide adds that the medium chosen to
communicate the message should avoid dominance of any
other media used, gain visitor interest and establish
rapport. They also endorse interactive participation as
particularly important for younger children and advocate
self-paced material that enables an appropriate pace for
the casual visitor. They infer that the chosen approach
should obtain feedback by testing the recall of the visitor
and that a conservationist response is produced [14].

4. VirtuAL project
VirtuAL is a European Commission funded project under
the Fifth Framework, IST Programme, Key Action 3,
Multimedia content and tools. The VirtuAL project is an
attempt to understand and create aneffective design for the
Web based historic collections as well as an investigation
for creating a multimedia web site that is intuitive and
easy to use, yet content rich with information that can be
retrieved or narrative experienced. The main aim of the
project is to develop a prototype for Web based historic
collections of a similar type and scale. An interactive, GIS
generated 3D VRML model of Wells Cathedral will be
employed as “a metaphor of the place” [15] and a main
portal to the archive and library content. The initial design
of the project has been based on continuing research at
UWE in several related areas to the 3D modelling and,
design of multimedia web sites as well as research on
architectural history and conservation.
The VirtuAL project has two main aspects, heritage and
research. Both aspects should inform and enhance each
other. In the context of the heritage and culture the
intention is to offer the means to explore and help to
educate visitors “not so much about their history, but in
how to explore, interpret and respect them” [16]. In terms
of the research it is intended to represent a database for
archaeologists, conservationists and historians. At the
same time the project should act as a vehicle for
professionals to contribute to the record, exchange ideas
and information. One of the major considerations for the
project was to define the many different user groups. The

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

content of the collection and the delivery via the Internet
accommodates both, local and distributed user groups,
allows alternative perspectives or views of data and
supports a meaningful relationship for the individual user
[15].
In the longer term once a sufficient number of records has
been created and added to the database the result will be a
Web based historic collection which assists a critical
understanding of our past and facilitates comparison with
other aspects of our cultures as well as of other cultures.
As a presentation medium the assembly and integration of
multimedia would offer the user sufficient control to
present the information contained within in a variety of
different situations and for variety of interested parties.

medieval library where books are still chained to the
bookshelves and windows with the original eleventh
century’s stained glass. Access to the archive information,
search and exploration of data will be visually based and
represented in a different manner from the library
collection as they are also very different in their nature.
The multimedia digital recordings after editing will be
separated into blocks of data and spatial placement will
take priority over the traditional “alpha-numeric“ folder
system.

4.1 Design and the structure of the project
The main body of the project has three parts: a sample of
digital surrogates of the records held in the Wells
Cathedral archive and library, a customised multimedia
database with built in search facilities and a 3D VRML
model of the Cathedral.
The project will be composed of a small number of key
elements: active server generated web pages, short video
and audio clips, images, text, pdf files of archive and
library catalogues, Flash animation and 3D VRML
models.

Figure 4. Flash 5 created Archive window acting
as a portal to the collection
Graphical content prevails and text is limited to 100-150
words per page. All multimedia presentation of the
collection content will start from the main portal, “the
home page”, an interactive 3D model of the Cathedral and
its surroundings. The digital content (Figure 5) created
from the archive and library recordings will be separated
into Archive and Library collections. While the Wells
Cathedral archive will be presented by a metaphor of the
“window” into the ten centuries long existence of the
Cathedral, the library collection will be introduced by a
short video clip inserted into VRML of the actual

Figure 5. An old manuscript, prayer book
recorded in the Wells cathedral library
A key design strategy is the spatial interdependence of the
data within the collection organised and grouped into two
subsets based on theme and time criteria. Both collections
contain the themes each, for example library themes are
theology, bibles, science and the archive themes are
Vicars Choral, fabric accounts etc. The criterion of time is
used to organise data around ten period of century long
duration and although using only a small fraction of the
data from the collection will attempt to cover the most
significant periods in the Cathedral’s existence.
The archive database is an index to a set of digital media
files that are stored in directories external to the database.
The index can be searched using combination of key
word, free text and search of specific categories.
Searching is conducted using ASP, returning queries by
appending parameters to the URL. This allows queries to
be sent from HTML or VRML worlds. The index is
managed using MS of Access and will hosted using a MS
SQL Server in the final implementation.
As the project is prototype model the structure will allow
further expansion of the database by adding more data in.
For the recording process and creation of the digital
surrogates several available multimedia techniques were
used. Prior to the beginning of recording testing of all
techniques was conducted, results assessed and decisions
made on what is the most appropriate method to produce
the best possible result. File sizes created were various
and an informed decision was made as to what we were
going to present and how. As a results the project datable

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

will contain three sizes of the data files; the first,
thumbnail size will be smallest possible with lower quality
for the first level of search where only introductory
information is given with a short downloading time. The
second will be preview size of the file where a good
quality information will be found but still maintained
small in size, the printout of data would not be of a
particularly good quality. The third level download will be
stored in the password-protected area and available only
for certain limited number of users of the project. So far
800 records have been created and approx. 350 files have
been already entered into database.

5. Methods of visualisation
The 3D VRML model of the Cathedral has been generated
from Pavan software by InfoTech, VRML authoring
system from the data entered into MapInfo GIS. As a 2D
source of data the 1832 map of the part of the city around
the cathedral provided us with sufficient information for
modelling the adjacent buildings and the Vicars close and
create a setting for the Cathedral.
The issue of how realistically Wells Cathedral should look
in 3D and on the Web is still a subject for discussion with
the Cathedral’s establishment. Their concern is that
having creating a model with the bitmaps using
photographs of the Cathedral might create to the viewer an
impression of already having seen the place and
consequently would reduce the number of the visitors to
the Cathedral. Our argument in this discussion is that it
will actually trigger more interest and bring people who
would like the feel and glory of the place.
Archive and library collections are separated and can be
accessed and explored by entering through two different
portals. The 3D VRML model of s book used to access
and search through the library collection was created in
3D Max software with added animation and exported as a
VRML 2.0 file. To create a realistic impression of an old
book we used photographs of the books from the library.
Integration with the rest of the project was conducted by
inserting the book model as an external VRML file into
MapInfo and compiled using Pavan.
The entrance to the archive is Macromedia Flash 5
animation inserted into the VRML model. Animation
reveals the content of the collection and allows the
exploration.
The models can be viewed in Cortona 2.0 VRML browser.
We also used Cortona VRML authoring tool both
produced by the Parallelgraphics to customise the
integration of the video and Flash files into VRML. The
3D models can be either interactively experienced or used
to view several pre-set animations and which are triggered
by selecting the animation viewpoint from the list. The 3D
models also acts as the event trigger providing the main
access to a theme or time period collections of data, by
hyperlinking URL of the stored data and generating web

pages with the listed content stored under the requested
theme or time.
The database system has been customised to
accommodate various multimedia types of data obtained
from the collection as well as metadata from the project.
Active server web pages will be generated on demand
from the database. Search facilities have been built in as
well as a variety of multimedia outputs becoming
available on demand as active server pages.
Fragility and the age of the documentation made available
for the recording determined the recording techniques to
be employed. Parchments from the tenth century,
colourful manuscripts with gold decoration as well as ink
written records could not be exposed to strong and long
light as they would damage them. Therefore we were
forced to use video as the only possible option to prevent
any damage to the original documents. This method of
recording has generated number of problems we are
currently looking into. The sizes of video clips although
reduced down to the length of 8-12 seconds and window
size 320 by 240 are still very big for publishing on the
Internet. Steaming video is one of the options we are
testing at the moment by placing two file, mpg3 and Real
file on the University Real streaming server and on the
project web site in order to evaluate the downloading time
and quality by a group of people chosen on the basis of
the type and speed of their network connection and
computer equipment. The results should give us indication
from which we will make a decision on whether to stream
video clips or not.

6. Progress to date
This paper presents work in progress hence some aspects
are not yet fully accessible on the public web site. The 3D
VRML model of the Cathedral and its environs has been
completed as well as models and animations for the
archive and library. The project web site was published on
the Internet in November 2001. At present it contains only
basic information about the project, staff data and
newsletters. The main reason for this lies in the fact that
only when integrated can all three parts of the project be
published on the Web. Although each of the parts can
exist independently no search or retrieval of data can be
conducted without the 3D model or Flash as well as no
web pages with the listed content on the chosen subject
can be generated if the digital data is not entered into the
database. We have allowed a period of the testing prior to
the publishing the project on the Web as there is a
possibility of broken links, poor presentation or loss of
data.
Major work on recording of the sample selected from the
archive content and library books has been completed in
the first six months instead of three months as planned due
to the restricted access and building work in the library. A
small team of experts: professional photographer,

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

cameraman (video) and multimedia designer spent a
considerable time on recording the material and making
decisions about the appropriate recording techniques.
A 3D VRML model has been created in a basic, crude
form and he work is in progress to add more data and
details. We expect that it will be fully elaborated much
before project’s completion and published on the web site.
The majority of digital records has been analysed, quality
assessed, edited and entering of multimedia recordings
into the database has commenced. As one of our main
goals remains that of a fully interactive web site which
will allow search and exploration we have to
accommodate the fact that the targeted audience is world
wide. Therefore we will set up links to other relevant web
site, the Cathedral’s own web site, European Commission,
UWE web sites but also to the virtual heritage and other
subject related web sites.

7. Conclusion
The initial idea behind the VirtuAL project is to create an
accessible, Internet based historic collection while
preserving artefacts and old documents, to give it enough
critical mass to be attractive and interesting, but also to
have content set in three layers of depth of information.
The first layer of information would be for WWW visitors
who only skim through the site looking for general
information. The second layer should give more details,
reveal history, and explore the multimedia site using the
most of the content and media. The third level should
include in-depth information about the collection and
research conducted which will be disseminated on the
Web. In this form the project would represent an elaborate
management information resource, significant in that the
content is designed to help to describe and understand the
collection and use the project for education, tourism and
promotion of European heritage and culture. The inclusion
of existing research and background information would
provide educational elements, which would serve as an
introduction to these values in the community and beyond.
Genuine interactivity of the site (once when the limits of
navigation tools used are accepted) will empower users to
filter a large quantity of information from the site. Our
previous experience shows that increasingly complex
web-sites require an underpinning database management
system to manage pages and links based on metadata such
as author and expiry date. We see this trend is now being
reversed with the increasing use of active server pages
generated on demand from databases.

[2] Smith A. Virtual Cities-Towards the Metaverse, Virtual
Cities Resource Centre, 1998, on line at
http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/planning/virtualcities.html
[3] Hardy R. Geographic Information Systems for World
Heritage Preservation, Master’s Practicum Report, 1997, on line
at http: www-personal.umich.edu/~roberts/gisrpt.html
[4] Second International Congress of Architects and
Technicians of Historic Monuments. 1964, International Charter
for the Conservation and Restoration of Monuments and Sites
(the Venice Charter)
[5] The Burra Charter, The Australia ICOMOS charter for the
conservation of places of cultural significance, Revised Version
from 1999
[6]Freeman Tilden Interpreting our Heritage University of N.
Carolina Press 1957
[7] Machin A. Changing the Viewpoint in Heritage
Interpretation 1986 Winter 34, pp.4-5
[8] Digital Library Research & Development (Berkeley
SunSITE) on line at http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/R+D
[9] M.I.T. Laboratory for Computer Science, on line at
http://cstr-www.lcs.mit.edu/ltt-www/index.html
[10] Virtual Paris (based on blaxxun technology)

http://www.2nd-world.fr/
[11] Virtual Toronto (VRML model)

http://www.intoronto.com
[12] Virtual Old Prague, Student Project

http://www.ms.mff.cuni.cz/vsp
[13] Binks G, Dyke J, Dagnall P, 1988, Visitors Welcome, A
Manual on the Presentation and Interpretation of
Archaeological Excavations, published by HMSO.
[14] HMSO 1975. Guide to Countryside Interpretation Part 1,
Principles of Countryside Interpretation and Interpretative
Planning , published by HMSO
[15] Dodge, M. Doyle, S. Smith, A. Fleetwood, S. Towards the
Virtual City: VR &Internet GIS for Urban Planning,
Proceedings, Virtual Reality and Geographical Information
Systems,
Birbeck
College,
1998,
or
http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/publications/birbeck/vrcity.html
[16] Virtual Heritage web site at http://www.virtualheritage.net
[17] Feeney and Day (ed.) Multimedia Information, Bower-Saur,
London 1991

References:
[1] Putz S. Interactive Information Services Using the WorldWide Web Hypertext, paper presented at the First International
World-Wide Web Conference, 1994

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

