Designing Screen-Based Interfaces for Advanced Multimedia Functionality
R. Brian Stone
Department of Industrial, Interior, and Visual Communication Design
The Ohio State University
stone.158@osu.edu
Abstract
As the complexity of screen-based functionality
develops, of primary concern is the broadening of an
interface and interaction palette that supports user
objectives and perceived functionality interpretations.
This paper examines the intersection of relevant design
principles and activities, and structures a process for
understanding and developing interfaces for the context of
screen-based multimedia. The process is based on a
synthesis of cognitive psychology, human computer
interaction, and industrial design principles germane to
designing screen-based interfaces. This interdisciplinary
approach has proven useful in building a framework for
understanding and teaching screen-based interface
design. The intended outcome of this research is to present
new directions to teaching and designing screen-based
interfaces, in order to define a context for growth in
professional education, and improve the user experience.
Because screen-based interfaces require the
interaction of a user, a foundation of guiding principles
from human computer interaction and the cognitive
sciences must be integrated into the visual communication
designer’s range of expertise. By applying this
interdisciplinary convergence into the design process of
screen-based interfaces, we believe our students are
equipped with a better understanding of the interaction
process between users and screen-based interfaces. Our
results of teaching are illustrated through a variety of
screen-based interface solutions. Each solution was
structured by applying this interdisciplinary design
process that synthesizes functional importance, cognitive
understanding, and visual interest.

1. Introduction
Concurrent to the rapid emergence of new products,
the field of design is going through a transformation. The
profession is largely focused on the creation of form, with
an understanding that form has the power to evoke

interaction. The growing complexity and increased use of
3-dimensional products such as DVD players, PDAs, and
PCs, as well as screen-based products such as web sites,
CD-ROMs, and touch screen kiosks, has caused designers
to shift their focus from design as simply a form-giving
process, to design as a process of enabling interaction [1].
Interaction is one of the higher order levels of
feedback that behaviorists and cognitivists agree is
important to the process of learning. Designers enable
interaction and affect an experience through the interfaces
they design. The way we use a product is as important as
what that product can do, or what it looks like, thus the
issue of what an object means or causes one to do with it
has moved to the foreground.
The design of screen-based interfaces is at the
foundation of the activity of humans interacting with
computer systems. As the medium of screen-based
communication develops, designers and design educators
involved in screen-based media must recognize the need
for fundamental training in interface design, humancomputer interaction, and visual literacy. With the
complexity of screen-based functionality, of primary
concern is the broadening of an interface and interaction
palette that supports user objectives and perceived
functionality interpretations. Addressing the blurring of
boundaries between the digital and physical interfaces of
products can yield interactive multimedia experiences that
are more meaningful, allowing users to visualize and
navigate a personal path to information.

2. Current Paradigms
Screen-based interface design for interactive
multimedia is a relatively new field of study within the
discipline of visual communication design. For this area of
study to mature, we believe it necessary to extract
appropriate ideology from companion disciplines such as
industrial design, human computer interaction, and
cognitive psychology. Visual communication students
must look to semantic issues to facilitate the design of

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

multimedia and the screen based interfaces that are at the
root of program functionality. Furthermore, the idea of
designing multidirectional paths of navigation, reaction,
and feedback (visual and audible) to facilitate meaningful
multimedia experiences must clearly be defined.
As the body of knowledge, and breadth of
applications continue to expand within the discipline of
visual communication, how do we appropriately integrate
the instruction of screen-based interface design for
advanced multimedia functionality into current visual
communication design curriculum? Our strategy has been
to look to our companion disciplines for structure,
guidance and principle. An examination of the
relationships between cognitive psychology, human
computer interaction, and industrial design activity has
proven useful in structuring a process for understanding
and teaching screen-based interface design for interactive
multimedia experiences such as CD-ROM based learning
tools, web sites, kiosks, and other information retrieval
systems.
By examining the areas that define and distinguish
screen-based interface design, several relevant concepts
have been realized. Having an understanding of these
concepts, and then applying them at appropriate levels of
the design process, can begin to yield screen-based
interfaces that truly meet or exceed the expectations of
users. The disciplines of human computer interaction
(HCI) and cognitive psychology have to be integrated into
our teaching in the Department of Design at The Ohio
State University. It has afforded our design students a
better understanding of how users interact with computer
systems and which elements come into play during this
process. Based on ergonomics, human factors and
cognitive psychology among others, HCI creates models
and principles of performance to analyze user behavior
while interacting with computer systems (screens). These
models and principles can help designers and design
students better understand, predict, and even to calculate
human performance relevant to interaction with computer
systems via screen-based interfaces. The results can help
us make use of these models to design more effective
interfaces.
Human learning and retrieval are two of the most
important elements during the interaction process.
Interaction is one of the higher order levels of feedback
that are important to understanding and comprehending a
given stimulus. Studies in cognitive psychology can give
us a clear picture of how users learn and perceive. By
appropriately applying cognitive psychology models,
designers will be better prepared to develop more efficient
and meaningful interactive systems.
The design department at The Ohio State University is
unique in that visual communication, industrial, and

interior space design are structured under one umbrella.
This offers opportunities for collaborative learning and
research. Many of our visual communication students with
interest in interactive media and interface design
supplement their education through course work in
industrial and interior space design. In teaching interactive
multimedia, our theoretical approach is based upon an
exploration of the relationships between these
interdisciplinary design curricula. The similarities in
design process and activity between industrial, interior,
and visual communication design models have aided in
structuring a process for understanding and teaching
interactive multimedia and screen-based interface design.
We embrace the syntactical ideas of physical product
interfaces and tactile feedback, and translate these
concepts into a screen-based solution, as well as the
pragmatic aspects explored by interior space designers,
(i.e. space planning, architecture, access, and egress) to
develop clear, intuitive paths of navigation.

3. Guidelines for Effective Screen-Based
Interface Design
Visual literacy deals with enhancing the construction
of a user's experience. It is the comprehension of a
physical layout such that meaning can be encoded from
the relationship between text, color, symbols, signs, icons,
and images [2]. In order for screen-based interfaces to be
effective, the visual representation must attract the user’s
attention and evoke interaction. The visual language, or
representation, must also be structured in a manner that
user’s can encode the meaning of the interface, so that it’s
function can be predictably interpreted. Visual
communication designers through informed creativity,
research, and design process are well equipped to deliver
the visual manifestation of a multimedia interface.
Because multimedia interfaces require the interaction
of a user, a foundation of guiding principles from humancomputer interaction and the cognitive sciences must be
synthesized into the visual communication designer’s
range of expertise. By integrating these relevant guidelines
into the design process of screen-based interfaces, we
believe our students are better equipped to deliver
interfaces that meet or exceed the expectations of users,
and improve the user experience.
We have structured a design methodology that
includes a synthesis of principles from fields of design,
HCI, and cognitive psychology. The approach adopts a
user centric focus, allowing content to enhance
functionality, performance, and reflect the maturity of the
user audience. It has also provided a framework to which
designers are able to clearly articulate why their design
solutions are appropriate and effective.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

3.1. Visual Communication Design Principles
To design is to form a plan, conceive, invent, and
compose a message to communicate to an audience
through the use of words and images. Designers create
compelling visual form to communication, and satisfy the
functional, psychological, and aesthetic needs of users.
Applied visual communication guidelines are as follows:
Visual Appeal: Control elements should visually
enhance the user’s interest by instilling a sense of beauty
or attraction. The presentation of elements should
stimulate and engage the user into the task of interacting
with the system.
Balance and Harmony: Control elements should work
as a series, maintaining a consistent visual density or
texture, a pleasing interaction, or appropriate combination
of the elements in a whole. The series should appear as
members of a family, facilitating stability, balance and
harmony [3].
Boundary: The outer limit or the edge of a control’s
shape, particularly as it stands in relation to an adjacent
form, space, or background.
Feedback: For every action there should be a system
reaction (highlight, roll-over, sound event, etc.). The level
of response should coincide with the frequency of the
action.
Contrast: To set in opposition in order to show or
emphasize differences in controls, functions, visual and
textual language, or background-foreground. The use of
opposing elements to produce an intensified visual effect.
Hierarchy: Controls and control elements should be
visually arranged according to rank, authority or capacity.
The presentation of elements as more important than
others. Clear hierarchy promotes stability, sequence,
direction, and movement.
Distinctive: Each control should be clearly
perceptible by the senses or the mind. Visual meaning
should be definite and unmistakable [3].
Organization: Controls should provide the user with a
clear and consistent conceptual structure.
Color: The integration and application of hue, value,
and saturation to stimulate and communicate. Color usage
is a complex subject that must be defined in a larger
context. A basic guideline is to use appropriate
highlighting and de-emphasis techniques to convey
meaningful semantic distinctions [4].
Icon: A representation based on likeness, or
resemblance (commonly used because they are least likely
to be misinterpreted, however the least interesting).
Symbol: A representation based on agreement or
convention (e.g., a flag for a country). These arbitrary
representations are sometimes easily accepted, other
instances require more extensive learning.

Index: A representation of an indirect nature, causally
influenced by the object (e.g., a finger print). They point to
or are the physical mark left by the object.

3.2. Cognitive Psychology Principles
These principles fall under the umbrella of HCI, but
lend important concepts deserving of their own
categorization. The following principles are not
represented in our results of teaching, but do provide a
framework for understanding cognitive psychology
principles and user testing which will be applied in our
further research.
Recognize-Act Cycle of the Cognitive Processor: On
each cycle of the cognitive processor, the contents of
working memory initiate actions associatively linked to
them in long-term memory. These actions in turn modify
the contents of working memory. Regarding memory
systems, there are two important memories in the
cognitive system: a working memory, to hold the
information under current consideration and a long-term
memory to store knowledge for future use [6].
Variable Perceptual Processor Rate: The perceptual
processor time varies inversely with stimulus intensity.
The perceptual system carries sensations of the physical
world detected by the body’s sensory systems into internal
representations of the mind by means of integrated
memory systems [6].
Encoding Specificity Principle: Specific encoding
operations performed on what is perceived determine what
is stored, and what is stored determines what retrieval cues
are effective in providing access to what is stored [6].
Discrimination Principle: The candidates that exist in
the memory, relative to the retrieval cues, determine the
difficulty of memory retrieval [6].
Variable Cognitive Processor Rate Principle: The
cognitive processor cycle time is shorter when greater
effort is induced by increased task demands or information
loads; it also diminishes with practice. In the simplest
tasks, the cognitive system merely serves to connect inputs
from the perceptual system to the right outputs of the
motor system. But most tasks performed by a person are
complex and involve learning, retrieval of facts, or the
solution of problems [6].
Uncertainty Principle: Decision time increases with
uncertainty about the judgment or decision to be made [6]
Rationality Principle: A person acts so as to attain his
goals through rational action, given the structure of the
task and his inputs of information and bounded by
limitations on his knowledge and processing ability [6].
Problem Space Principle: The rational activity in
which people engage to solve a problem can be described
in terms of (1) a set of states of knowledge, (2) operators

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

for changing one state into another, (3) constraints on
applying operators, and (4) control knowledge for
deciding which operator to apply next [6].

3.3. Human-Computer Interaction Principles
HCI is an interdisciplinary area of study concerned
with the design, evaluation and implementation of
interactive computing systems for human use and with the
study of major phenomena surrounding them [5]. The
general design objectives for data entry and control
functions presented are to enhance the users’ performance
through the establishment of consistency, minimization
entry actions by the user, and minimization of memory
load on the user.
Display only necessary data: Do not display
unnecessary information, but ensure that whatever data a
user needs for any operation will be available for display
[7].
Display controls in a usable form: Display controls to
users in directly usable form; do not make users convert
display data [7].
Display controls consistent with users conventions:
Display controls consistently with visual and textual
standards and conventions familiar to users, facilitating
recognition [7].
Establish display standards: When no specific user
conventions have been established, adopt some consistent
interface design standards for data/control display [7].
Context of control display: Ensure that each control
will provide needed context, recapitulating prior controls
as necessary so that a user does not have to rely on
memory to interpret new control [7].
Familiar wording or labeling: The wording of
displayed controls and labels should incorporate familiar
terms and the task-oriented jargon of the users, and avoid
the unfamiliar jargon of designers and programmers [7].
Consistent display format: For any particular type of
control display, maintain a consistent format from one
display to another [7].
Standard symbols: Establish standard meanings for
graphic symbols and use them consistently within a
system and among systems within the same users [7].
Pictorial symbols: Design pictorial symbols (e.g.,
icons, pictograms) to look like objects or processes they
represent, and test the resulting symbol set with a
representative group of users to ensure that the meaning
will be understood [7].
Highlight critical data: When a user’s attention must
be directed to a portion of a graphic display showing
critical or abnormal data, highlight the feature with some
distinctive means of data coding [7].

Fitt’s Law: The time to move the hand to a target is a
function of the distance from the target and it’s size. The
time to move the hand to a target depends only on the
relative precision required, that is, the ratio between the
target’s distance and it’s size [6].
Power Law of Practice: The time to perform a task
decreases as a function of practice [6].

4. Results of Teaching
Our results of teaching at The Ohio State University
have yielded a variety of screen based interface concepts.
The following studies were developed as a precursor to the
development of a fully functional interactive multimedia
program focused on the objective of teaching and learning.
This intermediate stage forces the student to think
specifically about the interaction, and function their
interfaces suggest. The objective was to develop a family
of interfaces supporting the actions of rotate, scale, drag,
and push (shown left to right in figures 1-7). Interfaces
were constrained to a square configuration, using pictorial
images only. Although these interface studies are not
placed in an actual context, it does challenge the student to
integrate the previously discussed concepts in an effort to
move beyond the overused, linear ‘next’ button.
This activity challenges the student to consider the
complexity of screen-based interface functionality, while
broadening their interface and interaction palette. Students
are encouraged to consider the following in the design
process of screen-based interfaces. Each project, in
different ways, accomplishes the following:
1. Semantics before interaction: considering how a
product looks so that it communicates what it
does [1].
2. Feedback during interaction: how the object
behaves so that it reinforces what it does, or what
it’s doing [1].
3. Reflection after interaction: What the user should
know after he or she has finished interacting [1].
4. Establish consistency and standardization.
5. Provides a stimulating and comprehensible context
for engagement.
6. Fosters the correct representations and
understanding of the information / functionality.
7. Provides a conceptual model that the user / learner
already understands.
8. Provides feedback to acknowledge user input.
9. Synthesizes visual communication design, HCI,
and cognitive psychology principles.
The visual languages of these conceptual studies are
intended to promote interaction and support tasks. An
overall thread is the establishment of clear boundaries and
consistent display format. By establishing consistency

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

over the different controls, some principles are recognized
from one control to the other. This visual language
standardization makes the interaction understandable, thus
navigation easier and more efficient.
Figure 5. The visual language of this series is distilled to

Figure 1. The use of contrast emphasizes function and
a hierarchy is created through the use of tonal values and
graphic juxtaposition. A standard visual language is
created by the use of ellipses, and each control has a
distinct character representing its function. The controls
carry a kinetic quality that is appealing and engaging.

Figure 2. This series utilizes arrows as a symbolic
reference to direction. Arrows are a near universally
understood graphic, and build on conventions established
in signage systems and graphical user interfaces. The
linear visual language lacks contrast as seen in Figure 1,
but is relatively clear in its communication.

Figure 3. The organization of graphic elements and the
use of conventions make an interesting series, dependent
on the use of dotted lines to imply continuation. This
reference is clear to a targeted audience such as
architects, engineers, and designers, but may pose
problems to those who do not have an association to this
visual language.

what is only necessary to communicate functionality. The
system uses indexical references to show activity and
behavior. Dotted lines are used to show the control prior
to interaction, while the positive graphic shows the result
of action. The semantic element that is missing is the
visualization of how to interact with the control.

Figure 6. The vibrant colors of this series make it
arresting, occupying the attention of the user. The visual
language is abstract, as opposed to the concrete
language used in Figure 4. This abstraction may create
intrigue, but may be misinterpreted by some users.
System depends on indexical references to communicate
functionality, and offers feedback once the control is
engaged. These indexical references and abstract
language would benefit from user testing, due to the level
of interpretation needed.

Figure 7. This series is visually appealing by the use of
balance, organization and consistent visual language. The
subtle use of a radius gives the controls a tactile, 3dimensional quality, enhancing its inviting qualities, and
exploiting the convention of buttons. The system is
interesting in that it displays semantics before interaction
(how it looks shows what it does), feedback during
interaction (showing how the control behaves), and
reflection after interaction (what the user should know
after interaction).

5. Conclusions
Figure 4. The function of controls is implied by the
iconic representation of a user’s finger interacting with the
control. The visual language is concrete and literal. The
position of the finger relative to the control attempts to
show the behavior of each control, thus reinforcing what it
does. The conceptual model is easy to understand once
the user interprets the system as showing the control
before interaction as well as after interaction.

As educators, designers, engineers, and authors, we
are all trying to fully understand the nature of screenbased interface design for interactive multimedia; where
its strengths lie, its appropriate application, and how best
to integrate it into design education curriculum. It appears
that we have many different skill sets trying to claim
ownership of the medium. We need to keep in mind that
there is a myriad of different skill sets, and they

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

complement each other. As the complexity of interactive
multimedia programs rise, users will have higher
expectations of the visual interfaces they interact with. To
satisfy the technical, functional, cognitive, and aesthetic
demands of these interfaces, a convergence of our
collective expertise will be necessary. With this, and
keeping users in mind, we may be at the forefront of a new
paradigm in the design of screen-based interfaces for
advanced multimedia functionality.

6. Further Study
Because screen-based interfaces are manifested as a
visual medium, its incorporation into visual
communication design curriculum is a logical one. In
order to design interfaces that are optimum for users, one
must be grounded in the issues relevant to those concepts
that distinguish the medium. Our preliminary research has
indicated that a synthesis of principles from fields of
design, HCI, and cognitive psychology have merit. It is
our intent to integrate these concepts into a more formal
area of study within the discipline of visual
communication design at our institution. We expect to
carry this research further, by authoring fully functional
interactive programs and testing the effectiveness of
interfaces in context with users. We believe that through
the understanding and application of these concepts,
designers will consistently deliver screen-based interfaces
that are visually appealing and stimulating, easy to learn
and understand, easy to use, and empowering to users.

7. References
[1] Pacione, C., “Making Meaning”, LOOP: AIGA Journal of
Interaction Design Education, November 2000, Number 1.
[2] Koszalka, T.A., et. al., “Insect_Net: A Constructivist
Learning Environment on the Web”, Connecting with the
Community: Exploring Resources for Visual Learning and
Expression. International Visual Literacy Association,
University Park, PA, 1998, pp. 73-82.
[3] McCreight, T., Design Language. Brynmorgen Press, Inc.,
Cape Elizabeth, ME, 1996.
[4] Marcus, A., “Principles of Effective Visual Communication
for Graphical User Interface Design”, Readings in HumanComputer Interaction: Toward the Year 2000, Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., San Francisco, CA, 2000, pp. 425441.

[6] Card, S.K., et. al., The Psychology of Human-Computer
Interaction. Lawrence Erlbaun Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 1983.
[7] Smith, S.L., & J.N. Mosier, Guidelines for Designing User
Interface Software. Mitre, Bedford, MA, 1986.

8. Credits
I greatly acknowledge the assistance of Daniel
Alenquer in the preparation of this paper. Interface
examples were developed as a part of course work in
“Interactive Visual Communication and Interface Design”
at The Ohio State University instructed by R. Brian Stone.
Student work featured was designed by Daniel Alenquer,
Aileen Aquino, André Bex, Phil Diol, Amy Detrick, Erin
Corrigan, and Daniel Landolt.

9. Author’s Biography
R. Brian Stone is an Assistant Professor teaching
visual communication in the Department of Industrial,
Interior and Visual Communication Design at The Ohio
State University. A practicing designer, the merits of his
work have been recognized by the American Institute of
Graphic Artists. He is a frequent speaker at conferences
and universities, and is the author of several articles on
interactive visual communication, web usability, type in
motion, and multimedia interface design.
Prior to joining the faculty at OSU, he taught for six
years at Philadelphia’s University of the Arts. He has also
held design staff positions at Surgical Laser Technologies,
Orthovita, Noel Mayo Associates (Philadelphia), and the
Bailey Design Group. His recent projects include a web
site usability study and redesign for Nationwide
Insurance, packaging and brand evaluation for Procter and
Gamble’s fabric and home care products, a packaging and
brand evaluation for Nestlé Foods, and the development of
communications guidelines for Lutron Electronics (the
worldwide leader in lighting-dimming controls).
He is a recipient of the 2002 Alumni Award for
Distinguished Teaching from The Ohio State University
for superior teaching achievement, and an Apple
Distinguished Educator (Apple Computer, Inc.) for the
innovative use of technology in design curriculum.
Professor Stone received an MA in design education, and
an MFA in web communication and usability from The
Ohio State University. He received his Bachelor of Fine
Arts degree in graphic design from the University of the
Arts in Philadelphia, PA.

[5] Hewett, T.T., et. al., “Definition and Overview of HumanComputer Interaction”, ACM SIGCHI Curricula for HumanComputer Interaction. New York: ACM, 1992.
http://sigchi.org/sigchi/cdg/cdg2.html

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

