Combining visualisation and choice experiments in built environment
research
Anne-Marie Davies, Richard Laing and Stephen Scott
The Robert Gordon University, Aberdeen
Abstract
This paper reports results from a project that
combined the visualisation of streetscapes with
environmental economics. The particular
economic methodology employed was choice
experimentation, which has previously tended
to use text to convey scenarios between which
respondents make choices. The research
investigated how the visual impact of
streetscapes could be incorporated in choice
experiments through the use of 3-dimensional
computer generated visualisations. Data was
gathered initially through an Internet based
survey, and replicated later using a high
specification stand-alone machine. This paper
identifies strengths and weaknesses in the
approach, and reports results pertaining to
effectiveness and practicality of the
methodology. Using visualisation offers many
potential benefits to the field of choice
experimentation, and application within the
built environment merits further development.

1: Introduction
Choice experimentation is a relatively
new non-market valuation technique in which
individuals choose their most preferred
resource use option from a range of
alternatives. Blamey et al. (1997) describe the
technique as one in which individuals are
typically presented with six to ten ‘choice
sets’, each containing a base option and several
alternatives, and asked to indicate their
preferred option in each set. The base option
generally corresponds to the current situation
or ‘do nothing’ option that remains constant
across all the choice sets. The attributes in
each of the remaining choice set options are
then varied to allow the researcher to estimate
the relative importance of each attribute
describing the option.

Choice experimentation attempts to
identify the utility that individuals derive from
the attributes of the commodity being valued.
It does this by examining the trade-offs
individuals make when making choice
decisions. According to Hanley et al. (1998)
researchers can infer four pieces of
information from choice experiments. First,
which attributes significantly influence choice;
second, the implied ranking of these attributes;
third, the marginal willingness to pay (WTP)
for an increase in any significant attributes;
and forth, implied WTP for a program which
changes
more
than
one
attribute
simultaneously.
To
convey
information,
choice
experiments describe a “choice set” using an
array of attributes, rather than one specific
change to the good or service. Rather than
being questioned about a single event in detail,
respondents are questioned about a sample of
events drawn from the universe of possible
events of that type (Louviere, 1994).
Adamowicz et al. (1995) suggest that choice
experiments may help therefore to reduce
strategic bias as the attributes in each choice
set change. Respondents will be unclear as to
which situation is the most ‘environmentally
friendly’ alternative and unable to vote for a
particular situation because they believe it is
the ‘right’ answer.
In addition, choice
experiments also eliminate the situation of
respondents having to choose between paying
for an environmental improvement or not
paying for it.
Adamowicz et al. (1995) and Hanley et
al. (1998) claim that because choice
experiments are based on valuing attributes
rather than a base case and an alternative, both
specific attributes and situation changes can be
valued. The experimental aspect of choice
experiments, means that bundles of attributes
can be constructed to reflect different states of
the environmental good or service. Individuals
are questioned on their preferred alternatives
from the choice set, allowing the researcher to
analyse the trade-offs made between attributes

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

in the choice set. When price is included as
one of the attributes, it becomes possible to
estimate the economic values associated with
the other attributes (Boxall et al. 1996).
Furthermore, choice experiments allow
compensation for damage to particular
environmental goods and services to be in the
form of other goods rather than strictly
monetary terms (Adamowicz et al. 1995).
Finally, Adamowicz et al. (1995),
Morrison et al. (1996) and Hanley et al. (1998)
argue that the issue of embedding1, a
commonly discussed problem in contingent
valuation studies, is overcome through choice
experimentation. As choice experiments are
formed using varying levels of attributes,
different subsets of goods (including
substitutes) are essentially incorporated within
their design. This enables researchers to
determine an individual’s sensitivity to
attribute levels thus eliminating embedding
problems. Issues relating to specific attributes
and substitutes can be explored prior to
conducting the survey through the use of focus
groups (Morrison et al. 1996).
A potential problem facing many
quantitative methodologies is that of
respondent burden. Where a research
participant is required to simultaneously
consider a complex range of variables, there is
a danger that complexities in the real
environment are lost on the respondent.
Through the use of visual images, it was felt
that there may be an opportunity to present a
wide range of variables (e.g. lighting, setting,
physical objects, spacing, perspective) in a
way which was both easy to understand and
which could act as a reasonable surrogate for
possible but unbuilt “actual” environments.
Although environmental economics has
been regarded as an established field within
economics for many years, it is still true that
the quantification of socio-economics impact
is rarely attempted, in the UK at least
(Chadwick 2002). The intention and main
contribution of this research, rather to
providing a one-stop solution to questions
facing designers and planners of urban space,
was to signal a method through which
environmental economics might aid the design
development process.

1

Embedding effects occur ‘when the estimated
mean willingness to pay for a good is lower when it
is valued as part of a more inclusive good, rather
than on its own’ (Morrison et al. 1996, p.12).
Kahneman and Knetch (1992) provide a discussion
of this form of bias.

2: Visualisation
Major questions posed by this research
concerned the extent to which visual
representations of a space could be used
effectively within a choice experiment.
Although it is true that many aspects of a space
are non-visual to some extent (e.g.
temperature, noise), it is also true that a
number of prominent recent urban design
guides focus very much on making physical
changes to space. The methodology, therefore,
took as its starting point a decision to impose a
cultural scenario on the case study space,
within which changes would be made.
A case study area within Aberdeen was
selected for study. The area was of interest
within the research as it arguably suffers from
under investment, despite possessing great
architectural and historical value. A series of
focus groups was completed, including
meetings with local residents, general public,
design students and built environment
professionals. The main purpose of these
meetings was to identify possible uses for the
case study area, and to suggest possible
choices that might be faced by the designer
and user alike.
A major finding from the focus groups
was that participants generally responded more
favourably towards options for the area which
reflected a change of use, rather than simply
considering individual objects. For example,
respondents rarely suggested the planting of
new tree species in the absence of a strong
rationale. Rather, an emphasis was placed on
the social environment, or the impact of
physical changes on behaviour. For example,
bollards could be used to create feelings of
enclosure or openness; trees could be used to
draw attention towards certain buildings, or to
create a market space; benches and café
seating could be used to significantly alter the
desired amount of activity in the space.
From these focus groups, a number of
possible arrangements for the space were
designed, using various combinations of
railings, café seating, trees and planters,
benches, paving and lighting. The resulting
proposed designs were then modelled in
AutoCAD, producing a total of 18 unique
configurations. Following further modelling
and rendering work in 3D Studio Max, a series
of high quality visual images were produced
for use in the choice experiments. For each
image, clear details were recorded as to the
environment
being
shown,
and
the
configuration for each of the variable objects.
Sample images from the model are shown in
Figure 1.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

The methodology was also concerned
with use of the internet to gather data in a
choice experiment. This in itself began to limit
the extent to which full virtual environments
could be made available within experiments,
notwithstanding concerns over the subsequent
analysis of data. Pedestrians most easily
approach the case study area from two main
locations, these being located at a pedestrian
entrance toward the south-west corner, and at
the exit from a car park at the north-east.

3: Experimental work
3.1: Methodology
The experiment was completed in two
stages, where the main differences were
concerned with delivery of the material and
control over the technology. The first phase of
the study was implemented through an entirely
Internet based experiment2. Following that
study, the experiment was replicated on a highend stand-alone machine, thus providing
further data to the study as a whole, and also
allowing for a comparison between the two
forms of data transfer.
The research was particularly interested in
any concerns over download time, image
quality, and operation of various browsers
types over the Internet. For example, in order
to minimise download times, initially large
images were necessarily reduced in size.
Although the option was provided to view all
images at a larger resolution, doing so
inevitably increased the time required
completing the questions. In addition, the
researchers had no control over the size of
screen used by respondents, so although it was
possible to ensure compatibility with most
browsers, the survey’s final appearance was
more difficult to control.

3.2: Respondent comments
As part of the study, several open-ended
questions were included at the end of the
choice experiment to give respondents the
opportunity to make any comments regarding
the study, as well as provide feedback.
Questions were asked about image quality,
payment levels, ease of answering the
questions, and the overall quality of the study.
Responses from both the Internet and standalone studies were categorised and the results
are discussed.

3.3 Results 1 (Internet study)
A total of 165 responses were received for
the Internet-based study, and the three most
common comments related to the images
themselves.
19% of respondents stated that the images
were too similar and found it difficult to tell
the differences between them. 15% thought
that the images were too small, and 15%
thought the images were too dark. These
comments suggest that many respondents only
looked at the smaller images presented on the
screen, and did not open them up to their full
size. By opening up the larger images,
respondents would have been able to see
differences more clearly. The size of the
images may also have affected brightness; that
is, the smaller the image, the darker it will
appear. If respondents had have opened up the
larger images, they should have automatically
appeared brighter. Alternatively, this problem
may simply have been the result of
respondents not adjusting their monitors at the
beginning of the study3.
The fourth most common comment (made
by 10% of respondents) was that more details
regarding each option were needed. By
providing some details about the attributes and
levels displayed in each option, respondents
would have been able to see the differences in
each one more clearly. This may additionally
have reduced the number of respondents
claiming the images were too similar.
A range of comments was made regarding
the types and levels information provided. For
example, respondents wanted to know about
the activities taking place in the square and
uses of the surrounding area (2%), as well as
the history of the Castlegate and the types of
materials being used (5%).
The cost variable raised interest from
respondents, in that each option was attached
to a corresponding tax levy. Almost 7% of
respondents said the suggested costs were too
high and that they would not pay. However,
almost as many respondents (6%) thought that
the levels of cost were reasonable. Almost 4%
of respondents said that cost did not influence
their choices, although 4% would have liked a
better explanation of this variable.

3

2

The full study can be accessed via
www2.rgu.ac.uk/subj/cps/exper/index.htm

A test image was included in the introduction and
respondents were asked to adjust their monitors to
optimise brightness and contrast.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Several other comments were made including:
x
x
x

any costs would be difficult to administer;
costs should be proportional to Council
tax;
the payment method proposed was an
interesting one.

Almost 7% of respondents said that the
survey was a good length4, however almost 4%
thought that it was too long. Just under 4% of
respondents said they liked the survey and/or
thought it was interesting. An equal amount of
respondents however thought the survey was
confusing and were unclear about what they
were doing.

3.4: Results 2 (stand alone study)
While the stand-alone study was asking
essentially the same questions as the Internetbased study, several improvements were made
to the questionnaire based on an early analysis
the Internet comments discussed above.
The main differences between the Internet
and the stand-alone studies were the sizes of
the images presented to respondents and
amount of information provided. The standalone study was conducted on one stand-alone
computer, which made it easier to control
some of the problems that occurred in the
Internet study. For example, issues to do with
individual monitors (such as screen size and
brightness) were virtually eliminated. All
respondents from the Stand-alone study
viewed the study on same monitor (a high
quality 21-inch screen) and saw the images at
the same level of brightness/contrast.
Downloading speed/time was also not an
issue in the Stand-alone study, as the
questionnaire was preloaded onto the
computer. All respondents were able to open
up the large images very quickly, and this
option was not accompanied by a possible
psychological reluctance to unduly extend the
survey time.
To overcome a problem of the images
being ‘too similar’ and the differences being
‘difficult to distinguish’5, a brief text
description was included in each choice set,
and text was used to highlight the differences
in the images being presented. This resulted in
the percentage of respondents claiming that the
images were ‘too similar’ being reduced to just
over 6% (compared with approximately 19%
in the Internet study).
Furthermore, the
percentage of respondents claiming the images
4
5

Or that it was ‘nice and short’.
As suggested by the Internet respondents

were of ‘poor quality’ and/or ‘too dark’ was
now only 3% (compared to 15% previously).
Unlike the Internet study where the most
common comments related to the images
themselves, popular comments from the standalone study focus on the attributes displayed
within the images. Approximately 12% of
respondents said that trees influenced their
choices6. This compares with only 1% of
Internet respondents. 11% of respondents said
that the coloured paving negatively influenced
their choices (compared with only 1% of
Internet respondents). Slightly less than 5% of
respondents said paving stones influenced their
choices but did not mention whether they were
referring to the grey or coloured stones. 3%
said that bollards influenced their choices.
6% of stand-alone respondents said the
survey was confusing and were not entirely
clear about what they were doing. It is
possible that the confusion experienced by
some respondents relates to the nature of
choice experiments in general and not
specifically to this study. In most choice
experiments, respondents are presented with
several choice sets with alternatives that differ
slightly. It is well accepted that the as number
of possible choice options increase, so to do
the cognitive demands associated with making
choices, and thus the level of confusion
increases (Blamey et al. 1997).
Almost 5% of respondents said that cost
influenced their choices. Other comments
relating to the cost variable include:
x
x
x

upgrades should be accounted for in
planning budgets;
total costs should be given; and,
the money would be better spent solving
Aberdeen’s traffic problems.

Nearly 5% of respondents would have
appreciated more information concerning, for
example, the materials used, maintenance and
the aims of the changes. Nearly 5% would
have liked to specify the options or select the
features they liked best, and view all the
images at once.
The differences in the types of comments
made by the Internet and stand-alone
respondents suggest that when larger, brighter
images are provided (which are fast to
download and open up), respondents are better
able to concentrate on image content rather
than on technical issues. This would suggest
that using a standalone computer is more
suitable for presenting detailed images to
6

No mention was made about the influence being a
positive or negative one.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

respondents7, and some level of text to
highlight differences in the images is required.

3.5 Image realism and easy of
answering the questionnaire
In addition to the open-ended questions
that allowed respondents to make comments
about the questionnaire, several closed-ended
questions were also asked. These included:
x
x

How realistic the do the images look?
How easy or difficult the survey was to
answer?

From Table 1, a quarter of the Internet
respondents said that the images looked ‘very
realistic’. This compared with nearly half
(43%) of the stand-alone respondents. The
differences in these results could again be a
result of monitor size and the ease of opening
up larger images on the stand-alone computer,
compared to the Internet. Less than 2% of the
stand-alone respondents thought that the
images looked ‘very unrealistic’, compared
with 5% of the Internet respondents.
Table 1: Do the images look realistic?
Very realistic
Fairly realistic
No opinion
Fairly unrealistic
Very unrealistic

% Internet
respondents
25.5
55.2
6.1
8.5
4.8
100.0

% Stand-alone
respondents
43.1
44.6
6.2
4.6
1.5
100.0

Table 2 provides a summary of how easy
or difficult respondents found the survey.
Almost 60% of the stand-alone respondents,
and 46% of the Internet respondents found the
survey ‘very easy’ to answer. None of the
stand-alone respondents and only 3% of the
Internet respondents thought the survey was
‘very difficult’.
Table 2: How easy or difficult did you find
the survey to answer?
% Internet % Stand-alone
respondents
respondents
Very easy
45.5
58.5
Fairly easy
32.1
29.2
No opinion
6.7
4.6
Fairly difficult
12.7
7.7
Very difficult
3.0
0.0
100.0
100.0

Overall, Tables 1 and 2 suggest that the
majority of respondents thought the images
were realistic (Internet: 81%, Stand-alone:
88%) and the questionnaire was easy to answer
(Internet 77%, Stand-alone: 88%)

4: Discussion
This research was concerned with an appraisal
of validity for the methodology. Although a
limited number of environmental economic
studies in the past have attempted to use
images as part of the survey, this research was
innovative in the use of images to convey
almost all aspects of the choice scenario. In
addition, by using fully computer generated
environments, the researchers were able to
realise far greater control over the contents of
scenes, than if using photographs.
The main findings of this study can be
categorised under two headings, namely, the
effectiveness of the “visualisation” within
choice experiments, and the technical
limitations. With regard to the choice
experiment, results from the survey (Davies &
Laing 2001) indicated that respondents were
able to understand contents of the images, and
that a number of the modelled objects were
found to have a significant influence on
choice. With regard to technical limitations,
the research used an Internet browser to collect
data for reasons of widespread compatibility
and inclusiveness. Due however to current
limitations and variation between user
equipment and connection speeds, some users
suggested that they were distracted from the
survey by technical barriers. The subsequent
stand-alone study served to show, however,
that most of these barriers can be overcome,
and that the method appears to offer great
potential for the future.
This research has raised a number of
important issues which merit further
development. The results suggest that the use
of “virtual” environments holds potential for
greater use within environmental economics.
Future work should at least begin to explore
the extent to which more immersive
environments could be used, or ways in which
more interactive models could be used to
capture data. As the level of realism possible
in virtual models increases, the possibilities for
using models as either surrogate or entirely
theoretical environments are clear. A balance
must be found between realising the benefits
of such models, and the richness inherent in
using actual environments.

7

At least until standard Internet connections
become faster.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

5: References
Adamowicz, W., Boxall, P., Williams, M. &
Louviere, J. 1995, Stated Preference Approaches
for Measuring Passive Use Values: Choice
Experiments and Contingent Valuation, Staff Paper
95-03, Department of Rural Economy, University of
Alberta, Edmonton.
Blamey, R.K., Rolfe, J.C., Bennett, J.W. &
Morrison, M.D. 1997, Environmental Choice
Modelling: Issues and Qualitative Insights, Choice
Modelling Research Report No. 4, University
College, The University of New South Wales,
Canberra.
Boxall, P.C., Adamowicz, W.L., Swait, J.,
Williams, M. & Louviere, J. 1996, ‘A comparison
of stated preference methods for environmental
valuation’, Ecological Economics, vol. 18, pp. 243253.
Chadwick, A. 2002, 'Socio-economic impacts: Are
they still the poor relations in UK environmental
statements?, Journal of Environmental Planning
and Management, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 3-24.
Davies, A. & Laing, R.A. 2001, Designing choice
experiments using focus groups: Results from an
Aberdeen case study, research report, Robert

Gordon University and Scottish Enterprise,
Aberdeen
Hanley, N., MacMillan, D.C., Wright, R.E.,
Bullock, C.H., Simpson, I., Parsisson, D. &
Crabtree, R. 1998, ‘Contingent valuation versus
choice experiments: Estimating the benefits of
Environmentally Sensitive Areas in Scotland’,
Journal of Agricultural Economics, vol. 49, no. 1,
pp. 1-15.
Kahneman, D. & Knetsch, J.L. 1992, ‘Valuing
public goods: The purchase of moral satisfaction’,
Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, vol. 22, pp. 57-70.
Louviere, J.J. 1994, Relating stated preference
measures and models to choices in real markets,
paper presented at the DOE/EPA Workshop on
Contingent Valuation to measure non-market
values, Herndon, VA, May.
Morrison, M.D., Blamey, R.K., Bennett, J.W. &
Louviere, J.J. 1996, A Comparison of Stated
Preference
Techniques
for
Estimating
Environmental Values, Choice Modelling Research
Report No. 1, University College, The University of
New South Wales, Canberra.

Acknowledgements
The work reported in this paper was jointly funded by Scottish Enterprise and The Robert Gordon
University.
Figure 1 - sample images from the study

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

