Bringing Production Work Flow to a Classroom Teaching
Muqeem Khan
Assistant Professor of Digital Design
School of Architecture and Design
American University of Sharjah
mukhan@aus.ac.ae
www.muqeem.com
Abstract
Muqeem Khan developed digital graphics nearly
fifteen years ago by working in BASIC language.
This curiosity led first to the National College of Arts,
Lahore Pakistan (NCA 1988), and then completion of
Bachelor of Science and Masters of Arts in Industrial
Design with emphasis on computer graphics from
ACCAD Advanced Computing Center for the Arts
and Design (1996) at Ohio State University,
Columbus Ohio. Muqeem produced the visual effects
for movies like Deep Rising, George of the Jungle,
Flubber, Armageddon and the newly released Final
Fantasy. Currently he is an assistant professor of
Digital Design at the American University of Sharjah,
UAE, instructing in Computer Graphics.

It is every academic’s dream that students can hold
their place in the job market or in higher education.
Furthermore, schools try their best to acquire equipment
and human resources to help students excel. But there
are many hurdles and constraints that have to be faced
in an academic environment as compared to a
production house.
In order to get the maximum result, an instructor has to
set parameters. These parameters are based on two
things:
- Student’s capabilities and their background.
- Resources at hand.
Within the above parameters, I formed an expectation
from each student. I had to have this expectation well
defined because the students I was teaching had no
knowledge of three-dimensional graphics at all. It was
the first time they had experienced modeling, rendering,
and animation, and it was the first time I had taught
computer graphics. I created exercises based on design
methodology that would separate ideation from the
implementation process. This is important in any
production related pipeline too. Regardless of required
software and hardware capabilities, expectations were
set in the beginning and were clear to both instructor
and students. Consequently, at the end of the term both,
educator and learners were satisfied with the result.
Time and money are two important elements in a
production house. The important task for higher-level
managers in any production house is to deal with the
financial matters. Lower level managers mainly deal with
project schedules. They are responsible for overseeing
the completion of the job with maximum effort in a
required time period.
These lower level managers/supervisors can be
compared to instructors and educators in any institution
responsible for teaching production related material. The
following are some of the issues that they are very
familiar with:
-Their own strengths and weaknesses.

To see his work visit:
http://www.muqeem.com
-Capabilities of their production house.
-Strengths and weaknesses of their staff.
-An overall picture of the project schedule.
-The necessity to meet deadlines
A teacher in a institutional setting may change the above
issues in the following manner:
-Instructor’s own strengths and weaknesses.
-Capabilities of the institution.
-Strengths and weaknesses of their students.
-An overall picture of the academic term
-The necessity for students to meet required deadlines.
By taking these issues with the production methodology
on board, an instructor achieves quality work by the
required deadline. This applies to teachers with or
without production experiences. An instructor, who either
has production experiences or not, can have these states
of mind. Therefore, it is important to understand how
production houses work with the highest capabilities.
Almost every production house, one way or the other,
uses very systematic, creative, and purposeful design
methodology.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Before looking at the design methodology for production,
let's visualize the near future in relation to technology.
The integration of computing, telecommunication,
visualization and new interaction techniques will change
and expand the paradigm of teacher-student interaction.
The role of a teacher in this century will be different and
will be based on traditional teaching techniques with
technology and its implementation. Initially computers
were not used progressively as a teaching tool. The future
world of design institutions will certainly adapt to the use
of computers. A similar example is that of photography,
which was just a chemical process in the past and has
become a technology based on digitized images and
processes in a classroom. The use of advanced
visualization tools will play a major role in the teaching
and learning process in design methodology by providing
a new institutional environment.
A new institutional environment, which will be available,
can be characterized as follows:
- Distributed
- Highly available
- Portable or mobile
- Dynamic
- Cooperative.

Design is a purposeful, systematic, and creative activity,
whose aim is produced in limited or mass quantities to
satisfy human needs and wants. In that highly active
environment, computer visualization will play a very
important role and will be an important domain of any
teaching aspects of design. Furthermore, a teacher's role
and potential in the development of computer
visualization will be accelerated in the next century. We
observe and see the development of a product in
industrial design, in the corporate identity, several phases
of spatial decision in the field of interior and architectural
design. Similar to these phases, the boundary of design
will expand to critically examine the influence of
computer and informational visualization. If we are
preparing designers for the next century, it would be our
responsibility to expand and explore the design thinking
and process for a digital visualization.
A carefully examined process or even disclosure of
various processes in the field of computer visualization in
classroom teaching will be an addition to the embodiment
of design knowledge. This activity, or study will help and
enhance the elements, academia, and the corporate world.

Motion
Studies

Concept

Background
and
Experiences

Character
Studies
Behavioral
Studies

Research

Color
Form
Light

Story

Concept
Development

Post
Production

Final
Product

Animatics

Software
Environment

Equipment
Responsibility

Technical
Help

Design Methodology for production

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

The whole process of bringing production work flow to
classroom teaching with the emphasis on systematic
design process is to compose cyclical design phases. This
process is covered with an ongoing evaluation cycle, as
can be seen in the diagram. Furthermore, the origin of this
whole process is composed of the following:
a) Definition and analysis of concept statement.
b) Designer's background and experience.
c) Environmental influence.
All of these elements tend to proceed towards a
thorough research activity, which then synthesize the
major steps and decisions within the process. After such
research students can easily understand a number of
processes and their expected solutions. Good research
leads the designer to a systematic design implementation
process where creativity and intuition can be combined
with all the other systematic design decisions.
Most of the time students are involved in the use of
several computer packages available in a institutional
facility. It is also important to minimize the gap between
student development and technical production of
computer animation. During the project development, I
tried to find ways of adjoining student’s personal design
and technical background in order to simplify a complex
process of production from concept development to final
presentation of an animation.

1:Concept Design and Procedures
A Sequential Design Process for the development of a
concept:
The animation that students completed had several
sequential design and technical processes. The whole
process of making this computer-generated film is a
cyclical, creative, intuitive, and analytic process where
inductive and deductive reasoning played an important
role. The whole process can be subcategorized into
several individual group processes as follows:

1.1:Early Sketches
The first step to start this process was to establish a
concept statement for the project. A concept statement
sets a goal to direct a student to a particular path. During
this process several basic line drawings were created
which were not very detailed. These drawings and
statements are there to create a personal rapport between
the student and his/her own creative thinking. The
student’s personal experiences and background are
important to elaborate and synthesize the creative
process.

Simple shapes within the stories

1.2:Linkage and Development of the Story
In this process of thinking and development, students
tried to find a link between the concept statement and
story development. As a designer they had to be very
sensitive about the importance of a concept and its goal.
The ability to think in three dimensions was important in
terms of the development of ideas and translating
visionary inputs into the design process. In the early
stages it is important to consider who would be the
audience for this design output.
In the creation of the story, one must clarify the possible
hurdles that will be encountered during the
implementation process. Most often the challenges were
the appearance of objects, texture and lights. There are
several issues the student needs to consider before the
implementation process:
a) What software is available within the facility?
b) Previous problems related to the software
c) Capabilities of tools
d) Technical Support
e) Previous users
f) Availability of the software in the facility
g) What software libraries are accessible in the facility?
h) Data transfer from other programs and related
problems
All of the above issues are relative to each other and
dependent on the facility and software available during
the design process.

1.3:Story in Segments and time
At this stage, a student should consider the rough
duration of time for each of the events within the story.
For example, how many seconds a particular scene or
movement requires.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

It is not very important to estimate a correct time at this
stage, however it would be beneficial for future
development.
If there is a talking character in the story, a student
should estimate the time of its speech. Early detection of
these elements will minimize the overall time it will take
to complete the story.

next can be tested in this stage. Good animatics can also
motivate the designer to peruse and implement more
ideas in terms of design issues. This stage of ideation is
also helpful for the evaluation of the whole process and
story. It can raise several questions for the
implementation process. Final animatics should result in
the following elements:

1.4:Design Thinking and Evaluation

-Timing of major parts i.e. A, B, C
-Division within A, B, C
-Transition among A, B, C

The Design process in the development of computer
animation is also a cyclical process where research,
ideation, implementation, and evaluation take place in a
parallel fashion. It would be great if the student follows
each one after another. In this cyclical process the first
step is to complete valuable research related to the story
and concept. Several data gathering techniques should be
utilized in this process, like literature search, case study,
observation, and previous related work. Even during the
implementation process, evaluation plays an important
role. Important issues related to the primary goal should
be considered during the ideation and concept
development process.

1.5:Finished Story Board
After completing all of the above stages, a clean and
elaborated, but focused storyboard can be generated.
Even at this stage, it is not extremely important to
consider all the techniques of the development process. A
storyboard can show a sequence of events and their
linkage to each other. Right numbers of representation of
events in the story can be presented in terms of clean and
colorful images. A final storyboard can give a feeling of
the final product. It can give an idea of space, time, color,
camera angle and position. It can also show a rough
feeling of camera movement to a particular direction.
The correct number of images should be represented in
the storyboard to show an event or events during the
particular time duration. The grouping and layout of
images can also show a semantic relationship of the
storyboard to the final product, the animation.

1.6:Animatics
"Animatics" is a combination of images, from a
storyboard, and a time sequence with the possible
addition of sound. After having good animatics, timing of
major the parts, division within the parts, and transition
among the parts can be examined. The minimization of
time, sound implementation and synchronization can also
be done in the animatics.
Any editing tool can be used in this very important part
of the ideation process. Transition from one event to the

B

A

C

-Minimization of time
-Sound Implementation
-Sound synchronization

1.7:Character Studies
Character studies are the most important element for the
development of any character animation. A character in
the story is the representation of cultural, social, and
psychological realities of living or non-living entities in
animation. The very first attempt to tackle this problem is
to actually video taped the possible actions and events. In
that way the body gesture, the way a character move, and
the character interaction within the space can be studied.
Different joints and action should be videotaped to
categorize and examine the behavior and psychology
within the character' personality. Camera angle and
framing can be analyzed during this process. After good
character movement is recorded on video, important
events can be taken out into a file strip using any editing
software to find the relationship between time and
frames. These frame-captured-images can be utilized as a
valuable resource in the production process.

1.8:Frame Studies
Using any editing software, a designer can easily
generate action information and see the joints movement
and position a certain instance of time. One should not
need to see each frame by itself. It should be helpful to
see every 15th or 30th frame. Again, all of this
information is just for the reference and should help in
the implementation process. The method that I thought
would work is as follows:

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Acting + Observation
Digitization of acting
Film Strip Output
Reference every 15th frames

1.9:Pose/Action Sheet

2:Implementation

After getting stationary information about the actions,
students decided to build their own Pose Sheet, in the
cartoon industry known as an Action Sheet. A student can
note all the possible sounds, its length and related
information in this stage. In the Movement Rate column
of the action sheet, the student should depict the rate of
the movement. Some students developed their own
percentage reading for the related action or movement.
For example 95% corresponds to fast movement. All of
the columns in the action sheet are controlled by the
column “Frame.”. One sheet can show all of the above
information in addition to the camera movement within
fifty frames. The main purpose of making this action
sheet was to synthesize the problem to the last stage so
the data should be ready for the implementation stage.

The method is primarily a means of resolving a conflict
that exists between logical analysis and creative thought.
The difficulty is that the imagination does not work well
unless it is free to alternate between all aspects of the
problem, in any order, and at any time, whereas logical
analysis breaks down if there is the slightest departure
from a systematic step by step sequence. It follows that
any design method must posses both kinds of thought to
proceed one by one if any progress is to be made.

2:Implementation of Data
The implementation of data in computer visualization,
especially in character animation, is very similar to the
traditional design process. Computer visualization is
similar to the design stages. For example in design, a
designer does the research, gathers all the related
information and using creative and intuitive process,
passes through the implementation stage. After these
stages, the first stage of implementation is to create rough
character animation. It is very similar to:
- Form study in Product Design,
or,
- Rough layout in visual Communication Design,
or,
- Spatial relationship within the field of Interior and
architecture design.
Like in Product, Visual Communication, Interior Space
and architectural design, it is the designer's responsibility
to select the right tool for the completion of the project.
The completion of computer visualization with the
involvement of many software is also very similar to the
design implementation process. There were two major
factors to complete the process:
a) To reduce the amount of design error, redesign or
delay.
b) To make possible a more imaginative and advanced
design process.
We can categorize thinking and story development as a
creative process and making animation as a systematic
design process. Both of these processes are parts of
systematic, creative, and purposeful design activities.

3:Systematic Design Process
I tried to establish a systematic design process in this
particular design problem for students where a student
deals with not only a creative thought process, but also
handling of a number of advanced visualizations. The
selection and research on the tools available in the
facility was extremely important to complete the task in
the early stages of animation development. For that
reason, a systematic design process was essential to
adopt. The Systematic Design in the development of
computer visualization could be explained as:
1) To leave the student mind free to produce ideas and
solutions at any time without confusing the process of
analysis.
2) To provide a system of notation which records every
item of design information outside the memory, keeping
design requirements and solutions completely separate
from each other. This means that when students move
from problem analysis to solution seeking, they feel the
need of the three distinct stages, analysis, synthesis, and
evaluation.
The making of Computer Visualization with the
elements of design and visual communication should be
carefully examined. The identification of the task,
elaboration and linkage of visual elements, transition
from one visual incident to other, implementation of
findings and the overall perceptive and cognitive
representation of messages are all important to
accomplish the required appropriate goal. A very
important role and responsibility of a student is to
carefully synthesize the possible problems within all the
phases of the development of computer visualization.
Clips of student's animation can be seen at:
http://www.muqeem.com/teaching.html

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

