Visual Navigation of Distributed Knowledge Structures in Groupware-based
Organizational Memories
Stefan Smolnik – Ingo Erdmann
Department of Business Computing 2, University of Paderborn, Germany
{Stefan.Smolnik|Ingo.Erdmann}@notes.upb.de
Abstract
Many of today's organizations already have a strong
integration of groupware systems in their ITinfrastructure. The shared databases of these groupware
systems form organizational memories, which comprise
the complete knowledge of an organization collected
over the time of its existence. One key problem is how to
find relevant knowledge in continuously growing and
distributed organizational memories. The basic
functionalities and mechanisms in groupware systems
are not sufficient to support users in finding required
knowledge. Topic maps provide strong paradigms and
concepts for the semantic structuring of link networks
and therefore, they are a considerable solution for
organizing and navigating large and continuously
growing organizational memories. The K-Discovery
project suggests applying topic maps to groupwarebased organizational memories to create knowledge
structures and address the mentioned challenges. Visual
navigation capabilities to exploit the created knowledge
structures are based on hyperbolic geometry concepts
and provide users with intuitive access mechanisms to
the required knowledge.

1. Introduction and overview
Within
many
organizations,
groupware-based
environments are the basis of communication and
information management. With an increasing integration
of these environments in internal business processes,
organizational memories grow fast. These shared
databases, often existing in groupware systems, allow
transformation of individual knowledge into common
knowledge. Looking at the technical perspective of
knowledge management, groupware seems to be a suitable
platform for managing organizational memories (cf. [1]).
The growing flood of available information requires
powerful concepts and mechanisms to support users, who
search for relevant knowledge objects. Mechanisms of

navigation and linking as well as functionalities for
extensive searches and investigations are needed to
explore and use complex offers of knowledge. These
functionalities are a necessary prerequisite for the core
processes of knowledge identification and knowledge use
[2]. Therefore, effective search and navigation
mechanisms, which improve organizational use of existing
individual and common knowledge objects, contribute to
the process of knowledge generation, i.e. the development
or collection of new knowledge. Particularly, visual
navigation techniques add an additional efficiency benefit
to this process of knowledge acquisition.
Topic maps – as defined in ISO/IEC 13250 – used on
information sets create knowledge structures and form a
structured semantic link network upon a large set of
information [3]. Thus, topic maps are a perfect basis to
realize the mentioned mechanisms and functionalities for
the identification of relevant knowledge objects. In this
contribution, we describe the fundamental idea of the
research project K-Discovery: Using topic maps to
identify distributed knowledge structures in groupwarebased organizational memories. In addition to the existing
techniques of search and navigation, such as hierarchical
navigation in categories of views or full text search, users
can be supported by the strong concept of associative
navigation in and visualization of semantic networks
(provided by topic maps) (cf. [4]). Further, a groupwarebased implementation of topic maps benefits from several
aspects of groupware paradigms and technologies, for
example distributed database architectures and replication,
workflow management, or security and access control
mechanisms.
The purpose of this paper is to support users in finding
relevant knowledge in distributed organizational
memories efficiently by combining groupware paradigms,
topic maps, and visualization techniques. This
contribution is structured as followed: In section 2, we
briefly describe a specific case study of a groupwarebased organizational memory and we give a motivation
for this work. The basic concepts of topic maps are shortly

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

introduced in section 3. In section 4, we present the
conceptual approach and primary idea of the K-Discovery
project: Applying topic maps to groupware-based
organizational memories to identify distributed knowledge
structures. In section 5, we discuss a concept for
visualization and navigation of groupware-based topic
maps based on hyperbolic geometry. Firstly, requirements
of an efficient navigation tool for structured data and
knowledge spaces are defined. Secondly, we suggest a
concept of simplifying the relation structure of knowledge
objects to enhance navigation efficiency of groupwarebased topic maps. Thirdly, we introduce and discuss the
HyperbolicTree concept for exploration of organizational
memories. Section 6 outlines concluding remarks, the
current state of the project and the future opportunities.

2. Motivation and short case
As pointed out above, groupware systems provide an
excellent environment for organizational knowledge
management. In many cases, however, the groupware
infrastructure is used to support teams in communication,
coordination, and collaboration (cf. [5]). Effective access
mechanisms are needed because of an increasing amount
of knowledge objects in shared information spaces of a
groupware-based infrastructure. The following short case
illustrates the need for these mechanisms:
Within the Groupware Competence Center (GCC) of
the University of Paderborn, Pavone Enterprise Office, an
integrated correspondence, office, document, workflow,
knowledge and archive management system, is used in
almost every part of operative work. There are several
core applications in different contexts, such as daily office
work, web publishing, teaching and examinations, projects
and cooperation, research, and literature maintenance.
These organizational memories consist of more than 30
databases with more than 60,000 documents. Even though
there are a lot of semantic relations between the
information in these databases, it is not possible to
navigate between them or to identify knowledge
structures. The capabilities for accessing the knowledge
objects are restricted to full text searching and navigating
through context sensitive views and category structures.
Full text indexes are not sufficient for searching
information, and structures like document types or
taxonomies are sometimes too constraining to qualify or
categorize information [6]. Furthermore, usage and scope
of these techniques is limited to a single database.
Analogous to this practical case, many organizations
have a strong integration of groupware systems, both in
their IT-infrastructure and in their working environment.
(To name only two examples, look at Deutsche Bank and
PriceWaterhouseCoopers. Both of them use an extensive

IT-infrastructure based on Lotus Notes/Domino.) With
growing organizational memories on the one hand, and the
lack of powerful, effective mechanisms and functionalities
for navigating, linking, searching and investigating on the
other hand, the need for enhanced access mechanisms to
explore and use a complex offer of knowledge is
becoming more than evident.

3. Introduction to topic maps
With the ongoing increase of information in the
intranets of organizations as well as in the internet, a need
for new information management technologies emerges.
So far, several technologies have been developed to
address different aspects of information management, e.g.
computer networks, document management systems,
workflow management systems, or recently different
kinds of portals. As pointed out above, with growing
organizational memories on one side and lack of powerful
and effective mechanisms and functionalities for
navigating, linking, searching and investigating on the
other side, the need for enhanced access mechanisms to
explore and use the complex offer of knowledge is getting
more and more evident. To address these shortcomings the
ISO standard ISO/IEC 13250 Topic Maps defines a model
and architecture for the semantic structuring of link
networks. By applying topic maps to large sets of
heterogeneous information resources, reusable structured
semantic link networks are created above those resources.
Furthermore, the standard provides navigation paradigms
to enable users to search knowledge structures [3].
The key concepts of topic maps are topics, occurrences
of topics, and relationships between topics (topic
associations). Firstly, a topic is a construct that represents
a real world subject and in this sense a topic can be almost
everything: a theme, a concept, a subject, a person, an
entity, etc. (v. fig. 1). A concrete topic is an instance of a
topic type. Therefore, a topic and a topic type form a
class-instance relationship. At the same time a topic type
is also a topic.
Topics have three kinds of characteristics: names,
occurrences and roles in associations. Occurrences and
roles in associations are described in detail later on. The
base name of a topic is required. In addition, topics can
have a display name and a sort name. These concepts
apply to multilingual scenarios or to the use in different
geographical regions.
A topic may be linked to one or more real knowledge
objects, like a report, a comment, a video or a picture, that
are considered to be relevant to the topic in some way.
Such knowledge objects are called occurrences of the
topic (v. fig. 1). Generally, an occurrence is not part of a
topic map. The link mechanism itself depends upon the

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

underlying system. For example, HyTime addressing,
XPointer, or document links in a groupware system can be
used as a link mechanism. To express different kinds of
occurrences, the standard provides the concept of
occurrence roles that are topics as well.
Topic associations describe the relationships between
topics (v. fig. 1). They are completely independent of the
real knowledge object and represent the essential valueadd of the topic map. This concept leads to some
conclusions: A concrete topic map can be applied to
different information repositories. Seen from the opposite
side, different topic maps can be applied to one
information repository and therefore, they can provide
different views e.g. for the different needs of different
users. Furthermore, topic maps are interchangeable and
can be merged.

European Union
Michael Schumacher
Denmark

Germany
World
Championship 2006
University of
Paderborn

Groupware
Competence Center

Topic
Occurrence
Association
Information Object

Figure 1. Key concepts of topic maps
Generally, topic associations are not one-way
relationships. They are symmetric as well as transitive and
thus, they have no direction. The construct of association
types can be used to group topic associations and the
involved topics. An association role describes the role of a
topic in a topic association. Again, both the association
types and the association roles are topics as well.
Additionally, the topic map standard provides the
extended concepts of scope, public subject, and facets,
which are not described here. For a comprehensive
reference refer to [3] and [8].

4. Using topic maps in groupware-based
environments
By applying topic maps – as defined in ISO/IEC
13250 – to groupware-based organizational memories, it
is possible to close a gap between knowledge and
information. So far, views and categories in groupware
systems have enabled the creation of little knowledge by

conveying documents into different contexts. But this
concept is limited to a weak identification of relations
between them. Topic maps provide much more
appropriate and sophisticated concepts to overcome this
limitation and to build a semantic link network from the
documents of a database. The basic design elements of a
groupware-based application, especially forms, can be
used to identify the main subjects (topic types) and
relationships between them (association types). (The
description of design elements of groupware-based
applications is beyond the scope of this paper. For a
comprehensive overview, refer to [7].)
While text analyzing methods with the support of
artificial intelligence concepts could provide more or less
reasonable results in identifying the main topics of a
document, we have chosen another approach in the KDiscovery project. To identify the relevant subjects of
documents, the fields of the forms must be considered. As
mentioned before in the short case, in many groupware
systems the knowledge objects, particularly documents,
contain many fields of various kinds and purposes:
obvious information, like the parts of an address (e.g.
city), or the category of a report (e.g. balance sheets
2000), or keywords and linking information (e.g. persons,
locations, time, free or predefined keywords). These fields
form a set of potential candidates for topic types.
Moreover, by looking at the forms as a whole and at the
views, a lot of basic associations can be found between
topic types. For example, in the context of an address
form, the associations “person lives in city” or “person
works for company” can be identified. Similarly, a report
form contains associations like “report is composed by
person” or “report belongs to category”. When
considering views, the content of fields is displayed in the
columns of a view. This mapping between fields and
columns creates another context and thus forms a base for
additional associations, like “report is in work by person”
in a view, that displays the state of documents in a
workflow. Obviously, the different forms, i.e. the different
document types, can be considered as occurrence roles,
while documents are occurrences in a concrete topic map.
These considerations about fields, forms, and views of
a groupware-based application, and their connections and
relationships, result in a template for a topic map. By
applying this template to groupware-based organizational
memories, a concrete topic map can be built up. In
particular – following the definitions of topic types,
association types, and occurrence roles made in the
template – topics, topic associations, and occurrences are
derived from all documents (for architectural and
implementation approaches refer to [9]) and form a topic
map. This topic map provides a structured semantic link
network and therefore allows easy and selective

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

navigation to the required knowledge objects, independent
of their origin (cf. [3]). In contrast to full text search and
hierarchical navigation, searching in knowledge structures
is enabled, i.e. search takes place in a meta level above the
knowledge objects, and transparent access to these objects
is provided. Further, knowledge objects can be found in
new contexts, regardless of potential manually assigned
categories in groupware-based organizational memories,
and therefore, new contextual knowledge can be gathered
(cf. [10]).
To sum up, applying topic maps to groupware-based
organizational memories provides a huge potential and a
lot of advantages for organizational knowledge
management. Seen from the perspective of groupware,
groupware systems leverage the benefits of topic maps
through their basic concepts and paradigms, like
distributed database architectures and replication,
workflow management, or security and access control
mechanisms. A groupware-based environment enables the
definition, generation, and maintenance of a topic map in
a consistent manner, on both a stationary and a mobile
workstation. Thus, the distributed management of a topic
map is independent of time and location. Differentiated
access rights can be defined for a certain set of knowledge
objects, single knowledge objects, and any part of a
knowledge object, as well as for functionality and
presentation elements and design elements (like forms and
views). These mechanisms enable the realistic adaptation
of access structures against the background of complex
and real organization models. As an example, some
organizational members form an editorial team, which
ensures that all published components of a topic map
adhere to organizational standards. Another key concept
of groupware systems, the workflow management, can be
used to describe and support the whole process chain of
topic map publishing. A model of an organizational
integration of topic maps and supporting workflows is
defined in [9].
The described concepts, paradigms, and functionalities
of groupware systems facilitate the team-based and
organizational wide use of topic maps. In combination,
both the groupware systems and the concept of topic maps
leverage their mutual potentials.
Based on these conceptual approaches, the KDiscovery project defines a framework and architecture
for a groupware-based knowledge management system
using topic maps. This architecture integrates repositories
as well as interfaces to these repositories, and tools, that
access the interfaces of the infrastructure model, the
process model, and the topic map model of an
organization. By applying a topic map to the set of
completed workflows, it is possible to identify
relationships between them as well as tacit and inherent

process knowledge. The resulting knowledge can be used
in several ways: For example, to group similar workflows
and to create predefined workflow. Furthermore, a
suitable framework for a new kind of knowledge
management applications – based on the underlying
concepts and paradigms of groupware and topic maps – is
provided. An example is a repository of workflows, or the
support of the analysis of the process structure as well as
the organizational structure. A concrete application for
distributing workflow process knowledge in organizations
as well as for the semantic associative navigation in
process networks is described in detail in [11].
Additionally, the K-Discovery project introduces an
implementation approach that provides a prototypic
application and tool framework that implements some of
the functionalities of the described architecture and thus,
allows a generic and almost automatic generation of topic
maps upon groupware-based organizational memories (by
using various technologies like groupware technologies,
relational database management systems, Java, XML).
The K-Discovery architecture as well as the
implementation approach are described in detail in [9].

5. Visual navigation of groupware-based
topic maps
So far, we have motivated the usage of topic maps to
create knowledge structures in groupware-based
organizational memories. In the following sections, we
introduce a visual approach based on hyperbolic geometry
to efficiently exploit these knowledge structures. The
original K-Discovery topic map navigator only offered a
textual user interface, which was less intuitive to use than
a visual browser, because users had to be familiar with
basic topic map terms and concepts, and could not
overlook larger parts of the structure. Therefore, we will
present an intuitive navigation approach to offer users a
visual interface to use groupware-based topic maps in a
more explorative way. Using the so called HyperbolicTree
concept, this approach makes it possible to visualize the
complete knowledge structure on the screen. Moreover, it
adds means of recognizing specific parts of knowledge
structures by visually highlighting areas that are important
to users. These highlights are referred to as landmarks.

5.1. Requirements of an efficient navigation tool
for structured data
The use of landmarks [12] is a very important factor
when considering a navigation space for users, as they
support user orientation in complex hierarchical
structures. Landmarks have a strong positive effect on the

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

work efficiency of people that often navigate the structure
and thus are familiar with it, as well as on people that
navigate the structure for the first time. Additionally,
landmarks make users feel well acquainted with the
structure and as a result, emend the user acceptance of the
system as well as user satisfaction.
Therefore, a navigation interface should support
landmarks. It can be thought of different types of
landmarks, such as color coded objects, bold text, and
particularly thumbnails, graphics, and icons. The
navigation of the structure should be as simple and
intuitive as possible, and the interface should allow direct
manipulation and re-adjustment of the area that is focused
by the user, to effectively perform searches in adjacent
and non adjacent areas of the current focus.
Especially in the field of explorative collaborative
systems it is important, that “users become completely
absorbed in their task domain.” [13]. “Focus + Context”
techniques can help users to become absorbed by the task
domain navigation and knowledge browsing. Focus +
Context is the name of a class of visualization concepts,
that displays structured data in a way that makes it
possible to present as many relevant knowledge objects as
possible on the screen at the same time. In a Focus +
Context user interface, the area that gets the current users
attention is called focus, and the surrounding area is called
context.
The basic assumption is that users should be able to
view focus and context areas at the same time and to
present an overview of the whole knowledge structure.
That enables them to easily refocus the tree into areas that
are close to the current focus and thus, makes navigation
more efficient. It can be assumed that the user needs more
detailed information in the context area than in the focus
area. The reason is that the visual acuity, and thus, the
sensual faculty, rapidly decreases outside of the focus area
[14]. Therefore, it is not necessary to offer detailed
information about knowledge objects, which are currently
of minor importance. [15] even states, that unnecessary
knowledge objects burden users, because of the limited
capacity of the human nervous system.
A perfect user interface would visualize the whole
knowledge structure at the same time on the screen, to
give users an ideal overview of the structure. As it is not
possible to assign each knowledge object the same display
space, consequently the display area per knowledge object
in the context area is less than in the focus area, while the
areas are not strictly divided. Moreover, the used area per
knowledge object decreases with increasing distance from
the focus, proportional to the sensual faculty of the user.
As the available display area per object decreases, the
amount of information per object has to be decreased as
well. Techniques that can be used to decrease the amount

of information are filtering, selective aggregation,
highlighting, and distortion [16].
Detailed information and examples of early
implementations of Focus + Context technologies can be
found in [17]. More current examples are presented in
[18] and [19].
To summarize, very important requirements of a
navigation tool for visualizations of structured data are
that the navigation should be efficient, the usage should be
easily to learn and intuitively to use. Focus + Context
characteristics help to increase the efficiency of
navigation. Additionally, it should support landmarks.

5.2. Projecting semantic link network structures
to trees
In the field of visualization of knowledge structures,
an important aspect is the visualization of the relations
between knowledge objects. Often, a relation or
connection between two objects is represented by a line or
an arc drawn between them. In network structures, such as
the WWW or a complex semantic network like a topic
map, navigation of visualized network structures can be
difficult and not very intuitive. This is due to the fact, that
all visible objects can have several connections between
each other, and some of them cannot even be drawn
because of several reasons. For example, objects can be
located outside of the display area and users cannot see
the object at the end of the line, if there is any. Or in a
Focus + Context user interface, objects can be located in
the distorted area of the structure and thus connections
between them cannot be displayed. Additionally, a clear
layout, that guarantees a good oversight over the entire
network structure is hardly impossible, as the data is not
hierarchically structured. Fig. 2 illustrates that even a
simple network with only 13 nodes and all connections
visible, makes it hard to visually identify which nodes are
connected.
Therefore, we suggest projecting the semantic link
network structure to a hierarchically organized model such
as a tree. In a tree, one object has to be defined as the root
object. This could be the best match out of a search using
a groupware-based topic map or a defined root object in
the companies’ intranet etc. With that root defined, all
related objects can be laid out from the root as children
and descendants of that object. The network structure
becomes directed that way, as the path through the
network always starts at the defined root. Fig. 3 shows a
simple network with very few connections between the
nodes to illustrate the projection mechanism. In the
network, the node named “A” is chosen as the root node
for a tree structure that results from the projection. Three
types of projections can be differentiated. The resulting

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

tree of a projection is called strict projection, if each node
in the network, that is directly connected with the root
node, is a child node of the root node in the tree. Then,
each connected node is recursively examined for
connected nodes in the network, and respectively
additional nodes are added to the tree.
As connections of objects in an undirected network
always represent two directions, each node in a strict
projection has one child node that is syntactically the same
as its parent node. As this relation is not relevant to a user
that navigates a knowledge structure, these relations do
not have to be considered to be part of the projected tree.
A projection that is reduced in the described way is called

Figure 2. Network with 13
nodes

navigated using Focus + Context techniques. But the
projection of the network only visualizes that part of the
network, that displays the context of the currently defined
root node. Therefore, the user interface must feature an
option to select every node in the network as the root node
of the tree. That way, the user can navigate deeper into the
structure while keeping the maximum depth of the tree
fixed, by selecting each node to be the new root node and
continue the search for relevant knowledge objects from
that point. Landmarks could be used to highlight the
descendant nodes of the current root, that have been root
nodes once before. That way, users can easily see their
entire search path in the network.

Figure 3. Simple network
with few connections

clean projection. Clean projections can still contain
irrelevant connections, because paths in a network often
contain loops, which let syntactically equivalent objects
appear several times in the projected tree. With loops, the
projected tree can grow up to an infinite level. Therefore,
loops have to be eliminated while building up a projected
tree. Loops in the tree can be easily recognized by looking
for equivalent nodes on the path from the root node to the
current node. Fig. 4 shows a so called loop filtered
projection of the network that is presented in Fig. 3.
If the path from the root to the leaf is very long, the
structure of the tree is called deep. The depth of the
resulting tree has to be limited to ensure an acceptable
performance during the projection process. If many nodes
in a tree have many child nodes, the structure of the tree is
called broad. Projected trees have the characteristic that
they can grow very deep, while they seldom grow very
broad. The reason is that knowledge objects are heavily
linked between each other if the whole knowledge
structure is considered, but each object contains a limited
number of links, which are represented by the children of
the node.
Thus using the concept of projection, the user can
easily navigate the knowledge structure using a visual
interface that is optimized for navigating hierarchies.
Additionally, tree structures are very well suited to be

Figure 4. Loop filtered projection of
Fig. 3 from node A

5.3. Visualizing of groupware-based topic maps
with the HyperbolicTree
To create efficient, ergonomic navigational concepts,
different teams in the research field of Human-ComputerInteraction (HCI) introduced innovative navigation
interface concepts, that should increase efficiency of
known browsing concepts such as the Microsoft Windows
Explorer. We chose the HyperbolicTree concept as the
most suitable approach as a navigation interface for
semantic link networks. A HyperbolicTree initially
displays a tree with its root node at the center of the
display area. The hierarchical structure is then laid out on
a plane in hyperbolic space and mapped onto a circular
display region. The circumference of a circle on the
hyperbolic plane grows exponentially with its radius,
which means that exponentially more space is available
with increasing distance from the root node. The tree uses
distortion in the context area to reduce the information per
knowledge object ratio. That way it is possible to display
an overview of the entire structure on the available display
area.
Projections of networks mostly have a deep rather than
a broad structure. [19] have shown that a HyperbolicTree
is very well suited to visualize and efficiently navigate this
kind of hierarchical structures. It is not suited to visualize

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

very broad structures, because the distortion effect in tree
levels close to the root is already too strong, which makes
the structure inconvenient to navigate. But very broad
structures do not occur very often in projected network
structures.

initial search in the topic map. All descendants of this root
node are presented and each of them can be selected to be
the new root node. Sub-trees of a node can be dynamically
displayed or hidden.

Figure 6. Visualization of a topic map using
the HyperbolicTree concept

Figure 5. HyperbolicTree including landmarks
Fig. 5 shows a HyperbolicTree that uses graphical
landmarks such as thumbnails and icons, as well as color
coding textual information and node background. For
more information about the HyperbolicTree concept see
[18] and [19].
For efficient projection and tree creation, the depth of
the tree has to be limited in real world environments. This
situation is acceptable because the root node is the result
of a user performed search, odds are good that the user
finds the needed information somewhere near the root
area. In case interesting information has been located, the
user can select the node of interest as the new root node of
the projection. A new projection of the network is then
performed, starting at the newly located node. That way,
users explore the environment of that node. Due to the
nature of the HyperbolicTree concept, the depth limitation
of the tree during the projection can be very high which
enables users to search a large part of the knowledge
structure without having to refocus the tree to a new root.
Additionally, the layout technique of the HyperbolicTree
offers great flexibility in the use of graphical landmarks.
A comprehensive overview of several visualization
concepts other than the HyperbolicTree can be found in
[16] and [20].
By applying the HyperbolicTree concept to
groupware-based topic maps using the projection of
semantic link network structures, as described in section
5.2, it is possible to provide users with a visual navigation
tool. In this newly created interface, nodes represent
topics, occurrences, and topic associations (v. fig. 6). At
the beginning of a navigation process, the root node is
either manually selected by users or is the result of an

6. Conclusions and future areas of research
An approach of discovery and representation of
knowledge structures in groupware-based organizational
memories based on the ISO standard ISO/IEC 13250
Topic Maps has been presented. The K-Discovery project
combines groupware paradigms, topic maps, and
visualization concepts, leading to substantial synergies for
organizational knowledge management. These synergies
leverage their mutual advantages and therefore, provide
benefits for the research fields. From our point of view,
the K-Discovery project provides a considerable
framework to identify, visualize, and navigate knowledge
structures in groupware-based environments. Therefore, it
supports users in finding required knowledge in
organizational memories. In particular, a graphical
visualization and navigation tool based on hyperbolic
technologies provides users with intuitive access
mechanisms to required knowledge, that can alternatively
be used instead of the existing topic map navigator, which
provides a tabular and textual user interface. In addition,
the findings are of high practical relevance as shown in
the short case. In fact, there are companies that have
shown interest in a solution based on the K-Discovery
framework.
Prototypes of the core modules and the graphical
visualization and navigation tool have been implemented
and can be used for trial purposes. Eventually, further
knowledge management applications upon this framework
for groupware-based topic maps will be developed.
Specifically, taxonomy issues in virtual organizations will
be addressed.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

References

Alamitos CA, Washington, Brussels, Tokio, September.

[1] Davenport, Thomas H. and Prusak, Laurence (1998),
“Working Knowledge – How Organizations Manage What They
Know”; Harvard Business School Press, Boston, Massachusetts.

[12] Ark, Wendy; Dryer, D. Christopher; Selker, Ted and Zhai,
Shumin (1998), “Landmarks to Aid Navigation in a Graphical
User Interface”, in: Proceedings of Workshop on Personalized
and Social Navigation in Information Space, Sweden.

[2] Probst, G.; Raub, S. and Romhardt, K. (1999), „Wissen
managen: Wie Unternehmen ihre wertvollste Ressource optimal
nutzen“; 3. Aufl., Gabler, Wiesbaden.

[13] Shneiderman, Ben (1998), “Designing the user interface:
strategies for effective human-computer-interaction”, Third
Edition, Addison-Wesley, Reading.

[3] Rath, Dr. Hans Holger and Pepper, Steve (1999), “Topic
Maps: Introduction and Allegro”; in: Proceedings of the Markup
Technologies 99, Philadelphia, USA.

[14] Glaser,
Wilhelm
R.
(1994),
„Menschliche
Informationsverarbeitung“, in: Eberleh, Edmund; Oberquelle,
Horst; Oppermann, Reinhard (alle Hrsg.): Einführung in die
Software-Ergonomie, 2. Auflage, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New
York 1994, pp. 7-51.

[4] Ahmed, Kal (2000), “Topic Maps for repositories”; in:
Proceedings of the XML Europe 2000, Paris, France.
[5] Lotus Development Corporation (1995), “Groupware Communication, Collaboration, Coordination”; Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA, November.
[6] Biezunski, Michel and Newcomb, Steven R. (2001), “Topic
Maps and XTM – A Manager’s Overview”; in: Proceedings of
the Knowledge Technologies 2001 (KT2001), Austin, Texas,
USA, 5-7 March 2001.
[7] Lotus Development Corporation (2001), “Domino Designer
Help [Release 5.06a]”; Database, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA.
[8] International Organization for Standardization (2000),
ISO/IEC 13250, “Information technology – SGML Applications
– Topic Maps”, Geneva: ISO.
[9] Smolnik, Stefan; Nastansky, Ludwig (2002), “K-Discovery:
Using Topic Maps to Identify Distributed Knowledge Structures
in Groupware-based Organizational Memories”, accepted for:
Thirty-fifth Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, (CD-ROM), January 2002, Computer Society Press.
[10] Nonaka, Ikujiro and Takeuchi, Hirotaka (1995), “The
Knowledge-Creating Company – How Japanese Companies
Create the Dynamics of Innovation”; Oxford University Press,
New York, Oxford.
[11] Huth, Carsten; Smolnik, Stefan and Nastansky, Ludwig
(2001), “Applying Topic Maps to Ad Hoc Workflows for
Semantic Associative Navigation in Process Networks”, in:
Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Groupware
(CRIWG'2001), Darmstadt, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los

[15] Stary, Christian (1994), „Interaktive Systeme – SoftwareEntwicklung
und
Software-Ergonomie“,
Vieweg,
Braunschweig/Wiesbaden.
[16] Card, Stuart K.; Mackinlay, Jock D. and Shneiderman, Ben
(1999), “Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
Think”, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco 1999.
[17] Furnas, G. W. (1999), “The Fisheye View: A New Look at
Structured Files”, in: Card, Stuart K.; Mackinlay, Jock D.;
Shneiderman, Ben: Readings in Information Visualization:
Using Vision to Think, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San
Francisco 1999, pp. 312-330.
[18] Lamping, John; Rao, Ramana and Pirolli, Peter (1995), “A
Focus+Context Technique Based on Hyperbolic Geometry for
Visualizing Large Hierarchies”, in: Proceedings of 1995
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’95),
Denver, Colorado, USA, May 7-11, 1995.
[19] Pirolli, Peter; Card, Stuart K. and van der Wege, Mija
(2000), “The Effect of Information Scent on Searching
Information - Visualizations of Large Tree Structures”, in:
Proceedings of the Advanced Visual Interfaces 2000 Conference
(AVI2000), May 23-26, Palermo, Italy.
[20] Gloor, Peter A. (1997), “Elements of hypermedia design:
techniques for navigation and visualization in cyberspace”,
Birkhäuser, Boston.
[21] Inxight Software, Inc. (2001), “Inxight Star Tree”;
http://startree.inxight.com/, Santa Clara, CA, USA.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

