The Empathic Visualisation Algorithm (EVA) – An Automatic Mapping from
Abstract Data to Naturalistic Visual Structure
Andreas Loizides
University College London (UCL)
Department of Computer Science
Gower Street WC1E 6BT, London, UK
A.Loizides@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Mel Slater
University College London (UCL)
Department of Computer Science
Gower Street WC1E 6BT, London, UK
M.Slater@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper demonstrates a technique for visualising multidimensional data sets holistically. The EVA algorithm provides an automatic mapping from semantically important
features of the data to emotionally or perceptually significant features of the corresponding visual structure (such as
a face). In other words a single glance at the visual structure informs the observer of the global state of the data,
since the visual structure has an emotional impact on the
observer. The visualisation is designed to correspond to the
impact that would have been generated had the observer
been able to access the relevant semantics of the underlying
data.

1. Introduction
The pictures of faces shown in Figure 1 represent the
financial state of different companies. In which one would
you invest? Without knowing any details of what the facial
expressions represent, it is very likely that you would have
chosen the company represented by the face to the bottom
right as your target of investment. In fact, more information
can be gleaned from the faces by knowing that the degree
of happiness represents profitability, the degree of fear represents lack of liquidity and so on.
The Empathic Visualisation Algorithm (EVA) is concerned with multivariate data visualiation [4],[5],[21], except that instead of using abstract diagrams to represent the
data [1],[11] a naturalistic visual structure is generated instead. By ‘naturalistic’ we imply one that is so familiar that
people do not have to learn how to understand its meaning,
and where this meaning is conformant with relevant meaning in the underlying data. An excellent example of such a
visual structure is the apparent view of a human face. No
one needs to be an expert in order to understand if a face

Figure 1. Random Examples of Faces Produced by the Method

is ‘sad’ or ‘happy’ - this understanding follows from being
human. More complex emotional expressions (e.g., generally looking happy, but with a tinge of anxiety) can be easily
recognised by human observers, and lead to their questioning the underlying data for the cause of such a visualisation. The EVA provides a global overview of what the data
is ‘saying’ relative to the underlying values or interests of
the data consumer.
A basic problem lies in finding a mapping from the multivariate data set to the features of the visual structure that
is designed to produce the appropriate emotional responses
in the human observer. If the mapping is arbitrary (as in the
case of Chernoff faces [6] for example) then this method

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

has no intrinsic value - we require that the emotional response of an observer to the visual structure is an appropriate one corresponding to the goals that the observer has in
understanding the data and the actions that should flow from
this. The ‘happy’ face should lead the observer to think that
(e.g.) the financial state of the companies that it represents
is a good one, the ‘sad’ face indicating that action to avert
a problem may be needed. We have devised an automatic
mapping from the data to the characteristics of the visual
structure that preserves this correspondence. This is done
using Genetic Programming techniques [13].
There are two main problems in such data visualisation:

¯

¯

Choosing a suitable mapping from the data to the chosen visual structure. The major difference is between
arbitrary, handcrafted visualisations (constructed manually by a designer or end-user using appropriate tools)
and automatic mapping (visualisations that are composed on the fly by the underlying system according
to a set of pre-supplied layout rules and components).
The problem of taking into account the impact the visualisation has on the emotional response of users in
an automatically generated visualisation is fundamental to this work.
The choice of a suitable representation of the data whether abstract or more naturalistic. Use of naturalistic visual structures, based on entities encountered in
everyday life that need no special knowledge for understanding by an average human observer, is at the
heart of this research paper.

In this research we use an automatic mapping paradigm
on a naturalistic visual representation, which up to now
we have based on human facial expressions. This takes
into account psychological research regarding characteristics of the face (e.g. universality of facial expressions - no
cultural dependencies on the emotions we use). Paul Ekman spent more than ¾¼ years studying faces, and derived
a system called the Facial Action Coding System (FACS)
which measures individual facial expressions [8]. This is
the basis of the software system [22] that we have used to
create faces with different emotional expressions. We call
this method the ‘Empathic Visualisation Algorithm (EVA)’.
EVA is not a 3D version (extension) of Chernoff Faces. The
non-arbitrary mapping used, to expressions rather than features, makes the whole concept different.

2. Related Work
Information Visualisation is the visual presentation of information spaces and structures to facilitate their rapid assimilation and understanding.

The techniques described in the literature describe several different approaches to visualise multidimensional data
sets of quantitative variables, with a number of advantages and disadvantages. There are numerous techniques
that use an arbitrary mapping and abstract representations
[7],[11],[19],[9], some techniques that use arbitrary mapping and naturalistic representations [6],[2], a few systems
that use automatic mapping and abstract representations
[17],[20] and the proposed EVA scheme that uses automatic mapping combined with naturalistic visual structures
[14],[3].
Techniques falling in the first category (arbitrary mapping, abstract representation) present a number of problems.
As the dimensionality increases, the complexity of those
systems increases as well, overloading the display with excessive information. Such techniques require user-learning
time to understand and be able to manipulate such interactive displays effectively. It becomes non-trivial to visualise
relationships of variables beyond quadratic and in particular
to get a holistic view of the data set.
The main example of the second category (arbitrary
mapping, naturalistic representations) is that of Chernoff
faces [6]. Hernan Chernoff was the first to realise the potential of using a human face as a representation for data.
His idea capitalises on two important principles. Firstly, is
our familiarity with human faces, and our ability to rapidly
process even the smallest nuances and changes in a human
face.Secondly, the fact that a human face evokes an emotional response in us and can therefore affect the way in
which we behave. Since humans are optimised in some
sense, for face recognition, it was hoped that using faces
would aid in the grouping of the data and also to illustrate
‘trends’ in multi-dimensional data. The method involves assigning to each column of the data a facial feature such as
width of the eye, position of the mouth, and for each row
of the data constructing the face associated with the assignment. It is believed to be able to represent a total of ¾¼
different dimensions.
Many researchers have built upon Chernoff’s initial idea
[10],[18],[16],[12],[23]. However, there are a number of
limitations when using Chernoff faces. The most important
of all is that the variables in the representation are treated
equally, but their emotional impact depends on which part
of the face they affect. Variables assigned to an area near the
mouth or eyes have higher emotional significance compared
to variables assigned to a different facial feature. Hence,
this arbitrary mapping from data variables to facial features
does not take into account the impact on the emotions of
the observer. Moreover, it is necessary to spend some time
training test subjects as to which features apply to which
variables. It can be argued that the visualisation loses its
effectiveness when we have extreme values, since these will
produce unrealistic faces.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

In the category of automatically generated visualisations
to abstract representations the visualisations are composed
on the fly by the underlying system according to a set of presupplied layout rules and components. These pre-supplied
rules and components restrict both the problem domain and
the visual interface. Such techniques require user-learning
time while they widen the gap between expert and nonexpert users.
The problems with existing methods described above led
to the original motivation to build a system using naturalistic representations with an automatically generated visualisation. The system, EVA, has been built and initial experiments with the method [3] show the following advantages
over existing methods:
1. Interrelationships between the data variables are incorporated into one visual structure.
2. The visual structure gives an overview of the whole
data set.
3. The visual structure is simple and thus easy to understand.
4. Both experts and non-experts are able to give a quick
overview of what is going on.
5. The complexity of the system does not increase with
dimensionality of the data but with dimensionality of
utility (value) functions, explained below.

3 Method
3.1 Basic Approach
Throughout this paper we are considering the representation of multivariate data in an Ò ¢ data matrix , conÜ .
sisting of Ò cases on quantitative variables Ü½ Ü¾
Each row in the data matrix typically represents an individual and there are observations made for each individual. The objective is to construct a visualisation of the data
matrix where the salient features of the data can be intuitively recognised by an observer, such that the representation gives an overall view of the data set. Within this overall
objective there are two fundamental goals:
1. Naturalistic visual representation. The visual structure should be something encountered in everyday life,
something that does not require special knowledge for
interpretation by a normal human observer.
2. Automatic mapping. The mapping should be such that
semantically important features in the data are mapped
to perceptually or emotionally important features of
the visual structure.

Examples of (1) include faces, buildings, towns and others. No human needs to be an expert to recognise the emotional content of another human face - it is recognisably
‘happy’, ‘sad’, ‘angry’, ‘relaxed’, ‘fearful’, and various possibilities of these basic emotions, including neutrality. We
frequently use, throughout this research, an example of a
‘face’ because it is the epitome of a naturalistic visual structure in the sense we mean here.
Given a set of data, and given a visual structure, it is
trivial to construct a mapping from the data to a visual
structure; for example map variable Ü to the th facial feature. However, such a mapping is arbitrary; it does not take
into account the impact of the face on the emotions of the
observer. Now the data is of interest to the observer for
some reason: associating with the data there will be some
‘value system’ (metric) reflecting the interest or importance
or consequences of aspects of the data for the situation of
the observer. A fundamental goal, reflected in (2) is that the
perceptually or emotionally significant features of the visual
structure directly reflect the value system over the data. We
call this visual homomorphism. Hence the mapping from
data to visual structure is not arbitrary, but constructed in
such a way that this visual homomorphism is realised.
What follows is a description of how such a mapping is
constructed in the situation where each row (i.e. individual)
in the data is to be represented by a different instance of the
same type of visual structure. That is to say, by using faces
as the visual structure, each row is mapped to a different
face.
Ô be Ô given functions over the
Let × ´ µ × ½ ¾
data representing specific utilities or values over the data
matrix. Suppose for example that the data matrix represents a set of customers of a telephone company, and the
variables are quantities such as age, gender, marital status,
income, number of years with the company, number of telephone calls made per week, monthly phone bill, and so on.
One utility or value might be a function of the overall age
distribution of the population - such as the mean age, or the
percentage over , or the percentage under ¾¼. Another
value might be the ’flatness’ of the data - for example the
ratio of the variance of the first principle component to the
total variation in the data. Another value might be the correlation coefficient between age and monthly bill, and so
on, for many other quantities that characterise the interests
or value system of the observer. That is, the user of the
data must be able to specify a set of utility functions, relationships over the data, that are important - that essentially
define the reasons why the data is of interest at all.
Now consider a visual structure (ª). We will use Ô importance metrics, that are characteristics of ª which are
measurable and significant to human perception or emo½ ¾ Ô. In the example of the face
tions, × ´ªµ ×
these might be the degree of anger, happiness, anxiety, - or

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

characteristics such as age, beauty, gender and so on.
The fundamental goal, in terms of any
and any ª ,
is to produce a mapping ´ µ   ª such that the values over the data matrix are reflected in characteristics of
the visual structure. In particular that × ´ªµ is a monotonically increasing function of × ´ µ . If happiness reflects the
utility function for a required relationship (financial stability) between profitability, investment, turnover and season,
and anger represents the utility function for the rate of staff
leaving a company, then a face with combined characteristics of happiness and anger will immediately present to the
observer a situation where there may be high financial stability, but also too high a rate of staff turnover. Of course
many such combinations can be considered in parallel, not
simply two at a time.
A characteristic is a measurement of some aspect of ª
as a whole (such as the emotions of a face) rather than some
individual feature (such as the shape of the mouth). A characteristic is a measure representing the totality of the face
such as the degree of ‘happiness’. The manifestation of a
characteristic (such as happiness) depends on many different individual features of the face - specific configurations
of muscle tensions. Similarly, the appearance of beauty or
age or gender is derived from many different features - such
as size of the eyes, inter-ocular distance, shape of the mouth,
symmetry, and so on. In other words, features are the individual components that make up a face - such as the specific configuration of muscle tensions for a specific face, or
the geometric and material properties of the actual features
(eyes, colour of the eye, mouth, nose, lips) that make up a
face. Therefore, we can render a face knowing its features.
Once rendered the face will then have a set of measurable
characteristics.
For instance, suppose that there are Ö features of the vi½ ¾ Ö. Knowing these feasual structure: Ø ´ªµ Ø
tures of ª results in being able to render it. Once rendered, we can measure it to determine its characteristics
½ ¾ Ô.
× ´ªµ ×
Finally, we introduce feature functions over the data maÖ. These functions completely detrix: Ø ´ µ Ø ½ ¾
termine the features of the visual structure, in fact
Ø

´ªµ

Ø

´ µ Ø ½¾

Ö

(1)

In other words, the values of these functions are interpreted as the values for the features of the visual structure.
Our goal is to select these functions in order to attain an
accurate correspondence between the value system over the
data and the characteristics of the visual structure. Therefore, attaining the visual homomorphism.
´½ ¾
´½ ¾
Let
Ô µ and
Ô µ. Suppose
that,
  is a measure of the ‘distance’ between these
two vectors. Then the specific goal is to choose Ø ´ µ Ø
½ ¾ Ö such that   is minimised.

3.2 Genetic Programming
EVA tackles the minimisation problem introduced above
(the selection of appropriate functions) using Genetic Programming (GP) techniques.
Let
´½ ¾
Ö µ be a specific set of feature
functions which when applied to
(the data set) produce
the visual structure features. We choose at random a large
collection of such sets of functions
½ ¾ Æ . This
collection defines a population of sets of feature functions
and is ready for ‘evolution’. The th member of the population produces a specific visual structure ª . This visual
structure has characteristics × ´ª µ ×
½ ¾ Ô. These
characteristics can be used to produce the distance measure  . The distance measurement can be used
ment
to compute a ‘fitness’ for the th member of the population. Hence, each member of the population has an associated fitness, which can be expressed as a probability. These
probabilities determine survival into the next generation and
selection for mating - thus producing a second generation.
The process continues until (possible) convergence. The
most fit member (i.e. set of feature functions) of all populations is chosen for the required mapping. Figure 2, shows a
diagrammatic review of the method.

3.3 Measuring Emotional Expressions
Values returned by the feature functions Ø ´ µ Ø
Ö were assigned to be contractions of individual
muscles in the face [22]. These values allow an individual face to be rendered. The muscles are shown as red lines
in bottom right face of Figure 3, and areas affected by the
muscles are shown in the face next to it. The lighter the
colour the more the muscles affect that particular area.
An experimental set-up was created to quantify emotional expressions on the face, for example, the scale of
happiness-sadness. This was achieved using a number of
landmark points on the face that are significantly influenced by muscle contractions expressing the various emotions measured. Two sets of data (randomly created facial
expressions) were created, the first consisting of ¾ ¼ faces
and the second ½ ¼ faces, and positions of each of the landmarks, for each face, were recorded. Each face was subjectively assessed for emotional state by at least ¿ different
people (from a pool of about ¿¼ people) for both data sets.
The answers of the subjects for the first data set only were
used to create symbolic regression equations with response
variable Ý representing the individual emotional expression
and explanatory variables Ü representing each of the landmarks on the face. The second data set was then used to verify the equations formed, and high positive correlations (all
above ¼ ) were found between the results from the equation produced and the subjective evaluations.

½¾

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

We use these estimated regression equations [15] to measure the emotional expressions for the method we describe
here. Note that this data analysis on generated faces only
had to be done once, and the results can be used in any
number of different visualisations.

4 Results
Figure 3, shows some sample results of the method applied to financial data. The data set used to construct these
faces, includes Balance-Sheet and Profit & Loss accounts
for ¾ ¼ companies. Each row represents an individual company for a specific year. In the data there are a number of
highly correlated variables and it is very hard if not impossible to get an overall view of the performance of the company.
The goal is to get an overall understanding on how well
these companies were performing on a number of utility
functions. For these we used ¿ financial ratios that cover
important features of the data. These are the × ´ µ ×
½ ¾ Ô functions where Ô ¿. The financial ratios were:
profitability and effectiveness in the management of the
capital of the firm (Return on Capital Employed), ability
of organisation to cover its immediate liabilities (Current
Liabilities over Total Assets) and risk ness and long-term
solvency (Gearing Ratio).
The corresponding emotions on the face used are:
1. Happiness-Sadness scale representing Profitability.
The happier the face the more profitable the organisation.
2. Degree of Anger representing Liabilities. Angry faces
representing companies that are ”technically insolvent”.
3. Degree of Fear representing Gearing. Risky organisations are mapped to fearful faces.
When using the EVA method we can produce a visual
structure that represents the company as a whole, and therefore quickly form a view regarding overall performance of
the company.
When looking at the ‘face matrix’ in Figure 3 , it is easy
to spot happy faces (second face in the first row, first face
in last row, second face in the third row) that may mean a
good overall performance according to profitability. It is
also easy to spot sad, angry and fearful faces that can denote differing types of poor performance. The mixing of
these emotions in one naturalistic visual structure, results in
a very powerful visualisation that is easy to interpret. This
could become even more powerful, if we could actually interact with and question the visual structure to get more information about the data set - in other words perform back-

tracking from the visualisation to the data. This is the subject of further research and out of the scope of this paper.

5 Conclusions
We have introduced a new method for constructing an
automatic mapping from data to visual structure, which enforces a homomorphism between important characteristics
of the data and the emotional or perceptual impact of the
visual structure. Salient global aspects of the data (the utility or value functions) are mapped to emotionally or perceptually significant aspects of a visual structure. The features that allow rendering of the visual structure are determined by a genetic program that breeds generations of visual structures such that in each successive generation there
is a greater match between the utility functions and the visual structure features.
The type of visual structure produced by this method
are meant to be informative ‘at a glance’, and can also reveal important detailed information or unusual characteristics present in the data (e.g., a happy face with a hint of
anxiety). It can also reveal, overall, general characteristics
from many cases. The method is not put forward as an alternative to other types of visualisation (it is less quantitative),
but rather it provides a ‘first-pass’ visualisation that may, in
particular applications, raise interesting features that then
may be explored in detail through traditional visualisation
techniques, or indeed statistical analysis.

Acknowledgements
Special thanks goes to the Knowledge Lab of NCR Financial Services who financially supports this work.

References
[1] C. Ahlberg and B. Shneiderman. Visual information seeking
using the filmfinder. In Proceedings of ACM CHI’94 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, volume 2
of VIDEOS: Part I: Browsing Navigation, page 433, 1994.
Color plates on page 484.
[2] M. Alexa and W. Muller. Visualisation by examples: Mapping data to visual representations using few correspondences. In Proceedings of the Joint EUROGRAPHICS and
IEEE TCVG, Symposium on Visualisation in Vienna, Austria, May 26–28, 1999, pages 23–32. Springer-Verlag/Wien,
1999.
[3] A.Loizides and M.Slater. An application of the empathetic
visualisation algorithm (eva). Research Note RN/99/50, Department of Computer Science, University College London,
1999.
[4] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman. Readings
In Information Visualisation: Using Vision To Think. Morgan Kaufman, 1999.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

[5] M. Chalmers. Tutorial on information visualisation. VLDB
Conference, 1999.
[6] H. Chernoff. The use of faces to represent points in ndimensional space graphically. Research Note NR-042-993,
Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Gower Street,
London WC1E 6BT, UK, december 1971.
[7] S. G. Eick, J. L. Steffen, and E. E. Sumner Jr. Seesoft —
A tool for visualizing line oriented software statistics. IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, pages 957–68, Nov.
1992.
[8] P. Ekman and W. V. Friesen. Facial Action Coding System
(Investigator’s Guide). Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc.,
Palo Alto, California, USA, 1978.
[9] S. Feiner and C. Beshers. Worlds within worlds: metaphors
for exploring n-dimensional virtual worlds. In ACM, editor,
UIST. Third Annual Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology. Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium, Snowbird, Utah, USA, October 3–5, 1990, pages
76–83, New York, NY 10036, USA, Oct. 1990. ACM Press.
[10] H. Homa and Schwartz. Perceptbility of schematic face
stimuli: evidence of a perceptual gestalt. Journal of Memory
and Cognition, 4, 1976.
[11] A. Inselberg. Parallel coordinates for multidimensional
displays. In Spatial Information Technologies for Remote
Sensing Today and Tomorrow, The Ninth William T. Pecora Memorial Remote Sensing Symposium, pages 312–324.
IEEE Computer Society Press, 1984.
[12] W. J., S. L., and S. R. Using a human face in an interface. In
Human Factors in Computer Systems, pages 85–91. ACM,
1994.
[13] J. R. Koza. Genetic Programming: On the Programming of
Computers by Means of Natural Selection. MIT Press, 1992.
[14] A. Loizides and M. Slater. The empathic visualisation algorithm, chernoff faces revisited. In Technical Sketch, ACM
Siggraph 2001 Conference Abstracts and Applications, page
175. ACM Siggraph, 2001. accepted.
[15] A. Loizides, M. Slater, and W. B. Langdon. Measuring
facial emotional expressions using genetic programming.
In WSC6, 6th World Conference on Soft Computing in Industrial Applications. Springer-Verlag, 10–24 Sept. 2001.
Forthcoming.
[16] S. G. M. and T. R. Improving the communication of accounting information through cartoon graphics. In Accounting, Auditing and Accountability Journal, volume 9, pages
68–85, 1996.
[17] J. MacKinlay. Automating the design of graphical presentations of relational information. In To appear in the TOG
special issue on user interfaces, Dec. 1986.
[18] Moriarity. Communicating financial information through
multi-dimensional graphics. In Journal of Accounting Research, volume 17, pages 205–224, 1979.
[19] R. Rao and S. K. Card. Exploring large tables with the table
lens. In Proceedings of ACM CHI’95 Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, volume 2 of Videos, pages
403–404, 1995.
[20] S. F. Roth, J. Kolojejchick, J. Mattis, M. C. Chuah, J. Goldstein, and O. Juarez. SAGE tools: A knowledge-based environment for designing and perusing data visualizations. In
Proceedings of ACM CHI’94 Conference on Human Factors

in Computing Systems, volume 2 of DEMONSTRATIONS:
Demonstrational Interfaces, pages 27–28, 1994.
[21] R. Spence. Information Visualization. Addison-Wesley,
2000.
[22] K. Waters. A muscle model for animating three-dimensional
facial expression. In M. C. Stone, editor, SIGGRAPH ’87
Conference Proceedings (Anaheim, CA, July 27–31, 1987),
pages 17–24. Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4,
July 1987.
[23] Wilkinson. An experimental evaluation of multivariate
graphical point representations. In Human Factors in Computer Systems, pages 202–209. ACM, 1982.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

(n x k)

Cases

Figure 2. From Data to Visual Structure: Diagrammatic example of automatic mapping

Variables

Matrix
X 11

X 12 X 13 ...

X 1k

X 21

X 22

X 2k

...

.
.
.

.
.
.

X n1

X n2

Naturalistic

Random combinations
of variables

Visual

.
.
.
...

Struucture

X nk

GLOBAL CHARACTERISTICS
VALUE SYSTEM

OF VISUAL STRUCTURE

S1= Profitability

S1= degree of Hapiness

Fitness function
S2= Liquidity

S2= degree of anger

S3= Dividend Payout

S3= degree of fear

...

...

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 3. Examples of facial expressions produced by EVA on real financial data. The last but one
face, shows how muscles affect areas of the face whereas the last one the muscles themselves in
red colour.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

