Bibliometric mapping as a science policy tool
ECM Noyons, RK Buter, and AFJ van Raan
Centre for Science and Technology Studies (CWTS), Leiden University, the Netherlands
noyons@cwts.leidenuniv.nl
Abstract
Bibliometric mapping of science within a science
policy context required a different approach to
visualization than for IR purposes. The identification of
sub-domains within a field and their unchanged
definition over time is crucial. A combination of this
structure with actor characteristics provides possible
answers to policy related questions. A dedicated
interface to enter a science map enables users to
explore the field and its developments and to retrieve
answers to user-defined questions from a policy
perspective.

1. Introduction
To visualize a knowledge domain, there are a
variety of possibilities at hand. In order to make a
proper choice, the crucial issue is to determine the
purpose of the visualization. For 90% of the
visualizations of knowledge domains, the purpose is
information retrieval at the lowest level. From a huge
domain, we wish to retrieve a particular relevant
document or set of documents.
For bibliometric mapping in a science policy
context, this issue of retrieving relevant documents is
less important. The main task for this kind of maps is
to generate an overview and fixed structure. This
overview is based on bibliographic data of relevant
publications in a science field. The public knowledge
of a science field is stored in the publications in
scientific literature.
Users in a science policy context are not primarily
interested in the contents of individual documents, but
rather in developments of the field as a whole and the
actors behind them. Of course, this is also a kind of
information retrieval, but not in the ‘classical’ sense,
not on the lowest level of documents. Bibliometric
mapping of science in a science policy context is
primarily directed at generating a helicopter view of
science fields and to characterize the role of actors
(continents, countries, organizations or individual

scientists) within. Therefore, the main task of
visualization in this context is to generate helicopter
views.
For visualization in an IR context, the main task is
to provide information about the environment of
relevant documents.
In this paper we wish to point out how our maps of
science are constructed and how they can be used to
provide relevant information within a science policy
context.

2. Method
In order to create a helicopter view over a science
field, we pass several stages. The first and crucial stage
is the delineation of a research field. Obviously, we can
only be sure to generate a reliable helicopter view on
the basis of bibliographic data, if we know we start
with the relevant documents. In some cases, we may
confine ourselves to the publication data from a set of
scholarly journals, in other we have to use highly
sophisticated combinations of search terms. This
choice depends upon the complexity of the field, the
possibilities of the bibliographic database, as well as
upon the aim of the study. For instance, the selection of
publications on the basis of journal titles will, in most
cases, exclude multidisciplinary journals like Science
and Nature. In studies where an overall picture of the
developments in a field is required, this should not be
too problematic. In case studies where the impact of
publications is involved, this may be a delicate
omission.
In a second stage, we distribute these publications
over sub-domains. In most of our mapping analyses,
we identify keywords to describe the field as a whole,
but in other cases we use classification codes.
Subsequently, we identify sub-domains by clustering
these keywords or codes and finally, we assign
publications to sub-domains on the basis of derived
clusters. The clusters are formed by complete linkage
clustering of the keyword co-occurrence vectors.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Subsequently, we map these sub-domains (sets of
publications) in relation to each other in a 2dimensional space. The sub-domain co-occurrence
(publications may be assigned to more than one subdomain) vectors are positioned in relation to each other
by multi-dimensional scaling (MDS) in SAS.
This is the overview, the helicopter view of the
field. The sub-domains are represented as circles,
varying in size corresponding the number of
publications included. In this respect, the maps are
principally different from IR maps, such as Author Cocitation Analysis [3, 6], SomPak, VxInsight,
Vantagepoint, and SemioMap [1,2]. The sub-domains
in our approach are identified first and then put in a
map, whereas similar IR maps visualize networks of
individual documents or smaller sets of documents,
allowing users to explore them. This is not an
accidental difference. The identification of subdomains (as clusters of publications) is essential for
bibliometric maps in a policy context [5], because it
can provide a stable structure over more than one year.
With different documents each year, a network of
documents does not guarantee this stability. We claim
that only with our maps, we are able to provide useful
answers from a bibliometric point of view to most
common policy related questions, like:
x What are the main developments in the field?
x Who are the main actors?
x What is the position of actor A (a country,
organization, …) in this field?
x Who are A’s competitors?
x How does the position of A relate to
benchmarks?
In order to be able to address questions like the
ones above, we should be able to combine information
about the structure of the field, the developments in the
field and about the actors behind the publications. For
this particular purpose, it is important to have a stable
structure to act as a helicopter view over the field under
study, and to act as a reference for developments.
Therefore, we identify sub-domains. For each subdomain, we calculate and extract a set of statistics to
characterize it. Thus, we are able to normalize features
of an individual publication within its own context

being the sub-domain to which it belongs. Then, by
defining an actor’s production by the collection of its
publications, we are able to characterize each actor
within the field understudy, and to normalize these
characteristics within a relevant context, i.e. the subdomains. In an actor analysis we combine the
information per actor, the data per sub-domain,
aggregated year by year. By using this methodology,
we are able to provide answers from a bibliometric
perspective to the questions stated above.
In [4], an extensive elaboration of the method is
given. In this paper we will present a case study in
which the current potentials of bibliometric mapping of
science in a policy context, is illustrated.

3. Results
In the case under study, we created a map of the
field microelectronics. The delineation was based on a
sophisticated combination of classification codes in
INSPEC, a worldwide bibliographic database on
physics, electrical & electronic engineering, computer
science and information technology. The delineation
procedure yielded about 45,000 publications per year
from 1996-2000. With a dedicated cluster analysis we
identified 23 sub-domains representing numbers of
publications, ranging between less than 100 and more
than 30,000 in 1999-2000. These sub-domains are put
in a map, showing the cognitive orientation of each
sub-domain in relation to all other sub-domains. Hence,
sub-domains with a similar cognitive orientation are in
each other’s vicinity, whereas sub-domains with a
different orientation are not. The map for
microelectronics is in Figure 1. Each circle is a subdomain, where the size of each circle corresponds to
the relative number of publications. Thus, if circle A
has a surface twice as big as Circle B, it means that A
represents twice the number of publications of B.
Furthermore, we added a color coding in such a way
that the Red sub-domains show a significant increase
of activity in a certain period of time, whereas Blue
sub-domains show a significant decrease. The Grey
sub-domains
show
no
significant
change.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

2-Particle & Radiation
detection

18-Electronic circuits
19-Project & production
engineering
14-Semiconductor devices

23-Semicond dev technol

8-Semiconductor IC
10-Semiconductor junctions
& interfaces

13-Education & training/
Management & planning

17-General electrical eng
topics

11-Thin film growth &
deposition
3-Signal processing &
detection

4-Treatment & properties of
materials

22-Magnetical materials
appl

6-Optical communic/
Micromech dev
16-Sensing devices &
transducers
9-Piezo- & Dielectric dev

5-Telecom applications
21-Communication systems
15-Digital signal processing

1-Telecommunication
20-Fluid surfaces/liquid
crystals

7-Optical elements &
devices/ lasers
12-Biomedical
measurement & imaging

Two-dimensional representation of the field based on the similarities between identified clusters of classification codes (subdomains). The circle size indicates the number of publications represented. The color of the circles indicates a significant
increase/decrease of activity:
x Red: increase of activity
x Blue: decrease of activity
The badness-of-fit criterion is 0.13; the distance correlation is 0.96 (statistics provided by SAS).

Figure 1. Bibliometric map of microelectronics (1999-2000)

With this map, we describe the present (or most
recent) situation in the field. On the Western hand side,
the map shows a region of basic-research-oriented subdomains, in the Northern part, a region of more
application-oriented research of IC design, and in the
Eastern part a region of typical application oriented
telecommunication technology. In the Southern part,
the map shows a region of Optics and Lasers research.
In relation to the policy related questions mentioned
above, this may be used to indicate certain
developments in the field based on the increases of
interest within sub-domains.
With respect to the question ‘what are the main
developments in the field’, we can use the color-coding
as in Figure 1. We detect increase of interest on
telecommunication and digital signal detection as well
as on the magnetic materials applications.
Furthermore, there seems to be a decreasing interest in
semiconductor junctions.

In view of the third question, we measure the
activity of an actor within this structure, and thus
determine his position. In combination with the
outcome of the first question this will yield relevant
information.
Furthermore, by using the activity profile of
actors, we are also able to identify benchmarks from a
bibliometric perspective for a particular actor of
interest. For this purpose, we can use the
characterization of each actor as identified within our
system. By comparing these profiles based on
particular aspects, we are able to compare them on the
basis of other characteristics.
For instance, consider the activity characterization
within the field for actor A and B. In the chart (Figure
2), we depicted the numbers of publications in the
identified 23 microelectronics sub-domains for two
actors (organizations).

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

160

A (3 1 4 )

B (1 8 3 )

140

120

Number of pubs

100

80

60

40

20

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23

S u b -d o m a in n u m b e r

Numbers of publications by Actor A and Actor B in 23 sub-domains in microelectronics in 1999-2000. The sub-domain
numbers refer to the numbers with labels in the map.

Figure 2. Publication distribution of A and B in microelectronics

This chart gives an activity characterization or
profile of these two actors. It is obvious that B
publishes less in total than A. However, if we compare
the publication profiles of A and B, we can detect a
remarkable resemblance. In other words, although the
total output of A is higher than B in microelectronics,
their research (or publication) profiles look very much
alike. These absolute numbers represent a certain

proportion of the sub-domain total. Furthermore, each
actor has an overall proportion in the field. If we
combine, these figures, we can determine for an actor
in each sub-domain, whether it is significantly above or
below its own field average. If we integrate this
information into the map by color-coding we can get a
picture like Figure 3 for Actor A.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

18-Electronic circuits
19-Project & production
engineering

2-Particle & Radiation
detection

23-Semicond dev technol

10-Semiconductor junctions
& interfaces

14-Semiconductor devices

8-Semiconductor IC
13-Education & training/
Management & planning

17-General electrical eng
topics

11-Thin film growth &
deposition
3-Signal processing &
detection

4-Treatment & properties of
materials

22-Magnetical materials
appl

5-Telecom applications

6-Optical communic/
Micromech dev

21-Communication systems

16-Sensing devices &
transducers
9-Piezo- & Dielectric dev

15-Digital signal processing

1-Telecommunication
20-Fluid surfaces/liquid
crystals

7-Optical elements &
devices/ lasers
12-Biomedical
measurement & imaging

Two-dimensional representation of the field based on the similarities between identified clusters of classification codes (subdomains). The circle size indicates the number of publications represented. The color of the circles indicates A’s activity focus
of interest:
x Red: relatively high interest
x Blue: relatively low interest
The badness-of-fit criterion is 0.13; the distance correlation is 0.96 (statistics provided by SAS).

Figure 3. Bibliometric map of microelectronics (1999-2000), A’s activity profile

This map shows in one comprehensive overview,
an activity profile for Actor A within the field of
microelectronics. This also gives some idea of the
position of this actor in the field. Obviously, A is an
actor that focuses clearly on the Northern and Western
regions of the map. And if we would depict the profile
for B, the map would look almost exactly the same.
The absolute numbers for B are lower, as we can see in
Figure 2, but the profile matches quite well. Therefore,
for the question of who are A’s competitors, we would
identify B as a good candidate, in terms of activity, and
as such a good candidate for benchmarking. And, for
instance, by comparing the impact of publications
(number of received citations) by A and by B, we have
another piece of information to describe the position of
A.

4. Conclusions
For bibliometric mapping of science within a
science policy context, the requirements for field
visualization are different from the requirements for
IR. The issue of a helicopter view with set sub-domains
within the field under study is crucial. With the
proposed method, we are able to address recurring
issues raised within a science policy context. An
interface to enter the structure (the map) enables a user
to get answers to specific user-defined question within
such a context.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

References
[1] Chen, C. & Paul, R. J. (2001). Visualizing a
knowledge domain’s intellectual structure. In: IEEE
Computer 34(3). 65-71.
[2] Boyack, K.W., B.N. Wylie and G.S. Davidson
(2002). Domain Visualization Using VxInsight for Science
and Technology Management, In: Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology. To be
published.
[3] McCain, K.W. (1990). Mapping Authors in
Intellectual Space: a Technical Overview. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science 41, 433-443.
[4] Noyons, E.C.M. (1999). Bibliometric Mapping as a
Science Policy and Research Management Tool. DSWO
Press, Leiden.
[5] Noyons, E.C.M. and A.F.J. van Raan (1998).
Monitoring Scientific Developments from a Dynamic
Perspective: Self-Organized Structuring to Map Neural
Network Research. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science 49, 68-81.
[6] White, H.D. and K.W. McCain (1998). Visualizing a
Discipline: An Author Co-citation Analysis of Information
Science, 1972-1995. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science 49, 327-355.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

