Visual 3D Computer Graphic Design-Simulation
In Technology Education
Patrick Connolly
William A. Ross
Department of Computer Graphics Technology
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA
Abstract
Ideally, freshman level students entering technology
and engineering programs should possess an innate or
intuitive understanding of the relationship between
interacting physical objects and the mathematical and
graphical fundamentals that describe that interaction,
Developing and refining an understanding of that
relationship is an important foundational preparation
for students preparing for occupations in these fields.
Historically, the development of that process has been
accomplished
predominantly
through
numerical
mathematical means that often necessitate presenting
important principles to students as numerical or nonvisual abstractions. The objective of this paper is to
describe initial eflorts to develop highly graphical visual, spatial, audile, motion-based methods which
address a vital emerging goal in applied computer
graphics instruction; problem solving through 30
computer graphic design- simulation.

1: Introduction
As part of an introductory course in the Computer
Graphics Department at Purdue University, the desire to
produce problem-solvers, has lead the faculty to explore
ways to use 2-D and 3-D models within the course as an
avenue for building problem-solving skills. This effort
was undertaken through the need to find inventive ways
to solidify certain mathematical, geometric, and physics
fundamentals in the minds of the students. An important
outcome of this activity is to develop student ability to
apply these fundamentals in order to analyze, explore,
and solve spatial and motion oriented problems which
can then be displayed and interacted with in graphical
form.

The intent of this paper and its presentation is to
give an update on the current status of developmental
activities, accomplishments, and plans in this area. The
following sections of this paper offer an overview of the
various topics and methods being examined.

2: Available Computer Graphics
Technologies
Computer Aided Design, as it has evolved, has
logically focused on static or ranges of geometric
relationships between and among parts which comprise
3D mechanical systems.
After all, the design,
manufacture, tracking, and distribution of individual
parts are the heart of the manufacturing process. As a
secondary supporting
activity, the computational
complexity of handling the interrelated mathematics of
acceleration,
velocity,
mass, collision
detection,
interference, friction, centers of gravity, and other
important variables of dynamic simulation has been
largely left to the future evolution of computer graphic
A recent outgrowth of the technology has
technology.
been a growing number of software tools that enable
designers to graphically experiment with and accurately
depict dynamic visual relationships in 2D and 3D space.
One issue that causes confusion in graphics is
distinguishing between computer graphic animation and
simulation.
Within the field of Computer Graphics,
animation is generally considered to be a visual,
sufficiently believable visual approximation of motion
and collision between and among physical objects in a
scene over a specific period of time. In other words, if it
looks sufficiently realistic to be believable, then the
mission of the animation is accomplished. In computer

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

animation, although properties such as mass, gravity,
velocity, acceleration, centers of mass, friction, collision
detection, and other physical properties and motions can
be calculated, they are frequently roughly estimated in
order to quickly create a visual representation.
In
computer graphic simulation, the physical relationships
and events occurring between and among physical
objects must conform to a much more accurate and
rigorous set of physical rules. Graphical simulation is
based much more on assigning and calculating all
possible physical properties, events, and outcomes that
will take place in a scene over time. A distinctive
difference between animation and simulation is the
intended use of the results and their consequences. In
animation, 3D computer graphics are used almost
entirely for visual approximation in preliminary design,
marketing, and/or entertainment.
In simulation, the
results may be tied directly to the critical design of
physical phenomenon in the ‘real world’ affecting the
design, safety, operation, and production of ‘real
products’ and ‘real events’, such as safety testing of a
proposed space vehicle or new automotive design.
The distinction between these two processes
becomes blurred when the number of overlapping
features between animation and graphical simulation
software products are examined.
Most animation
software products allow the precise calculation of a
number of physical properties; such as gravity, collision,
and the inclusion of accurate motion capture data which
allow highly precise control of events. Conversely,
graphical simulation packages have limited sets of
physical properties that can be assigned to an object.
This restricts the accuracy or realism of the resulting
graphical simulation. At this level, it is important to
keep in mind, that even the best graphical simulation
with publicly available software tools is still only a
crude approximation of ‘real world events’.

3: Computer Graphics Freshman Student
Profile
Freshmen students entering the Computer Graphics
department are interested in graphics as a creative
communication and problem-solving tool. They are
attracted to animation and simulation (motion-based
graphics),
interactive
multimedia,
CAD/CAE
applications,
web
development,
construction/architectural
graphics,
illustration,
computer gaming, and many other subsets of the graphic
continuum. Generally, they are among the top 15% of
their high school class, with strong technical-analytical
backgrounds. Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) scores are
typically above 1100 for most students. Academically
most of these students are equally qualified to choose
Engineering or the Sciences as a field of study, but have
chosen a graphical career path instead. The broad range
of applied computer graphics available for study invites
a very diverse, broadly interested student population.

4: Important Foundational Math Skills
An important activity in this project was to identify
and compile a critical list of formulas and terms
representing essential math knowledge from geometry,
trigonometry, algebra, and physics. Important sources
for cross referencing essential math knowledge for 3D
mechanical design with computer graphics were drawn
from Machinery’s Handbook, Thies, Kuhfittig, and
Foley, et al. Following is a list of math knowledge
which showed up consistently in most references and
was deemed highly important for problem solving skills
in computer graphics.

The resulting ‘tool sets’ examined for the
development of graphical simulations include a variety
of tools which represent the current ‘desk top’
capabilities for graphical simulation as of 2000- 2001.
They include Pro/E, Mat Lab, Pro/Mechanics, CATIA,
Maya and 3D Studio MAX. Although not inclusive, this
set of products offers students an opportunity to
experience and grasp the strengths, limitations, and
potential of a wide-ranging set of tools for generating
graphical simulation fundamentals.

Geometry
Angles - Acute, Obtuse, and Right or Normal
Triangles - Right, Equilateral, Scalene,
Isosceles
Polygons - Parallelograms, Trapezoids,
Regular Polygons
Circles & Arcs - Radius, Diameter,
Circumference, Pi, Arc, Radians, Sector,
Segment, Chord
Areas - Circle, Polygon
Volumes - Prism, Cylinder, Cone, Sphere,
Torus
Coordinate Systems
Systems - Cartesian, Polar, Spherical
Coordinate System Reference - World,
Local, View, Relative
Right Hand Rule

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Trigonometry
Functions & Laws - Sine, Cosine, Tangent,
Cotangent, Secant, Cosecant
Algebra
Equations - Line, Circle, Ellipse, Parabola,
Hyperbola
Powers & Roots

Mice, Yankee Doodle, Red River Valley, I’m a Little
Teapot, or Twinkle Twinkle Little Star. One verse of the
song will be recorded and furnished to you with a
playing time of between 10 and 16 seconds. Digital
versions of the songs will be available as .wav audio
files. For this example, a draft of the music for Mary
had a Little Lamb is shown in figure 1.

Quadratic Equation
Matrices, Vectors & Scalars
Transformations - Translation, Rotation,
Scaling
Physical Properties & Motion
Velocity & Acceleration
Gravity
Mass & Weight - Centroid
The above list is not intended to be all-inclusive.
Rather, it is intended to serve as a checklist for the
design of problems suitable for use in a freshman level
course intended to deal with elementary dynamic 3D
physical/spatial problems.

5: A Sample Scenario
The following sections describe a specific sample
project created by students in this course. The sample
project that follows is based on the design of a physical
object intended to function as a child’s music box.
Section VI describes a laboratory assignment leading
into the project. Section VII contains the specifications
for the complete lab project. Section VIII contains
visual examples of the results of several projects.

6:

Figure 1. Music for Mary Had a Little Lamb
3D Solid Model: A geometric solid model of the
cylinder is to be built in inches with the following
specifications. Diameter = 1.25. Length = 2.50. Spikes
are to have a diameter of .lO and protrude above the
surface of the cylinder by . 10 inches. Down the length
of the cylinder each note (C, D, E, F, G, A, B [B7], and
C) will have its own cross-sectional location. As the
cylinder rotates, there must be a spike at the right
angular location around the cylinder to pluck the correct
chime at exactly the right time. The design sketches
shown in figures 2 and 3 should help you further
visualize the model.

Sample Weekly Laboratory Assignment

The Rhythm of Geometry - Designing a Dynamic Solid
Model with Audio (CGT I1 6 Lab Assignment #6)
Create a solid model of a ‘rotating spiked cylinder’
for a mechanical music box that is designed to play a
simple tune or nursery rhyme in one octave (notes C, D,
E, F, G, A, B [orB7], C). The cylinder is designed to
rotate around its axis. As the cylinder rotates, the spikes
on the cylinder are designed to ‘pluck’ a set of adjacent
chimes and play a tune.
Music Specifications: The tune must be a familiar
simple child’s nursery song that can be played with a
one-octave set of chimes. The song is to be played with
single and harmonic notes as demonstrated. Available
songs include London Bridge, Chopsticks, Three Blind

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 2. Basic Dimensions and Pictorial

Design Problem. A mathematically operated 3D
computer graphic simulation of a virtual mechanical
music box to play the song from your musical cylinder.
Product:
Prototype

Music Box - Operational 3D Virtual

Theme: A mechanical-musical
on children’s musical themes.

‘whatzit’ toy based

Target Market: Ages 3 to adult.
store with $5 - $12 price range.
Figure 3. Spike Dimensions
Getting Started: Determine the exact placement of
the spikes by unrolling the cylinder onto a flat plane as
shown in figure 4. The circumference is equal to one
complete 360-degree rotation. In the case of Mary had a
Little Lamb, the circumference also equals 10 seconds as
well as 32 beats for the song. Now, use what you have
already learned from high school math to determine the
exact angle and location (cylindrical coordinates!) for
each of the spikes on the cylinder. Make a valid solid
model of the ‘tune’. Good luck!

Toy or novelty

Mechanism: Hand or wheel cranked gear train used
to rotate and play a mechanical music box mechanism
consisting of a rotating studded cylinder and steel
pronged chimes.
Material & Visual Appearance: Outer music box
case - Plastic/acrylic see through outer case made in at
least two pieces with hollow interior for gears, shafts,
music cylinder, soundboard & chimes. Gears - plastic,
primary colors. Shafts & Screws - Steel. Music
cylinder & Chimes - steel.
Unit/Size: Design in decimal inches. Finished
design must be no larger than 9 inches in any exterior
dimension.

Figure 4. Flat Plane Rollout of Drum
NOTE: Do a thorough job here because we’ll be
using this model later in the semester as part of a larger
design project.

Operating Conditions & Limitations:
When the
driving gear is turned (by crank) or rolled (by wheel) at a
rate of approximately once per second (+/-), the gear
train is put in operation which causes the music cylinder
to revolve one complete rotation every X seconds
(length of song in seconds) to play the song once.
Therefore, the length of the motion-based cycle is equal
to the length of the song.
Rotational Motion:
This is continuous rotational
motion. The music box must contain at least 2 gear ratio
changes requiring a minimum of three shafts and four
gears to play the song. Sound is generated by a steel
comb with variable length prongs which are struck by
the rotating studs on the musical cylinder. The prongs
on the comb have a one octave range (C, D, E, F, G, A,
B, including Bflat, and C) similar to the music cylinder.

7: Project Specification and Format
Lab Project - Spring 2001 (CGT 116)
Preliminary Project Description - March 19,200l

Music Timing & the Gear Ratio: Listed below are
the names and run times for each of the songs which has
been recorded and which will require a unique 3D model
for its music drum. Remember that the length of each
song in seconds is also the number of turns the gear
crank must make in order to play the song once.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Therefore, calculate your gear train accordingly
discussed in lecture.

as

NAME OF SONG
LENGTH IN SECONDS
London Bridge
16
Twinkle Twinkle
20
Three Blind Mice
16
Yankee Doodle
12
Hail Purdue
24
Brother John
16
Red River Valley
20
Row Your Boat
10
NOTE: The sound files listed above are available in
.wav format on the G: drive. Checkout and download
your file as soon as possible.
Intermittent Rotational or Linear Motion: This is
‘back and forth’ motion. Each music box must also have
at least one intermittent motion that is mathematically
tied to the rotational motion of the main gear train.
Examples of this could be London Bridge going up and
down, Yankee Doodles hat bobbing up and down, tails
swinging back and forth for Three Blind Mice, stars
swinging back and forth for Twinkle Twinkle Little
Start, a rotating tail for Mary Had a Little Lamb, etc.
Material-Physical Design Conditions in Cavity:
Design the webbing and bosses inside of the plastic
cavity of the music box case to mount the music comb,
hold the shafts, gears, and screws in place with room for
parts to move as required.
Moving Parts Outside of Cavity: External cranks,
wheels used to operate the music box, as well as,
flapping ears, swinging mouse tails, etc., must be
directly connected to the main drive train in the cavity.
Design of Outer Music Box Case: The Outer Music
Box Case is to be see-through plastic/acrylic and made
in at least two pieces with hollow interior cavity for
mechanism.
Holes and small openings need to be
designed into the Outer Case to accommodate hearing
the sound, cranks, shafts, wheels, and other moving
exterior parts.
Computer Graphic Technology Specifications: 3D
CAD Models (except for gears) are to be and built and
assembled in SolidEdge software. Gear blanks (plain
cylinders), based on pitch diameter are to be built and
assembled in SolidEdge. Gears are to be generated in
IronCAD. Individual part files from the assembly model
are to be exported out of CAD programs and imported
for re-assembly 3DS MAX software for development of

mathematical expression development to drive the 3D
virtual assembly and play the music. File format and tile
management techniques to be announced.
Ideation Sketches: A. Interior Cavity grid paper
layout assembly for planning, sizing, and placing gears,
shafts, etc. B. Design sketches used for building 3D
exterior or Outer Music Box Case model.
DigitaZ Files: Your 3D musical drum model, digital
recording of your song, specifications for modeling a
comb with steel pronged chimes, a SolidEdge assembly
model with all 3D parts, 3D gears from IronCAD, a 3DS
MAX tile containing an expression (mathematically)
operated assembly of the Music Box with associated
music file.
Project Documentation:
Use a 3 ring binder
ONLY.
Begin by keeping all of your preliminary
concept sketches and notes, even for the ideas you don’t
use (including the really bad ones). A more detailed
assembly sketch for the gear train as well as all concept
sketches for the exterior shell design are required.
Printouts from Solid Edge of the final external shell
model and the completed assembly are required. One
printout of the rendered/completed assembly in MAX is
also required. Label and date all project sketches, notes,
and printouts and keep the material in chronological
order.
Due Dates: To Be Announced.
Primary Final Evaluation Criteria: Projects will be
judged using two different but complimentary methods.
1. AESTHETIC: The project will be judged on how
well the case design and mechanism arrangement meets
the theme of the song as well as for visual, simplistic,
creative, graphical qualities. 2. TECHNICAL:
The
creative technical solution of how the gear train is
integrated into the music box is important. Here, the
project will be judged on how technically accurate and
precisely the gear train is designed.
A complete
assembly model must be completed in SolidEdge and
3DS MAX. The project must have a basic operational
gear train by means of expressions in 3DS MAX (even if
the intermittent motion feature doesn’t work).

8: Sample Student Project Results
One of the challenges of this project was to ensure
that the internal mechanism would actually conform to
and fit within the intended design of the exterior shell.
To illustrate this point, images rendered from the

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

completed student design of a music box for ‘Inspector
Gadget’ are shown in figures 5 and 6.

References
1.

Machineiy’s Handbook, 23’d Edition, Industrial
Press, Inc., New York, New York, 1990.

2.

Thies, M. A., Industrial Mathematics, Prentice-Hall,
Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1959.

3.

Kuhfittig, P., Technical Calculus with Analytic
Geometry, 3’d Edition, Brooks/Cole Publishing
Company, Pacific Grove, California, 1994.

4.

Foley, J., van Dam, A., Feiner, S., and Hughes, J.,
Computer Graphics: Princiules and Practice, 2”d
Edition, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company,
Reading, Massachusetts, 1992.

5.

Bertoline, G., Wiebe, E., Miller, C., and Mohler, J.,
Technical Granhics Communications, 2”d Edition,
Irwin McGraw Hill, New York, New York, 1997.

6.

Harrisberger, L., Enaineersmanship: the doing of
engineering design, 2”d Edition, Wadsworth, Inc.,
Belmont, California, 1982.

Figure 5. Inspector Gadget: Gear Train

Voland, G., Engineering by Design, Addison Wesley
Longman, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts, 1999.
Burghardt, M., Introduction to Engineering Design
and Problem Solving, WCBMcGraw-Hill,
New
York, New York, 1999.
Miller, P., et. al., Inside 3D Studio MAX 3, New
Riders Publishing, Indianapolis, Indiana, 1999.
10. User’s Guide, Getting Started with Solid Edge,
Unigraphics Solutions, Inc., Maryland Heights,
Missouri, 2000.

Figure 6. Inspector Gadget: Assembled Model

9: Conclusions
In conclusion, freshman level design projects of this
nature will continue to be motivational and challenging
for students. The integration of sound, basic mechanical
principles, motion, 3D computer graphics, visualization,
and basic engineering design methods may assist a larger
number of students to grasp many of the issues involved
in the basic mechanical design process.
To avoid repetition and keep students challenged,
this project will require a new and different theme each
semester.
With modification and refinement, the
continued development of ‘3D virtual design/simulation’
learning

activities

will

continue

to be a primary

goal in

the CGT 116 course at Purdue University.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

