The Development of a
Functional Visualization System
for the
Creation of Digital Human Models

John Jay Miller
School of Architecture, Mississippi State University
jmiller@sarc.msstate.edu
Gavin Jenkins
T.K. Martin Center for Technology and Disability, Mississippi State University
GJenkins@TKMartin.MsState.Edu

Abstract
The design of artifacts and environments for people with
disabilities has been frustrated by the lack of design oriented Digital Human Models (DHM). This paper describes
a process for the development of a Functional
Visualization System (FVS) for the creation of DHM for use
by designers and progress made in the development of the
FVS. The System employs a ‘synthetic’ or ‘human figure
model’ approach and includes standard measurement procedures for the capture of anthropometric data, the development of computer programs and processes for the visualization of the data which has been captured, the verification of collected data and the investigation of the utilization of visualization tools by designers and clinicians.

Motivation
Inadequately or poorly designed environments and tools
of daily living impose barriers to people with a disability.
This issue needs to be addressed in order for people with
disabilities to lead full and purposeful lives. To accomplish
this goal it is imperative that designers of environments
and artifacts have an in-depth knowledge of human functioning in the performance of tasks and problem-solving
strategies to develop environments and products that best
accommodate performance of these tasks. They require an
understanding and useful characterizations of the abilities
of people with disabilities and relevant mechanisms to
incorporate this into a modern design process.
The last few years have seen an dramatic increase in
Digital Human Modeling (DHM) capabilities. This tech-

nology can provide designers and clinicians the human factors tools needed in the design process. It holds the promise
of allowing qualitative pre-visualization and quantitative
analysis, as well as dynamic simulation, of the ergonomic
relationships between humans and the products they utilize
and environments they inhabit - before the products are
manufactured or the environments constructed.
The effort to improve and utilize DHM technology for
design purposes is important to designers and people with
disabilities for two key reasons:
1) The design process is, by nature, time-intensive, nonlinear and iterative which means that any pressure, such as
lack of necessary information, time schedule or financial
exigency will short circuit the process and lead to an
incomplete or poorly designed product.
The nature and extent of inadequately designed
resources has been well documented, most notable by
Donald Norman [1]. This reality is experienced daily by
every living person. The serious lack of designer-oriented
computer-based anthropometric tools for use in threedimensional computer graphics software, has perpetuated
the creation of inferior products and environments. DHM
software offers significant promise to designers of artifacts
and environments for human use.
2) Currently available DHM software is unsuitable for the
typical design process as practiced by industrial and product
designers, as demonstrated by the following four points:

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

a) The price point of the more sophisticated DHM
applications is beyond what designers are willing or able to
spend on an 'unknown' capability. As noted by John
Roebuck, a respected anthropometry consultant that, while
there are several highly competent computer modeling
systems available, “These require high-end computers and
are quite expensive”. Of the few simple/inexpensive DHM
programs available, a number of unresolved issues are
identified such as “the need for non-standard postures and
a variety of body shapes and sizes.” [2]

Stakeholders involved in this effort include the following: Occupational Therapist/Clinicians,
Computer
Programmers, Visual Communication Designers,
Industrial Designers, Statistician, Participants/End User/
Specifier (in this project people with disabilities) of products created using the visualization software.

Also, companies currently providing high-end DHM at a
price point which begins at $25,000, and is acceptable to
larger firms are not interested in “playing in designer space”,
as it is seen as diluting their profit margin. [3]
b) Current DHM software is oriented towards engineering
applications. As has been detailed by one of the most active
and visible researchers in the field of DHM, Don B.
Chaffin, most users are in the fields of automotive
engineering, aerospace engineering, or industrial
engineering as shown in the results of a SAE G-13 Human
Modeling Technology and Standards Committee survey.[4]
c) Many designers have not been trained adequately to
effectively and accurately use DHM. [4]
d) The prevalent approach to the creation of DHMs, the socalled ‘static’ or ‘task-oriented’ approach, attempts to
predict human motion using statistical models, of noncontext specific motions, from data which have been
gathered in surveys. A significant aspect of this lack of
context sensitivity to the problem under consideration have
been described by two current researchers in the field of
digital human modeling:

Figure 1. Some holistic design process relationships

Validating the Process
Preliminary work done by these researchers has
demonstrated the ability to create useful DHM
visualizations of individuals with disabilities, based upon
simple measurements of limb segment length and
maximum joint angles.[8, 9, 10]

“... figure models can be applied to novel situations for
which task-oriented models are not available; that is, most
tasks...” [6] {emphasis mine}
“In general, models that are solely statistical in nature have
bounded predictive power, especially when extrapolated to
novel, untested situations.” [7] {emphasis mine}

Approach
This project employs a holistic approach to the generation of solutions for typical problems confronted by people
with disabilities. This project is, by its very nature, interdisciplinary and broad in scope. It will provide services
and information to many groups in order to demonstrate an
integrated approach to disabilities studies and provide
proof of concept demonstrations which show that products
and environments, meeting the needs of people with disabilities, can move out the realm of ‘orphan technology’ that is, not commercially viable of its own account.

Figure 2. DOF Limits Editor window in MIRAI ®

The COTS software used in the research MIRAI
includes a default skeleton with 15 segments and 12 joints.
It will also create figures with any number of segments and
joints. The model bone segments can be scaled to any
desired length and the range of motion specified for any
joint to generate motions like flexion, extension,
abduction, adduction, internal and external rotation. [11]

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

The validity of our approach has been confirmed by good
comparison with measurements taken by respected authors
in the field of anthropometrics, including Kennedy, Farley
and Squires[12, 13]. See figures 2,3, 4.

Data Which Makes Data
Using Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS) software the
researchers have extended the software’s basic capabilities
to create ‘data which makes data’. Rather than replaying
choreographed animations, or repetitively positioning a
static mannequin, designers can measure and manipulate
three-dimensional objects which represent Range of
Motion (ROM) volumes for specific individuals or ‘percentile’ ranges.
Figure 2. White dots show a close match with Farley’s curve
which visualizes movement with a fixed elbow.

Figure 3. White dots show a close match with Squires’ curve
which visualizes movement allowing elbow movement.

.

Figure 5. Maximum arm reach is developed for horizontal
levels in a manner similar to the one used by Kennedy. The
path data which is created can measured and transformed
the same as any other 3D data.

With these capabilities a designer or clinician can create
three dimensional forms which quantitatively describe any
motion or task, be it an everyday activity or a new unique
motion associated with an envisioned product or space. See
figures 6,7,8.
Creating such useful models helps to overcome the
specific shortcomings of traditional anthropometric
visualization which cannot:
- address the dynamic nature of functional abilities
- accommodate widely varying movement capabilities
and different levels of total body engagement
- dynamically incorporate anthropometric factors into
the design process

Figure 4. White dots show a close match with Kennedy’s
work showing arm reach, here in the HP 10 inches above
SPR with shoulder fixed during the motion.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Conclusions

Figure 6. Intersection of maximum arm reach and cabinetry.

Industrial and product designers are likely to be ill server by DHM software until a suitable enterprise arises dedicated to addressing the specific needs of that audience.
Specific issues which need research and exploration for
the refinement of such software include the following:
- what are the minimum measurements needed to provide
basic, but robust inverse kinematic (IK) software systems
with the data needed to model human motion in at least
three basic categories: gross motion, moderate detail
motion (as shown here), and highly detailed motion (such
as intricate hand movements)
- what amount of precision is needed by designers in the
visualization of human motion, for a range of problem
types
- appropriate choreographic techniques need to be developed to guide designers in the visualization of task-based
movement
- educational institutions must incorporate the use of DHM
software into design curriculum
- practicing designers and educators need to form partnerships with DHM software producers in order to help guide
the software development and to provide vital information
on the nature of the design process to the software producers

Current Activities

Figure 7. Side view of a comparison of a 41yr. old female with
arthritis (smaller dark volume) and 95th percentile female ROM

Current activities of this project include:
- the refinement of validation techniques to include the use
of magnetic tracking devices and optical tracking systems
- research into the degree of quantitative precision required
during various stages of the design process
- development of various procedural techniques to
automatically generate a set of standard ROM envelopes
- development of various procedural shape/volume
querying routines
References
[1] Norman, Donald. (1988) The Design of Everyday Things.
Basic Books, New York N.Y.
[2] Roebuck, John A., (2001) “Computer Modeling and
Anthropometry: Advances for Wheelchair Users”,
Anthropometric of Disability Proceedings, Buffalo , N.Y
[3] Ulrich Raschke. Program Manager, Human Simulation
Technology, UGS, Inc vendor of JACK ® DHM software,
Personal Communication, 3.21.2002
[4] Chaffin, Don B. (2001) Digital Human Modeling for Vehicle
and Workplace Design. Society of Automotive Engineers,
Warrendale PA

Figure 8. Front view of a comparison of a 41yr. old female
with arthritis (smaller dark volume) and 95th percentile
female ROM data , from Damon. [14]

[5] Henshaw, Robert. Principle of Formation Design Group,
Personal Communication 2001

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

[6] Reed, Matthew P., “Creating Design Tools from Functional
Anthropometric Data”, Anthropometric of Disability
Proceedings, Buffalo June 2001

[10] Miller, John J, Wang, W., Jenkins G. 2000
The Anthropometric Measurement and Modeling Project,
In Proceedings of ACADIA 2000, Washington DC

[7] Zhang, Xudong. (2001) “Biomechanical Realism Versus
Algorithmic Efficiency: A trade-off in Human Motion
Simulation Modeling”, SAE DHM Conference Proceedings,
Arlington VA.

[11] Wang, Weidong. (2001). Using computer modeling and
visualization techniques to incorporate anthropometric analysis
into design. Unpublished master’s thesis, Mississippi State
University, USA

[8] Miller, John J and Wang Weidong. 2001.
Application of Computer Visualization Techniques for the
Use of Anthropometric Data in the Design Process, In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Affective
Human Factors Design, ASEAN Academic Press LTD,
England UK

[12] Kennedy, K. W. Reach Capability of the USAF Population.
Phase I. The Outer Boundaries of Grasping-Reach Envelopes
for the Shirt-Sleeved, Seated Operator. AMRL-TDR-64-59
Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, Wright-Patterson Air
Force Base, Ohio, 1964

[9] Miller, John J, Wang, W., Jenkins G. 2000
The Development of Computer-based Representations of
Anthropometric and Biomechanical Data for Use in
Environmental and Product Design, Poster session presentation
Infodesign 2000, Coventry England

[13] Farley, R.R. (1955) Some Principles of Methods and
Motion Study as Used in Development Work, General Motors
Engineering Journal 2(6)
[14] Damon, Albert. et al (1966) The Human Body in Equipment
Design, Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

