Training and Telecooperation in Architecture
Ing. Luis N. Paredes León.
Departamento de Tecnología de la Construcción
Facultad de Arquitectura y Arte.
Universidad de Los Andes.
Mérida. Venezuela.
luisp@ula.ve

Abstract
Since the chalk was brought into education in the
XIX century, the use of communication technology has
been the most impressive change in this field. We are
aware of the need of forming team works and giving a new
direction to education in order to improve the
communication between teachers and students of
Architecture, Engineering and Construction. We make use
of the following concepts: constructivist learning, virtual
classroom, virtual simulation laboratory, internet, team
work, cooperative work (such as digital and electronic
cooperative
spaces).
We
also
refer
to
a
synchronous/asynchronous communication group, which
offers cooperative approaches for teaching and training.
Keywords: Architecture teaching, multimedia, cooperative
teaching, teaching, constructivist learning

1. Introduction
Communication technological development has played
a revolutionary role in training at professional stages. So,
professional learning and teaching processes ought to offer
new academic programs to meet current work demands,
which could offer a possible solution to nowadays
anachronism in training workers and production means.
The use of advanced technology is frequently observed just
in a small group having purchasing power to get access to
it. Usually it always occurs in the information field.

MSc Carmen M. Viña
Doctorado Ciencias Políticas
Universidad Central de Venezuela
Caracas. Venezuela.
vinac@ula.ve

Computer and communication system creation has
made possible advanced technology to have a wide range
of applications. Their application as a tool in engineering
has made the production process easier. In the academic
area, advanced technology has not only facilitated the
teaching job, it has transformed educational paradigms as
well, since it offered engineering teacher to get the design,
the model and the virtual representations of a work; all of
this within the classroom.
For the students, it makes possible they have a direct
participation in the production process even before he/she
has finished his/her courses. This way they can become
qualified if they have the appropriate tools.
“Technicians are and will continue being very
important employees in any company due to the fact that
the good working of the technological equipment depends
on them. It has been possible thanks to the technological
revolution, that is why they must be extremely well
trained” =1?.
Besides, professional teaching institutions, such as
universities, colleges of further education, technological
universities, technical and commercial colleges, etc., are
always looking for restructuring their teaching offers. In
fact, following the former paradigms of specialization just
produces professionals whose knowledge is not put into
practice and, as social beings, make black economy and
unemployment rate higher.
Nevertheless, this production process and the way the
professional teaching process works are dissimilar to it in
Venezuela, economy Restructuring and that of higher
education have not been developed at the same speed,
since the syllabus and studies programs are based on the
students passive participation and not on the skill they
have gotten from their practical experience within the
classroom.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

coordination and communication are very poor. We
propose that education through team works and in an AEC
convergent way is the key to improve those projects
communications, coordination and efficiency. The role of
communication technology is determined by its capacity to
support all of these activities by which coordination and
communication is carried out. Our challenge is to be able
to create methodologies and tools and use those existing to
support the AEC convergent activities.
Our approach main characteristics would be:
Use of “real solution” projects, like design workshop
proposals; use data base on projects have already been
suggested and solved (e.g. TEGA1 data base creation), use
the computer as an essential tool to solve problems,
constitute multidisciplinary the work teams including:
AEC activities that share their experiences, knowledge,
authenticity and searching for structural and architectonic
models. In 3D real time, these multidisciplinary team
works should also plan cooperative solutions, simulate or
plan constructive process, and solutions to very possible
problems. At the same time, these team works should
interact with a design, analysis and construction virtual
setting to store and get back information – communication
system-, and evaluate computing system influence on
students to get knowledge of structures, management and
project task organization to model and simulate in the AEC
industry. Besides, team works should train in computing
laboratory to learn the fundamental concepts of
organization structural systems. In short, we are faced with
a qualitative change, where the AEC teacher is provided
with the possibility of designing, modeling and illustrating
virtually a final project, everything within the classroom.
For students, this means their direct participation in
the productive process, even before they have finished
their courses at the university. They would not work alone,
but they would work with the information technology and
computing tool assistance, which would bring them to a
new paradigm: cooperation and team work in the AEC
industry.
Several approaches and methodologies converge in
our proposal =7? =8? =9? =10?: learning from problems,
cooperative work and study of cases. Our goal is to get an
enormous variety of methods, tools and software devices
together to support new methodological approaches for
designing distance learning and to back knowledge and
multidisciplinary abilities integration.
Our approach Cooperative learning would be:
Teaching design area has traditionally been considered
difficult and delicate by several pedagogues =11? =12? =13?
Providing knowledge is not always direct and linear. In
relation to a creative solution on design problem, many
1
TEGA: Trabajo Especial de Grado - Undergraduate special thesis in
Architecture. Universidad de Los Andes.

delicate aspects of the students cognitive activity are
involved, one of the challenges in our proposal, related to
pedagogical aspects, is to identify and put into practice
teaching methodologies based on cognitive models. This
seems to recover the direct interaction between the teacher
and the student. The central approach we have chosen is
related to cooperative and constructivist learning =14? =15?
which can be defined as a process where cooperative
efforts between teachers and students are stronger. This
approach emphasizes on the active participation and
interaction between teachers and students, so that teaching
process respond to social interaction in an electronic
atmosphere which makes interaction, cooperation and
evaluation easier.
A sample of cooperative learning is the strategy
“multimedia seminar”. This works as an exchange through
which students became teachers. Small groups or
individuals are responsible for constructing a previously
selected theme-usually assigned by the teacher. Reading
material is not assigned to the rest of the class, but the
group or the individual construct the work using
multimedia tools for the main ideas, then, this is shown to
the class and finally a discussion on the topic is given. One
of the most used strategies is the team work because it
responds to AEC needs and activity group dynamics.
Therefore, education gives us the opportunity of improving
the communication among AEC professionals and
developing a new methodology and team work atmosphere
to design in Architecture, Engineering and Construction.
Our task is not to improve the computer use
effectiveness. We suggest the use of computer power to
produce better education through the use of new
computing paradigms. We use concepts like:
constructivist, virtual classroom, multimedia classrooms,
virtual simulation laboratory, internet, cooperative and
team work (such as cooperation electronic and digital
spaces). These concepts reflect asynchronous/synchronous
communication groups which follow cooperative
approaches in teaching and training. The student, who
learns trough innovative learning and teaching techniques,
is an active part of the learning group.
We think of getting advanced educative experiences in
order to the students and teachers can take part on far - off
learning communities, or in those places where computers
are not used such as work, studio or home. So, we suggest
to improve education quality and effectiveness by using
computer as a tool and support to cooperative learning.
This kind of learning emphasizes on teachers and students
cooperative efforts, their active participation and
interaction to produce knowledge. Education as a
particular cooperative work shows us the importance of
computing systems and communication technology in
supporting the idea that this kind of teaching adds the
interactivity and effectiveness absent in traditional
education.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

4. Experiences and some results

5. Conclusions

Courses using this methodology have allowed us to
identify some important aspects and reflect on some topics.
Anyway, our intention is to describe the events through
paradox.

We think that functionalism conceptualization is the
key to teaching improvement. This could make advanced
learning system to progress, and could be applied in a
simple way for an easy learning. The methodology and
results from our courses must be considered as tools that
allow the instructor to have the control ands to help student
with some techniques. This is why we have focused on the
metaphor of project and activities, which can be selected
and used in a class.
The model of our proposal is not appropriate for any
lecture. From the qualitative evaluation view-point, our
proposal has not determined which is “the best” approach:
conventional lectures, or our proposal. The answer is “it
depends on”. When referred to well-trained students, who
have access to computers and take advantages interacting
with teachers and work mates, results favor our
methodology.
Our work is based on our learning & teaching
experiences, having computer system as the main tool. As
a teaching setting, teachers are provided with a set of
tools, weakness and strength. Many of this model
characteristics are mainly potential, which ask the students
and teachers for creativity and effort.

• Although is the student is who must learn, teacher
activities are emphasized.

• We wish to provide an active and critical learning,
but many academic hours and activities are assigned to
students.

• We wish to provide constructivist learning, but
courses are made of many students
• We want to offer cooperative learning but only
trough discussion groups.
• It is paradoxical that our aim is to get a cooperative
teaching, but we offer a kind of variation of a
“computerized conference”.

• We want to promote dialogue process, but we stay
in the conductivism.
• We want to promote the interaction, but we answer
questions and messages very late.
• We think that if students do not communicate
among themselves, they do not have learning difficulties.

• We want to elaborate tasks for adults, but we design

activities thinking students are not responsible for their
own learning.

• We consider our teaching is flexible but we design
very strict activities.
• We wish to have a innovator process, but we
reproduce the existing ones.

• We evaluate individual work, but we do not have
any mechanisms to check the student work authenticity.
• We promote team work and this generates “virtual
parasite”.

• We want to be in the vanguard, but we do not
evaluate our changes in technology.
• We wish to support multimedia use, but the use of
written texts is more common.

• We wish to form professionals able to face
challenges in a digitized society but we do it from a
traditional organizational structure.

• Ethics is present in our reflections, but we do not
emphasize on royalties.
• We depend on computers for communication but
students find it difficult to use it.
• It is a paradox that “linear education” support the
globalization process but the cost restrict its access.

5. References.
=1? Richman. Louis. (1994). La Nueva Elite Trabajadora.
SUMMIT, 15 de octubre de 1994, Año 1 No. 9. P. 31.
=2? ibidem.
=3?.Díaz, P et al. (1997) De la Multimedia a la Hipermedia.
Computec Ra-Ma. Madrid, España.
=4? Ackermann Edith (1994), "Direct And Mediated Experience:
Their Role In Learning", In R. Lewis And P. Mendelsohn (Eds.)
Lessons From Learning, Amsterdam: North-Holland, (Ifip
Tc3/Wg3.3 Working Conference 1993), 13-22.
=5? Albanese, M. A. & Mitchell, S. (1993). Problem-based
learning: A review of literature on its outcomes and
implementation issues. Academic Medicine, 68(1), 52-81.
=6? Au, K. & Carroll, J. H. (1997). Improving literacy
achievement through a constructivist approach: The KEEP
demonstration classroom project. Elementary School Journal, 97,
203-221.
=7?.Barrows, H. S. (1996). Problem-based learning in medicine
and beyond: A brief overview. In L. Wilkerson & W. H.
=8? Boud, D. & Feletti, G. (1992). The challenge of problembased learning. London: Kogan
=9? Bush, V. [1945] "As We May Think". Atlantic Monthly 176,1
(July 1945), Pp. 101-108.
=10? Gallagher, S. A., Stepien, W. J., & Rosenthal, H. (1992). The
effects of problem-based learning on problem-solving. Gifted
Child Quarterly, 36, 195-200.
=11? Harasim Linda (1993), "Collaborating In Cyberspace: Using
Computer Conferences As A Group Learning Environment",

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Interactive Learning Environments, 3, 119-130.
=12? Hiltz, S.R. (1993), The Virtual Classroom, Norwood, Nj:
Ablex.
=13? Rogoff, B. (1991) Social Interaction As Apprenticeship In
Thinking: Guided Participation In Spatial Planning. In L.
Russell D.M., Moran T.P., Jordan D.S. (1988) The InstructionalDesign Environment. In J.

=14? Sandberg, Jacobijn A., (1994) "Educational Paradigms:
Issues And Trends", N R. Lewis And P. Mendelsohn (Eds.)
Lessons From Learning, Amsterdam: North-Holland, Working
Conference 1993, 13-22.
=15? Vernon, D. T. A. & Blake, R. L. (1993). Does problem-based
learning work? A meta-analysis of evaluation research. Academic
Medicine, 68(7), 550-563.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

