Using Visualization for Information Management Tasks
Christiaan Fluit
Christiaan.Fluit@aidministrator.nl

Jeroen Wester
Jeroen.Wester@aidministrator.nl

Aidministrator Nederland BV, Amersfoort
http://www.aidministrator.nl/

Abstract
Taxonomies are a powerful modelling tool when building interfaces for disclosing large information repositories. However, their actual use is far from trivial; tasks
such as creation, instantiation and maintenance of taxonomies are often difficult and time-consuming.
We present a number of ways in which the Cluster
Map, a component for the visualization of instantiated
taxonomies, can help in these tasks. Using the proposed
visualizations, a user gains insight in the information,
detects anomalies, monitors the information as it evolves
over time and assesses the quality of the output of automatic classification tools.
The proposed visualizations are presented in the context of one of our customers, for which we create web portals based on taxonomies, providing access to a large
document collection.

1.

Introduction

The sheer size and explosive growth of information
repositories in recent years have prompted organizations
to reconsider how efficient and effective access to their
information can be guaranteed.
One way to approach this problem is to provide end
users with personalized information presentations, taking
into account their task, vocabulary, perspective, etc.
Portals are a common and easy to use mechanism for
realizing such personalized information presentations [7]
[9]. Often, the content of these portals is based on the repository’s metadata, which contains descriptive and contextual information about the items in the repository.
Taxonomies are a particular kind of metadata, capturing the characteristics of a domain in a hierarchy of
classes (also referred to as concepts). Their use implies a
number of non-trivial tasks, e.g. taxonomy creation, classification of items and maintenance of the taxonomy and
its instantiation. These tasks require overview of and insight into the domain and the data involved.

Information visualizations are good candidates for assisting users with acquiring this overview and insight,
harnessing human perceptual capabilities to detect patterns and outliers in visual information.
This paper explores the use of visualization in a taxo nomy-based environment. Spectacle [3], one of Aidministrator’s core products, is a platform for constructing in formation presentations, such as portals, based on taxonomies. It has been used for disclosing large information
repositories, e.g. document collections. Assuming that a
taxonomy already exists or can be derived from existing
information structures, the following information management tasks occur frequently when applying Spectacle
(see Figure 1):
A. Acquiring insight into an information repository.
B. Monitoring the repository as it evolves over time.
C. Populating the repository using automatic, heuristic classification techniques.
Title:
outline.eps
Creator:
fig2dev Version 3.2 Patchlevel 3c
Preview:
This EPS picture was not saved
with a preview included in it.
Comment:
This EPS picture will print to a
PostScript printer, but not to
other types of printers.

Figure 1: Three information management tasks.
We will describe these information management tasks in
the context of one of our customers. This customer uses
Spectacle for providing portals to various kinds of end
users, through which they can access a large document
repository. We will show how these tasks can benefit from
our visualization, the Spectacle Cluster Map [4] [6], enabling the information managers to offer higher-quality
portals. Note that we position the proposed visualizations
as an aid for information providers, enabling them to op-

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

timise their information dissemination, instead of as an
alternative means to access the information for informa tion consumers.
This work builds on earlier proposed usage of our
technology presented at IV2001 [6], and reports on its use
in the context of a specific case. The visualisations described in this paper are made together with and judged by
domain experts in the customer’s organization. The goal
was to decide on ways to support the tasks of information
managers.
This paper is organized as follows: section 2 and 3 describe the customer’s domain and Cluster Map visualization respectively. Section 4 elaborates on the information
management tasks and describes how they can benefit
from visualization in general. Section 5 proposes several
Cluster Map visualizations that address these tasks, illustrated with examples on the customer’s data. Finally, section 6 summarizes our findings so far.

2.

In order to perform their tasks, information managers need
to know what information is available and how (well) it is
classified. Note that they are domain experts, not experts
in document management and automatic classification
technologies.

3.

The Spectacle Cluster Map

We will briefly introduce the basics of the Cluster
Map; see [4] and [6] for a more elaborate introduction.
The Cluster Map visualizes the instances of a number
of selected classes, using these classes as its main organization principle. Figure 2 shows a Cluster Map, displaying
the instances of three classes. The large spheres represent
classes and are labelled with the class name and cardinality. The smaller spheres represent instances, in this case
documents.

The Application Domain

One of Aidministrator’s customers is Bouwradius, a
knowledge centre in the building and construction sector
in the Netherlands. One of Bouwradius’ tasks is to act as
an “information broker”: documents from various building- and construction-related sources are gathered, classified and distributed among various information consumers
within and outside Bouwradius.
Bouwradius uses Spectacle for providing convenient
access to the documents in their repository. Ge nerated
portals deliver relevant documents to information consumers and give them a natural and intuitive perspective
on those documents, based on their user profile.
The taxonomy used in this domain consists of a large
set of keywords. Each document is labelled with one or
more keywords. Therefore, the classes in the taxonomy
can overlap (i.e. share instances). This is an important
taxonomy characteristic, not only for Bouwradius but also
for Spectacle applications in general, since it allows users
to find the same information in multiple ways. The classes
in the taxonomy are used for defining the structure and
content of each portal.
Currently, domain experts from Bouwradius label the
documents manually. In the near future this will be replaced by an automatic classification system based on
machine learning techniques.
This Spectacle application has two kinds of users:
• The information consumers receive relevant and
structured content in their personalized portal, optimised for their task and reflecting their views.
• The information managers are Bouwradius employees responsible for filtering and structuring the
information, maintaining the set of user profiles that
the information consumers may choose from, and in
time also the automatic document classification.

Figure 2: An example Cluster Map.
Instances that have the same set of class memberships are
grouped together in a cluster. Each cluster connects to the
classes it represents through a balloon-shaped edge. When
a subclass relation holds between two classes (not used in
this example), they are connected by a directed edge.
Clusters are then only connected to their most specific
classes.
Cluster Maps contain a lot of information about the instantiation of the classes, specifically exploiting the overlaps between them. For example, Figure 2 shows that the
Insulation class has more overlap with Materials than
with Tools. Such observations can trigger hypotheses
about the available information and the domain in general.
The calculation of the graph layout results in the geometric closeness of objects indicating their semantic
closeness: classes that share ni stances are located near
each other, and so are instances with the same or similar
class memberships.
The Cluster Map comes with a highly interactive, animated GUI, designed for browsing-oriented exploration of

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

the taxonomy. Through interaction a user can also retrieve
information about the specific documents that are contained in a class or cluster.
Summarizing, we can say that Cluster Maps enable a
user to acquire high-level overview of and insight in the
taxonomy structure and instantiation, and map very naturally on the domain discussed above.

4.

Three Tasks of an Information Manager

In the introduction we have identified three frequently
occurring information management tasks related to the use
of taxonomies. In this section we will elaborate on these
tasks, using Bouwradius as a context, and point out opportunities for the application of visualization technologies.

4.1.

Acquiring Insight

Information managers require a global overview of
and insight into the document collection, e.g. to see how
documents are distributed over classes, how classes relate
to each other through shared instances, etc. This knowledge enables them to determine how to present information to the consumers in an effective and mean ingful way.
Additionally, they can optimise the existing classification, e.g. by filtering noise in the document labelling or
restructuring the existing taxonomies, resulting in higherquality portals .
Numerous possibilities for visualizing such information collections are described and compared in the information visualization literature, see e.g. [1] and [2].

4.2.

Monitoring Information Repositories

Information managers have the desire to know how the
content of an information repository changes over time, so
that they can adapt the taxonomy accordingly. For exa mple, the taxonomy may need to provide more detail in an
area with an increasing amount of documents. This kind
of overview can be achieved by periodically creating the
visualizations proposed for the former task, or by extending them with an explicit time dimension.
Furthermore, there is always the possibility of a conceptual change in the domain: the nature of the central
topics may slowly change. This is also called semantic or
conceptual drift. It is interesting to see whether visualization can be used as an early warning system for such subtle but important changes.

4.3.

Measuring Quality of Automatic Classification

Bouwradius plans to use an automatic classification
tool based on machine learning techniques in the near future, to replace the manual classification process (domain

experts reading and labelling every document). The application of this tool consists of a number of steps:
1. A taxonomy is defined.
2. A set of documents is manually classified using the
classes of this taxo nomy.
3. This set is split into a training set and a test set.
4. The classification tool uses the training set to learn
how to recognize these classes. This results in a classifier that can automatically classify a document with
some degree of certainty.
5. The classifier is applied on the test set. The resulting
classification is used to assess the classifier’s quality,
e.g. in terms of number of misclassified documents,
precision and recall, etc. A separate data set is used
for this purpose to ensure the classifier’s generalizability.
6. Depending on this quality, one may wish to change
certain parameters and repeat step 4 and 5.
In the domain of Bouwradius, it seems natural to use the
existing, manually labelled documents for creating training and test sets. Clearly, the quality of these data sets is
very important, since it determines the quality the classifier can achieve. Section 4.1 already suggested that vis ualization can aid discovering and fixing errors in the data.
Another area where visualization can help is in step 6
of the application procedure. Assessment of the quality of
a classifier often comes down to interpreting statistics
such as the ratio of correctly classified documents. Although useful as a first indication, these statistics give
little qualitative information on the performance of the
system. For example, a classifier may correctly classify
certain classes but fail to differentiate between certain
other classes. Vis ualization of the classifier’s output with
respect to the desired output enables a user to acquire insight in these qualities, allowing him to make wellinformed parameter changes. When the training and quality assessment is fast enough, this can even make interactive exploration of the parameter settings possible.
The generalization ability measured by the test set
should also be monitored over time , since a conceptual
drift in the domain may result in less accurate classifications. Therefore, this task overlaps with the task formulated in section 4.2.
A beneficial side effect of using visual representations
of the classifier’s quality is that they help the information
managers, who cannot be expected to be experts in machine-learning, to better comprehend these techniques.
This increases their trust and understanding in the system
(even though it remains a “black box”), which on its turn
increases its acceptability for everyday usage.

4.4.

Summary

The main problems in this context can be summarized
as follows: the information consumer’s requirements are

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

met by their personalized portals, but the information
managers often lack the global overview needed to fulfill
their tasks. Furthermore, the use of automatic classification will only help to automate the classification task, but
overview and insight into the information are still needed
to direct the classifier and ensure high-quality output.
Visualization can significantly help to achieve this
overview and insight, enabling information managers to
produce higher-quality portals.

5.

the middle (Beton), i.e. in a richer taxo nomy they would
have been subclasses. Therefore, all their documents
would ideally also be classified as being about Beton.
However, there are several clusters of documents not classified as Beton, leading to the same problem as mentioned
above.

Using Cluster Maps for Information
Management Tasks

We will now describe several ways in which the Cluster Map can be used for the formulated information management tasks, following the structure of section 4, and
illustrate it with examples on the Bouwradius data.

5.1.

Acquiring Insight

The Cluster Map can immediately be applied on the
set of classified documents for acquiring insight into the
domain, since it was originally designed for such analysis
tasks. In order to realize insight-providing visualizations,
assistance from domain experts is needed to find relevant
sets of classes to visualize, since the taxo nomy is too large
to visualize at once.
Several methods are conceivable for establishing useful visualizations. Usually one starts with visualizing collections of classes about similar topics to see how they
relate at the instance level. At first, this can result in detecting flaws in the classification. For exa mple, Figure 3 is
a visualization of 5 classes concerning “beton” (concrete).
Note that this map differs from previous maps in that it
displays a cluster as a single visual entity instead of its
individual objects, leading to better scalability. Also, the
edges starting from the same class have the same colour,
resulting in better interpretability.
From this visualization two observations can be made
about the classification. The first is that synonymous
terms in the taxonomy are not necessarily treated as synonymous at the instance level: Betonverwerken and
Betonverwerking both refer to the same concept (concrete
processing), but they share hardly any instances; only two
documents have been labelled with both keywords. This
effect occurs very often in the classification, in various
forms, e.g. singular vs. plural words, abbreviations vs. full
descriptions, nouns vs. verbs, etc. This is problematic because the document repository using this classification has
no knowledge about thesaurical relations between keywords. Therefore, if a query to the document repository
does not specify all applicable key words, only a fragment
of the relevant documents will be returned.
The second observation is that all classes at the border
of Figure 3 are conceptually specializations of the class in

Figure 3: Documents about "beton" (concrete).
It is not clear what has caused these flaws. It could be
that the authors overlooked some keywords, since the taxonomy is rather large and unstructured, or that they mistakenly assumed that the document repository would
know about redundancies in the taxonomy, etc.
The next two examples provide more insight into the
domain.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 4: Documents about "daken" (roofs).

Figure 5: Documents about educational topics.

Figure 4 shows a number of classes related to “daken”
(roofs). Figure 5 visualizes various educational classes.
Although both images are rather complex for making very
detailed observations, it does allow for one high-level
observation: the classification provides much more detail
for documents about education. Not only are there more
classes about education than about roofs, the classes and
clusters are also much smaller, indicating a higher distinctiveness of the classification. Domain experts from
Bouwradius explain that the classification of technical
subjects is more sound and stable than the classification of
educational topics, and that the characteristics as observed
in the educational classification are not desirable due to
their complexity.
In the Bouwradius context, the taxonomy classes are
used for defining presentation-oriented classes, reflecting
the portal structures. Visualizations of these classes result
in maps with a much more task- and user-oriented perspective. Figure 6 is an example of this visualization strategy. It shows how documents are used in the curriculum
of bricklayers. Each class represents the documents relevant to a single module in the course. The number at the
start of a class name indicates the module order. In order
to reduce the visual clutter that results from visualising all
classes at once, we have removed all clusters with less
than 10 documents. This is justifiable since we only want
to have a very global overview of the mo dules.

Figure 6: Bricklayer curriculum documents.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

The visualisation helps to understand that some
modules, like Metselwerk algemeen and Schoon- en
vuilmetselwerk , are more central to the domain: they
have a strong interrelationship with most other mo dules. This can be expected since these are the first two
modules in the course. Other modules are more peripheral, like Vloeren and Stelwerk voor metselaars.
Note that three subareas emerge at the top (course 13
and 15), left (4, 5, 6, 7 and 9) and right side (12 and
14) of the map; these classes are closely interconnected and are mainly connected with the rest through
the courses 1 and 2.
The general layout and the formation of conceptual
subareas in the visualisation met the expectations of
the domain experts. They were concerned about the
fact that some modules, such as the courses 5 and 14,
had little or no documents of their own (even when
considering that small clusters have been removed).
There are numerous ways to obtain additional insightful visualizations, for example, by using derived
classes such as in Figure 6, or by using additional information such as a document’s author, origin, etc.
The domain experts are often able to extend this list,
since they know a lot about the context of the taxo nomy (e.g. how it
is established, how it is used) that is not apparent from
the taxonomy itself and that can be exploited to establish highly informative visualizations.
It may be interesting to see whether algorithms can
be developed that support the user with the interactive
exploration of the taxonomy, by suggesting interesting
visualizations based on the taxonomy’s characteristics.
For example, such tools could notify a user about sets
of classes with a similar instantiation (e.g. a large intersection and a small symmetric diffe rence).

5.2.

Monitoring Information Repositories

Several options exist for tracking changes in an information repository over time. One approach is to
periodically visualize the total document set, or the set
of added documents, and see how the distribution of
the information changes. This will not only show
changes in volume but also changes in relationships
between classes, possibly triggering a revision of the
taxonomy. belong to a class.
Figure 7 shows a content drift in four consecutive
years. Each graph shows all documents about energie
and duurzaam bouwen, as well as a class representing
all documents published in a specific year. We see that
in 1997 (top left) there are no documents published on
energie. The number of energie documents grows in
the following years but decreases in 2000 (bottom
right). The number of documents related to duurzaam

bouwen is evenly distributed over the last three years.
Instead of adding the year class to the visualisation, we
could also use it to filter the documents displayed in the
map. This map would be easier to interpret, but gives no
indication of how the shown amounts of documents relate to the total number published in that year.

Figure 7: Changes over time for Energie and
Duurzaam bouwen.
A problem with this visualization is that it is hard to
differentiate changes in volume from conceptual
changes, which can also result in growing or shrinking
classes and clusters. A solution may lie in the fact that a
lot of classifiers do not inherently produce a binary classification, where a document either belongs or does not.
Instead they produce a weighted classification, where a
document belongs to a class with some probability. A
binary classification is then established by thresholding
the weights. We suspect that conceptual changes in the
domain are reflected in these weights (their average
value will decrease).
Furthermore, when using automatic classification, the
visualization of the errors made on a manually labelled
test set may be repeated periodically, in order to track if
and how the generalization capabilities change.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Visualization for monitoring purposes may be implemented simply by producing various maps over
time. A user interface is also conceivable that allows
its users to “go back and forth in time”, showing the
changes using smooth animations.

5.3.

Visualizing Automatic Classification
Quality

In this subsection we describe a recently devised
and speculative method for giving a visual impression
of a classifier’s quality.
Section 4.3 introduced the training and test sets
that are used when training an automatic classifier. By
visualizing both the original classification of the training set and the classification produced by the classifier, the classification quality is assessed; ultimately
both visualizations should be identical.
Another approach is to visualize the original classification and highlight those documents that are incorrectly classified by the classifier. This allows one to
quickly oversee the quality of the classifier and detect
parts of the taxonomy that appear to be difficult to
characterise.
Figure 8 shows a mock-up of such a visualization,
using grey spheres for correctly classified documents
and red spheres for errors. This visualization tells us
that the classification quality is reasonable for the two
classes at the right but that it can be improved for the
classes at the left.

Figure 8: Visualizing classification errors.
Note that this visualization gives considerably
more information about the classifier’s quality than a
ratio of correctly classified documents. Using this in-

formation one can decide to change certain parameter
settings (some algorithms use separate parameters for
each class) or even switch to a different algorithm. Subsequent changes in the results can immediately be visualized, giving instant insight into the obtained improvements. This visualization method can also be applied on
the test set, resulting in a visual overview of the generalization ability of the algorithm. This can again give rise
to different parameter settings or the choice of a different
algorithm.
Instead of using the original classification, one can
also use the classification produced by the classifier as a
basis for the map and highlight the errors in it. The resulting visualization has a different meaning. When the
original classification is displayed, one clearly sees
which parts of the taxo nomy are hard to learn. On the
other hand, when the classifier’s classification is used,
one gets an overview of the reliability of the classifier’s
classification per class, i.e. it indicates for every class
whether documents classified as such are likely to really
belong to that class. Note that this difference in content
corresponds more-or-less to the concepts of recall and
precision, which are common error measurements for
information retrieval and machine learn ing algorithms.
5.3.1

Problems to be Investigated

Although this visualization method seems promising,
there are still a number of problems that need to be investigated.
First, there are some methodological issues, e.g.
whether it is sound to use the visualization of the training
set; maybe one should only use the test set. Also, it has
to be clearly formulated how these visualization methods
relate to the precision and recall concepts, as they are
very common quality measurements in Machine Learning and Information Retrieval.
Furthermore, a shortcoming of the proposed visualization is that, when the original classification is visualized, a user will want to know the classifier’s classification of an incorrectly classified object, and vice versa.
For example, in Figure 8 (which is based on the original
classification) one might wonder whether the large number of errors is caused because the algorithm fails to differentiate between Heat Insulation and Moistureproof
Constructing or whether the incorrectly classified objects
are simply distributed over all other classes by the classifier. Related to this is the fact that, since objects may
belong to multiple classes, the current vis ualization gives
no indication of the degree of misclassification of an
object. Various solutions are conceivable, e.g. offering
new ways of user interaction (mouse-over effects,
animations, etc.) or an extension of the visualization
metaphors.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

5.3.2

Related Work

There are few systems that use visualization for
aiding machine learning tasks and that go beyond
regular charts and similar diagrams (see [5] for an introduction to this field). A prominent example is
MineSet [8], a system for (among other things) classifying objects based on decision tree and Bayesian
methods. A difference with our approach is that MineSet uses the visualization to let the user understand the
classifier’s structure (e.g. the decision tree), with only
a secondary role for the resulting classification. Our
approach abstracts from the inner workings of the
classifier, still regarding it as a black box, but tries to
increase the user’s trust and understanding of the classifier’s capabilities by focusing on the difference between the desired and the actual output. Consequently,
our approach is also algorithm-independent. However,
we cannot give an explanation of the classifier’s mistakes, but it is not clear how many of our users (the
Bouwradius information managers) would be able to
comprehend this explanation in the first place without
expert assistance.

6.

Summary

In this paper we have explored a number of vis ualizations that assist in building and maintaining taxonomy -based applications such as portals. These vis ualizations are specifically aimed at assisting information managers, rather than information consumers.
The initial results show that the visualizations already benefit current practice, since they enable a user
to achieve insight in the existing classification. Furthermore, visualization methods are formulated that
assist in monitoring an information repository over
time and assessing the quality of the output of automatic classification tools.

Several topics for further research and development
have been mentioned, varying from the improvement of
the current visualization component (e.g. improving the
number of classes that can be visualized at the same
time, zooming and filtering functionality) to the development of special purpose viewers optimised for certain
tasks. Empirical results are strongly needed to guide future development.

References
[1] C. Chen. Information Visualisation and Virtual
Environments. Springer-Verlag, London, 1999.
[2] M. Dodge, R. Kitchin. Atlas of Cyberspace. Addison
Wesley, 2001.
[3] C. Fluit, H. ter Horst, J. van der Meer and M. Sabou.
Spectacle. In J. Davies, D. Fensel, and F. van Harmelen,
editors, Towards the Semantic Web: Ontology-driven
Knowledge Management. John Wiley, 2002 (to appear).
[4] C. Fluit, M. Sabou and F. van Harmelen. Ontology -Based
Information Visualisation. In V. Geroimenko, C. Chen,
editors, Visualising the Semantic Web. Springer Verlag,
2002 (to appear).
[5] U. Fayyad, G. Grinstein and A. Wierse. Information
Visualisation in Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2001.
[6] F. van Harmelen, J. Broekstra, C. Fluit, H. ter Horst, A.
Kampman, J. van der Meer and M. Sabou. Ontology based Information Visualisation. In Proceedings of the
Fifth International Conference on Information
Visualisation. IEEE Computer Society, 2001
[7] A. Maedche, S. Staab, N. Stojanovic, R. Studer and Y.
Sure. SEAL – A Framework for Developing SEmantic Web
PortALs. In Proceedings of the British National
Conference on Databases, 2001.
[8] MineSet. http://www.sgi.com/software/mineset.html.
[9] S. Staab and A. Maedche. Knowledge Portals –
Ontologies at Work. AI Magazine, 21(2), 2001.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

