VICO
A Tool for Supporting Visual Comparisons
of Different Pine-Beetle Management Approaches
Angela Cristina Duta, M. S. T. Carpendale, Ken Barker
Department of Computer Science
University of Calgary
{mituac, sheelagh, barker}@cpsc.ucalgary.ca
Abstract
In this paper a visual tool for comparing different
mountain pine-beetle management approaches is
presented. This comparison tool gives the users the
possibility of viewing their information, but more
importantly it provides the ability to visually see the
similarities and the differences between two simulations.
This tool can help users to make decisions regarding their
future actions against beetle attacks. The technique used
is based on colour indexing combined with the mapping
of the strategies into colour histograms. The system is
entitled VICO from the phrase Visual Comparison.

Keywords: scenario, visual comparison between maps,
colour histogram, probability, simulation.

1. Introduction
Each year the mountain pine beetle destroys millions
of mature mountain pine trees in British Columbia.
Unfortunately these epidemics have attacked many forest
resources such as the Banff National Park. The Ministry
of Forests [9] has coordinated the development of a
number of management approaches in order to stop the
killing of pines by these destructive insects.
The Kamloops Landscape Model (KLM) [5, 6] was
created in order to evaluate the results of mountain pine
beetle (MPB) management activities in Kamloops forest
districts. Two aspects were taken into consideration
during the evaluation: the influence on the volume of
timber from the infested area and the growth of the beetle
population. The main goal of MPB management activities
was to increase the volume of timber that can still be used
in the forest industry. This can be achieved by either
decreasing the volume of timber killed by beetles or
salvaging the trees that have been already attacked.
The MPB management activities combine four
different techniques

•
•
•
•

Clearcut harvesting of beetle infested areas.
Harvesting of susceptible blocks.
Salvage of the attacked blocks.
Single tree treatments: fell and burn or spread of
MSMA.
The MSMA method permits the recuperation of the
standing dead wood. Fell and burn are just used to
prevent the spread of infestation.
The KLM approach showed that timber from areas
with no MPB management is more likely to be destroyed
by MPB than timber from those areas where MPB
management is used to prevent beetles from spreading.
However, this is not a uniform response. The increase in
the effort of fighting against beetles does not always
result in a higher benefit. The KLM model showed that a
decrease in beetle management in areas affected by beetle
infections has as a result an increase in MPB attacks. On
the other hand sometimes an increase in beetle
management determines a marginal increase in benefits.
Initial
state
BM
Landscape
dynamics

Partial
simulation

SELES

Partial
simulation

Cumulative
simulation

VICO

Partial
simulation

Figure 1: The relationship between SELES and
VICO
The SELES (Spatially Explicit Landscape Event
Simulator) [4, 6, 10] is a tool for simulating the landscape
dynamics that has been used for studying the areas
affected by MPB attacks. SELES is a stochastic
environment working with various assumptions like the
rate of the beetle growth, the temperature over the periods
of a year, accidental strikes of light and fire,

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

precipitations etc., also called landscape dynamics. Since
SELES is stochastic it runs ten Monte Carlo simulations
for each scenario and then cumulates them as a final
output. These ten simulations will be referred as partial
simulations, while their combined result as a cumulative
simulation. The practice of generating ten partial
simulations combined in a cumulative one is called a
simulation run.
The VICO project aims to create a tool to facilitate
choosing the most suitable landscape ecology
management for any area already infected by beetles. The
goal of this project is to provide users with a tool that
helps them to visually compare cumulative simulations.
By offering easy to understand visual comparison tools
for data generated by SELES simulations, VICO makes a
powerful assistant for making decisions about fighting
against MPB attacks (see Figure 1).
Other terms used in this paper are strategy and
scenario. A strategy or a beetle management approach
means a group of actions performed together in order to
stop the beetle attacks. A scenario refers to a strategy that
can be applied to a particular location at a particular time
and the probable result to be obtained.

one. A joint histogram contains information about a group
of pixels according to a set of features like RGB colours,
edge density, degree of texture, rank and gradient
magnitude. This method gives better results even when
searching in totally different images that have similar
colour histograms.
“Descartes” (earlier called “IRIS”) [1, 2] is an
application developed to compare values of certain
statistical indices regarding several countries at a
particular moment in time. It does not use histograms, but
a bar according to the statistical index is drawn in the area
of each country considered for comparison.
Visualising data generated by SELES was the goal of
another tool called “Tardis”[3]. Tardis is an extension of
SELES and it is focused on 3-dimensional visualisation
of simulations generated by SELES. Tardis’ main goal is
to show the spatial-temporal changes that occur in
landscape dynamics. One visualisation included in the
Tardis is like a movie. One can move through it from the
beginning to the end, or one can go directly to the end of
it to see the final scene or one can stop it at time in the
simulation and move either forward or backward. This
allows one to see the simulated landscape situated both
spatially and temporally (see Figure 2).

2. SELES
SELES [4, 6, 10] models and simulates landscape
dynamics. A landscape is a heterogeneous region that
generally is composed differing areas with differing
interacting ecosystems. Analyses of landscape change
tend to involve great distances and tend to take place over
long periods of time. This makes experimentation
impractical and leads to a need for the development of
landscape models. These models can be of use in
predicting the consequences of management actions.

3. Related Work
Histograms are frequently used for the presentation
of information. They have also been used to recognise
individual objects. Swain and Ballard [8] have developed
an image search machine using histograms to search for
an object in a database of images. The first step in
searching is to create a histogram for each image. Each
histogram shows the number of pixels for every colour
that appears in the image. The second step is to
distinguish objects from their background and redraw
each histogram according to objects found into the image.
The third step is to compare the histogram of the query
object with the histograms of images. Sometimes the
query object appears in another image having other
dimensions and because of that it is difficult to detect its
presence.
Pass and Zabih [7] have extended this method by
using a joint histogram instead of just a simple colour

Figure 2: Tardis: visualization of the spatialtemporal “movie” [3]

4. Comparison between Scenarios
Four scenarios have been identified to fight against
beetles, scenarios that have varying levels of pine beetle
management: Beetle Management (BM), BM*2, BM/2
and BM*10. Their names express the effort involved in
each strategy compared to the first one (BM), not
necessarily the results obtained.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

It is not easy to decide which scenario is more
efficient at a particular moment in time for a specific area
due to different species of trees found in that area,
different bio-geo-climatic influences and the elevation of
the area. Another aspect to take into consideration is that
the cost of implementing scenarios can be very different.
An interesting set of terms for comparison is:
• Cost of the beetle management
• Effect on beetle population
• Amount of wood lost / salvaged
• Size of infestation area

•

Two cumulative simulations of the same MPB
approach for two different periods of time.
• Two cumulative simulations of different MPB
approaches for two different periods of time.
Each cumulative simulation of a scenario results in a
map that is created by adding the results of running the
simulation ten times. It is a map of probabilities of beetle
attacks, where probabilities are visually represented using
different colours. As each of the partial simulations is
based on probabilities it can result a different map of
beetle attacks in an area. Table 1 shows the signification
of colours in the cumulative simulation.
Table 1: The meaning of colours in cumulative
simulations

Colour
Black
Green
Cyan
Light blue
Blue
Dark blue
Pink
Light red
Dark red
Orange
Yellow

Probability to be
attacked
(out of 10)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Figure 3: An inventory map showing tree types
VICO (VIsual COmparison) is a tool developed to
permit comparison between different simulations
generated by SELES (see Figure 1) in terms of the area of
infestation. The user can identify exactly the areas that
will be most likely affected by beetle attacks depending
on the strategy applied. At the beginning, a map of a
specific region is chosen where there is already a history
of the activity of mountain pine beetles. The terrain data
used to develop the comparison model was obtained from
the Canadian Forest Service and British Columbia
Ministry of Forest. The starting map representing an area
attacked by MPB is one of the following:
• A bio-geo-climatic map of the area
• An inventory map showing the types of trees
growing in that area (see Figure 3)
• An elevation map in metres
• A map showing the starting beetle population
In VICO the user can select two scenarios to
compare. They can be:
• Two cumulative simulations of different MPB
approaches for the same period of time.

The probability that a cell is attacked is the number
of partial simulations in the cumulative simulation, in
which that cell is simulated as being attacked.

Figure 4: Two cumulative simulations showing
the probable MPB attacks in the same area. The
first one is showing the area after BM has been
applied for one year and the second one BM/2
after ten years

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 5: VICO implementation

5. How Does VICO Work?
In VICO (see Figure 5) the user has the possibility of
choosing the type of map he/she wants: a bio-geo-climatic
map of the area, an inventory map showing the types of
trees growing in that area, an elevation map or a map
showing the starting beetle population or even a map of
another cumulative simulation. Then the user has to
choose the type of beetle management strategy and the
number of years the simulation should be run. For
example: the first scenario can be BM showing the cells
attacked after one year from the moment when the beetle
attack was recorded and the second one can be BM/2
applied for ten years (see Figure 4).

histogram of the numbers of cells probable to be attacked
in each scenario. The histogram is drawn according to the
area of the map that is currently under the observation.

5.1 The comparison histogram
After selecting the two scenarios two small windows
will appear to show parts of the cumulative simulations
according to the parts selected from the map (see Figure
4). The user can compare these two scenarios by
comparing parts of them displayed in two small windows.
To facilitate the comparison another window displays a

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 6: The histogram for comparison

The bars drawn represent relative values of the
selected area from the map. Every time a small area is
selected the numbers of cells from each scenario are
computed according to their probability. Then the
maximum of these numbers is chosen and all the values
are divided by this maximum. This method ensures a
good visual representation every time the histogram is
redrawn. The position of bars, one under the other,
grouped by the values of probability, makes differences
easy to see. The small coloured squares from the left side
of the window show all the possible probabilities for a
cell to be attacked. In case in one scenario or in both
scenarios there are no cells to be attacked with a certain
probability the small square from the left side of the
histogram will just let the user know that (see Figure 6).

5.2 Cells within a range of probability
The user may be interested only in the comparison of
the cells attacked with the probability in a certain range,
for example: either lower than 50%, or more than 50%, or
between 30% and 60% (see Figure 7). For this a filter
specifying the upper value and the lower value of the
probability considered is incorporated in the application.

5.4 The histogram for differences
Another histogram is attached to the window of
differences showing in a visual way the differences
between scenarios. The starting point for this histogram
refers to the numbers of cells for each probability for the
first scenario. The values for the same cells in the second
scenario are shown in each second line. If two adjacent
bars are equal that means all cells of a certain probability
from scenario 1 are also probably being attacked in
scenario 2. If two adjacent bars are not equal then the
second one is shorter and that means that not all cells
attacked in scenario 1 are also probably to be attacked in
scenario 2.
Let’s take as an example the histogram from Figure
9. In the first group of bars (the group that has a small
green square on the left side) the first bar shows the
number of cells with the value of probability 1 in the first
scenario. The second line of the group shows how many
of the cells, which appear with value 1 in the first
cumulative simulation, are simulated as being attacked in
the second scenario and with what probabilities. The
second line has lots of colours meaning that some of the
cells with value 1 in the first scenario are going to be
attacked with the same probability in the second scenario
(green cells) or with greater values of probability
(represented by cyan, blue, red and yellow parts of the
bar) or are not probable to be attacked at all (the black
part of the bar).

Figure 7: Options in VICO

5.3 Seeing the differences
In order to depict the differences between two
scenarios in a detailed manner the user can choose to
display another window (see Figure 8). Two colours
appear in it:
• white for cells where applying scenario 1 there is a
lower probability to be infected.
• brown for cells where applying scenario 2 there is a
lower probability to be infected.

Figure 9: Histogram of differences
Figure 8: Window showing differences between
two scenarios

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

5.5 Technical considerations
VICO is developed using Visual C++ 6.0, OpenGL
and FLTK on Windows 2000.
The cumulative simulation files generated by SELES
are ARC ASCII files. The information in files is coded
according to the probability of each cell to be attacked.
Each file has 1550 * 1498 cells encoded as 0 through 10
(see Figure 10).
1 1 0 0 1 0 1 2 1 10 10 10 9 7 7 6 7 4 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 4 0
…………………………………………………………
3 3 3 3 4 4 4 0 0 0 0 7 7 7 5 6 8 8 8 8 8 8 9 3 4 4 9 9 10
Figure 10: Example of coding in SELES ARC
ASCII files

6. Advantages of VICO
VICO is one of the few tools to implement visual
comparison between huge files and the only one to
facilitate comparison between MPB simulations. Images
in VICO are displayed with no overlapping, having the
possibility of seeing both scenarios as they are and also to
distinguish the differences between them.
Colours are easy to distinguish and are grouped by
colour family. Green, cyan, light blue, blue, dark blue are
coding low values of probability (1 through 5), while
pink, light red, dark red, orange and yellow are coding
high values of probability (6 through 10).
The comparison window containing a histogram of
frequencies and probabilities that are drawn in parallel
facilitates the comparison task. Because the histogram is
represented in 2D the length of the bars are easy to
compare.

7. Future Work
A number of future improvements to this technique
are possible.
In the actual implementation there is a legend of the
colours used in the scenarios images. It would be
interesting to have a legend for the map image according
to the type of map used. Example: for an inventory type
group map a legend of the colours and species, for an
elevation map a legend of colours and elevation in metres.
VICO has the ability to compare two cumulative
simulations. It would probably be useful to be able to
compare a higher number of scenarios.
There are shown only small areas of the images of the
scenarios simulated. Depending if the user finds this
useful or not a large window showing the entire image of

the cumulative simulations can be added in order to see
the context.
We would like to extend our area of research from
graphics to databases and to organize the information in a
spatial database instead of ARC ASCII files. This will
increase the execution speed of our application and it will
make it more flexible.

8. Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Andrew Fall,
Gowlland Technologies Ltd., for suggesting this topic of
research and for providing SELES simulations files for
tests.

9. References
[1] Gennady Andrienko, and Natalia Andrienko, “Descartes
System - Interactive Intelligent Cartography in Internet”,
ERCIM News No.34 - July 1998, also available at
http://www.ercim.org/publication/Ercim_News/enw34/andr
ienko.html
[2] Gennady L. Andrienko, and Natalia V. Andrienko,
“Interactive Maps for Visual Data Exploration”,
International Journal Geographic Information Science, vol.
13 (4), June 1999, pp. 355-374, also available at
http://ais.gmd.de/and/icavis/
[3] M.S.T. Carpendale, D.J. Cowperthwaite, M. Tigges, A.
Fall, and F.D. Fracchia, “The Tardis: A Visual Exploration
Environment for Landscape Dynamics”, Proceedings, SPIE
Conference on Visual Data Exploration and Analysis VI.
Santa Fe, USA, 1999, pp. 110-119,
[4] Andrew Fall, Dave Daust, and Don G. Morgan, “A
Framework
and
Software
Tool
to
Support
Collaborative Landscape Analysis: Fitting Square Pegs into
Square Holes”, Transactions in GIS 5(1): 67-86. Special
issue
of
selected
papers
from
the
4th
International Conference on Integrating Geographic
Information
Systems
and
Environmental
Modeling, Banff, Alberta, 2000.
[5] Andrew Fall, Marvin Eng, Terry Shore, Bill Riel, and Don
Sachs, “Mountain Pine Beetle Audit Project Kamloops
Forest District Landscape Model”, B.C. Ministry of
Forests internal report 2001.
[6] Andrew Fall, and Joseph Fall, “A Domain-Specific
Language for Models of Landscape Dynamics”, Ecological
Modelling 141(1-3): 1-18, 2001.
[7] Greg Pass, and Ramin Zabih, “Comparing Images Using
Joint Histograms”, Multimedia Systems 7(3): 234240,1999.
[8] Michael Swain and Dana Ballard, “Colour indexing”,
International Journal of Computer Vision, 7(1), pages 1132, 1991.
[9] Pacific Forestry Centre, available at
http://www.pfc.forestry.ca/entomology/mpb/index_e.html
[10] SELES, web page available at
http://www.cs.sfu.ca/research/SEED

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

