VISUALISATION OF PERTURBED VOWEL PHONATION USING
DYNAMIC FUNDAMENTAL HARMONIC NORMALISATION
Kathiresan Manickam, C.J.Moore
North Western Medical Physics, Christie Hospital, Manchester, UK
E-mail : kathiresan.manickam@physics.cr.man.ac.uk
Keywords : speech, spectrum, fundamental frequency, tracking, normalisation, impedance

Abstract
In larynx cancer patients the monitoring of
vocal fold behaviour can be achieved using glottal
waveforms for vowels captured as trans-larynx
impedance time series via an electro-laryngograph.
The impedance signals are sustained for up to 4
seconds, digitised at 20kHz, and divided into 1000
point frames. An estimate of the instantaneous power
spectral density PSD is computed from of each frame.
However, detailed spectral differences between normal
and aberrant vowel phonation are obscured by
dynamic variations in fundamental frequency f0. To
separate fundamental and harmonic behaviour, f0 is
extracted from a frame and used to normalise spectral
powers and to transform the entire frequency range
into floating point multiples of the fundamentalfrequency. FHN dynamic PSD can then be presented as
shaded surfaces to the clinician for evaluation.
Examples are given for normal volunteers and a
patient assessed by speech and language therapists
pre-treatment, then at 6 and 12 months post treatment.

1.0

Introduction

Medical treatments are increasingly based on
expert opinion enhanced by objective measurement.
Radiotherapy and surgery now rival each other as
treatments of choice for larynx cancer patients. Both
techniques offer local control of disease, so that quality
of life after treatment is potentially a deciding factor.
In contrast to laryngectomy, radiotherapy does not
require the removal of tissues. However, irradiation can
and does induce physical changes in the vocal folds
and vocal tract. Conservative surgery has equally
persuasive claims. This has produced increased
interest in the measurement of voice quality [1-3] and a
realisation that there is far too much data available to
be readily appreciated by clinical staff [4], which
includes the speech and language therapists, or SALTs,
who might be called upon to rehabilitate selected
patients. Indeed, in the UK the SALT is likely to
employ expert assessment based almost exclusively on
voice quality, which convolves vocal fold vibration
with vocal tract configuration. This is despite the
availability of trans-larynx impedance measurements
from the electro-laryngograph [5]., which are
selectively correlated with vocal fold vibration [6].
The SALT is uniquely trained to be sensitive
to changes in acoustic fundamental frequency. Vowel
production normally requires the vocal folds to vibrate,
whereas consonants do not. It is this vibration that

produces the fundamental frequency that distinguishes
male from female, both at a population and an
individual level [7]. This suggests that perturbations to
vocal fold functionality caused by disease and by its
treatment can be tracked more effectively during
sustained vowel phonation. Indeed, this is one reason
for a physician asking a patient to say /æ/ whenever a
laryngitis is suspected.
SALTs continue to subjectively assess and
score voice quality. However, in doing so they make
use of descriptive terminology that can be related to
scientific spectral concepts [7,8]. ‘Shimmer’ and ‘jitter’
describe the variability of f0 power and frequency.
‘Whisper’, ‘vocal fry’, and ‘creak’ describe noise
content. Just as f0 and its statistical variability are
determined by vocal fold vibration, so to is noise,
which can be caused by incomplete vocal fold closure
and the abnormal escape of air through the resulting
cavity. Whilst SALTs routinely use summary dynamic
spectral parameters, the complete dynamic acoustic
PSD, occasionally seen as a spectrogram, finds little
practical application. This is because of the difficulty
of visually identifying subtle changes in the
spectrogram that are more easily identified by the
expert ear. When the familiar acoustic signal is
replaced by the non-intuitive impedance signal from
the electro-laryngograph, the dynamic PSD becomes
even less tractable, despite its relative simplicity. In all
cases these difficulties are amplified when aberrant
phonation is being considered. Consequently, a great
deal of useful data is simply ignored, or worse still,
SALTs will not commit to the use of devices such as
the electrolaryngograph.

2.0 Theoretical Background
This paper identifies the variability of f0 as the
primary obstacle to the inspection of dynamic spectra.
In support of this view it is noted firstly that f0 variation
appears to be tracked and compensated for by the
human observer. Indeed, removing this complication
may well contribute to the intelligibility of language,
which endures regardless of the pitch of the speaker.
Secondly, the observation is made that the human
auditory system appears to be calibrated in terms of
harmonic
relationships
and
not
frequency.
Consequently, the appreciation of phonation data may
require the normalisation of spectral power and
frequency scales to the power and frequency of the
instantaneous f0 itself, termed ‘fundamental harmonic
normalisation’, or FHN. Here it is also suggested that
the visualisation of the data in the conventional

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

spectrogram can be greatly improved by dynamic f0
tracking and removal followed by FHN processing of
the PSD. Finally, given that spectral slope is of some
importance to SALTs , the conventional grey scale
image display of the familiar spectrogram is
unsatisfactory. Most individuals are only able to
distinguish a few tens of shades of grey, and are
notoriously bad at judging changes in grey-level.
Hence shaded surface representation of dynamic FHN
with scaled axes is to be preferred.
FHN has been described in detail by Moore et
al [9], but only in the context of time averaged spectra
derived from well behaved normal population
phonation. Dynamic data and measurements taken
from patients with abnormal phonation were not
considered because of the need to continuously and
reliably extract f0 from degraded signals. In such
degraded signals, even impedance, it is possible for the
fundamental frequency of a small frame of dynamic
data to be weak compared to formant resonance peaks
or associated harmonics.
At first sight it might be thought that the
dynamic values of f0 might simply be read from the
electro-laryngograph used to source the phonation
signals. However, the device assumes f0 can be related
to the occurrence of just one major peak defined to lie
between two, consecutive, negative going pulses in the
time domain. The reciprocal of this period is taken to
be f0. The approach is not reliable enough for the
analysis of dynamic aberrant speech.
An alternative and widely used approach to
detect f0 is Cepstral analysis (Homomorphic
Deconvolution). In this technique [10], the input is
considered to be the convolution of two signals, one
being the low frequency component containing f0 , and
the other being the unwanted high frequency detail.
Transformation into the frequency domain produces a
spectrum that is the multiplication of the individual
signal spectra. In order to filter out the unwanted high
frequencies, the logarithmic of the squared, absolute
values of the compound spectrum is taken prior to
inverse transformation into the modified time domain.
Once back in the modified time domain the largest
peak is selected by windowing, the simplest approach
being to define some peak threshold. If the peak does
not exceed the threshold, then the particular phonation
data frame under consideration speech is usually said
to be ‘unvoiced . For aberrant speech this assumption is
not well founded, and the lack of an identifiable peak
reflects the limitations of the cepstral approach.
Since the power spectral density can be
estimated using the Fourier Transform of the autocovariance the fundamental frequency can be selected
from the maxima in the autocovariance itself [10]. This
approach has been found to robust to the presence of
noise and transients for the particular case of vowel
phonation. Unlike cepstral analysis it also produces f0
values that are well matched for dual modality signals
in the impedance and acoustic domains, though only
the impedance domain is considered in this report.

2.0 Methods
Healthy volunteers and larynx cancer patients,
male and female, were recruited for clinical trials.
Patients were assessed pre-treatment, 6-months and 12months post treatment. A seven point scale, with 0
indicating normal and 6 severely aberrant was used to
categorise voice quality. Each examination included
the phonation of the vowel /i/. Expert SALTs examined
selected
subjects
using
a
PC
controlled
electrolaryngograph. Using throat sensors, trans-larynx
impedance signals for /i/ were sampled at 20 kHz for
up to 4 seconds and stored in binary WAV data-files.
These files were then transmitted by FTP to a
COMPAQ Unix Alpha-server-2000 dual 4/275
processor system for storage. Visualisation and
analysis was then performed off-line on an AMDAthlon. 1GHz processor NT-PC equipped with 1Gbyte
memory. All software utilities were written in Research
Systems IDL 5.5.
Signals were stationarised by differencing.
This removes slow trends, such as transducer drift,
background sound and mains contamination, which
would otherwise obstruct identification of low
frequency, fundamental frequencies. The processed
data streams were then split into sequential data
frames, each 1000 samples long. The auto-covariance
of each frame was computed and f0 estimated. Prior to
Fourier transformation the variance of the
autocovariance points at high lags was reduced by
applying a multiplicative Hanning window. Each
resultant power spectral density estimate was then FHN
processed and stored. Non-normalised PSD and FHNPSD sequences were then transferred into 2D arrays for
perspective surface projection and Gouraud shading.

3.0 Results
3.1 Visualisation of Normal Phonation

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 1
Normal male impedance frame, vowel /i/

The autocovariance of a single 1000 point
frame of impedance data taken from a normal volunteer
phonating vowel /i/ is shown in Figure-1. An
approximate 100Hz f0 is clearly visible from the
maxima. The dashed lines represent 1, 2 and 3 standard
deviations for white noise, so the significance of the
maxima is high. The corresponding multi-frame,
dynamic PSD is shown in Figure-2, upper. The lower
frequency sections up to 1kHz would be considered
relatively quiescent, though visually hard to appreciate.
In contrast the dynamic FHN-PSD, with the effects of
f0 tracked and removed for every frame of data, clearly
shows how stable normal vowel phonation really is.
The instantaneous f0 ridge is intentionally located at 1.0
on the ‘harmonic scale’, since it is always a unit
multiple of its own frequency. The physical harmonics
of each instantaneous f0 can be identified by
subtracting 1 from their scale positions at integer
values.

3.2 Visualisation of Patient Phonation
Patient data is a severe test of f0 tracking and
the FHN-PSD visualisation approach. Results for a
male subject with pre-treatment, 6 and 12 months post
treatment categorisation SALT scores of 4, 2 and 0
are presented to illustrate the power of appropriate
visualisation of spectral data. It should be noted that
the SALT scores indicate that in their expert opinion
the patient started abnormal and recovered gradually to
excellent and voicing after 1-year.

Figure 2
Upper: Male volunteer impedance, vowel /i/,
dynamic PSD. Frame count shown lower left
axis, spectral frequency lower right axis,
power vertical.
Lower:
Corresponding
FHN-PSD
with
frequency axis replaced by multiple of
dynamically extracted f0 and vertical power
axis normalised to instantaneous power of f0.
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 3
Male patient impedance frame, vowel /i/.
Upper: Pre-treatment.
Middle: 6-momths post treatment.
Lower: 12-months post treatment.

Figure-3 shows a noisy pre-treatment
autocovariance function for a single data frame.
Nevertheless, periodic maxima are clearly visible for
fundamental tracking. At the 6 and 12 months posttreatment stages there are few significant peaks, but
those peaks that do exist can readily be identified as
lying above the 3 standard deviation noise thresholds.
They also appear at predictable lag multiples, giving
further confidence in derived f0.

Figure-4 and Figure-5 show the PSDs and
corresponding FHN-PSDs for each of the three patient
assessment stages. Inspection of the 0-1 KHz lower
frequency range, approximately harmonic scale 0-9,
suggests that relatively poorly differentiated harmonic
power has been restored to more normal levels after 6
months. At 12 months f0 power is exceeded by
harmonic power to the extent that re-scaling is
required.

Figure 4
Male patient impedance, /i/, dynamic PSD.

Figure 5
Male patient impedance, /i/, dynamic FHN-PSD.

Upper: Pre-treatment.
Middle: 6-momths post treatment.
Lower: 12-months post treatment.

Upper: Pre-treatment. Power scale 0.0-1.0
Middle: 6-months post treatment.
Power scale 0.0-1.0.
Lower: 12-months post treatment.
Power scale 0.0-2.5

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

4.0 Discussion and Conclusions
SALTs describe individuals with excellent
harmonic power, measured relative to that at f0 , as
having a sharp clear voice. Before treatment the FHNPSD for the example patient clearly shows power
filling in the spectral troughs between the nearharmonic ridges. This suggests incomplete vocal fold
closure and noisy escape of air. After 6 months much
of this anharmonic power has retreated, leaving
sharpened ridges. This is particularly visible next to the
primary f0 ridge. One year after treatment the FHNPSD exhibits harmonic powers that exceed those
typically found in the normal population (c.f. Figure-5
and Figure-2 lower). However, harmonic power
instability is clearly visible and contrasts with the
regimented, level ridges seen in the normal volunteer in
Figure-2 lower.
A technical interpolation issue remains to be
solved in the FHN normalisation scheme. The value of
f0 can be determined to greater accuracy than the 20Hz
bin width in the spectral domain. This high resolution
f0 can then be used to estimate the power of the true
fundamental using adjacent bins in the discrete
spectrum. Power normalisation then produces a visible
peak close to but not coincident with the true f0 . This is
clearly visible as residual ripple in the FHN-PSD
surfaces for a harmonic-scale multiple of unity.
An impenetrable obstacle arises when data
frames have no meaningful fundamental frequency.
This invariably occurs with onset of phonation. In this
transient state the vocal folds start moving from an
open position, vibrate in a pulsatile and then in a truly
periodic manner. The effect is clearly visible in the
degraded phonation of the patient example. Figure-4
shows flat low frequency zones, 0-2kHz, for the initial
PSDs. Accordingly, these frames and their abnormally
high f0 values have been filtered out prior to FHN-PSD
display in Figure-5. This filtering is seen as a
shift/truncation in the frame axis range.
In conclusion it has been shown that with
appropriate visualisation of complex data SALT
investigations can be enhanced. In this manner the
authors hope to encourage the wider use of objective
measurement devices such as the electrolaryngograph,
and to hide the mathematical complexities of spectral
processing by only presenting results in a format
consistent with sensory intuition and professional
practice. In the process it has been possible to
demonstrate unambiguously a powerful example of
voice restoration following radical, life saving
radiotherapy.

Comp Soc, Procs HC-99 Current Perspectives in
Healthcare Computing, Harrogate UK, 137-145,
1999.
3. McGillion M A, Moore C J, Ritchings R T,
‘Objective Voice Quality Assessment Using MultiLayer Perceptrons’, Procs 4th Intl Workshop Neural
Networks in Applications NN’99, Magdeburg
Germany, 141-149, 1999.
4. Baken R J and Orlikoff, ‘Voice measurement: Is
More Better?’, Logopedics Phoniatrics Vocology,
22:4, 147-151, 1997
5. Winstanley S and Wright H , “ Vocal fold contact
area patterns in normal speakers: An investigation
using the electrolaryngograph interface system”,
British Journal of Disorders of Communication, 26,
25-39, 1991
6. Fourcin A J, ‘Electrolaryngographic Assessment of
Vocal Fold Function’, Journal of Phonetics, 14,
435-442, 1986.
7. Titze I R, Principles of Voice Production, Prentice
Hall, 1994.
8. Priestley M B. Spectral Analysis and Time Series,
Academic Press 1981
9. Moore C J, Slevin N and Winstanley S,
‘Characterising Vowel Phonation By Fundamental
Spectral Normalisation of Lx-Waveforms’, Procs
Intl Workshop Models & Analysis of Vocal
Emissions for Biomedical Appls, Florence Italy, 16, 1999
10. Rabinar,L.R. et al. ,, Digital Processing of Speech
Signals,”1978

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr Nick
Slevin, Consultant Radiation Oncologist at the Christie
Hospital, Manchester, Amanda Carr and Susan Jones,
Speech and Language Therapists at Wythenshawe
Hospital, for their advice and help. Thanks also go to
the EPSC for their financial support through Grant
GR/R04713/01, ’Automated Voice Quality Monitoring
for Differentiating Cancer Therapy, Recovery Patterns
and Rehabilitation’.

5.0 References
1. Baken R J. Clinical Measurement of Speech and
Voice. College Hill Press, 1987

2. Moore C J, Slevin N , Winstanley S, Woods H,

Allan E, Birzgalis A R, W T Farrington,
Computerised
Quantification
and
3DVisualisation of Voice Quality Changes following
Radiotherapy for Carcinoma of the Larynx”, Brit

“

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

