“Human-Computer Interaction in Life Drawing, a Fine Artist’s Perspective”
Prof. Jen Grey (a.k.a. JEN ZEN), California State University Long Beach
ABSTRACT
Experiments in human-computer interaction
(HCI) are presented from my perspective as an artist
who teaches Life Drawing at California State
University Long Beach.
I discuss original
cybertouch figures created with Steven Schkolne’s
unprecedented Surface Drawing software, linked to
Responsive Workbench projects supported by the
Caltech Multi-Res Modeling Group. The Workbench
and the tangible interface tools are described. I use
the proprietary software in a unique way to draw live
models, a purpose for which it was not intended. This
work is addressed in context with fine art exhibitions
“Siggraph 2000”, and “The Cyborg Manifesto, or
The Joy of Artifice” in 2001, The artists re-examine a
sense of our bodies, technology and culture, Their
philosophical insights are presented in contrast to
“old school” humanist values fostered in the Life
Drawing Gallery, an interactive web site for students.
Brief conclusions highlight an evolving cultural
paradigm for human identity and portrayal.

My “Self-Portrait” reflects multiple interests in
traditional and non-traditional representation. The
fire is a freehand drawing, not a photograph, created
in PhotoShop, then printed using a ColorSpan
Display Maker XII (new manufacturing technology
premiered in The Studio at Los Angeles SIGGRAPH
1999). One of my virtual sculptures, created in a
semi -immersive Workbench environment, floats
between my hands. The images, all from different
digital sources, were edited as one master composite.
This range of skills made me well suited for alpha
testing proprietary Surface Drawing software.

1. Introduction
Experiments in human-computer interaction
(HCI) are presented from my perspective as an artist
who teaches Life Drawing at California State
University Long Beach. I discuss original drawings
created with unprecedented Surface Drawing
software, using the semi -immersive Responsive
Workbench system supported by the Caltech MultiRes Modeling Group. I describe how unique 3D
models were created, then edited in large format
digital prints for millennium exhibitions “Siggraph
2000”, and “The Cyborg Manifesto, or The Joy of
Artifice” in 2001. I present exhibition artists who
redefine a sense of our bodies in a world changed by
technology and culture. In contrast, I summarize “old
school” humanist values in the Life Drawing Gallery,
an interactive educational web site fo rmy
undergraduate university art students.
Creative
conclusions highlight an evolving cultural paradigm
for human identity and portrayal.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Fig. 1. “Self-Portrait” by JEN ZEN
Virtual Digital Art, 2000

2.0 Surface Drawing on the Workbench
2.1 Steven Schkolne Surface Drawing@
As part of the Caltech Multi-Res Modeling
Group directed by Peter Schroder, Steven Schkolne
and Michael Pruett demonstrated tangible interface
tools with the Responsive Workbench at the
“Emerging Technologies Exhibition, Los Angeles
SIGGRAPH 1999”. This work is unprecedented.

Fig. 2. Surface Drawing by Steven Schkolne
Courtesy of Steven Schkolne
“Surface Drawing allows artists and designers
to create 3D shapes comfortably and naturally with
hand motions and physical tools. As you mo ve your
hand through space, the motion is recorded by the
computer as a stroke. Strokes appear to float in the
air, thanks to the head-tracked stereoscopic display
environment of the Responsive Workbench.
Freehand strokes can be combined to make complex
organic shapes. This experimental technology for 3D
sketching is useful in developing architectural and
industrial designs, fine art and digital movies. The
work is supported by the National Science
Foundation and BMW Designworks, USA.” [1]

“The Responsive Workbench is a 3D interactive
virtual reality system originally developed by
Wolfgang Krueger and associates at GMD. The
workbench user interacts with virtual objects as if
working on a table. Actual and virtual objects can
coexist in the tabletop environment. This creates
reinforcing cues and a very natural working
environment for many applications. In order to
create the 3D environment, users wear shutter glasses
to view computer-generated stereoscopic images that
are projected on the tabletop display surface by a
projector/mirror system. The user's head position and
orientation are tracked to create the correct
perspective for the computer to use when rendering
the environment. An input device is also tracked by
the system allowing the users to interact with objects
in the tabletop environment.” [2]

2.2

Surface

Drawing

Interface

Tools

2.1 The Caltech Responsive Workbench

Fig. 4. Tools, Courtesy of Steven Schkolne
“Four input devices are used in Surface
Drawing, tangible tools that comprise a minimal,
physical interface for creating shapes. The glove is
used to draw ribbon strokes. The path of the hand
creates a stroke that appears to float in 3D space.
Bending the hand controls the curvature of the stroke.
A stroke is started by closing the thumb, and stopped
by opening the thumb. Utility “tongs” are used to
grab a shape and move it in 3D space. Two pairs of
tongs can be used together to stretch a shape, and
increase its scale so finer details can be added. The
“eraser” fits comfortably in the hand; squeezing its
sensor removes a small region from the 3d drawing.
The plastic magnet tool is held between the fingers,
and can be used for fine control of a shape.” [3]
Fig. 3. Responsive Workbench, Courtesy of
Caltech Computer Science Department
[1] “Steven Schkolne” by Steven Schkolne, Caltech, 2002
at <http://www.cs.caltech.edu/~ss/sdraw/>

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

[2] “Responsive Workbench”, by Caltech, 2002 at
<http://www.multires.caltech.edu/~rwbdemo/ >
[3] “Surface Drawing Interface” by S. Schkolne, Caltech,
2002 at <http://www.cs.caltech.edu/~ss/sdraw/interface/>

2.3 Experimental Surface Drawing

observed that maintaining the same angle and
distance of the stereoscopic glasses in relation to the
gloved hand while drawing invariably yielded more
realistic visual results, minimizing apparent multiple
perspective distortion that frustrated the working
process in our preliminary studies.

2.4 The “Rockman” Experiment

Fig. 5. “Pollock Nuvo” by Sheriann Ki Sun
Burnham, Virtual Digital Art, 1999 - 2002
Courtesy of the Artist
At Steven Schkolne’s invitation, I worked
with my friend and collaborator Sheriann Ki Sun
Burnham in Surface Drawing© one day a week for
more than three months, then a few more times the
next two years. One of us would monitor computer
systems while the other drew. When everything
worked correctly, Surface Drawing© was incredible
fun. Freehand drawings seemed to pour out of our
fingers like water. We felt like living paintbrushes.
We drew hundreds of spontaneous sketches, erased
most. In homage to Jackson Pollock, Sheri created
“Pollock Nuvo”, a celebration of the existential
nature of the freehand process we explored. (Later,
Sheri texture mapped the 3D model in Bryce 4.0.)
Sheriann Ki Sun Burnham is shown drawing
digital pioneer Judith Moncrieff by tracing her body
from head to toe with the motion capture glove. We

Fig. 6. Life Drawing, 1999, Courtesy of ZENKI

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Contrary to the appropriate use of Surface
Drawing©, I did not wear the stereoscopic glasses as
I traced Tyler Stallings from head to toe, so I could
not see the virtual figure as it was created. (Tyler is
an artist, freelance writer, and visionary curator of
contemporary art and popular culture.) The glasses
were taped to the ceiling above him, which
established a fixed vanishing point for motion
capture. In the spirit of traditional blind contour
drawing, the intention was not to look at the virtual
figure as it was created, but to focus on the
interactive, kinesthetic aspect of cybertouch drawing.

Fig. 7. “Rockman”, 2000, Courtesy of ZENKI
When the stereoscopic glasses were fixed in
location, it was easier to achieve visually “realistic”
results in creating a cybertouch figure based on
kinesthetic action alone. When the glasses were used
in constant motion, the fluid changes in perspective
vanishing points created aggregate distortions in
drawing forms.
Maximizing motion tended to
generate drawings that felt like the sense of touch
made visible, whereas stabilizing vanishing points
generated images more consistent with an
acculturated visual recognition of the final image.
I had no idea what the cybertouch drawings of
Tyler Stallings would look like, but I felt they might
look like touch made visible. The computer system
could not capture nuances of form, and skipped
recording when I moved too fast. The virtual 3D
figures were surprising, like husks of eerie cyborgs.

“Badwater” is a composite digital painting of a
remote boron salt flat in Death Valley National
Monument. Last remnant of an ancient sea, this
desolate place is now the lowest place on dry land in
North America, a unique place for a unique being.
Turned to a different angle in “Visitation”, the
same “Rockman” character looks entirely different.
It is an alien changeling, a sharp pointy thing that
floats above the salt flat like a living mirage. (The
side panel is a pyrotechnic display I exploded at a
party John Wayne hosted at his home many years
ago…archived for the right resonant connection.)

Fig. 8. “Rockman” by JEN ZEN
Virtual Digital Art, 2000
The cybertouch figures are curiously alien,
anthropomorphic but not human. My favorite is
called “Rockman”, a virtual motion capture data set
that can programmed as a musical score, animated as
a 3D figure, or presented in 2D formats like a weird
movie still. It looks intriguingly different when
rotated to different views.

2.6 “Rockman” Composite Editing
“Rockman” is the central character in my digital
artwork “Badwater”. The image was exported from
The Responsive Workbench as a proprietary .iv file,
then converted to edit as a .vrml file in Bryce 4.0, a
commercially available software program.
The
figure was texture mapped, and lit from a new angle.
No changes were made to the geometric mesh
structure inherent to original 3D motion capture data.

Fig. 9. “Badwater” by JEN ZEN
ColorSpan Print,, 72 x 105 inches, 2001

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Fig. 10. “Visitation” by JEN ZEN
Digital Fine Art Print, 72 x 72 inches, 2001
“Rockman” was used again in “Hotlicks’. The
figure was given a new texture-map in Bryce 4.0, and
keyed to a different light source before final editing
as a .psd file in PhotoShop 5.5. The backdrop is a
composite digital painting and digital photograph.
The source was shot with a 35mm SLR Canon F-1
camera with 28mm lens - in Death Valley National
Monument, the perfect place to discover an alien.
The fire panel in “Hotlicks” is pure digital
painting. It is not a photograph. The high degree of
realism was achieved with standard PhotoShop tools
(paint brush, rubber stamp, smudger, eraser, pointer,
etc.), used as a only a painter trained in “old school”
academic tradition can. Finishing layers were filtered
in Painter 6.0. Dozens of semi-transparent layers
were flattened to achieve final fire effects.
“Hotlicks” feels alive when you see it life-sized.
At eye level for small children, there are tiny plastic
soldiers and a Red Cross ambulance painted in the
flames, which makes the eerie cyborg seem bigger,

Fig. 11. “Hotlicks” by JEN ZEN
ColorSpan Print,, 72 x 79 ½ inches, 2002

figures, but months to edit them. Inspired by
classical painters Eugene Delacroix and Sir Peter
Paul Rubens, who used mathematical formulae to
portray pictorial movement, I was obsessed with
creating still animations (while retaining the integrity
of the original motion capture data). I wanted to
create surprising visions of kinesthetic limbic
memory, ancient, futuristic and eternal.
Caught in a spinning web of time, I made them
dance on “The Devil’s Racetrack” in Death Valley.
According to legend, strange things happen there.
During fierce thunderstorms, wild poltergeists race
across the salt flat, pushing large rocks through the
slippery mud. The rocks leave long tracks in the sunbaked salt flat…but the demons leave no footprints.
People that see it try to keep it secret. I wanted to see
my creatures in an impossible flashback, a paradox in
elemental experience and memory, a strange form of
reversible destiny.
“The Siggraph Art Gallery 2000” featured artists
who felt like kindred spirits, especially those with a
sense of transmutable time. Their work provokes and
reflects different aspects of self-portrayal, part of an
evolving paradigm for identity in the new millenium.

maybe dangerous. Recreating human scale is
important, so large format digital prints are output at
up to 300 dpi on a ColorSpan Display Maker XII at
Jack Duganne’s Atelier, Santa Monica, California.
“Hotlicks” is one of my favorite composites, a
complex high tech life drawing. The floating figure
is fantastic, not realistic. Few people can tell it is not
a photograph. I count on the cyberspace generation
to accept artifice and fiction as surprising reality.

3. Human-Computer Interaction (HCI)
in Cultural Context of Fine Art Shows
3.1 “The Siggraph 2000” Art Gallery
“The “Siggraph 2000 Art Gallery” in New
Orleans featured sixty contemporary artists who use
highly developed or emerging computer technology
to create time based and interactive work, art sites,
mutations and still digital images. The range and
intensity is fascinating, redefining a sense of humancomputer interaction in the new millennium.
We looked for original work that explored new
connections between mind and body, the human and
the technological, the esthetic and the critical. Works
that provoke, challenge, and enable us to reexperience, re-examine and make sense of our
bodies, our technologies, and our culture.” (Diane
Gromala, Chair, Siggraph 2000 Art Gallery)
I was honored to have “Final Spin” in the show.
It took days to create the original Surface Drawing

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Picture: 12. “Final Spin” by JEN ZEN
ColorSpan Print, 72 x 48 inches, 2000

Fig. 13. “TimeWarp-Philadelphia”, T. Porett, Iris Print, 7 x 32 inches, 1960’s, Courtesy of the Artist
The pedestrians in “'Time -Warp Philadelphia”
feel like reflections in machined glass. “The street
scene was shot in the late 1960’s, a multiple exposure
made with three layered negatives. It has a sense of
flashback memory, and spatial complexity.” (Thomas
Porett) [4] A tour de force, the work is a time capsule
capturing everyday people in unremarkable moments,
absorbed in the dynamic pulse of the city hive.

The connection between self and object is nearly
instant in the “Wooden Mirror”. “The computerized
grid of wood blocks moves fast enough to be a unique
form of live animation. The artwork reflects any
object or person in front of it. Light and dark patterns
are recorded by a video camera that signals a
computer. The computer signals individual blocks to
tilt at different angles, towards or away from the
primary light source, to create patterns. It is amazing
how little information this is for a computer…yet how
much character it conveys (Daniel Rozin)” [5]
“Text Rain” is also a magnificent installation,
which “encourages playful interaction that blurs the
boundaries between the familiar and the magical, self
and reflection. Participants see a life-sized projection
of thems elves. Colored text appears to rain or snow
onto their heads and arms. The falling letters can be
caught, lifted, then let fall again. The letters are lines
of a poem about bodies and language, that fade as they
fall.” (Camille Utterback and Romy Achitov)” [6]
The baby in “Consume 2” is a banal abortion.
“Corporate brand mongers created this voracious,
consumer monster. (Jim Scott)” [7] The banner phrase
“Consume and be free!” is reminiscent of Barbara
Kruger’s famous aphorism, “I shop therefore I am”.
The dangers in melding self and object are clear.

Fig. 14. “Wooden Mirror” by Daniel Rozin
Mixed Media, 70 x 60 x 6 inches, 1999
Courtesy of the Artist

Fig. 16. “Consume 2” by Jim Scott, C-Print
52 x 52 x 3 inches, 2000, Courtesy of the Artist

Fig. 15. “Text Rain” by Utterback and Achituv
Installation, 2000, Courtesy of the Artists

[4, 5, 6, 7] The Electronic Art and Animation Catalog, “Art
Gallery”, Diana Gromala, Ed., Computer Graphics Annual
Conference Series, 2000, A Publication of ACM Siggraph at
http://www.siggraph.org/artdesign/gallery/S00/index.html/

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

3.2 “The Cyborg Manifesto, or The Joy of
Artifice” (exploring art, technology, culture)

Fig. 17. “Mary Shelley's Daughter” by S. E.
Barnett, Installation, 5 x 10 x 12 feet, 1999
Courtesy of The Collection of The Long Beach
Museum of Art, Long Beach, California

Fig. 19. “Frankenstein” by Mike Kelley
Found Objects, 12 x 78 x 28 inches, 1989
The Stuart and Judy Spence Collection
Courtesy of Artist and Patrick Painter Gallery

Fig. 18. “DEEPER SKIN” by Naida Osline
Internal-dye-diffusion Transfer (Polaroid) Print
4¼ x 3¼ inches, 1999-2000, Courtesy of Artist

Fig. 20. “Untitled #94” by Ken Gonzales-Day
Ectacolor print, 50 x 43 inches, 1999
Courtesy of the Artist

“The ‘Cyborg Manifesto, or The Joy of Artifice’
is an art exhibition that explores the interrelationship
of technology, nature, and culture. The artists explore
a territory that falls between a fear of technology as a
product of our own making, and a view of technology
as a path towards progress - one, that for many, leads
to a kind of spiritual transcendence. In this exhibit, the

cyborg, a hybrid of machine and organism, is used as a
metaphor for navigating boundaries between fact and
fiction. It is another way of reexamining body politics,
gender, technology and society. Part of the title,
‘Cyborg Manifesto’ was coined by theorist Donna
Haraway, who writes, ‘the cyborg is resolutely
committed to partiality, irony, intimacy, and

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

perversity.’ The latter part of the exhibit's title,
‘...The Joy of Artifice’ alludes to another of Haraway's
thoughts regarding the cyborgian perspective: ‘Nature
and culture are reworked; the one can no longer be the
resource for appropriation or incorporation by the
other.’ Such a discussion often focuses on gender or
ethnicity conflicts, exploring ideas such as "the
melting pot " or multiculturalism. In other words,
when boundaries are being transgressed and when
fusions create new entities, then it is hard to discern
between the natural and artificial, especially in today's
technology mediated society. This process has begun
to gain speed already, especially considering such
mundane things as laser eye surgery, pacemakers, or
hearing aids. The artists in this exhibit recognize that
they live in such a society and are indeed complicit
with it. For the most part, their work does not judge
this condition, nor does it praise it, but rather it
attempts to be an entry point by which to enter such a
world, with a perspective that is meant to remind us of
our bodies and of our ‘personhood’. Many of the
artists in the show use low-tech materials or use
traditional media in order to look at our high-tech
world. It is an approach that is meant to bring a level

of vulnerability to a subject that for many people can
seem overwhelming. (Tyler Stallings)” [8]
Seen examining a ball of strange matter in “When
(Dante’s View)” , my cyborgs are created with a cyber
glove by petting a live human being in motion. The
figures are alien, anthropomorphic but not human. I
measure their illusionist existence against the mission
of creating intelligent artificial life forms, the way
Romantic existentialists measure the smallness of man
against the enormity of Nature and Creation.

3.0 Human-Computer Interaction (HCI)
in Teaching Traditional Life Drawing
My experimental work in Surface Drawing is in
stark contrast to the draftsmanship I demonstrate in
teaching Life Drawing. Fundamental to the humanist
tradition, Life Drawing provides basic training in selfexpression. Most people want life drawings that “look
real”, and assume people agree what that means.
[8] The Cyborg Manifesto or The Joy of Artifice, by Tyler Stallings,
Exhibition Curator, Laguna Museum of Art, Laguna, Ca., 2001 at
<http://www.cyborg-manifesto.com/>

Fig. 21. “When” (Dante’s View, Death Valley Series) by JEN ZEN (a.k.a. Jen Grey)
ColorSpan Print on Canvas, Display Maker XII with Epson Archival Ink, 72 x 96 inches, 2000

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Fig. 22. “Keith” and “Josine” by JEN ZEN
Two Watercolors, Each 30 x 22 inches, 2001
As Leonardo De Vinci once quipped, “Even the
common man knows when a limb is maimed or
distorted – and will grumble if the artist does not fix
it.” It takes years of practice to be fast, accurate, and
emotionally expressive. Life Drawing students use the
simplest tools, charcoal, brushes, ink, gouache, pencil,
and paper. Mastering visual, tactile and kinesthetic
ability in concert is critical to perceptive expression.
I directed the Life Drawing Gallery web site to
promote professional incentive and scholarship in
visual art. Students use it to appraise made by their
peers. They learn to draw faster and more accurately
because of it. More than 700 artworks, created by my
beginning life drawing students are featured in the
gallery. New work is added each term.
“Flash Art” graphics are an attractive introduction
to the site. The interactive menu is designed in a
familiar format, so people learn to navigate very
quickly. Main topics can be selected in any order:
Anatomy, Deep Space, Gesture, Line, Tone, Context,
Materials and Techniques, etc. New subtopics pop up
when main topics are selected. Clicking on an artwork
will enlarge it for closer study.
“Crieteria for evaluating the artwork includes:
§ Perceptual skill in seeing and drawing the
human form accurately.
§ Expressive skill in visual analysis and
technical interpretation.
§ Originality, creative self-expression and
intellectual initiative.
§ A desire to express the nature of the human
condition, with respect for life.” [9]
The student names are not posted on the Life Drawing
Gallery as a protocol to protect individual rights of
privacy. (Educational policies are more conservative
than those in the entertainment industry.)
[9] Life Drawing Gallery by Jen Grey, Director and Vjeran
Miljenovic, Design, California State University Long Beach
Foundation, 2002 at <http://www.art.csulb.edu/art184grey/> (Click
Drawing and Painting; click Jen Grey; click Life Drawing Gallery.)

Fig. 24. Student Work, “Shadow Play”
Brush and Gouache, 9 x 12 inches, 2001
Courtesy of Cal State University Long Beach

Fig. 23. Student Work, “Two Gesture Studies”
Ink and Charcoal, Each 18 x 24 inches, 2002
Courtesy of Cal State University Long Beach

Fig. 25. Student Work, “Star” and “Crowd”
Charcoal (L) and Ink (R), Each 22 x 30 inches
Courtesy of Cal State University Long Beach

Fig. 26. Student Work, “Interlude” and “Self”
Charcoal (L) and Ink (R), Each 24 x 18 inches
Courtesy of Cal State University Long Beach

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Fig.27. Student Work, “Screamer” and “911”
Charcoal (L and R), Each 18 inches Height
Courtesy of Cal State Universi ty Long Beach

4.0 Creative Conclusions
Surface Drawing affords an unprecedented
union of Human-Computer interaction (HCI) in
freehand 3D drawing. It is work of genius that could
be further developed with new arrays of tangible tools,
and a more versatile motion capture projection system.
More important, The Caltech Workbench needs more
computing power to compete with the mass of visual
data a life drawing student can create in an hour.
Models created by petting human beings with a
cyberglove (linked to the Caltech Workbench) looked
like alien cyborgs. I am amazed that intimate acts of
touch filtered by the computer interface yielded such

strange human-computer creatures. Viewed life-sized,
they feel alive, as real as the digital fires painted from
my imagination. Joy of discovery is not predictable.
My HCI experiments in Life Drawing do not fit
traditional methods of human portrayal. You can see
this in comparison to the academic art exhibited in the
Life Drawing Gallery, the interactive web site I
directed to promote figurative scholarship.
Experimental art in HCI does fit the evolving
definition of “self” fostered by the 20th c. avante garde.
Influenced by motion studies of Eadweard Muybridge
and cubist art of Italian Futurists, “Marcel Duchamp
changed history at the legendary New York Armory
Show of 1913 with his infamous “Nude Descending a
Staircase No. 2”. One critic called it “an explosion in
a shingle factory”.
Duchamp pioneered main
innovations of the 20th century, kinetic art and readymades, which outraged the status quo by redefining
the nature of an object by choice and context.” [10]
Equally bold, American Action Painter Jackson
Pollock declared, “I am painting.” a renowned,
enigmatic statement that shifted the post-modern
paradigm of consciousness and self-portrayal in art.
Fine artists in “Siggraph 2000” and “The Cyborg
Manifesto, or The Joy of Artifice” redefine a sense of
our bodies in a world changed by technology and
culture. Boundaries between “being” and “thing”,
“self” and “other” are becoming increasingly blurred
and transmutable in artistic portrayals. What we make
is perceived to have a life of its own. This is more
than a philosophy of animistic, exis tential materialism.
We may actually become the things we make.
[10] The American Museum of Beat Art , Al Razutis, Web site
Curator, 2002 at <http://www.beatmuseum.org/>

------------------------------------------------------------------

Fig. 28. “Leap” by JEN ZEN
ColorSpan Print, 72 x 86 inches, 2001

Web Site References:
[1] “Steven Schkolne” by Steven Schkolne, Caltech, 2002 at
<http://www.cs.caltech.edu/~ss/sdraw/>
[2] “Responsive Workbench”, by Caltech, 2002 at
<http://www.multires.caltech.edu/~rwbdemo/>
[3] “Surface Drawing Interface” by S. Schkolne, Caltech,
2002 at <http://www.cs.caltech.edu/~ss/sdraw/interface/>
[4, 5, 6, 7] The Electronic Art and Animation Catalog, “Art
Gallery”, Diana Gromala, Ed., Computer Graphics Annual
Conference Series, 2000, A Publication of ACM Siggraph at
http://www.siggraph.org/artdesign/gallery/S00/index.html/
[8] The Cyborg Manifesto or The Joy of Artifice, by Tyler
Stallings, Exhibition Curator, Laguna Museum of Art,
Laguna, Ca., 2001 at <http://www.cyborg-manifesto.com/>
[9] Life Drawing Gallery by Jen Grey, Director and Vjeran
Miljenovic, Design, California State University Long Beach
Foundation, 2002 at <http://www.art.csulb.edu/art184grey/>
(Click Drawing and Painting; click Jen Grey; click Life
Drawing Gallery.)
[10] The American Museum of Beat Art , Al Razutis, Web
site Curator, 2002 at <http://www.beatmuseum.org/>

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

