Exploring interaction strategies with Wall-screen:
a new dual-display device for managing collections of web pages
Frederic Sackx
University of Paris-sud,
LRI, UMR 8623 du C.N.R.S,
Bât. 490, 91 405 ORSAY CEDEX, FRANCE
E-mail: sackx@lri.fr

Mountaz Hascoët
Univ. Montpellier II
LIRMM, UMR 5506 du CNRS,
161, rue Ada, 34 392 MONTPELLIER Cedex, FRANCE
E-mail:mountaz@lirmm.fr
ABSTRACT

Wall-screen is a heterogeneous dual-headed display
combining (1) a wall-size augmented surface to display
peripheral information and (2) a common screen to focus on
specific tasks. Wall-screen has been used for tasks related
to the management of collections of web pages ranging
from authoring new web pages to browsing, organizing or
retrieving pages from existing collections. This specific
application is used to illustrate the benefits of Wall-screen
device but we believe that our model is generic enough to
be used in many other areas where (1) a user needs to shift
from his main focus to related peripheral information
relatively frequently, (2) peripheral information might be
organized, discussed, and shared among several users and
(3) focus and periphery can be divided into two
independent spaces with no additional cognitive load for
the user. In this paper we present Wall-screen basics, we
propose three different design strategies that determines: (1)
how to manipulate information on the wall and (2) how to
organize the space between the two display devices. Further
we present preliminary evaluation and lessons learned.

of the screen real-estate.
Therefore, sharing the screen between one or more
visualization systems and other applications usually implies
switching from one window to another without being able
to keep all windows entirely visible at the same time.
Recently, dual-headed displays have become widely
available. At the same time projectors with a brightness of
1000 lumens and a resolution of 1024x768 are now
affordable, and prices keep dropping. This situation creates
opportunities for designing electronic interactive surfaces
also called “augmented surfaces” for today’s offices.
RELATED WORK

Our project is related to at least three areas of active
research: wall-size augmented surfaces, multi-scale
information visualization, and new interaction models. Our
approach is compared with related work in both multi-scale
information visualization and new interaction models
respectively in [2, 3] and [4]. Therefore in this section we
limit our review to wall-size augmented surfaces area.

KEYWORDS: Wall-size Screen, Bookmarks, Visualization,

User interface, WWW, Evaluation.
INTRODUCTION

Most information visualization systems that have emerged
over the past decade run on regular CRT display. While
many other fields in computer technologies have improved
rapidly, the size of common CRT display has not drastically
changed over the past decades. Composite displays used in
virtual reality immersive environments such as the CAVE
[1] are still too much too massive and too expensive to
massively reach current offices. Over the past decades,
most screen sizes have varied between 15 and 21 inches.
Compared to the Xerox Star, that was already 17 inches
back to 1981, the improvements were accomplished more
in terms of quality (3D graphics card accelerator or
resolution improvements) than by augmenting the physical
sizes of screens. At the same time, the amount of
information available in electronic format is growing
infinitely and information visualization systems make it
possible to display more and more information on a screen.
Nevertheless, many of these systems require large amount

Wall-size augmented surfaces

Wall-size augmented surfaces were first designed as
electronic whiteboards such as Liveboard [5], or others
[6],[7]. Whiteboard are mostly used in collaborative
situations (group meeting or informal communications)
where the problem of available screen real-estate is crucial.
Indeed, as soon as several users meet in front of a regular
CRT screen to work on a collaborative task, the need for
more space is critical to visualize and discuss information
presented through charts, timelines, hand-written notes or
sketches. Electronic whiteboards have long been the largest
display spaces available for real use. Nevertheless, most of
the main problems addressed in this area of research are not
directly connected to our work. Indeed, work on electronic
whiteboards aims primarily at enabling informal
communication among a group of people. Their interaction
and visualization models are more concerned with
supporting hand-writing, sketching, item selection, or
integration of unstructured information with electronic
information than with the issues that we address. In Tivoli
[8], for example, one non-trivial problem is to enable a user
to select a hand-written object in order to copy, paste or
move the objects around. The problem is difficult only
because the system that handles selection has no trivial way
of determining what a user may want to consider as an

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

object when sketching on the board. On the contrary, when
the information displayed on the wall is mostly electronic
like in our context, object selection is a trivial issue.

When the Wall-screen is used by a single user, the
augmented surface serves as the peripheral display space
while the main tasks application is displayed on a regular
19”FD Trinitron CRT monitor.

The situation for layout is exactly the opposite. When some
users write or use notes on a electronic whiteboard, they
decide where to position which item. This simplifies the
layout problem on whiteboards in most cases. On the
contrary, in our context the system potentially has to
display several hundreds information items on a given
surface. Automatic layout is addressed by many research
work in the area of information visualization [9, 10]. Our
aim is to adapt and extend previous visualization strategies
[2] with a heterogeneous dual-headed display made of one
regular screen and one wall-size display.
In that sense our work is closer to more recent work on
augmented surfaces such as the Focus plus Context Screens
approach [11]. Focus plus context screens consist of
combining a small but hi-resolution display with a large but
low resolution one. In [11], two displays are superimposed
to compose a single display where image content is
rendered at both high or low resolution according to which
display region it is displayed in. One example of use of
Focus plus context screen is for displaying video where low
resolution can be used to display the overall scene (e.g. the
context) at a large size while presenting some details (e.g.
the focus) at hi-resolution in the smaller hi-resolution area
of the screen. In this example, splitting off the focus from
the context like in Wall-screen, would hamper the use of
the display for at least two reasons: the combined
focus+context image is of more interest than both focus and
context view taken separately and additional cognitive load
would be required for the user to mentally stick back
together the two images. In this case, focus and peripheral
details are almost inseparable from each other. This is not
true of many other situations [12] where context and
peripheral information can be split apart. In our project the
task involves reading or authoring documents while
occasionally retrieving or browsing related information.
This generic task is common to many diverse situations
ranging from a biologist focussing on a specific protein
while retrieving other information about the protein to a
webmaster authoring new web pages while browsing
related information on the web. In these situations, having
focus and context always on the same seamless screen
would be unnecessarily intrusive when the user
concentrates on authoring the document on his screen or it
would raise privacy issues when several users collaborate
or share the contextual information displayed on the wall.
WALL-SCREEN DISPLAY BASICS

Wall-screen is a heterogeneous dual-headed display
combining (1) a wall-size augmented surface to display
peripheral information and (2) a regular monitor to focus on
specific tasks. The augmented surface is made of a back
projected screen which is approximately 1.4 meter wide and
1 m high. It is attached to a Mimio capture bar to detect
Mimio pen state and position in order to enable direct
manipulation of information displayed on the surface.

Figure 1 : Wall-screen for a dual-display for infomation visualization

Wall-screen presents three major advantages over current
systems: (1) augmentation and partitioning of display
space, (2) immediate access to information at a location in
peripheral vision, (3) collaboration and sharing of
information.
Augmentation and partitioning of display space

A recent study of multiple monitors usage by J. Grudin
[12], brought some insights about the benefits of dualdisplay over a single display of the same size. According to
Grudin, most of the benefits comes from the physical
partitioning that multi-monitors imply. When multiple
displays are not connected to provide a unique seamless
interaction surface, the physical gap between monitors urge
users to organize their display space as distinct spaces.
According to Grudin, a second monitor is not only
additional space, it splits the available space in two space of
different nature. One is dedicated to the main task, the other
is used for miscellaneous tasks. To better illustrate the
difference between a seamless display space and a multimonitors one, Grudin notes: “consider the difference
between a single large meeting room and several small
breakout rooms. Each arrangement can be valuable but
different tasks are optimal in one or the other. As with
monitors, rooms of equal size may be arbitrarily assigned
different functions whereas rooms of different size may be
assigned functions in part based on the requirements of
different tasks”. In the Wall-screen arrangement, the
different nature of both the screen and the wall-size display
offers opportunities for new organization of the desktop.
In the setup discussed in this paper, we use Edelweiss [2] to
compute maps (called Bookmaps) of web collections and
display these maps on the wall. The regular screen is
dedicated to reading or authoring new web pages.
Edelweiss, is an application based on advanced
visualization techniques to provide the users with
overviews of
organized collections of web pages.
Edelweiss adopts the “spatial approach” where
visualization strategies take advantage of human visual

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

memory and spatial ability to instantly retrieve information
located on a display. Several past research projects such as
spatial hypertext or Data Mountain [13] use the same
approach but with different layout algorithms or domain
applications. Edelweiss also provides advanced interaction
techniques like fisheye-like distortions [14] or excentric
labeling [15]. Like many other information visualization
tools, Edelweiss is space-intensive, bringing together
information needed for peripheral tasks, in relation with a
focus tasks and can be used independently of the focus task,
mainly for interactively re-organizing generated maps
structurally or spatially. All these conditions make it a good
candidate application for the Wall-screen display.
Immediate access to information at a location in
peripheral vision

Multiple monitors are not mandatory to support multiple
display spaces. Most window managers in the X-Windows
environment have long proposed virtual desktops larger
than the screen or multiple desktops inspired by the rooms
metaphor [16]. On Windows and MacOSX, the task bar or
dock gather a set of iconified windows that are quickly
accessible through a click or keyboard shortcut. The
problem with these alternatives is that information is not
directly accessible in the peripheral vision of the user.
Actions and cognitive processing is useful to retrieve items
that are not visible. As participants in the multi-monitor
study of J. Grudin noted: “alt-tabbing with many windows
minimized to get someplace and then back is tedious”.
Similarly, with virtual desktop or rooms, moving back and
forth from one area to another invisible area is disruptive.
More over, it hampers integration of the various areas
because only one can be visible at a time: this is a
hindrance for all tasks that involve both areas like moving
items from one area to another or comparing information
displayed in both areas, etc.
Collaboration and sharing of information

Wall-screen display presents most of the advantages of the
dual monitor set up. What are then the advantages of a
wall-size display over a regular monitor? Here again the
answer refers to the same observation that J. Grudin made
for using two monitors instead of one seamless same sized
monitor: both have benefits but one setup is better than the
other depending on the target tasks. As mentioned earlier,
the value in having a secondary monitor is to have direct
access to a resource in a known location in peripheral
vision. From his study J. Grudin listed several types of
resources that participants liked to locate on a secondary
monitor. One typical setup for CAD designers was to have
the main application maximized on the main display and
the many possible toolbars of the application opened on the
secondary display to easily find and invoke functions. In
such a repartition of tasks, wall-size display would be more
of a hindrance than a help compared with a regular monitor.
On the contrary, if the secondary display is devoted to the
visualization of information that are shared among several
users then the wall-size display becomes a shared
information place where people can collaborate whereas a
simple monitor would not enable such collaboration.

Figure 2 : a multi-user setup for the Wall-screen

WALL-SCREEN: A CONTINUOUS OR DISCONTINUOUS
SPACE ?

This section discusses three different design strategies that
determine (1)whether to manipulate the wall with direct or
remote manipulation, (2) how to organize the space offered
by the two display devices. The first two designs are based
on distant manipulation of the wall-size display, and the
third design is based on direct manipulation with a Mimio
pointer.
The first solution is based on a continuous space between
the screen and the wall. We call it the standard solution,
since it is the way most current windowing systems deal
with multiple monitors. In the other two the space is
considered as discontinuous, i.e. composed of two distinct
interaction areas (one is the screen and the other is the
wall). As a consequence each area owns its pointer. One
solution uses two distinct pointers but a unique mouse to
control them and the other uses two pointing devices (a
mouse and a Mimio pen) associated with each pointer.
Standard Solution

In this interaction strategy, we use standard input devices: a
mouse and a keyboard. A unique pointer can move from the
screen to the wall and back. The wall can stand right, left or
on top of the screen, and moving the mouse in the direction
of the wall moves the pointer from the screen to the wall.
This pointer behavior is the standard behavior of the mouse
pointer in most implementation of dual-screen management
in windowing systems such as Microsoft Windows or XWindows.
The fact that the second screen is a wall implied some
revisions to the initial design of our bookmarks
visualization system. First, buttons and toolbars were
removed because they were obviously well-suited to wall
display and distant interaction. Indeed, it was obvious from
the initial informal testing that the precision of wall
pointing was not as good as the precision a user could have
when pointing on a screen just in front of him. This is partly
due to the distance between the user and the screen and to
users habits with a standard screen. Therefore all the
commands were gathered in a pop-up menu. The advantage
of the popup menu over toolbars and buttons is that it does
not require a high pointing precision. Popup menus can be
activated by clicking anywhere in the background of the
screen and item selection in the menu also proved to be

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

more easier to manage than item selection in a toolbar.
Second, the original bookmarks visualization system font
sizes had too be increased.
One of the main drawbacks with this solution comes with
the fact that the pointer has to be shared between the wall
and the screen. This implies at least two problems: firstly,
in a single user context, when the user has the focus on its
screen, he cannot point to the wall without losing the focus
in the original screen. After having moved the mouse to the
wall to do what he wants, he needs to come back to his
initial focus by moving the mouse again in the opposite
direction. By providing two different pointers, one for the
wall and one for the screen, mouse round-trip between
screen and wall can be avoided as the screen mouse could
be left where the focus is in the screen when the user shifts
to the wall. Second, by providing only one mouse pointer
for both screen and wall, sharing the wall with other users
cannot be done in a synchronous cooperative way. In other
words, one user cannot point to the wall, while another user
is pointing on his screen. Sharing the pointer implies an
exclusive use of the screen and the wall at a given time.
This is a major drawback because synchronous
collaboration on the wall is one of the major advantages of
using a wall-size display instead of a standard secondary
monitor. Therefore, we propose two alternative solutions
based on discontinuous spaces in which each display device
handles one or more pointers.
Discontinuous spaces and mouse interaction

Two slightly different design strategies are considered here.
Both strategies use two different pointers: one for each
display device. They only differ in the way that these
pointers can be controlled. In the first strategy, each pointer
is controlled by a different mouse. This is particularly
convenient in a multiple user context, in which one user can
use one mouse on the wall, while another user can interact
with his own screen. Nevertheless, in a single user context,
the use of two mice is far from being optimal. Previous
work on two-handed input has shown that performance is
optimal when the non-dominant hand (left hand for a righthanded person) operates first and sets the frame of
reference for the dominant hand [17]. Unfortunately,
typical tasks when interacting with both the screen and the
wall do not fall in this category of asymmetric tasks.
Indeed, the typical tasks performed when using the Wallscreen display require that both pointing devices be
managed accurately. So we cannot expect a user to use both
hands for handling both mice. Alternatively, one could use
two mice with only the dominant hand. Unfortunately,
informal user testing with this solution showed that users
usually forget which mouse to use with which display and
this is very disruptive because it forces them to shift focus
from the screen down to their desk to decide upon which
mouse is the good one. Because of these major drawbacks,
we dropped this design and preferred an alternative strategy
where one mouse can control two different pointers.

Discontinuous space and direct manipulation on the wall

Our last design involves two different pointing device: a
mouse and a Mimio pen. The Mimio pen-pointer is
used for direct manipulation of the wall. The Mimio
system uses acoustic and IR (infrared) sensors in a data
capture bar to track pen-pointer motion on any flat surface.
With this design, the user interacts with the wall very
naturally. The Mimio pen-pointer can simulate two of the
three buttons usually available with a standard mouse.
Therefore by applying the pen pointer directly on items
displayed on the wall a user can either select them and
directly manipulate them or issue commands through popup menus. Using the Mimio implies additional constraints
on the layout: when the wall is large and high, some areas
might be more difficult to reach for some users. For
example, the top of the wall might be more difficult to
reach than the center. Therefore most frequently used
information should be located either at the bottom or at the
left and right side of the screen rather than at the top as is
often the case in regular display settings.
IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES

Our system is mainly written in Java and runs on a PC
running Windows’98. The same machine is used for
rendering both the screen and the wall, using a dual-display
graphics card. The implementation of the discontinuous
space required the ability to handle two pointers
simultaneously. For this purpose, we used the MID
(Multiple Input Device) library from [18] [19].
The wall display is made of a back projected display using
one digital projector of 1024x768 pixels and 1300 lumens
in order to be used in a regular office under ordinary
lighting conditions. Compared with projects such as the
Interactive Mural [Grimbretière, 2002 #78], our display
device has lower resolution. At the same time, it presents
one major advantage: it is relatively light and easy to install
in most existing offices and requires very little space
compared with the Interactive Mural. We expect that in the
near future, displays of this size with higher resolution will
become widely available. Therefore our work does not aim
at providing the best resolution wall-size display but rather
to design and study an interaction space made of two
display surfaces.
PRELIMINARY EVALUATION

The evaluation of the different design strategies was
realized through a set of user tests.
Experiment design and methodology

Real users participated in the design since the early stages
of the project. Informal testing sessions influenced the
design. We also designed a pilot experiment with five
subjects. We chose a within-subject design with factors
being the three design strategies presented in previous
section: standard interaction, discontinuous spaces with
mouse interaction, discontinuous spaces and Mimio pen
interaction. Each subject had to complete the same set of
six tasks. The set of tasks was made of three groups of
similar tasks.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

In the first group of tasks, the user had to retrieve a page
among the pages displayed on the wall. The page to retrieve
was automatically displayed on the focus screen in front of
the user. This tasks was repeated three times for 3 different
pages. The second group of tasks consisted in having the
user first type a URL in the browser displayed on the focus
screen and then retrieve it and select it on the wall. The
purpose of this task was to force the user to focus on the
screen (to type the url) before moving to the wall. A third
set of tasks addressed the organization of bookmarks on the
wall. The user was told to store a new web page in the preorganized structure that was displayed on the wall. Again
this type of task was repeated for different web pages. This
set of tasks aimed at making users interact with the
Edelweiss visualization tools and the organizational
structure displayed on the wall.

where we expect it to be”.

Figure 3: a collection of 60 web pages with 6 levels of depth displayed by Edelweiss

Each users took approximately 25 minutes to complete the
test. During the test, users were allowed to use any of
Edelweiss functionality like zooming, distorting, or any
other common editing operation. The bookmarks used for
testing was made of 60 web pages with 6 levels of depth. It
was displayed using a radial layout algorithm (see Figure
3). After the experiment, users were submitted a
questionnaire to give their opinion regarding several
important issues : quality of the overall visualization,
difficulty of tasks and usability of interaction techniques,
and preferences.

Worse solution was considered to be the standard
continuous space design by two users while the Mimio
based design was considered the worse for one user and the
two pointers based design was considered the worse of the
three design by two users. The table below shows
preferences of the five users participating in the evaluation
for the three different design strategies. Preferences range
from 1 (preferred) to 3 (considered as the worse design).
Design
1 pointer
2 pointers
Mimio
Pointer

Results

This section summarizes the main observations and
preferences given by the participants.
General preferences

The general behavior observed during the retrieval
experiments was the following:
(1) the user starts by identifying an area of interest on the
wall where he could find the given web page
(2) he concentrates on the area and tries to find the target
page by zooming in or by using the magnifying glass [2].
(3) if he does not find the target page he zooms out on the
global view and repeats the process on another area of the
wall.
The overall quality judgment by the users was positive. The
only criticism concerned the low resolution and size of
some thumbnails that made them hardly recognizable. The
most used and useful techniques were local zooming, and
magnifying glass. Global fisheye distortions on the contrary
were not often used nor found amongst user preferences.
Interaction design preferences

Overall the most preferred interaction was with the 2
different pointers designs, with a small advantage for the
one in which the Mimio was used to control the pointer
on the wall. The main explanation given by the user was
that in both solution, a major advantage over the standard
solution was that it prevents the mouse pointer from “being
lost between the two display”. As one user mentioned, with
the two pointer strategy, “the mouse pointer is always

User1
3
2
1

User2
2
3
1

User3
2
1
3

User4
2
3
1

User5
3
1
2

The fact that the Mimio based solution is slightly
preferred to the one with the unique mouse controlling both
pointers is remarkable. We did not expect it to be preferred
in the single user setting because using a mouse for distant
interaction saves the user significant body motion. Our
rationale for using the Mimio was to support
collaborative tasks. These result are encouraging because
they suggest that it is also efficient for single interaction. Of
course, further tests are needed to validate these results.
Lessons learned and perspectives

This preliminary evaluation elicited lots of feedback from
the subjects. Most participants were very enthusiastic when
trying wall-screen. Even though they had many comments
and suggestions for improvements, most participants
admitted they would want one in their office. Observations
tend to converge in one direction: the natural physical
differences between the two display devices provides many
interesting new affordances for organizing the desktop.
Nevertheless, additional work is needed in at least two
directions. Firstly, the “autonomy” of each display as well
as communication between both displays can still be
improved. In other words each display should easily be
assigned resources (such as pointer, resolution attributes,
color coding attributes, etc) just as a stand-alone display
would, while being able to also share resources for specific

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

purposes (for example a set of mouse pointers should be
sharable between the two displays instead of only one in
current systems). Regarding this aspect Windows 2000 and
Windows98 default drivers differ significantly. For
Windows2000, multiple monitors are considered as a single
display surface. As a consequence both monitors share the
same display attributes and for example they cannot be of
different resolutions. The default behavior for Windows98
basic drivers is more interesting because it considers both
monitors as two different display spaces with their own
display attributes. This makes it possible to have different
resolution on the monitor and on the wall. Similar problems
arose with pointers. Handling one pointer for each display
in a Java application was not transparent. In order to
provide more autonomy for each display we are currently
exploring a multi-agent distributed architecture as well as
other toolkits and windowing systems that support this type
of “display autonomy”. Future work also includes further
user testing and exploring other application domains.

6.

7.

8.

9.

CONCLUSION

We have introduced a new kind of display device that
builds upon multiple monitor technology and wall-size
display to provide a heterogeneous multi-display
environment that can be built at relatively low cost. As the
increase in available on-line information urge us to find
more screen real-estate we believe that Wall-screen display
provides adequate answers to this problem especially in
application domain where large space is needed to display
peripheral information. Many information visualization
tools constitute good candidate application to display
overview of peripheral information on the wall while
showing detailed information on the screen. B.
Shneiderman’s famous mantra [20] characterizing
information visualization design principles “Overview first,
zoom and filter and details on demand” could naturally fit
on a Wall-screen setup maintaining details on the screen
while overview, zoom and filter run on the wall.

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.

ACKNOWLEGMENTS

Many thanks to and M. Beaudouin-Lafon and Guy
Melançon for improving the readibility of the paper and to
J. Ferber and M. Beaudouin-Lafon for providing support
for this project.

16.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1.
2.
3.

4.
5.

Cruz-Neira, C., et al., The CAVE: audio visual
experience in automatic virtual environments.
CACM, 1992. 35(6): p. 64-72.
Hascoët, M. Interaction and visualisation
supporting web browsing patterns. in Information
Visualization. 2001. London: IEEE.
Zizi, M. and M. Beaudouin-Lafon, Hypermedia
exploration with interactive dynamic maps.
International Journal on Human Computer
Studies, 1995. 43: p. 441-464.
Hascoët, M., Submission to UIST'2002, . 2002.
Elrod, S., et al., Liveboard: A Large Interactive
Display
Supporting
Group
Meetings,

17.
18.

19.

20.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Presentations and Remote Collaboration, in
Proceedings of ACM CHI'92 Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1992. p.
599-607.
Stefik, M., et al., Beyond the chalkboard:
Computer Support for Collaboration and Problem
Solving in Meetings. Communications of the
ACM, January 1987, 1987. 30: p. 32-47.
Nakagawa, M., et al., Interactive dynamic
blackboard for educational applications. Proc.
Int*l Conf. on Virtual Systems and Multimedia
'96, Gifu Cpp., 1996: p. 479-484.
Pedersen, E.R., et al., Tivoli: An Electronic
Whiteboard for Informal Workgroup Meetings, in
Proceedings of ACM INTERCHI'93 Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1993. p.
391-398.
Herman, I., G. Melancon, and M.S. Marshall,
Graph visualization and Navigation in Information
Visualisation. IEEE trans. on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 2000. 6(1): p. p 24-43.
Card, S.K., J.D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman,
Information visualization, Using Vision to Think.
1999: Morgan Kaufman.
Baudish, P., N. Goo, and P. Stewart. Focus plus
context screens: combining display technology and
visualization techniques. in UIST'2001, User
Interface Software Technology. 2001: ACM Press.
Grudin, J., Partitioning Digital Worlds : Focal
and Peripheral Awareness in Multiple Monitor
Use. SIGCHI'01, 2001: p. pp 458-465.
Robertson, G., et al. Data Mountain: using spatial
memory for document management. in UIST.
1998: ACM Press.
Sarkar, M. and M.H. Brown, Graphical Fisheye
Views of Graphs, in CHI'92. May 1992, Addison
Wesley. p. 83--91.
Fekete, J.-D. and C. Plaisant, Excentric Labeling:
Dynamic Neighborhood Labeling for Data
Visualization, in Proceedings of ACM CHI 99
Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. 1999. p. 512-519.
Henderson, D.A. and S.K. Card, Rooms: The Use
of Multiple Virtual Worspaces to Reduce
Contention in a Window-Based Graphical User
Interface. Transactions on graphics, 1986. 5(3): p.
211--243.
MacKenzie, I., & Guiard, Y. The Two-Handed
Desktop Interface:Are We There Yet? in Extended
Abstracts of CHI'2001. 2001: ACM Press.
Hourcade, J.P. and B.B. Bederson, Architecture
and Implementation of a Java Package for
Multiple Input Devices (MID). HCIL Technical
Report No 99-08 (May 1999), 1999.
Shoemaker,
G.B.D.
and
K.M.
Inkpen,
MIDDesktop: An Application Framework for
Single Display Groupware Investigations.
Technical Report TR 2000-1., 2000.
Shneiderman, B., Designing the User Interface:
Third Edition. 1997: Addison-Wesley.

