Towards Visualising Temporal Features in Large Scale Microarray Time-series
Data
Paul Craig, Jessie Kennedy and Andrew Cumming
School of Computing. Napier University, 10 Colinton road, Edinburgh, EH14 1DJ, UK
e-mail: {p.craig, j.kennedy, a.cumming}@napier.ac.uk
Abstract
Current techniques for visualising large-scale microarray
data are unable to present temporal features without
reducing the number of elements being displayed. This
paper introduces a technique that overcomes this problem
by combining a novel display technique, which operates
over a continuous temporal subset of the time series, with
direct manipulation of the parameters defining the subset.

1. Introduction
The genome is the complete set of instructions for
making an organism, containing the master blueprint for
all cellular structures and activities for the lifetime of the
organism. The current initiative of microbiology is
focused on advancing understanding of the organism by
investigating the chemical structure and functioning of the
genome.
A genome consists of several chromosomes, each of
which is essentially a package for one long continuous
strand of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). DNA is
composed of building blocks called nucleotides consisting
of a deoxyribose sugar, a phosphate group and one of four
nitrogen bases – adenine (A), thymine (T), guanine (G) or
cytosine (C). There have been several initiatives to map
the precise chemical structure (the sequence of nitrogen
bases) of the human genome and that of several model
organisms. Sequence information is essentially a static
view of the genome, telling us a lot about structure but
relatively little about functioning. A better understanding
of genome functioning can be reached by using
microarray technology, which monitors the initial output
of the genome by recording levels of messenger RNA
(mRNA).
mRNA is the molecule that carries the code of a
section of DNA into the cytoplasm surrounding the cell

nucleus. Once in the cytoplasm, the mRNA encodes a
protein or polypeptide specific to the section of DNA
from which it was produced. This process is known as
transcription, or expression. The sections of DNA, which
are capable of transcription, are defined as genes.
Following expression, the gene product interacts with a
variety of other biomolecules, all primary or secondary
gene products which in turn either directly or indirectly
regulate the expression of genes through complex
signalling cascades [1]. In effect we have a complex
network of inter-gene reactions.
Microarrays facilitate the monitoring of gene
expression for tens of thousands of genes in parallel [2],
allowing a view of expression levels over a range of
samples or over a period of time [3]. When working
toward a better understanding of the functioning of the
genome some of the questions typically asked of the data
are:
! What genes, from the entire genome, are
differentially expressed in a particular sample or cell
state?
! What are the functional roles of genes and in which
cellular processes do they participate?
! What are the me chanisms involved in these
processes?
This paper gives an overview of microarray data and
discusses some of the issues associated with its effective
visualisation. We evaluate existing visualisation
techniques and highlight their limitations with regard to
uncovering certain aspects of the data. We conclude with
our proposal for a new approach to representing and
interacting with the data, which uncovers some aspects
that are not revealed by existing applications.

2. Microarray Data
The output of any microarray experiment is in the form
of a series of images where each gene is represented by a
coloured dot. The colour of each dot depends on the level

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

of mRNA in each sample or, in the case of temporal
experiments, the control and the sample. Image
processing software is used to translate these images into
an expression matrix where columns relate to samples or
time-points, rows relate to genes, and cells relate to
relative mRNA abundances.
Before any analysis can proceed, a statistical
procedure, known as normalization, is applied to the data.
Normalization seeks to account for and remove sources of
variation obscuring the underlying variation of interest,
the level of gene expression [4]. Normalization adjusts for
differences in labelling, detection efficiencies for
florescent labels, and differences in the quality of RNA
from the two samples examined in the assay. While
expression values cannot be quantified due to the nature
of the experimentation, which deals with gross cell
populations, normalization makes values relative across
genes and samples/times.
In the case of time-series experiments, the product of
normalization can be considered as large-scale time-series
data. An important aspect of the data, with regard to its
analysis, is that it constitutes the output of a complex
network and any investigation of the data will have the
main objective of uncovering aspects of the underlying
network's functioning.

3. Mircroarray Data Analysis
The primary objective of Microarray data analysis, a
better understanding of the genome functioning, can be
addressed by considering a number of lower level
objectives relating to the data produced. These are:
! Representing the experimental results: A natural first
step in extracting some of the biological information tied
up in Microarray data is to examine the extremes by
viewing the differential expression [5]. A representation
for individual gene expression patterns is required which,
when used to represent all of the gene expressions
measured in the experiment can combine to provide a
more complete view of the genome. A single model such
as this facilitates an assessment of differential expression
between samples or across time.
! Inferring associations: This allows us to group genes
with regard to the particular sample or cellular process,
which leads to information about each gene's functional
role and cellular process participation. Grouping genes
can also be thought of as the first stage in inferring
interactions.
! Inferring interactions: As the genome mechanism
consists of a network of gene interactions, the uncovering
of such interactions is necessary to understand the
genome. The timing of interactions is a crucial aspect of
cellular functioning with regard to a number of significant
biological processes, such as the switching between
alternate process pathways. It is therefore also important

to consider the temporal aspect of the data. Moreover,
observing the timing of events is necessary to infer certain
mechanisms, such as combinatorial regulation, where the
expression of a single gene is affected by that of more
than one other gene.
To address these objectives, a variety of statistical
methods and visualisation techniques can be used. This
paper is specifically concerned with the challenges of
developing a visualisation technique.

4. Challenges of Microarray Data
Visualisation
There are a number of significant challenges associated
with the objectives of microarray data analysis, many of
which apply specifically to information visualisation
approaches.
When representing microarray data the number of
individual data-elements (genes) being considered in any
one experiment can be anything up to around ten
thousand. For time series experiments the quantity of data
can be further multiplied by the number of time points.
With such large amounts of data, representative
visualisation is a significant challenge.
When modelling an unknown process it is advisable to
observe as many parameters of the system as possible.
This is reflected in the current initiative to measure the
expression of more and more genes [6]. In considering
associations between expression patterns, the same logic
leads us to consider all pairwise associations. The number
of possible associations is equal to the number of genes
raised to the power of two. Displaying such a large
quantity of information, anything up to around 108
associations, is also problematic.
While the number of possible interactions is equivalent
to the number of possible associations, there are also a
number of other challenges pertaining more specifically
to the complexity of the underlying network. Some
features of this complexity that prove particularly
problematic are the variety of gene-gene interaction types
and the existence of combinatorial regulation.
A gene may act to inhibit or activate the expression of
another gene. The time lag between event and reaction is
variable, depending on the route of the signal, as are the
relative concentrations of mRNA in each gene. As the
number of inferred interactions will rise with the variety
of possible interactions it follows that actual reactions
will be harder to detect.
Combinatorial regulation occurs when the expression
of one gene is controlled by the expression of more than
one other gene. These types of interaction are crucial for
many of the more subtle mechanisms within the cell, such
as pathway switching, yet they are particularly hard to
detect with existing visualisation methods.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

5. Existing techniques
This section describes some established techniques
employed in the visualisation of microarray data. The
techniques are categorised by the primary objectives that
they achieve i.e. representing the data, inferring
associations, and inferring interactions.

5.1. Representing the data
Before the data can be presented in a single
visualisation, a representation for each expression pattern
is required.
When the data has been produced by a time -series
experiment, visualising the expression pattern of an
individual gene is fairly intuitive. As both expression and
time are ordered quantities they can be represented in a
simple graph like the example shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Graph representation of expression
versus time.
With multi-sample experimental data there is no
intrinsic ordering of samples making it inappropriate to
use a graph for displa y. Instead, expression levels are
usually represented by adjacent colour-coded squares.
Negative values are green and positive values are red,
with the colour intensity linearly proportional to the
expression (or log ratio of the expression). This approach
has the advantage of being more compact than mapping to
a graph, and as such, is often also used to represent time series data when screen space is at a premium. The
problem with this approach is that a colour representation
of expression has fewer distinguishable steps than a
planar representation. This will make small differences in
expression between cells harder to detect. This problem
will be exacerbated for the sizeable minority of the
population who are colour-blind or have difficulty
distinguishing between green and red.
While graph and colour coded representations have the
advantage of revealing the timing of events they are
inadequate for presenting the large number of expression
patterns available from microarray experiments. While
selection and filtering techniques may reduce the number
of patterns that require to be displayed at any one time, a
global view of gene expression is often necessary. To
facilitate this global view, the expression pattern of a gene
is often encoded into a single pixel or a small square. The

position of the representation on the screen, with regard to
that of other representations, corresponds to aspects of the
gene's expression pattern. These techniques often apply
some measure of association or interaction between gene
pairings and will be discussed in the following sections.

5.2. Inferring Associations
The inference of associations between genes is
normally preceded by the creation of a similarity matrix.
The similarity matrix compares all possible gene pairings
using some predefined distance measure. There are a
number of different distance measures that account for the
different associations that may exist between genes. Some
popular distance measures are Euclidean distance,
Pearson’s linear dissimilarity, Mutual informat ion [7],
Correlation metric [8] and Edge detection [9].
‘Euclidean distance measure’ is used to measure direct
correlation between expression patterns. ‘Pearson’s linear
dissimilarity’ is similar to Euclidean distance, with the
addition that it accounts for variable expression amplitude
between the genes it associates. ‘Mutual information’
groups genes according to shared information content,
picking up negative and positive correlation. ‘Correlation
metric’ groups genes according to their maximum phaseshifted correlation. ‘Edge detection’ scores pairs of genes
with regard to slopes between significant maximum and
minimum expression levels that have a time lag below a
set threshold. The resulting measure has amplitude of 1,
with the sign indicating positive or negative correlation.
The similarity matrix visualisation is a direct
visualisation of the similarity matrix with similarity
values colour-coded. If genes are ordered according to
functional groupings, then the vertical and horizontal
bands that define the groupings can be analysed, with
outlying genes easily identifiable.
The most common display of microarray data is based
on the results of hierarchical agglomerative clustering [5].
The output of this clustering is a type of binary tree
known as a dendrogram. For display, gene expression
patterns are colour-coded and stacked. This part of the
display is known as an expression mosaic. A tree type
graphic at the top and/or sides is a direct visual
representation of the dendrogram. This shows the
groupings, which have been imposed by the clustering
algorithm. An example of this visualisation method is
shown in Figure 2.
Parallel Plots can be used to combine the results of
different clustering algorithms and scientific information
such as the functional grouping of genes [10].
Principal component analysis is a linear mapping of
data points in n-dimensional space to d-dimensional
space, where usually d<<n. When dimensionality is
reduced, the intersection with maximum variation is used
so as to preserve that aspect of the data. This is principal

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Mutual information relevance networks [16] use a
mutual information distance measure to display genes in a
graph where joins represent associations above a given
mutual information threshold. Relationships with higher
mutual information are drawn with a thicker line. Unlike
MDS and SOM the positioning of genes in the diagram
has no significance as to their expression pattern, the
technique uses a standard graph layout algorithm to
position gene representations.

5.3. Inferring interactions

Figure 2. Combination colour mosaic and
dendrogram, visualisation of expression data.
component 1 (PC1), which can be thought of as
describing most of the data. Principal component 2 (PC2)
lies perpendicular to PC 1 and can be thought of as
describing most of the rest of the data. Normally PC1 is
plotted against PC2 in any visualisation.
Multidimensional scaling (MDS) is another
dimensionality reduction technique. Individual elements
are laid out so that the distance between any two elements
is approximate to their dissimilarity. As the dissimilarity
matrix exists in a higher dimensional space than the
display space, which is normally two or three
dimensional, it is inevitable that there will be some stress
in the resultant display. Stress is measured as the total of
all differences between scaled inter-point distances and
dissimilarity measures between elements. The major
advantage of multidimensional scaling over principal
component analysis is that it can work with a number of
different (dis) similarity measures in order to reveal more
subtle inter-gene associations, such as
the inverse
correlation of expression patterns.
Self organizing maps [11] are similar to MDS but have
the advantage that clusters may be seeded to incorporate
biological knowledge. While evidence shows that selforganizing maps are more effective at grouping similar
items [12] it is also evident that SOMs are less effective
than MDS in preserving the structure of clusters [13].
An extension of this standard display of hierarchical
clusters is the cluster tree produced by the FITCH
software [14]. The length of the branches joining
endpoints (genes) is approximate to their dissimilarity.
The extra freedom provided by using connected-line
length rather than direct inter-point distance should allow
a significant reduction in any measure of stress as
compared with MDS. However, tracking lines to assess
dissimilarity can be a complicated visual operation [15].

Many of the methods that infer associations can be
thought of as working toward the inference of interactions
e.g. if two genes have closely correlated expression it may
be inferred that they are functionally related. These
associations do not, however, assign any form of
causality. In order to assign causality, the timing of events
must be accounted for. In order to do this, the time
structure of the data must be preserved.
Visualisation techniques that compress the expression
pattern into a single point do so by destroying the time
structure of the data and therefore they cannot be used to
assign causality.
Another disadvantage of these
techniques is that the distance measures employed can
only detect singular associations over the entire time
period being considered. This is inconsistent with the
reality of the biological system, where an individual
gene’s expression may be regulated by that of a number
of different genes at different times [17].
Visualisation techniques that fully accommodate the
inference of interactions and combinatorial relationships
are those that preserve the time structure of the data.
These include the time versus expression graph display
and the colour coding of the expression pattern.

5.4. Summary
At present there is no clear consensus as to the best
method for revealing patterns of gene expression. Indeed
it is becoming increasingly clear that there might never be
a ‘best’ approach and that the application of various
techniques will allow different aspects of the data to be
explored [18]. Important aspects of the data which are not
effectively revealed by any current microarray data
visualisation technique, at least not when a large number
of patterns are combined in a single image, are temporal
features such as the timing of events and the effects of
combinatorial relationships.
Graph and colour coded representations of expression
patterns, which preserve the time structure of the data, are
too bulky to be included in an entire genome display.
Genome wide visualisations destroy the time structure of
the data and have little scope to reveal temporal features.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

6. Visualising Temporal Features in Large
Scale Microarray Time -series Data
We propose a technique for visualising microarray
data that facilitates mining for temporal features. Our
strategy is to visualise a continuous temporal subset of the
data allowing the user direct manipulation of the subset
parameters. The subset parameters are; t 0, the start-time of
the subset, and ∆t, the subset duration. This allows the
user to view events only when they occur within the
subset, giving some indication of the timing of events.
Altering the subset parameters will reveal multiple events
within a single expression pattern as distinct entities. This
will allow the user to mine for more complex mechanisms
within the network, such as combinatorial regulation.
We have devised a novel display technique, from
which the expression pattern subset of each gene can be
inferred. This display includes all genes from the
experiment and is combined with a freehand selection
technique that facilitates the association of gene subset
representations across time as the subset parameters are
adjusted.

representations when 0t is incremented. Moreover, the
position of a representation within the visualisation will
yield information relating to its expression pattern over
the specified time period (i.e. whether it is high or low,
rising or falling) regardless of the state of other genes.
As a precursor to placing the gene representations on a
2-dimensional plane, we took the common approach [5, 9,
10, 11, 15] of conceptualising the range of possible
expression levels at each time-point as axes defining an ndimensional expression space. Figure 3 demonstrates this
approach with the translation of an expression pattern
subset, for which there are three time -points, into a point
in a 3-dimensional expression space.

Figure 3. Translating a three time-point
expression pattern subset to a point in 3dimensional expression space.

6.1. Displaying the subset
The requirements for displaying each subset are as
follows:
1) When t0 is incremented, it would be beneficial for the
representation of individual genes to have minimal
displacement in order to reduce the perceptual
complexity of relating the representation of a single
gene through successive iterations of t 0 .
2) The visualisation should consider all genes that are
examined in the experiment within any single image.
Exclusive filtering of the data may hinder innovative
hypotheses and should be avoided.
In order to fulfil the first requirement it would be
beneficial if t 0 could be incremented with granularity
smaller than that of the experiment. Although the time
series is discrete, it can be presumed that expression
changes smoothly over time [19] so, t0 can be adjusted in
small steps and expression levels at time points between
actual measurements derived using linear interpolation.
In order to fulfil the second requirement, including all
genes in each static image of the visualisation, it was
decided to represent each expression pattern subset as a
pixel or small square. Given the more compact nature of
this strategy and the fact that the visual representation of
each gene is based only on a limited temporal subset,
there is a greater capacity to place individual
representations with regard to their absolute expression
pattern rather than inter-pattern relationships, while
maintaining the distinction between unrelated patterns.
This has the advantage of allowing us to design a layout
where there is minimum displacement of gene

As the range of possible expression levels at all time
points are equivalent, we can bound the n-dimensional
space in an n-dimensional cube that contains all the
expression pattern subsets. The gene representations are
positioned according to the distance of their ndimensional mapping to the corners of the n-dimensional
cube which bounds all the expression pattern subsets .
This involves the creation of a dissimilarity matrix
consisting of all pattern subset-corner dissimilarities
rather than all pattern-pattern dissimilarities.
For mapping the corners of the cube to a twodimensional plane, the layout chosen was circular with
the points representing corners distributed evenly around
the rim. The following algorithm was employed to assign
corners to points.
1) Opposing points around the circle should correspond
to opposing points in the n-dimensional cube. This
will partially preserve the symmetry of the
representation, allowing for better detection of
converse correlation.
2) The representation of a gene should have minimal
displacement when t 0 is advanced, regardless of
whether its expression has changed or not.
We employed this algorithm for three and four timepoint subsets. The resulting layouts are illustrated in
Figures 4 and 5. Each node corresponds to a corner, of the
n-dimensional cube that bounds the n-dimensional
mappings of all expression pattern subsets. Corners are
mapped backed to expression patterns to illustrate their
ordering.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 4. Corners of a 3-dimensional expression
space mapped to a 2-dimensional plane .

The single point representations of genes were
positioned according to a least stress direct mapping of
their Euclidean distance from each corner. The general
layout of subset representations is shown in Figure 6.
In addition to the patterns that can be revealed from
static frames of the display, there are also some
interesting features revealed by incrementing t 0 . For
example, if there is a pulse in expression then the
representation will rise into the top hemisphere then fall
sharply into the bottom hemisphere.
It was found that gene representations would be more
evenly dispersed, with clusters more distinct, if their
expression patterns were rescaled and adjusted so that
maximum and minimum values equalled ±1. This is a
standard pre-processing procedure that allows the analysis
to focus on shape of the expression patterns rather than
absolute expression. The disadvantage of this technique is
that it may amplify noise for patterns where the
expression amplitude is low and may require pre-filtering
of the data to remove genes with invariant expression
patterns.

6.2. Data Exploration

Figure 5. Corners of a 4-dimensional expression
space mapped to a 2-dimensional plane .

Figure 7 shows a screen shot of our initial prototype.
The visualisation comprises three co-ordinated panels,
one representing traditional gene expression graphs,
another providing a list of gene names, and the main
visualisation panel. The main panel employs the
visualisation technique described above to reveal
temporal features in the microarray data. Genes are
selected by either clicking on their names in the list panel,
or enclosing an area on the main visualisation panel. Once
selected, the gene representations are highlighted in the
main panel; their names are highlighted in the list panel,
and their expression patterns are displayed as traditional
expression graphs in the graph display panel. A control
bar, at the bottom of the screen, allows the user to adjust
the parameters of the continuous temporal subset
considered in the main visualisation panel. Using a slider
or a complementary set of play, pause, stop, rewind and
fast-forward buttons to control t0 , the user is able view
how the expression of any selected gene grouping evolves
through time. An additional slider can be used to adjust
∆t, changing the period of time that is considered in each
static frame of the display.

7. Conclusions and Further Work

Figure 6. General layout of subset
representations on translation to the 2dimensional display.

Given the intrinsic complexity of the system and
subsequent variation in expression patterns, it is evident
that the mapping to a lower dimensional space of any
subset can never be truly representative. However, the
technique employed was found to reveal some unique
patterns in the data leading to information regarding the

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 7. Screen shot of initial prototype.
timing of events and the evolution of gene clusters.
Moreover, while it is accepted that in any individual static
view of the data unrelated pattern subsets may be
clustered together (e.g. a rising pattern and a pulse) it is
extremely unlikely that this clustering will persist while
the subset parameters are adjusted.
So far we have tested our technique with a small data
set (~200 genes). The tool proved effective at displaying
differential expression and gave a clear indication of how
clusters of genes evolve throughout the period of the
experiment. A more comprehensive evaluation, involving
members of our target user group, will proceed once we
have adapted our tool to accommodate larger data sets
(~104 genes).
Possible extensions for the tool include:
!
A Boolean selection mechanism, so that the user
can more effectively mine for cluster events.
!
A mechanism by which the user can save
selections to file for cross experiment comparison.
!
Integrated pre-processing of the data, with some
measure of confidence integrated into the visualisation, to
accommodate for the amplification of noise.
In summary, it was found that our technique has the
potential to assist the mining of Microarray data for
features that are not revealed by existing technologies. In
this capacity, once fully developed, the tool should prove
a valid addition to the existing arsenal of Microarray
visualisation techniques already available.

8. References
[1] B. Bryant, A. Milosavljevic, and R. Somogyi, "Gene
Expression and Genetic Networks (Session Introduction),"
Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, vol. 3, pp. 3-5, 1998.
[2] M. Schena, D. Shalon, R. Heller, A. Chai, P. O. Brown, and
R. W. Davis, "Parallel human genome analysis: microarraybased expression monitoring of 1000 genes," Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. U.S.A. 93,, pp. 10614-10619, 1996.
[3] D. J. Duggan, M. Chen, P. Meltzer, and J. Trent, "Expression
profiling using cDNA microarrays," Nature Genetics, vol. 21,
pp. 10-14, 1999.
[4] A. Hartemink, D. Gifford, T. Jaakkola, and R. Young,
"Maximum likelihood estimation of optimal scaling factors for
expression array normalization," Microarrays: Optical
Technologies and Informatics, Proceedings of SPIE, vol. 4266,
2001.
[5] M. B. Eisen, P. T. Spellman, P. O. Brown, and D. Bostein,
"Cluster analysis and display of genome-wide expression
patterns.," Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 95, pp. 14863-14868,
1998.
[6] P. D'Haeseleer, R. Somogyi, and S. Liang, "Gene expression
data analysis and modeling," Pacific Symposium on
Biocomputing, 1999.
[7] S. Fuhrman, P. D'Haeseleer, and R. Somogyi, "Tracing
genetic information flow from gene expression to pathways and
molecular networks," 2000.
[8] A. Arkin, P. Shen, and J. Ross, "A test case of correlation
metric construction of a reaction pathway from measurements,"
Science, vol. 277, pp. 1275- 1279, 1997.
[9] V. Filkov, S. Skiena, and J. Zhi, "Analysis Techniques for
Microarray Time-Series Data," RECOMB 2001: Proceedings of
the Fifth Annual International Conference on Computational
Biology, 2001.
[10] X. Wen, S. Fuhrman, G. S. Michaels, D. B. Carr, S. Smith,
J. L. Barker, and R. Somogyi, "Large-Scale Temporal Gene
Expression Mapping of CNS Development," Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA, vol. 95, pp. 334-339, 1998.
[11] P. Tamayo, D. Slonim, J. Mesirov, Q. Zhu, S. Kitareewan,
E. Dmitrovsky, E. Lander, and T. Golub, "Interpreting patterns
of gene expression with self-organizing maps.," Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, vol. 96, pp. 2907-2912, 1999.
[12] J. Venna and S. Kaski, "Neighborhood preservation in
nonlinear projection methods: An experimental study,"
presented at International Conference on Articial Neural
Networks, 2001.
[13] A. Flexer, "Limitations of Self-Organizing Maps for Vector
Quantization and Multidimensional Scaling," Neural
Information Processing Systems, 1997.
[14] J. Felsenstein, "FITCH," 3.5c ed. Washington: University
of Washington, 1993.
[15] D. B. Carr, G. S. Michaels, and R. Somogyi, "Templates
for Looking at Gene Expression Clustering," Statistical
Computing & Graphics Newsletter, vol. 9, pp. 20-29, 1997.
[16]A. J. Butte and I. S. Kohane, "Mutual information relevance
networks: functional genomic clustering using pairwise entropy
measurements," Proceedings of the Pacific Symposium on
Biocomputing, 2000.
[17] F. C. P. Holstege, E. G. Jennings, J. J. Wyrick, T. I. Lee, C.
J. Hengartner, M. R. Green, T. R. Golub, E. S. Lander, and R.
A. Young, "Dissecting the regulatory circuitry of a eukaryotic
genome," Cell, vol. 95, pp. 717-728, 1998.
[18] J. Quackenbush, "Computational Analysis of Microarray
Data," in Nature Reviews, vol. 2, 2001, pp. 418- 427.
[19] P. D'Haeseleer, X. Wen, S. Fuhrman, and R. Somogyi,
"Linear Modeling Of mRNA Expression Levels During CNS
Development And Injury," Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing,
pp. 41-52, 1999.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

