Explain Me Visually: Exploring Information Design through Multimedia
Amod Damle
Department of Industrial, Interior, and Visual Communication Design,
The Ohio State University, damle.4@osu.edu

Abstract
To convey a complex piece of information, we often
use devices such as maps, graphs, and charts. Edward
Tufte, in his book Visual Display of Quantitative
Information, points out that these devices help us convey
information with multiple dimensions. Tufte holds that to
convey a complex piece of information, one needs to break
away from the analogies of reality and to maintain
distance from illusionary representations of objects. This
research project aims at analyzing visual communication
devices such as maps, charts, graphs, and dance notations
that are abstract in nature. Through an interactive
multimedia program, the project helps users explore
individual concepts as well as their relevance to one
another. The content of this multimedia program is
structured to better assist users to explore relationships
between the concepts mentioned above and to form their
own connections in the process.

1. Introduction
Philosophers such as E.H. Gombrich and Nelson
Goodman have argued that unless viewers learn to read the
abstract marks on a canvas, they will fail to see the illusion
of 3-dimensional space on a 2-dimensional surface.
Gombrich (1972) holds that artists do not have access
to their inner perceptual mechanism and can only find
abstract visual elements through trial-and-error, which
allows them to translate visual experiences into paint.
Gombrich (1972) claims that, a person can evolve a
pictorial language without reference to nature, without
learning to draw from a model. (p.339).
Like a painter, a designer needs to find abstract
elements that convey the logic inherent in a piece of
information when set in a specific context. As far as the
viewers or readers are concerned both realistic paintings
and charts are equally abstract unless one learns to

decipher the abstract pictorial code. Thus, educating
viewers to read and decipher pictorial code is as important
as designing effective informational graphics. In the next
section, some examples of visual communication devices
that break away from the analogies of reality to convey a
complex piece of information will be discussed.

2. Maps
Nishioka (1992) states that maps are mainly associated
with our movement in space from one point to another. A
map, by establishing a link between space and movement,
guides our movements so that we can reach our goals. Ye t,
maps help us convey information that is not spatial in
nature. Nishioka adds that in our everyday speech, verbal
expressions such as a wide range of interests and the
peripheral areas of the industry help us convey non- spatial
ideas through spatial metaphors (p.122) [4] . According to
him, map-making is a similar phenomenon where ideas
that have nothing to do with space are conveyed through
spatial arrangement of visual elements. Nishioka further
states that maps have the capacity to break away from the
analogies of the real world and to serve the usual function
of text by operating as a learning material (p.122) [4].
Tufte (1983) points out that it took centuries for designers
to free maps from analogies of the real world and to use
them to convey non-spatial, statistical information. Tufte
states that until 1786, no one had thought of making a
quantitative abstraction by replacing latitude and longitude
with some other dimensions, such as time and money
(p.22) [2] .
3. Notations
According to Nishioka (1992), a score is a visual
description of the flow of changes in data, often along a
time line (p.74) [4]. He adds that, although both graphs
and musical scores illustrate change, a graph indicates a

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

quantitative change and a musical score indicates
qualitative change.
Tufte (1990) holds that dance notations are effective
visual devices of conveying information with multiple
dimensions such as the use of three spaces, physical
movements, and musical scores. One such notation system,
the Benesh Movement Notation, was created by Rudolf
and Joan Benesh. Rudolf, a musician and mathematician,
and Joan, a former dancer, have played significant roles in
the documentation of dance. The Benesh Notation system
was conceived as a creative tool, a means of
communication and dissemination of ideas (Parker &
Macmillan, 1990, pp.84-85) [5].
Parker and Macmillan (1990) point out that the
Beneshes recognized the danger of sheer volumes of
information swamping pertinent data (p.90) [5]. They add
that the Beneshes noticed that dancers and musicians
perceive music and timing in different ways. A dancer
reacts to a pulse whereas a musician needs to know the
duration of a note. These constraints lead them to eliminate
unnecessary information and to create a notation system
that conveyed only the relevant information concisely.
Visual representation of movement was their primary
concern. They chose the five-line music stave on which to
convey pictures of movement: the stave lines provide a
framework that coincides naturally with the visually
distinct features of the human body (Parker & Macmillan,
1990, p.90) [5].
Parker and Macmillan hold that by just looking at a
video recording of a dance performance, it is not possible
to receive the required information. For example, they
discuss an instance that occurred in 1983 during the
reconstruction of the Royal Ballet of Requiem (originally
created for the Stuttgart Ballet in 1976) where the viewing
of the video of the dance performance impeded the
reconstruction process. An extensive study of video
recordings was made to reconstruct a complex dance
sequence. Despite having rich audio-visual information, no
one could understand how to perform the choreography.
The experts had to go back to the dance notations (Parker
& Macmillan, 1990, p.93) [5].
Parker & Macmillan conclude that it is better to refer
to a notation system than a moving image for a better
understanding of a dance performance.

What makes a notational system a notational
system?

“Figure 1. Dance notation”

Margaret Morris, The Notations of Movement
(London, 1928), pp. 103- 104
discusses the characteristics that make a set of visual
elements a notational system. Goodman (1969) holds that a
picture in one system may be a description in another, and
whether a denoting symbol is representational depends not
upon whether it resembles what it denotes, but upon its
own relationships to other symbols in a given scheme
(p.226) [6].
As an example of this phenomenon, Goodman
compares an electrocardiogram with a Hokusai drawing of
Mount Fujiyama. He says that despite the visual
similarities, one is a diagram and the other is simply a
picture. According to him, the difference mainly lies in the
way one reads the visual. When reading the wiggly lines on
a white background as a diagram, one restricts its
constitutive parts narrowly. The only relevant features of
the diagram are the coordinate and abscissa of each of the
points the center of the line passes through. The thickness
of the line, its color and intensity, the absolute size of the
diagram, etceteras, do not matter. When one looks at the
same visual as a picture of Mount Fujiyama, one also pays
attention to subtle changes in the thickness of the lines or
the texture of the paper. (p.229) [6] .
How information is read and extracted from a set of
visual elements not only depends on how the visual is
designed, but also on the viewer’s understanding of the
given symbol system. Without an adequate understanding,
a viewer may not be able to tell the difference between an
electrocardiogram and a line drawing of Mount Fujiyama
and extract useful information from them.
Figure 1 taken from “Envisioning Information” by Edward Tufte, p.27,

Nelson Goodman (1968), in his book Language of Art,

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

4. Diagrams
According to Nishioka (1992), the origin of the word
diagram is the Greek diagrama, which simply means
something drawn. The prefix "dia" means "via", and was
attached to the verb "graphein" which means to draw a
line, or to draw (p.6) [4] .
The word diagram is a general term for that which
uses graphic design as an expository tool to convey a
concept which would be difficult to explain with text alone
(Nishioka, 1992, p.8,) [4].
According to Tufte (1997), drawings have an
abstracting quality. Diagrams often depict general ideas
rather than visual representations of a specific object. Tufte
holds that the ability of diagrams to depict multiple,
layered views gives viewers access to places or activities
that they cannot see from a fixed viewpoint in the real
world (p.57) [3].

“Figure 2. A diagram”

emergence of cubism and abstract art, the two dimensions
of the canvas no longer referred to worldly scenery but
only to themselves.

6. Summary
This paper is an attempt to analyze a designer’s effort
to break away from the analogies of reality in order to
convey multivariate information efficiently. As pointed out
by Tufte, it took designers several years to convert a map
into a statistical graphic. Tufte finds this shift in thinking
similar to that experienced by an abstract or a cubist
painter. Whether it is about converting a map into a
statistical graphic or breaking away from the illusion of
three-dimensional space, it involves assigning alternative
meanings to familiar ideas or visuals. It requires one to
think of an object or idea in terms of another object or idea.
Achieving this conceptual shift is as difficult for a designer
as for a viewer. Designing better graphics, by itself, may
not improve visual communication. Educating viewers and
helping them make the same conceptual shifts may
improve the quality of communication.

References
[1] D. Lodge, “Narration with Words”, Images and
Understanding, H. Barlow, C. Blakemore & .0M. smith (Eds.),
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New York, (1990).
[2] E. Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information
Graphic Press. Cheshire, Connecticut, 1983.

Pyramid: Eyewitness Books, DK Multimedia

[3] E, Tufte, Visual Explanations- Images and Quantities,
Evidence and Narrative, Graphic Press- Cheshire, Connecticut,
1997.

5. Graphs
Tufte states that despite their quantifying scales and
grids, maps resemble miniature pictorial representations of
the physical world (pp.14-15). He says that to convey
statistical, abstract information, one needs to replace a
map’s geographical scales with abstract measurement
scales not based on geographical analogy. According to
Tufte, to break away from the geographical analogy of
maps was a huge conceptual step. He compares this
conceptual step with the one that abstractionists and
cubists took in order to break away from the realistically
rendered two-dimensional space. Tufte says that with the

[4] E, Tufte, Envisioning
Cheshire, 1990.

Information,

Graphics

Press,

[5] F. Nishioka, Diagram Graphics- P.I.E. Books Japan, Nippan
Germany, 1992
[5] M. Parker, & K. Macmillan, “Benesh: The Notation of
Dance”, Images and Understanding, H. Barlow, C. Blakemore &
M. smith (Eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, New
York, (1990).
[7] N. Goodman, Languages of Art, An Approach to A Theory of
Symbols, Bobbs- Merrill Company, Inc. New York, Indianapolis,
1968.

Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’02)
1093-9547/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

