Cluster Correspondence Views for Enhanced Analysis of SOM Displays
Jurgen
Bernard∗
¨

Tatiana von Landesberger†

Sebastian Bremm‡

Interactive Graphics Systems Group
TU Darmstadt, Germany

Interactive Graphics Systems Group
TU Darmstadt, Germany, and
Fraunhofer IGD, Darmstadt

Interactive Graphics Systems Group
TU Darmstadt, Germany

Tobias Schreck§
Interactive Graphics Systems Group
TU Darmstadt, Germany

A BSTRACT
The Self-Organizing Map (SOM) algorithm [4] is a popular and
widely used cluster algorithm. Its constraint to organize clusters
on a grid structure makes it very amenable to visualization. On
the other hand, the grid constraint may lead to reduced cluster accuracy and reliability, compared to other clustering methods not
implementing this restriction. We propose a visual cluster analysis system that allows to validate the output of the SOM algorithm
by comparison with alternative clustering methods. Specifically,
visual mappings overlaying alternative clustering results onto the
SOM are proposed. We apply our system on an example data set,
and outline main analytical use cases.

clustering result. However, the assessment of the quality of the
SOM result is restricted to standard SOM-based diagrams such as
distance or density maps [4]. We here present an extension to the
available methods that allows to compare the SOM output with alternative clustering algorithms. It is based on mappings of clusters
obtained by external clustering methods to the SOM cluster grid.
We introduce our extensions and apply them to an example data
set. Our approach is applicable to any data that can be processed by
the SOM algorithm. In this poster, we use a data set consisting of
trajectories, as considered in [5] (see Figure 1(a) for an illustration).
2

I NTERACTIVE C LUSTER C ORRESPONDENCE V IEWS

Index Terms: H.4 [Information Systems]: Information Systems
Applications; I.3.6 [Computing Methodologies]: Methodology and
Techniques
1

I NTRODUCTION

AND

P REVIOUS W ORK

Cluster analysis is a valuable data mining technique, supporting
analysis of large data collections by abstraction to a limited number
of data representatives (clusters). Visualization of cluster analysis
results can help to better understand and communicate the output
of the cluster algorithm at hand. While many clustering algorithms
exist, the SOM method is very applicable to visualization, as it arranges the resulting clusters on a grid structure. However, this grid
constraint at the same time may impact the algorithm’s precision
as compared to other methods that do not incorporate this constraint. The SOM method only provides implicit information about
the number of clusters found in the data. Furthermore, the SOM
method requires setting of a significant number of parameters. It
may lead to increased uncertainty about the validity of the SOM
results. For these reasons, it is also desirable to compare and validate the output of the SOM method against alternative clustering
algorithms. Specifically, methods exist that provide reduced quantization error or allow better assessment of the actual number of
clusters found. Integrating such methods with the SOM analysis in
an appropriate way is expected to combine the advantages of each
methods, while avoiding respective disadvantages.
In previous work, we introduced an interactive system that allowed to visually monitor and steer the SOM clustering process
[5]. The system provides enhanced visual controls for the different parameters and is able to progressively visualize the resulting
∗ e-mail:

Juergen.Bernard@gris.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de
Tatiana.von Landesberger@gris.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de
‡ e-mail: Sebastian.Bremm@gris.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de
§ e-mail: Tobias.Schreck@gris.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de

† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

(a) SOM output

(b) Higher-resolution SOM output

Figure 1: SOM-based cluster analysis of a trajectory data set [5]
showing the result grid of prototype trajectories with background color
indicating cell densities (from light to dark color). Left: SOM clustering result. Right: Higher resolution SOM result using method of [2].

Our cluster correspondence view works on top of the SOM cluster grid as shown in Figure 1(b). It overlays SOM results by structures obtained by alternative clustering methods. The correspondence view can be chosen from a variety of proposed visualization
methods. The overlay process is as follows:
1. Generation of alternative clusterings. Alternative clustering results are generated using selected clustering methods. We implemented the k-Means and DBScan methods [3] as alternative partitioning and density-based clustering algorithms, respectively. The
methods are invoked by the setting of clustering parameters: the
number of clusters k for k-Means, or density and distance thresholds for DBScan.
2. Mapping alternative clusters onto SOM reference grid.
We map each obtained cluster onto the SOM reference grid by
means of Spline-based continuous interpolation of the grid of SOM
clusters. The technique was initially introduced to support mapping of large numbers of data points [2], but is equally suited for
mapping alternative clusters for comparison purposes.
3. Visual representation of the alternative clusters. We
propose several options to visually represent the relation of the

217

(a) k-Means correspondence view

(b) DBScan correspondence view

(c) Increased number of DBScan clusters

Figure 2: Overlaying alternative clustering results onto the SOM map for validation and refinement purposes. It shows two clustering algorithms
with various correspondence visualizations. Left: K-means result overlay on SOM distance view. Color are assigned to clusters. Middle: DBScan
result overlay on SOM distance view. Right: DBScan result. Icons show representative data elements for each cluster. Icon size indicates cluster
size. Darker background shading means higher average distance to neighboring cells.

found alternative clusters to the underlying SOM grid. The representation comprises (a) a glyph for the cluster representative based
on the underlying data, whose size represents the cluster size; and
(b) a color-coding of corresponding areas on the SOM grid according to the cluster membership. Both representations are mapped
onto the given SOM visualization as an additional layer of information.
These additional displays can be combined with the system’s underlying SOM visualization capabilities. This is done by blending
both visualizations, adding another layer of information to the base
SOM display.
3

A PPLICATION E XAMPLES

We demonstrate the capabilities of our system by application to a
test dataset of 5000 trajectory elements. An initial SOM clustering
of the data set is shown in Figure 1. It displays the SOM cluster grid
where each cell shows a representative trajectory. The background
color represents the density.
Figure 2(a) shows the mapping of a k-Means clustering (k = 10)
onto the base SOM. The position of each cluster on the map is
shown by a colored area (in the nearest neighbor sense). Each cluster is assigned a unique color. Each cluster is also represented by an
icon showing a sample cluster trajectory. This view allows to assess
the distribution of clusters over the map. As the k-Means is a partitioning scheme, the whole map is covered. Underlying the k-Means
visualization layer is an original SOM view showing the average
cell distance to its neighbors (light colors mean low distance). Owing to the opacity-based drawing, both cluster visualization layers
can be jointly visually analyzed.
Figure 2(b) shows a mapping of a DBScan clustering result to
the base SOM. As DBScan is a density-based scheme, therefore
not all data items in the data set are necessarily also represented
in the DBScan result. In particular, data from non-dense areas are
considered as noise and are therefore ignored in the DBScan output. In this case, the 11 dominant clusters identified by the DBScan
algorithm, cover only a part of the whole SOM map. This indicates
that significant parts in the SOM map do not constitute relevant
clusters, according to the particular parameterization. The view includes small trajectory icons showing the representative trajectory
elements in the dataset. The icons size indicates the cluster size.
We can use this display to easily assess the nature and distribution
of DBScan clusters, in relation to the overall distribution of data
elements. An overlay of this view with cell distance view (light
colors mean small average distances to the neighbor cell) show a
strong correspondence between density-based clustering result and
the dense areas of SOM grid.
Figure 2(c) visualizes the result of a DBScan cluster analysis us-

218

ing a different parametrization from the previous example. In this
case, a larger number of clusters was generated. The underlying
SOM grid is used as a reference layout for positioning of the DBScan clusters. The scale of the cluster icons represents the size of
the DBScan clusters. The display allows the analyst to concentrate
on the DBScan clustering result, abstracting from the SOM result.
4 C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK
We presented an extension of a SOM-based visual cluster system
that allows to validate and assess the SOM cluster output by means
of alternative clusterings that can be overlaid onto the SOM result
grid. We demonstrated our method for two clustering algorithms: kmeans and DBScan. The comparison of SOM output with k-Means
clustering provides information of cluster membership with possibly better quantization accuracy as the SOM method. DBScan
comparison identifies dense areas in the SOM cluster space. The
integration of additional, alternative clusterings are expected to be
useful for arriving at more reliable clustering results. Specifically,
by our approach the user is able to validate her hypotheses about
characteristics of clusters, by visually comparing the “opinions” of
alternative clustering methods.
Future work includes incorporation of additional clustering algorithms, and design of cluster glyphs to encode addition statistical
information about the found clusters and their interrelationships.
We will also systematically explore approaches for visualization of
quality aspects in visual cluster analysis. First steps toward this
goal are taken in [1].
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was partially supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) within the project Visual Feature Space Analysis, as
part of the Priority Program on Scalable Visual Analytics.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Bernard, T. von Landesberger, S. Bremm, and T. Schreck. Multiperspective quality views for improved visual cluster analysis with selforganizing maps. Submitted.
[2] J. Bernard, T. von Landesberger, S. Bremm, and T. Schreck. Micromacro views for visual trajectory cluster analysis. In Eurographics/IEEE Symposium on Visualization, 2009. Poster.
[3] J. Han and M. Kamber. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann, 2006.
[4] T. Kohonen. Self-Organizing Maps. Springer, 3rd edition, 2001.
[5] T. Schreck, J. Bernard, T. Tekuˇsov´a, and J. Kohlhammer. Visual cluster
analysis of trajectory data with interactive Kohonen maps. Palgrave
Macmillan Information Visualization, 8:14–29, 2009.

