VisWorks Text and Network Visual Analytics
VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 1 Award:“Effective Interactive Visualization of Document Contents”
Lei Shi

Weihong Qian

Furu Wei

Li Tan ∗

A BSTRACT
VisWorks is a software package for text and network visual analytics. This paper introduces its visualization, analytic process and
lesson learned in solving Mini-Challenge 1 of VAST 2010 contest.
1

I NTRODUCTION

Analytics over data mixed up by both unstructured and structured
information poses a great challenge to the community. The usual
pain points include the difficulty to select the appropriate mining/learning algorithms, the time/labor cost to customize analytic
process and the lack of methodology to synthesize the insights
found at multiple facets. To the end, there is rigid and urgent demand for an integrated visual analytics tool that could combine the
human intelligence and machine capability to tackle the above challenges and fasten the analytic tasks.
VisWorks is a software package for text and network visual analytics. It tightly combines state-of-the-art analytics algorithms with
interactive visualization for iterative and progressive human analytics. The visualization designs in VisWorks carefully trade-off
ease of use, effectiveness for analytics and appeals of the user interface. The package also provides support to common data formats
and various interactions for visual exploration and reasoning, hence
offers user great flexibility in the analytic tasks.
2

V IS W ORKS V ISUALIZATION

Figure 1 shows an overview of Mini-Challenge 1 data by TIARA
visualization [2]. X axis represents document time and Y axis represents document number evolved over time. The vertical layers
show topics/categories extracted from text collection and here correspond to different countries. Keywords in each layer are timesensitive named entitles extracted from documents of specific country. Keyword size indicates its occurrence count (aka hotness) while
the keyword color indicates its entity facet type, such as people,
place and activity. The facet navigation panel in the left offers control to the entity facets and the legend panel in the main view allow
user to select the layers drawn in the visualization.
Figure 3(a) gives a example of VIGOR network visualization. It
provides the basic node/edge rendering function that encodes multiple information facets on the node/edge size/thickness/color/shape.
Some network analytics algorithms including role analysis and
clustering are also embedded in the package. Additionally, we provide advanced filtering functions over both node and edge in the
network, based on the information facets encoded.
3
3.1

A NALYTIC P ROCESS
Data Pre-Processing

The pre-processing starts by segmenting the raw contest data into
text snippets according to title line of each report/message/post inside the aggregated document. Both the time and body of each snippet could be obtained through regular expression matching. Named
∗ Lei Shi, Weihong Qian, Furu Wei and Li Tan are with IBM Research China, e-mail:{shllsh,qianwh,weifr,tltan}@cn.ibm.com

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

Figure 1: Visual summary of document content by country.

entitles (NE) are extracted with Stanford NE Parser [1], including
people, place and organization. In a further step, places are mapped
to countries and activities are extracted from verbs with POS parser.
To develop an effective snippet classification, we conduct a clustering over the country co-occurrence graph where node weight is
mapped to country occurrence count by snippets and edge weight
indicates country co-occurrence within the same snippet. By filtering out nodes and edges with smaller weights and removing some
bridging nodes (which should be the intermediate countries), we
finally find out eight country groups. They are used as snippet category in the following visualization.
3.2 Visual Analytics
For the first task of Mini-Challenge 1, we compose an overview
picture to summarize the activities happened in each country group
using TIARA visualization, as shown in Figure 1. As required by
the task, we drill-down to the content of each country group and
derive insights by navigating the data with our tool. Here we only
explain the analytic process over the arms dealing activities of one
country group - Venezuela. The analyses of other countries are of
the same methodology.
We select the Venezuela layer in TIARA and choose the time
period containing snippets of this country group to proceed. The
content summarization of Venezuela then shows up, as illustrated
in Figure 2(a). The three layers in the view indicate the keywords
of different category: people, place and activity. In the activity
layer, an evolving trend of call-send-transfer(money)-meet reveals.
We hypothesis that the local Venezuela buyer first call to discuss
with the dealer, then send something (maybe the arms list), transfer
the money and finally arrange to meet. We further locate the key
people in these arms dealing events. It is noticed that jhon appears
throughout the timeline, so we click on this keyword and retrieve
all the snippets containing jhon, as shown in Figure 2(b). After
reading these snippets arranged by time, we find out that jhon is an
intermediate dealer connecting Venezuela buyer to jtomski. To help
summarize the situation by the end of the period, we drill-down to
the most recent time and click on the layer to let TIARA extract
the top five important sentences. With these output, we conclude
that both jhon (the intermediate) and Vwhombre (probably the local
buyer) will meet jt (the arms dealer) in UAE on late April, 2009.
For the second task, we start from the player social network in
Figure 3(a). It is found that the player network is composed of several connected components, where Nicolai and Mikhail connect the
largest component together. To gain insight of country distribution

269

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: Drilling to content of single country and the snippets containing a keyword.

(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)
Figure 3: Player social networks by co-occurrence in same snippet: (a) Original; (b) Highlight inter-country edges; (c) Add location/organization
nodes; (d) Color-coding by country group category.

270

over the player network, we encode national flag into each node to
indicate his/her country and highlight the inter-country connections
by a different orange color. The results in Figure 3(b) demonstrate
that Nicolai,Mikhail, Arkadi and Boonmee act as intermediate players for liaison among countries. This could also be detected by
measuring the betweenness centrality score of these players. In a
next step, we incorporate locations and organizations into the cooccurrence graph. It is interesting to notice that the whole graph
snaps together as almost one connected component, shown in Figure 3(c). Dubai acts as the primary bridge. To further understand
the situation, we choose to map the country group category into
contour color of each node icon. As given in Figure 3(d), Dubai
actually connects to all the eight country groups either directly or
through one intermediate potential dealer.

alytics are hardly glued together. Whenever a issue is found in the
visualization related to the data, the analyst should go back to correct the pre-processing and then restart the analysis. Built-in visual
editing should be able to reduce this iteration cost by modifying the
processed data on-the-fly. Second, in this practice, we frequently
switch between the text and network visualization to synthesize the
information gained in each approach. However, view change considerably destroys our mental map to the data and degrade the task
performance. Visualization mashups, as mentioned by the reviewer,
should help to improve the synthesis tasks. Third, throughout the
task analysis, we rely on manual recording of the patterns discovered and insight gained. It will be quite useful if the visual analytics
tools could introduce some kind of reporting function which allows
user to input discoveries and retrieve the summary in the end.

4 L ESSON L EARNED AND F UTURE D IRECTION
In this visual analytics practice, we identify several shortcomings in
the current tool and process, which point out potential directions for
our future works: First, the data pre-processing and the visual an-

[1] Stanford NE Parser, http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/crf-ner.shtml.
[2] L. Shi, F. Wei, S. Liu, L. Tan, X. Lian, and M. X. Zhou. Understanding
text corpora with multiple facets. In VAST ’10, 2010.

R EFERENCES

