A Statistical Approach to Measuring Alignment of Genetic Sequences and
Determining Critical Mutations in a Viral Gene Sequence
VAST 2010 Mini Challenge 3 Award: Innovative Visualization
Harshawardhan Nene
BFS Innovation, Cognizant Technology Solutions Pune, India

ABSTRACT
This summarizes the approach used by the author to gain insights
from the genetic sequence data of a virus outbreak. The objective
is to create visualizations that help discover the origin of the
outbreak and identify mutations that worsen disease
characteristics. The author employs simple statistical methods to
achieve the same. This exercise was done for the VAST 2010
Mini-challenge 3.
KEYWORDS: VAST challenge, visualization, genetic sequence
INDEX TERMS: K.6.1 [Management of Computing and
Information Systems]: Project and People Management—Life
Cycle; K.7.m [The Computing Profession]: Miscellaneous—
Ethics
1

INTRODUCTION

The VAST 2010 mini-challenge 3 provides three datasets. The
first one contains genetic sequence information collected from
viral mutants during the current outbreak. The second one
contains genetic sequences for viral strains collected from
research labs and hospitals in Africa prior to the outbreak. Each of
these viral strains is native to a particular country or region. The
third dataset contains supplemental information on the disease
characteristics observed in the current outbreak. One of the tasks
involves measuring similarity and alignment between genetic
sequences in order to trace the origin of the virus outbreak. The
other task is about finding mutations that are most likely to
worsen the disease characteristics.
The data processing is done in a custom built java application
using Netbeans1. The output of the application is a set of basic
instructions for Processing2 that generates the visualization.
2

VISUALIZATIONS

The Skyline visualization is designed to measure similarity
between genetic sequences. The visualization is a sequence of
squares that resembles a city skyline. The length of each square is
equal to the streak of matching nucleotides in the two sequences
at a given position. When a mutation is encountered, the streak
ends and a new square begins. As the number of mutations
increase, so does the number of squares while their size becomes
smaller. White dashes below the skyline indicate mutations.

Red dashes indicate mutations that occur in at least 5% of the
sequences in the dataset.
Stacking the skylines above each other allows a comparison of
multiple sequences. The skyline acts as a metaphor where larger
the blocks, the closer one is to the city/country.

Figure 1. Skyline view comparing two genetic sequences

The visualization used to address the last two tasks represents a
univariate analysis of mutations. The data-set contains 58
mutation sequences collected from the current outbreak
containing 1404 nucleotides each. A mutation at any given
position is considered statistically relevant if it is present in at
least 5% of the above sequences. Each disease characteristic is
grouped into two categories: severe and not severe.
The unit shown in Figure 2 represents a single mutation at
position 821. The number on top is the nucleotide position. Two
large color-coded blocks indicate the bases
found at that position, the upper block being
the dominant base (A, 55 cases) and the
lower block being the mutation (G, 3 cases).
Each block is lined with smaller red and
orange
blocks
representing
disease
characteristics for that base (S: symptoms, M:
mortality, C: complications, D: drug
resistance and V: at risk vulnerability). The
smaller blocks indicate the percentage of
severe cases for either the dominant base or
the mutation, the higher of two being colored
red e.g. 25% of symptoms are severe if the
base is ‘A’ and 0% are severe if the base is
mutation ‘G’. The absolute difference
between these percentages is represented
using bar charts only for red blocks appearing
in the mutation block. Thus, higher the
number of red blocks in the bottom row and
higher the absolute difference between the
percentages of severe characteristics, the
more dangerous the mutation. This
visualization allows us to look at one or more
disease characteristics at a time.
Figure 2. Sample unit of matrix for disease characteristics

harshawardhan.nene@cognizant.com
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

289

3

ANALYSIS

3.1
Task 1
The first task is to identify the source of the current outbreak. A
sequence that represents the current outbreak is created by
selecting the base having maximum occurrence at each position.
This sequence is then compared to the ten native sequences using
the skyline visualization (Figure 3). Nigeria B (bottommost
skyline) has the most prominent squares and they are visibly
fewer in number making it the most likely source of the outbreak.

These are positions 269, 212 and 946 respectively. The top
three mutations for other characteristics can be found in the same
fashion.
3.4
Task 4
The fourth task, like the third, is to identify the top three
mutations that worsen all disease characteristics. We now look for
mutation positions having a maximum number of red squares in
the bottom row along with high absolute differences. The sum of
absolute differences is indicated in a circle below each mutation
position (Figure 5). The top three mutations are highlighted pink:
269, 223 and 946.
4

COMMENTS

The analysis presented makes use of non-conventional
visualizations and logic that appeal to a novice rather than an
expert. The approach to the problem was motivated by simple
visual cues that are very easy to understand in the case of the first
two tasks followed by a comprehensive visualization of data for
the next two tasks.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
Figure 3. Comparison of only 3 of 10 skylines

3.2
Task 2
The second task involves comparing genetic sequences of three
patients, one of them being Nicolai. In order
to find out who contracted the disease from
Nicolai, two skylines are generated for
comparison (Figure 4). Sequence 123
appears to be more aligned to Nicolai's
sequence with only one mutation. Also, the
presence of two statistically important
mutations in sequence 51 reduces the
likelihood that the patient acquired the
illness from Nicolai.
Figure 4. Comparison of patient sequences using skylines

3.3
Task 3
The third task is to find the top three mutations that cause an
increase in symptom severity. We look for red squares in the
bottom row under ‘S’ (Figure 5) since we are interested in the
mutations that have a higher percentage of severe symptoms than
the dominant base (upper row). The top three mutations can be
identified by the longest bars (colored blue).
Figure 5. Matrix for disease characteristics of important mutations

290

Netbeans IDE. http://netbeans.org/
Processing. http://processing.org/

