Large-scale Neuroanatomical Visualization Using a
Manifold Embedding Approach
Shantanu H. Joshi ∗

Ian Bowman†

John Darrell Van Horn‡

Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of Neurology, UCLA School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, CA 90034

A BSTRACT
We present a unified framework for data processing, mining and
interactive visualization of large-scale neuroanatomical databases.
The input data is assumed to lie in a specific atlas space, or simply exist as a separate collection. Users can specify their own atlas
for comparative analyses. The original data exist as MRI images in
standard formats. It is uploaded to a remote server and processed
offline by a parallelized pipeline workflow. This workflow transforms the data to represent it as both volumetric and triangular mesh
cortical surfaces. We use multiresolution representations to scale
complexity to data storage availability as well as graphical processing performance. Our workflow implements predefined metrics for
clustering and classification, and data projection schemes to aid in
visualization. Additionally the system provides a visual query interface for performing selection requests based on user-defined search
criteria.
Index Terms:
I.3 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional
Graphics and Realism; I.3.3 [Viewing Algorithms]; I.3.8 [Applications]
1

I NTRODUCTION

Neuroimaging repositories continue to grow rapidly. A large number of such databases reside in established research sites both nationally and internationally. The interface to such systems is usually
in the form of a textual or web-based query, providing sequential access to collections of data. Such serialized lookup does not facilitate
a comprehensive view of the data, and thus may present incomplete
information to the user. As typical for such systems, the user has
no choice but to cycle through each and every object in the population in order to get a better understanding of the data before using
it for analysis. With this background in mind, we claim that there is
a pressing need for a graphics-based, informatics approach for interacting with neuroimaging data. Our goal is to enable large-scale
informatics, mining, and visualization of the existing neuroimaging
data repositories by developing streamlined data processing workflows and visualizing the results in an interactive application.
Recently, Herskovits et al. [2] have developed an open source
database system with data-mining capabilities for managing, querying, analyzing and visualizing brain-MR images (BRAID). However, their focus is on manipulation, visualization, and analysis
of individual images. Our approach is different in that we construct compact representations of brain features by their cortical
surfaces, and present the user with interfaces for graphically navigating, browsing, and querying aggregates of such repositories. To
our knowledge, there is currently no effort in the neuroinformatics
or even the visualization community in this direction.
∗ e-mail:

sjoshi.loni.ucla.edu

† e-mail:ian.bowman@loni.ucla.edu
‡ e-mail:jvanhorn@loni.ucla.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

Figure 1: From left, a cortical surface colored with shape-index,
curvedness, Gaussian curvatures, and mean curvatures respectively.

2

M ETHODS

We adopt a three-stage approach for constructing the proposed visual informatics framework: i) the input-processing stage consisting of feature extraction and representation, ii) the data-analytics
stage consisting of modeling, regression, and clustering, and finally
iii) the visualization stage that gives unrestricted, multi-faceted, 3D
navigable and selectable views of the neuroimaging data. The input data comprises of structural neuroimaging acquisitions that are
generated from 3D MRI scanners. The primary source of visualization is a surface geometry representation of the cortex, obtained
after pre-processing, skull removal, segmentation, cortical extraction, and topology correction [4]. After preprocessing, we calculate
several features on cortical surfaces, e.g. shape foldedness index,
principal curvatures, and curvedness. Additionally we incorporate
several volumetric features such as cortical thickness and gray matter volumes, thereby defining a feature n−dimensional vector at
each point on each cortex. Finally, for visualization purposes we
project distances between feature vectors in the Euclidean space
after approximation, using multi-dimensional scaling. The visualization environment is a dynamic view of the database, enabling
the user to navigate, discover, and verify the brain surface geometry simultaneously in relation to its neighbors. Each brain surface is
accompanied by an XML description of its meta-data that the user
can optionally display.
2.1 Extracting Local and Global Features
In order to conduct a large-scale discriminative analysis on a population of brains, we extract pertinent local and global features which
serve as compact representations of underlying dataset patterns.
The local features are given by local curvatures (Gaussian or Mean),
shape index, and curvedness, whereas the global features are represented by areas and volumes. Furthermore, in order to improve
the resolution, we parcellate an individual cortex into 56 different
labeled regions. [6] For each region we compute local spatial values and their averages. As an example, Figure 1 shows a cortical
surface overlaid with the local shape-index, curvedness, Gaussian
curvature, and mean curvature calculated at each vertex.
2.2 Manifold Embedding of Brain Association Graphs
We derive previously defined local and global features on the surface of the cortex, and then represent these quantities in the space
of real numbers and adopt the standard Euclidean metric. As a specific example, for a database with N subjects and L delineated subvolumes, given by {Vki }, i = 1, . . . , N, k = 1, . . . , L we first normalize
all the volumes to have a unit scale. Then given a set of features
{Si }, i = 1, . . . , N, we calculate a N-by-N dissimilarity matrix given

237

by,
j

∑Lk=1 (Vki −Vk )2
(i, j = 1 . . . N, i = j)
(1)
L
In order to explore the dissimilarities between brain volumes, we
need to project the dissimilarity matrix into an appropriate 2D or
3D space. There are numerous techniques to project high dimensional data into lower dimensional spaces for analysis or visualization. As discussed above, one could calculate principal coefficients, or principal factors explaining the maximum observed population variability in terms of a few determining factors. For visualization purposes, only the first 3 eigen projections are needed to
display objects in a 3D space. Since the construction of our embedding relies on dissimilarities among neuro-structures, we will use
the multidimensional scaling [3] approach for projecting the dissimilarity matrix into a 3D space. Multidimensional scaling is an
optimization technique that projects a high dimensional dissimilarity matrix into a low dimensional space that most accurately represents the pairwise distances between the objects. Furthermore
we also attempt to learn the inherent low-dimensional structure that
was not exposed using MDS. For this purpose we use the Isomap
algorithm [5] that achieves non-linear dimension reduction by performing classical MDS on an adjacency matrix which approximates
the geodesic distance between data points. We then render this
reduced-dimensional manifold representation of the whole data and
use it as the basis for user interaction.
D(Si , S j ) =

2.3 Interactive Visualization of Neuroimaging Repositories
The main challenge for real-time visualization of such large data
is the long-term storage and memory requirements which multiply progressively according to data volume. Real time visualization of large datasets presents numerous difficulties with regards
to limited processing power and computer memory. For this reason, it is necessary to represent the data in multiple resolutions.
For our visualization interface, we have implemented the quadric
error mesh simplification strategy [1] that keeps on contracting
edges defined by vertex-pairs until the desired number of faces
are achieved. Multi-resolution representation and rendering enables faster response times, and facilitates better user interaction.
Currently the surface geometry is stored as triangular meshes with
faces, vertices, and colors. We also allow surfaces to be colored
according to vertex attributes. These attributes measure features
such as cortical thickness, and functional activity. Figure 2 shows a
snapshot of this interactive visualization environment that was developed in C++ and OpenGL.
3 D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
The proposed architecture is decentralized in nature, with storage,
computing and visualization shared across heterogeneous platforms
and physical locations. The novelty in our approach lies in the user
ability to simultaneously view and interact with one or more atlases,
and utilize off the shelf discriminatory analysis and visualization
capabilities. The problem of manifold learning by itself is complicated, and unlike most synthetic examples, we do not have ground
truth for evaluating our results. Additionally, in the case of human
brains there is are vast local and global features that describe underlying patterns. As the next step in neuroimaging informatics, we
anticipate the development of graphical visualization tools which
enhance scientific interaction with large-scale databases. Though
some basic image viewing tools exist, we argue the need for a next
generation visual interaction framework. We also demonstrated a
content-based solution that can be applied to any such archive in
order for researchers to more easily examine dissimilarity between
brains, and dynamically visualize their degree of proximity. This
may further be indicative of the demographic and clinical attributes
of the data themselves. In fact, throughout our approach we have

238

Figure 2: A screenshot of the 3D Visualization environment for the
neuroimaging repositories that displays a large collection (N=400) of
brain surfaces along with their meta-data.

made as few assumptions about the data as possible, allowing the
data to segregate itself based upon regional shape and geometry.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
R EFERENCES
[1] M. Garland and P. Heckbert. Surface simplification using quadric error
metrics. In SIGGRAPH ’97: Proceedings of the 24th annual conference
on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 209–216, New
York, NY, USA, 1997. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.
[2] E. H. Herskovits and R. Chen. Integrating data-mining support into
a brain-image database using open-source components. Adv Med Sci,
53(2):172–81, 2008.
[3] J. B. Kruskal and M. Wish. Multidimensional scaling. Beverly Hills:
Sage Publications, 1978.
[4] D. W. Shattuck and R. M. Leahy. Brainsuite: an automated cortical
surface identification tool. Med Image Anal, 6(2):129–142, 2002.
[5] V. D. Silva and J. B. Tenenbaum. Global versus local methods in nonlinear dimensionality reduction. Neural Information Processing Systems, 16:721–728, 2002.
[6] Z. Tu, K. L. Narr, P. Dollar, I. Dinov, P. M. Thompson, and A. W.
Toga. Brain anatomical structure segmentation by hybrid discriminative/generative models. IEEE Trans Med Imaging, 27(4):495–508,
2008.

