Adapting Daniel and Wood’s Modeling Approach
to Interactive Visual Analytics
Justin Talbot∗

Pat Hanrahan†

Computer Science Department
Stanford University

A BSTRACT
This poster describes our progress in developing an interactive linear modeling system that supports the modeling approach described
by Daniel and Wood [4]. Our visual interface permits analysts to
build sets of possible models and then creates appropriate visualizations to permit human-in-the-loop model comparison and selection.
Index Terms: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
User Interfaces—Graphical user interfaces
1 I NTRODUCTION
In the classic statistical text, Fitting Equations to Data: Computer Analysis of Multifactor Data [4], Daniel and Wood recommend an approach to developing statistical models inspired by experimental design. By systematically varying model parameters
along semantically-meaningful dimensions, an analyst can build up
a structured set of possible models. They can then use standard
model comparison techniques to select a model from the set for further analysis. The emphasis on structured comparisons, rather than
the more common approach of iteratively examining a single models at a time, makes the model selection more rigorous and helps
avoid confirmation bias.
We believe that the Daniel and Wood approach may be profitably
applied to visual analytics. This poster describes our progress in
adapting their approach for use in our interactive linear modeling
tool. We present an interface element, the model bar, which permits
analysts to interactively construct a set of models. Then, we give
examples of visual model comparisons leveraging the structure of
the set.
2 BACKGROUND
Analysis of competing hypotheses has guided the design of interfaces that allow users to express multiple interpretations of the data
and to gather evidence supporting or refuting an interpretation in a
structured way [2, 5].
Like our work, Ed Chi’s visualization spreadsheets [1] support
making comparisons across multiple visualizations while providing
some higher-level structure to ease analysis.
The DataDesk [8] and Arc [3] systems provide interactive visual
interfaces for building statistical models. Arc allows users to interactively experiment with models by dragging sliders to change
transformations, smoothing parameters, and other values.
3 S EMANTIC DIMENSIONS OF THE MODELING TASK
We follow Daniel and Wood in thinking of the linear modeling task
as composed of the following semantic dimensions:
• choosing the model’s response variable,
∗ e-mail:
† e-mail:

jtalbot@stanford.edu
hanrahan@cs.stanford.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

• adding predictor variables to the linear model,
• transforming variables (e.g. by Box-Cox transformations),
• selecting a data set to use in fitting the model.
To build a set of models, the analyst must first specify the possible values for each dimension (e.g. which variables are plausible
response variables or which data sets should be considered). Then
these dimensions are combined by taking their cross product, creating a space of possible linear models, organized by the constituent
dimensions.
4

A N INTERFACE FOR BUILDING A SET OF MODELS

To support building and combining these task dimensions within an
interactive visual analytics tool, we have designed the model bar
(top of Figure 1). The bar format was chosen to leverage user familiarity with Excel’s formula bar. The formula within the bar takes
the form of Wilkinson and Rogers’s model equations [9] which are
commonly used to specify linear models, with the model’s response
variable shown on the left of the ∼ and the predictors on the right.
We extend this notation to allow sets of variables to appear in each
location, indicating the alternative values that the user has specified
for that dimension of the modeling task.
The user can drag variables on to or off of the model bar to specify the model response and to add predictors (the first two dimensions). Right-clicking on any variable permits the user to expand
the variable into a set of Box-Cox transformed variants. The user
can also exclude individual data points or subset the data by restricting a variable. In either case, the modified data set is added to the
model bar as an alternative data set (see Figure 3).
5

E XAMPLES OF VISUAL COMPARISONS

Given the structure provided by the task dimensions, we can lay
out a visualization that enables appropriate model comparisons. We
give three examples using data from Florida county voting results
in the 2000 U.S. Presidential election [7].
Example 1. In Figure 1, the user explores the relationship between votes for a minor candidate, Buchanan, and votes for Bush.
The relationship (shown in the upper-left corner) is not linear and
the analyst can see that it would be inappropriate to fit a linear
model. To address this issue, the user interactively creates a comparison of possible transformations of both variables. We lay out
the visualization in small multiples, arranging the visualization by
increasing distortion of the data. This arrangement makes it easy to
visually locate a pair of transformations that roughly linearizes the
relationship between Buchanan and Bush votes (either a cube root
or log transform to both variables).
Example 2. In Figure 2, the user creates a comparison between
two response variables, the percentages of votes for Bush and for
Gore in the same election, and four demographic predictors. The
visualization supports comparison across responses (vertically) and
predictors (horizontally). If the user had included all variables, the
result would have been the more common scatterplot matrix, but
the visual complexity would have made the relationships of interest
more difficult to interpret.

253

Figure 3: A more complicated comparison between four models
that differ in whether or not they include log npop as a predictor
(columns), and in the training data set (rows).

Figure 1: A structured comparison of models that differ by the transformations applied to the response and predictor variables.

Example 3. In Figure 3, the analyst sets up a comparison between four more complicated linear models. They differ by whether
or not each includes the predictor log npop and by the data set used
to fit each model (in one, the county of Palm Beach, a possible
outlier, is excluded). Since the models include multiple predictors,
we use Bayes Marginal Model Plots [6]. By checking for overlap
between the purple loess curve and the orange marginal model realizations, the analyst can see that including log npop produces a
much better model and that excluding Palm Beach produces a noticeably better fit, but only when log npop is included.

Figure 2: A comparison between two possible response variables
and four possible demographic predictors.

254

6

C ONCLUSION

We believe there is promise in adapting Daniel and Wood’s
comparison-based modeling process to visual analytics. Our current interface permits the construction of interesting sets of models
and the creation of appropriate visualizations for comparison. More
work remains to be done in developing this conceptual framework,
exploring new interface and interactive tools to support its use, and
producing evidence for its practical impact on the visual analytic
workflow.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by FODAVA grant 0937123.
R EFERENCES
[1] E. H.-H. Chi. A framework for information visualization spreadsheets.
PhD thesis, 1999. Adviser-Riedl, John T.
[2] D. Cluxton and S. G. Eick. Decide hypothesis visualization tool. In
Proceedings of Intl. Conf. on Intelligence Analysis 2009, 2005.
[3] R. Cook and S. Weisberg. Applied regression including computing and
graphics. Wiley, New York, 1999.
[4] C. Daniel and F. S. Wood. Fitting Equations to Data: Computer Analysis of Multifactor Data. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA,
1980.
[5] N. Kadivar, V. Chen, D. Dunsmuir, E. Lee, C. Qian, J. Dill, and
C. Shaw. Capturing and supporting the analysis process. In Proceedings of IEEE VAST 2009, pages 131–138, 2009.
[6] I. Pardoe. A Bayesian sampling approach to regression model checking. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 10(4):617–
627, 2001.
[7] R. L. Smith. A statistical assessment of Buchanan’s vote in Palm Beach
county. Statistical Science, 17(4):441–457, 2002.
[8] P. F. Velleman. Learning Data Analysis with DataDesk Student Version 6.0 for Windows. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc.,
Boston, MA, USA, 1998.
[9] G. N. Wilkinson and C. E. Rogers. Symbolic description of factorial models for analysis of variance. Applied Statistics, 22(3):392–399,
1973.

