Diamonds in the Rough:
Social Media Visual Analytics for Journalistic Inquiry
Nicholas Diakopoulos, Mor Naaman, Funda Kivran-Swaine
Rutgers University, School of Communication and Information

ABSTRACT
Journalists increasingly turn to social media sources such as
Facebook or Twitter to support their coverage of various news
events. For large-scale events such as televised debates and
speeches, the amount of content on social media can easily
become overwhelming, yet still contain information that may aid
and augment reporting via individual content items as well as via
aggregate information from the crowd’s response. In this work we
present a visual analytic tool, Vox Civitas, designed to help
journalists and media professionals extract news value from largescale aggregations of social media content around broadcast
events. We discuss the design of the tool, present the text analysis
techniques used to enable the presentation, and provide details on
the visual and interaction design. We provide an exploratory
evaluation based on a user study in which journalists interacted
with the system to explore and report on a dataset of over one
hundred thousand twitter messages collected during the U.S. State
of the Union presidential address in 2010.
KEYWORDS: Computational Journalism, Computer Assisted
Reporting, Social Media, Sensemaking
INDEX TERMS: H.5.2 Information Interfaces and Presentation:
User Interfaces
1

INTRODUCTION

Social media systems have proven to be valuable platforms for
information and communication, in particular during events such
as the magnitude 7.0 earthquake that rattled Haiti in 2010. In
recognition of this phenomena, journalists are increasingly turning
to social media sources like Twitter, Facebook, or other online
sources of user content in an effort to track the importance of
stories and to find sources of expertise to drive new stories [17].
However, the rush of information from millions of new “human
sensors” contributing information about events and news stories
leads to the challenge of making sense of the overwhelming
response, both at an individual and aggregate level of analysis.
In this paper, we consider how social media content contributed
around large-scale broadcast news events can inform journalistic
inquiry. For instance: what kinds of insights, analyses, and other
activities can be enabled through the support of visual analytic
tools in the context of journalism? In particular, we designed and
evaluated a visual analytics system, Vox Civitas, whose goal is to
make the social media (e.g., Twitter) response to events more
amenable to journalistic investigation and sensemaking.
diakop@rutgers.edu
mor@rutgers.edu
funda@eden.rutgers.com

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

Journalistic investigation and sensemaking poses a somewhat
different context than the more oft studied context of investigative
analysis for intelligence [2, 13, 19, 20]. Such studies in the
intelligence analysis context are certainly valuable for informing
the general cognitive processes involved with information
analysis. Here, we are more concerned with the context of
journalism, including the goals and work products journalists are
tasked with. Through the design and evaluation of Vox Civitas we
are exploring the domain of journalistic analysis in response to
social media data, including implications for the design of
appropriately tailored visual analytics tools.
We were careful in our design of Vox Civitas to consider
journalistic and news values [14] and use these to inform the
filtering capabilities and visual schema that were chosen to
organize the information stream. In addition to the value-sensitive
design rationale that we provide for Vox Civitas, we contribute
results of an exploratory study that assessed the utility of the tool.
The study, using a dataset from the Twitter response to the U.S.
State of the Union presidential address in 2010, examined the
kinds of journalistic activities the application supports, and the
ways in which the schema and features designed into the
application are used by journalists in this context. We relate our
findings to the sensemaking model of Pirolli and Card [20].
Understanding if, how, and why the features designed into Vox
Civitas support journalistic inquiry will inform the design of
future systems built for journalistic sensemaking activities.
2

RELATED WORK

Our work is most inspired by the work of Shamma et al. [24, 25]
who have looked at revealing (and to a more limited extent
visualizing) the structure and dynamics of twitter content around
broadcast media events such as the Presidential Debates. In their
work, the authors identify usage cues (magnitude of response) and
content cues (salient keyword extraction) as indicators of
interesting occurrences in the event such as topic shifts. Our work
builds on these ideas in several important ways by integrating
such usage and content cues with powerful filtering and
interaction mechanisms, derivative data facets such as sentiment,
and visual methods for schematizing analyses for journalistic
purposes. Moreover, we present an exploratory evaluation of our
system in the context of journalistic sensemaking.
Other related work has examined social media content as an
information source in the context of emergency response and
crisis scenarios such as fires [5] and floods [26]. Indeed, Starbird
et al.’s [26] study of the Twitter response to the Red River
flooding in early 2009 showed that Twitter users are participating
in useful information generation and synthesis activities but are
part of a larger ecosystem involving information from traditional
media outlets. It is the generative and synthetic activity of social
media users that we hope to harness in the context of visual
analytics for journalism. Our long-term goal is to enable
traditional media to go beyond simply publishing in social media
platforms and harness it to drive new insights and stories leading
to a virtuous cycle of collaborative sensemaking between social
media participants and the newsroom.

115

The analysis of text corpora over time has been addressed by a
variety of systems including ThemeRiver [12], which looks at the
evolution of topics over time; Narratives [8], which allows users
to track, analyze, and correlate the blog response to news stories
over time; and MemeTracker [15] which visualizes the patterns of
phrases that appear in news and social media content over time.
Recent research has also looked at assessing thematic story
visualization in the context of dynamically evolving information
streams [22]. Our approach differs insofar as thematic change in
social media is not the analytic end goal but rather an input in a
matrix of analytic enablers including sentiment analysis and
journalistically motivated data filters.
The visual analysis of sentiment in large text corpora has
garnered some attention in the visualization literature. Gregory et
al. [10] presented the integration of sentiment analysis
visualizations into the IN-SPIRE system though there was no
attempt at temporal analysis. Wanner et al. [27] looked at
visualizing sentiment trends in streams of RSS news feeds around
the U.S. presidential election in 2008. Diakopoulos and Shamma
[7] presented temporal visuals which depict sentiment patterns
(e.g. periodicity, strength or weakness of actors) in the context of
the social media response to the U.S. presidential debates. Here,
we go beyond these prior systems to visually connect sentiment
patterns with topicality and the magnitude of the response.
3

DESIGNING FOR JOURNALISTIC INQUIRY

In this section our intent is to describe some of the aspects of
journalistic practice and values that inform the design of Vox
Civitas. In particular, our design objective is to be able to direct
attention to the pieces of information that may be most interesting
journalistically, as well as to schematize the visual representations
in ways that enable improved journalistic inquiry. And while
many of the design ideas stem from normative descriptions of
journalistic practice, the development of Vox Civitas also
involved iterative gathering of feedback from several journalists.
Journalism can be defined as the professionalized practice of
“producing and disseminating information about contemporary
affairs of general public interest and importance” [23].
Journalistic values include notions of accuracy, balance, and
objectivity as well as a keen emphasis on telling an engaging and
clear story using primary source interview quotations [14].
What are the types of questions that journalists would
reasonably ask of a social media visual analytics tool? We can
look to how media events have been covered by the news in the
past for indicators of importance and newsworthiness that would
inform the design of our system. For instance, studies of
newspaper coverage of televised political messages such as
debates have shown a tendency for the news to cover “decisive
moments” with a preference for moments of clearly divergent
points of view, where the audience has indicated approbation or
criticism, and which are easily extractable and can stand on their
own with minimal need for re-contextualization [3]. Moreover,
general newsworthiness guidelines in journalism tend to favor
stories that are in some way surprising, unusual, or which are
particularly good or bad news [11]. These findings and values
imply that sentiment analysis (applause, criticism, controversy,
good, bad) in conjunction with the magnitude of the social media
response to different quotes, topics, or issues in the speech will be
useful analytic indicators for journalistic inquiry.
In order to initially assess what the signal to noise ratio of
useful information sharing is on social network systems like
Twitter, we collected a sample of ~900 twitter messages (tweets)
made in response to Obama’s speech at the Copenhagen 15
meeting in December 2009. Qualitative analysis of this (albeit
small) sample confirmed that there are indeed journalistically
relevant pieces of information being shared on Twitter. We

116

manually categorized messages from the sample and identified
contributions such as: quotes of the speech, observations from the
scene including the environment and situated response, comments
on the appearance of key actors, sentiment evaluations of the tone
or content, interpretations of political implications, and
intertextual ideological associations. These activities suggest that
if properly connected to a visual analytics tool, journalists could
harness the wisdom of the social media crowd to ultimately do
better reporting of events.
We begin in the next section by describing the text analysis
algorithms that support the journalistic goals and enhance the use
of Vox Civitas as a visual analytics tool for journalistic inquiry.
4

COMPUTATIONAL ENABLERS

Evaluations of visual analytics systems such as Jigsaw [13] have
highlighted the importance of designing to jumpstart the analytical
process by directing attention to relevant information and
providing appropriate starting points for analysis. In order to
facilitate these objectives in Vox Civitas we leverage four types of
automatic content analysis: relevance, uniqueness, sentiment, and
keyword extraction. These automatic analyses provide capabilities
both for searching and filtering raw information in journalistically
meaningful ways, as well as providing aggregate values (e.g. of
sentiment) that can inform analyses.
4.1
Relevance
Assessing the relevance of social media messages is important for
helping analysts reduce the amount of noise and focus on
information more relevant to the event. We define relevance of
social media messages with respect to the underlying event
content: the transcript of the spoken words in the event. For many
large-scale news events, such as the State of the Union, transcripts
are readily available from news services. Our definition of
relevance also incorporates a temporal component by assessing
relevance for a message at a particular point in time. We
acknowledge that different definitions of relevance could lead to
different types of analytic capabilities.
We computed relevancy by calculating term-vector similarity of
messages to the moment in the event during which the messages
were posted. In order to compute relevancy at a finer level of
granularity than the entire event, we further structured the raw
transcript by breaking it into one-minute segments, and consider
the text from each segment as the basis for relevance. For each
message, relevance was computed as the cosine distance [16] of
the term-vector space representations of the message and of the
transcript for the minute when the message occurred (the
transcript and messages were first filtered through a standard stop
word list). To control for possible lag in the social media
response, we used a running window (with weighting) over the
previous two minutes. This method is designed to account for
some delayed reaction to the speech, and compute a temporally
sensitive relevance score, rather then assess the relevance of
messages with a potentially unlimited lag. To calculate the
relevance of a social media message at time m (Sm) to a particular
minute m of the speech we use the transcript at time m (Tm) and
associated term vectors,
rel(Sm ,m) = 2 ×

V (Sm ) • V (Tm )
V (Sm ) V (Tm )

+

V (Sm ) • V (Tm −1 )
V (Sm ) V (Tm −1 )

4.2
Uniqueness
Definitions of “newsworthiness” and “news values” in journalism
often espouse the importance of the unusual or unexpected in the
selection criteria for what becomes “news” [9, 11]. In the context
of social media, “unusual” may manifest itself as more unique

messages when compared to other social media messages
provided that the messages are still relevant to the event (see
Figure 1). We incorporate this concept into our system by
developing a message uniqueness metric, which can be used to
direct attention toward what may be more unusual contributions.
Here we define the uniqueness of a message in relation to the
other messages sent during the same time interval. It is computed
as the difference between the term-vector space representation of
the message to the centroid term-vector representation of all of the
messages for that particular minute of the event (as above,
messages were filtered through a standard stop word list). The
centroid vector for each minute is constructed from the top 200
most frequent terms for that minute. For a social media message at
time m (Sm) and the centroid for aggregate minute m (Cm) we
calculated uniqueness as:
V (Sm ) • V (Cm )
uniqueness(Sm ) = 1 −
V (Sm ) V (Cm )
A message that uses words unusual for that minute will not
share many words with the centroid and will thus have a low
cosine similarity score. We then define the “journalistically
interesting” range of uniqueness for the filter presented in the
interface by thresholding uniqueness values between a minimum
and maximum value as suggested in Figure 1.
4.3

Sentiment

Sentiment analysis can be broadly construed as facilitating the
understanding of opinion, emotion, and subjectivity in text [18].
Here we focus more specifically on sentiment analysis to inform
an analyst’s understanding of the polarity (i.e. positive versus
negative) of the social media reaction to the event. Some of our
prior work has shown that sentiment analysis of social media text
polarity can inform analyses of the aggregate reactivity of the
audience to an event topic, issue, or actor [7].
Classifying social media messages from sources such as Twitter
poses a significant challenge. Despite considerable progress in the
maturation and accuracy of sentiment polarity classification
algorithms, these algorithms are still far from perfect [18].
Exacerbating the problem is the fact that social media content,
often due to constraints on message length, is riddled with
irregular language such as inconsistent abbreviations, internetspeak and other slang, and acronyms. Attempting to handle these
issues, we followed a two-step procedure: we first ran a simple
classifier based on a lexicon of words that classified messages
based on whether they were carrying subjective (positive or
negative) information [21]. In a second step we applied a
supervised learning algorithm (language model) trained with 1900
manually tagged messages from the State of the Union corpus
together with messages tagged as “other” by the simple classifier.
We found the best performance using a language model including
all n-grams of length less than or equal to four. The combined
classifier resulted in a 5-fold cross validated accuracy of 62.4%.
This is sufficient for giving an overall impression of the
sentiment, but the classifier still fails on difficult cases involving
sarcasm or slang. For example, “whats goodie twiggaz..im
watchin Obama talk about how he gna clear my student loans..i
kno there was a reason i voted for him lol!” was classified as
negative by the algorithm but is arguably positive.
4.4

Keyword Extraction

In keeping with the design goal of jump-starting analysis, we
aimed to identify keywords used in the social media stream that
could be useful and interesting for guiding analysts. To this end,
we extracted descriptive keywords for each minute of the
aggregate message content. For each minute we extract the top 10

	


	

	

	
	





Figure 1. A conceptual diagram showing the relationship
between message utility in the context of journalism with levels
of uniqueness. Those messages in the middle gray band may
be newsworthy in the sense that they are unusual but still
relevant to the discussion.

keywords ranked by their tf-idf score [16], comparing the
keyword’s frequency at that minute to its frequency in the rest of
the dataset. We found tf-idf performed adequately for identifying
salient keywords, although other methods for extracting salient
key phrases [22] or words [4] could be implemented and
integrated into our data processing pipeline. For the purposes of
the document frequency in our tf-idf scores we define pseudodocuments temporally as the aggregate of the words of all
messages for each minute. Words are first stemmed using the
Porter stemming algorithm and after computing tf-idf scores on
word stems we apply reverse stemming to the most common full
keyword mapping so that complete words are visible in the
interface [4].
5

VISUAL REPRESENTATIONS AND INTERACTIONS

The Vox Civitas interface integrates video from an event with the
ability to visually assess the textual social media response to that
event at both (1) individual, and (2) aggregate levels of analysis.
The unifying schema for organizing information in Vox Civitas is
temporal, which facilitates looking at responses and trends over
time in the social media stream, in relationship to the underlying
event video. Figure 2 shows an overview of the interface.
Filtering messages is done via the module shown in Figure 2A.
Browsing and analysis of individual responses is facilitated by a
view of the actual Twitter messages posted about the event (next
to the video content, in Figure 2B). Aggregate response analysis is
enabled by three views: volume graph (2E), sentiment timeline
(2F); and the keywords component (2G). These views are all
aligned to the video timeline (2C) and the topic timeline (2D) and
are connected visually to the timeline via a light gray vertical bar
which tracks the navigation thumb of the video timeline. In the
rest of this section, we explain the main interactive elements of
our interface. For each element, we explain the interaction and,
where appropriate, how the interaction builds on the
computational foundations laid out above.
5.1
Content Component
The content component (Figure 2B) displays the “raw” content
from the event and its social media response. On the left, the
video feed from the event is shown. The video is controlled by the
timeline (Figure 2C) that allows start, pause and nonlinear
navigation of the video steam. On the right side of Figure 2B, the
interface shows the set of messages about the event that were

117

Figure 2. Vox Civitas User Interface. (A. Keyword Search & Filtering, B. Video & Twitter Messages, C. Video Timeline, D. Topic Sections, E.
Message Volume Graph, F. Trends in overall Tweet Sentiment, G. Salient Key Words Over Time)

posted during the minute currently selected by the user via the
various timeline interactions, mirroring the currently-viewed
portion of the video. The messages displayed can be filtered using
the filtering module as we explain next.
5.2
Filtering Module
The filtering module, shown in Figure 2A, allows Vox Civitas
users to filter the social media responses to the event according to
a number of criteria or search terms. The filtering has a number of
outcomes: it determines which messages are displayed in the main
content pane (2B), as well as the aggregate statistics in the
message volume graph (2E) and sentiment timeline (2F). All these
components update interactively with the filter. In our current
implementation, filtering does not change the keyword pane (2G).
The filtering module options build on some of the
computational aspects described above. Users can apply the
following filters to the messages, individually or in conjunctive
combination: (1) messages with specific keywords or authors, (2)
messages with quotes (i.e, quotation marks), (3) messages that are
retweets (messages that are repeated or forwarded from other
users and usually marked “RT” at the beginning), (4) messages
that include links, (5) messages classified as being topically
relevant (Section 4.1 above), (6) messages classified as unique
(Section 4.2 above), and (7) messages with positive or negative
sentiment (Section 4.3 above). The system also allows for filtering
out quotes, retweets or links. In Figure 2, for example, the active
filters are the keyword “college” and “no quotes”.

118

5.3
Topic Timeline
We included a topic segmentation timeline (Figure 2D) that
facilitates building connections between topicality, time, and the
social media response. The topic timeline shows the temporal
extent of topic sections of the speech and is aligned with the video
timeline (Figure 2C). Hovering over a topic section shows the
section’s label and clicking navigates the content component
(video and messages) to the beginning of that section. Note that
the topics appearing on the timeline and their time range could be
automatically detected from the message or the event content, or
provided by a human editor.
5.4
Message Volume Graph
The message volume graph (Figure 2E) shows the message
volume over time as a histogram, where each bar represents one
minute. The heights of the bars represent the aggregate volume of
messages according to the currently applied filter. By default, the
overall volume of messages is shown. Changes to the filters
initiate an animated transition on the graph so that differences can
be tracked visually. Check boxes allow the user to compare the
current filtered set to the total volume, as well as change the
vertical scale from absolute to percent in order to assess the
proportional filtered response over time. Hovering over the graph
shows a popup of the exact count or percent of messages at that
minute as well as the number of unique users contributing to those
messages. The message volume graph also acts as an interactive
timeline: clicking the graph navigates the video and messages of
the content component to that minute.

5.5
Sentiment Timeline
The sentiment timeline (Figure 2F) shows an aggregate of the
sentiment response for each minute of the event, as derived by the
sentiment analysis described in Section 4.3. The timeline is colorcoded according to one of four categories: positive (green),
negative (red), controversial (yellow), or neutral (gray). A minute
is categorized as controversial if the ratio of positive to negative
messages for that minute is between 0.45 and 0.55. If there are no
positive or negative messages then that minute is categorized as
neutral. If either positive or negative messages dominate the
dataset for that minute (the ratio is above 0.55) then that minute is
categorized as positive or negative respectively. The coloring for
positive or negative minutes has five grades of intensity
depending on the ratio of how much one sentiment dominates the
other. Hovering over the sentiment graph will show the detailed
counts of positive and negative classifications of messages for that
minute. The sentiment timeline changes to reflect the currently
applied filter, and is interactive: clicking navigates the video and
messages of the content component to that minute.
The sentiment representation is explicitly designed to give only
an impression of aggregate sentiment due to concerns over the
accuracy of the sentiment classifier. We do not represent the
automatic sentiment classification of individual messages in the
message list (Figure 2B) since we assume users can quickly
surmise sentiment as they are skimming the short text messages.
Also, we do not represent absolute magnitude of the aggregate
sentiment response (or show the distribution of positive and
negative magnitudes). Journalists that we spoke to early in the
design process believed that until the accuracy of the classifier
was ~70-80% or higher, visual representations could easily
mislead the analyst if they showed absolute magnitudes. Our
visual representation helps cope with the depiction of uncertainty
in the accuracy of the sentiment classifier by not giving undue
weight to the comparative magnitude of positive versus negative
messages. Moreover, if we assume that the error in the classifier is
uniformly distributed in time, temporal sentiment trends are still
meaningful.
5.6
Keywords Component
The keywords component (Figure 2G) depicts salient keywords
over time, extracted as described in Section 4.4. It is similar to a
“tag cloud” that has been laid out so that word positions are
correlated with the time span when the chosen word was most
salient in the event. We chose to keep the visual depiction simple
by not visually encoding any additional facets of information (e.g.
degree of salience into color intensity or font size) beyond just the
keyword and its approximate time-span. Clicking on a word in the
keyword component filters the dataset using that keyword, which
in turn affects the other components as described above.
The component is laid out from left to right and top to bottom
using a greedy algorithm. For each minute, we have a list of
salient keywords ranked by their tf-idf scores. For a given layout
position we compute the layout score of a proposed keyword as
the sum of the word’s tf-idf scores for all minute intervals that the
keyword would span when laid out. So for example, if a word
when added to the component would span 5 minutes worth of
space, that word’s score is the sum of its tf-idf scores for all of
those 5 minutes. This way, we give preference to words that are
potentially relevant for more than a single minute in time. For
each time position, we select the keyword with the highest layout
score, add it to the layout, and advance to the next position (after
the current word plus a padding offset). Once a word has been
added to the component it is removed from the ranked lists of
keywords for the minute intervals it spans. This prevents duplicate
words being added to the component adjacent to each other, but
also allows duplicate words if they are relevant at different

sections of the event. The depth of the layout can be expanded to
include as many rows of words as desired.
6

EXPLORATORY STUDY

We designed and executed an exploratory evaluation of Vox
Civitas to assess its effectiveness in a journalistic reporting
scenario performed by the application’s target audience, namely
journalists and media professionals. The goals of the evaluation
were to develop an understanding of how journalists use the tool,
and how Vox Civitas matches the journalists’ requirements and
work process. We address these research questions:
• How useful and effective was the tool for journalists in
generating story ideas and reporting on the event?
• What kind of insights and analysis does Vox Civitas support?
• What are the shortcomings of Vox Civitas for journalists
analyzing social media streams?
• How do journalists interact with the system and which parts
of the interaction are most salient?
To answer these questions, we deployed Vox Civitas using a
popular broadcast event as a content source, recruited participants
with a background in journalism, and deployed the system while
collecting questionnaire feedback and analyzing interaction logs.
We analyzed the open-ended questionnaire items using a
grounded-theory inspired methodology. This methodology
involves iterative coding of concepts and their relationships
apparent in the text in order to form typologies of use and patterns
of interaction grounded in the participants’ textual response data.
6.1
Content
We structured the evaluation of Vox Civitas around the State of
the Union address by U.S. President Barack Obama in early 2010.
This broadcast event is traditionally heavily covered by media,
and generates high news interest. We anticipated the event would
result in a large social media response on Twitter and other
forums. Indeed, immediately after the event we collected 101,285
English language Twitter messages containing the terms “SOTU”
(for “State of the Union”), “Obama”, or “State of the Union”
using the Twitter API. This keyword-based sampling method does
not ensure collection of all relevant messages for the event
(relevant messages not containing these terms will not be
retrieved). However, we believe that the resultant dataset is more
than adequate for enabling the sensemaking capabilities of the
interface.
Once retrieved, we analyzed the 101,285 messages to detect
relevance, uniqueness, and sentiment (Section 4). In total, the
algorithms marked 15,312 messages (15% of all messages) as
“relevant”, 12,110 messages (12%) as “unique”, 24,487 messages
(24%) as positive, and 54,043 messages (53%) as negative. We
used an upper threshold of 0.99 and a lower threshold of 0.95 for
uniqueness, and a threshold of 0.3 for relevance to obtain those
numbers. These thresholds seem to work in practice, but we leave
it for future work to optimize and further evaluate these values.
6.2
Procedure
Vox Civitas is a Web-based system1 and the evaluation was
conducted online. We chose an online evaluation rather than a lab
study to enhance the ecological and external validity of the study.
The experiment was deployed using “natural” settings in terms of
work environment, time constraints and so forth. The online
nature of the deployment also enhanced the ability to include a
larger number of journalism professionals from around the nation.
We logged the participants’ actions with the interface and
recorded open-ended survey responses. We identified interactions
1

http://sm.rutgers.edu/voxcivitas/voxcivitas.html

119

or survey responses too short to be meaningful and excluded one
response from our analysis as a result.
To solicit participation, a convenience sample of journalists and
journalism students was emailed with a request to participate in
our study, for which they were entered into a drawing to win a
$50 gift card. The call for participation was also published in
other venues that we thought likely to bring participants (e.g.,
Twitter and mailing lists). Participants were directed to a website,
where, upon consent to become a research participant, they were
presented with the Vox Civitas system. An overview description
of the tool and its functionality was displayed next to the tool
itself, briefly explaining to the users the interface’s main features.
The instructions and scenario for the task were persistently
displayed next to the tool. The participants were instructed to act
as journalists performing a task, namely using the tool to find
stories to pitch to a national news editor, shortly after the State of
the Union address took place. The participants were then asked to
develop at least two story angles, which they thought would make
good stories. Their interactions with the interface (mouse hovers,
clicks, time spent using the tool) were logged.
When ready with their story angles, participants were asked to
fill out an online questionnaire. The bulk of the questionnaire was
composed of open-ended questions including the story angles the
participants developed, the ways in which the tool enabled them
to develop the story angles, how they would use such a tool to
inform their reporting on a broadcast media event, and what they
liked or disliked about the user interface. The questionnaire also
included demographic data, as well as questions about the
participant’s training in journalism and the frequency of their
usage of social media services.
6.3

Participants

Eighteen participants were recruited, 15 of which had formal or
on the job training in journalism according to their responses:
seven participants identified themselves as professional
journalists, five as journalism students, and one as a citizen
journalist; two additional participants did not identify as
journalists but specified that they had an undergraduate degree or
“on the job” experience in journalism. Six respondents were male,
and twelve were female. The ages of the participants ranged from
21 to 55 (μ=34). Eleven of the participants indicated that they use
social media services such as Twitter all the time, while five
indicated they use them “often”, and only two indicated that they
use them “sometimes”.
6.4
Results
We first report on our findings based on the grounded analysis of
open-ended questionnaire items. We then briefly report on the
usage of the application and its various features as captured by the
interaction log.
6.4.1
Perceived Utility
In the questionnaire, participants answered the open-ended
question “If you were to use this or a similar application to inform
your reporting on a broadcast media event, how would you use
it?” We used a grounded approach to categorize and code the
open-ended responses to this question. We identified two primary
use cases for Vox Civitas: (1) as a mechanism for finding sources
to interview and (2) as an ideation tool for driving follow-up
journalistic activity.
Finding and interviewing credible primary sources is an
important aspect of journalistic storytelling [14]. Indeed, prior
studies assessing tools for journalists have shown the primacy of
sourcing in appealing to the journalistic mindset [6]. As such, it is

120

perhaps unsurprising that several users of Vox Civitas suggested it
would be a valuable tool for helping to identify sources. As one
participant put it, “I might use it to track sources reacting to an
event that I could quickly turn to for an interview” (P11).
Beyond sourcing, several participants noted that Vox Civitas
would be useful for helping to find unusual story angles and
statements that resonated with the audience: “I would use it for
drilling down to the outlier sentiments in response to the State of
the Union” (P16) and “Using the quotes and retweet filters, I can
also easily figure out what statement resonated the most with the
public” (P8). These responses reaffirm the newsworthiness values
which Vox Civitas was designed to support, such as helping to
identify unique contributions, or “decisive moments” which draw
heavy audience response [3, 11]. Other participants identified
related uses for driving journalistic activities such as helping to
measure interest for particular follow-up stories or as an input to a
discussion panel after the event.
It is important to note that, while predominantly positive in
their outlook for Vox Civitas, several responses indicated healthy
suspicions about relying solely on the tool for reporting. Concerns
revolved around the recognition that Twitter does not represent an
accurate population sample for measuring global sentiment, and
that tools like Vox Civitas are useful “as long as they are used as
a compliment to stories that include more sound data” (P4) or “as
a jumping off point for stories, as long as it is clear that the tweets
aren’t representative for the whole country” (P9).
6.4.2
Story Angles
In order to assess more specifically what kinds of story ideas and
types of insight might be generated with Vox Civitas we asked
participants to consider the scenario of using the tool to come up
with two story angles they might pitch to a news editor of a
national publication. Of course, this scenario serves only as a
(reasonable) proxy for real journalistic practice, since real story
angles would depend on the context of publication and audience.
Again, we used a grounded approach to categorize and
iteratively code participants’ open-ended responses. We address
the types of story angles, as well as the Vox Civitas features that
drove and enabled the development of stories.
Two main foci of story angles emerged from our analysis:
stories that focus and reference the event content and stories that
reference audience responses to the event. Event content story
angles focused on topics, issues, or personalities in the event such
as words spoken, or the body language or appearance of people in
the video. Most often, these story angles referred to topics or
issues that were referenced in the speech. One story pitch read:
“Obama’s plan to increase Pell grants: What kind of
students, majors and schools would give the government
the best return on their investment to get the kinds of
workers the country needs?” (P1)
Notice that these stories emerged from examining Vox Civitas,
but the participants did not directly reference the social media
response in their story angle.
On the other hand, story angles referencing audience responses
focused on the reactions of the audience to the event, including
both reactions captured in individual messages, as well as the
magnitude or sentiment of the aggregate audience response to
various aspects of the event and the issues being discussed
therein. One participant wrote:
“The two topics that did create a ‘controversial’
exchange were ‘People’s Struggles’ and ‘Stimulus: Tax
cuts and Employment.’ This could compliment other data
about job losses and the economy and … could make for

an interesting angle on what topics in public sentiment
are most polarized.” (P4)
A more minor focus (two story angles in our survey) was
audience meta discussion. These stories focused on the
characteristics of the audience in the social media channel (e.g.,
its demographic), rather than the audience response to the event.
How exactly did Vox Civitas support the creation of these story
ideas? Some participants reported that their story angles were
informed through the use of keyword searches and further
filtering (e.g. sentiment) to help them identify individual or
aggregate responses. One participant started an inquiry in
response to an individual tweet she saw referencing low college
loan payments. The story angle read: “Further investigation into
statistics on college loan debt. How much are students carrying?
And how long does it take to pay off?” (P16). Other participants,
like P4 above, looked to aggregate cues such as the magnitude or
sentiment of a response to a keyword or topic to drive ideation:
“I liked using the keywords to elicit the popularity of a
certain topic. For example, ‘college’ was probably by far
the most powerful statement, showing 500 tweets
immediately after Obama’s ‘no one should go broke’
statement…” (P8).
“I chose the keyword ‘overseas’. This gave me more of
mixed emotions for the audience due to the slash in tax
breaks being given to companies who ship their jobs
overseas” (P18).
Indeed, many of the story angles that were reported mentioned
aspects of the visuals and interface that were used to enable those
thoughts. We turn briefly in the following section to aspects of the
log analysis that further support these findings.
6.4.3
Usage of Interface Features
We see the results of the log analysis as illustrative and use them
to support our findings on the utility of features for journalists,
although we did not have enough participants to be able to derive
statistically meaningful patterns from the log data. Participants
spent an average of 21.6 minutes interacting with the application,
with 89% of users spending more than five minutes.
The utility and popularity of searching for keywords and
combining those searches with further filters was evident in the
logs. All 18 participants performed some keyword searching and
filtering activity. Users searched for an average of 9.67 unique
words each (σ=10.2). Half of the participants also used compound
filters, meaning they combined a keyword search with a filter
modifier. Among these, two people filtered for relevancy, three
for uniqueness, six for negative sentiment, two for positive
sentiment, two for retweets, four for no retweets, three for quotes,
and one each for no quotes and links. Judging from these counts,
filters for sentiment and retweets were used most in conjunction
with the keyword filters, with other filters used to a lesser extent.
An average of 4.67 keyword searches per user were initiated
from the keywords over time component, meaning that 48% of all
keyword queries came from users interacting with that interface
feature (the remaining keyword queries were initiated by users
typing words into the search box). However, we note that only
eight of the 18 participants clicked to filter by a keyword via the
keyword component, with five users making heavy use of the
component to drive the filtering. When we looked at the use of the
keyword component by professional journalists versus all others
(students, citizen journalists, and non-journalists) there was a clear
trend of the professionals using the keyword component less: only
one journalist used it.
The topic timeline, volume graph, and sentiment timeline all
saw robust usage in terms of users gleaning data details from

hovering over these representations. Sixteen out of 18 users
hovered over the topic timeline (mean of 34 operations per user)
and when normalized for interaction duration, seven users
averaged more than one hover operation per minute of use. A total
of 17 users hovered over the volume graph (μ=392) with 15 users
averaging more than one hover operation per minute. Similarly,
15 users hovered over the sentiment timeline for details (μ=54)
and 13 users averaged more than one sentiment hover operation
per minute. Combined with the prevalence for searching and
filtering for keywords, these numbers tend to indicate that users
informed their analyses by employing the volume graph most,
followed by the sentiment timeline, and topic timeline.
7

DISCUSSION

Our results suggest that Vox Civitas’ utility is in divergent modes
of sensemaking, where the tool is used to (1) drive analysts to
gather information from identified sources, and (2) to otherwise
inform journalists in more “creative” follow-up activities such as
finding unusual story angles, or as a starting point for further
inquiry on a topic or sentiment reaction. The journalistic goal in
this use case is not so much to provide rigorous assessment and
decision support about hypotheses, but rather to spur the divergent
and creative generation of hypotheses, insights, and questions for
follow-up activities.
Let us consider a sensemaking model such as that of Pirolli and
Card [20], which consists of information foraging (collecting
from external data sources, shoeboxing, building an evidence file)
and sensemaking loops (scheme generation, hypothesis
generation, and final presentation). Vox Civitas seems to best
support aspects of hypothesis generation in the sensemaking loop,
as well as rapid transition back to the foraging loop in terms of
facilitating connecting to external data sources. This support was
assisted by the journalistically-motivated design that provided for
a sensemaking schema, thus organizing the information visually
according to cues expected to be of interest (topic, magnitude,
sentiment, uniqueness) to the target audience.
Vox Civitas obviates the initial phases of the sensemaking
process (data collection and schema generation) and allows
analysts to “skip” to divergent thinking and hypothesis generation
around the data. This divergent thinking can then connect back to
the foraging loop to collect data from external sources to support a
follow-up story. We believe that designers of similar visual
analytics systems may be able to extend this notion to other
domains of expert analysts by tailoring filtering and initial visual
scheme presentation in order to jump start the sensemaking
process at a high level of thinking.
The keywords component drove a substantial portion of the
keyword searching and filtering activity, albeit the utility of this
component for professional journalists may be less than for citizen
journalists or student journalists. Nonetheless, the component
raises the idea of driving different people to different parts of the
information space so as to jumpstart analysis along different
dimensions. For instance, we could imagine producing a keyword
timeline that varies depending on the news genre that someone is
interested in reporting on. Keywords for business, sports,
technology, or fashion would tend to drive analysts to think about
those term-sets in relation to the event.
Amar and Stasko’s [1] first suggestion for dealing with the
rationale gap (the gap “between perceiving a relationship and
actually being able to explain confidence in that relationship”) is
to expose uncertainty. In the design of our sentiment visualization
timeline we were forced to accept the limitations of the accuracy
of our automatic classifier and in doing so approached the
visualization of uncertainty a bit differently: we reduced the
precision of the visual representation commensurate with the
degree of uncertainty. More specifically, we chose to deal with the

121

depiction of uncertainty in the sentiment classifier by not giving
undue weight to the representation of comparative magnitude
between positive and negative aggregates. Of course, the user is
left with less information (and no accurate depiction of the
uncertainty in the classifier), but the interface is simpler, and users
are not lead to assume relationships that are inaccurate.
The evaluation of information visualization and visual analytics
systems has been acknowledged as one of the defining challenges
of the field. The approach we have taken, an online evaluation
which links concrete but open-ended analytic insights to user’s
interactions with the interface, is a promising evaluation
methodology, which if scaled up to include more users would lead
to an ability to run statistical tests between interaction patterns and
coded analytic outputs produced in ecologically valid situations.
8

CONCLUSION

Journalists turn to social media for story angles, leads and even to
obtain rough (yet immediate) proxies of public response. We
presented a tool to support media professionals in achieving these
goals by collecting, analyzing, aggregating and visualizing
content from one major broadcast event, the US presidential State
of the Union address of 2010. We have shown that journalists
(and others) effectively use the tool to generate insight about the
social media response to the event, and about the event itself.
In future work, we intend to generalize the application and
verify its utility for different types of broadcast events, from
entertainment (e.g., The Academy Awards) to televised breaking
news. We also intend to enhance and improve the automated
analysis tools, and in particular the sentiment analysis, which can
now only provide very general trends. We plan to extend the reach
and usefulness of the application by allowing users to illustrate a
point by embedding a selected visualization state in any webpage.
Finally, we believe there is significant space for computational
and technical innovation to more directly support core journalistic
tasks while adhering to the journalistic values of accuracy,
objectivity, and impartiality. For example, potential advances can
leverage network structure as well as content and activity volume
to extract metrics of expertise. In combination with sentiment
analysis, such metrics could help characterize sources in terms of
bias, and in turn help inform a journalist’s selection of sources to
better balance the reporting on a story. Developing such tools will
be key for future systems that report on all the news that’s fit to
tweet.
9

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Financial support for this work was provided through the CRA
and NSF as part of a Computing Innovation Fellowship (CIF197). Thanks to Hrishikesh Bakshi for help with dataset
collection. We would also like to thank Smaranda Muresan, Susan
Keith, and Steve Miller as well as journalists from the New York
Times and American Public Media for feedback on early versions
of our system interface and functionality.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]

122

Amar, R.A. and Stasko, J.T. Knowledge precepts for design and
evaluation of information visualizations. Visualization and Computer
Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 11 (4). 432-442.
Chin Jr., G., Kuchar, O.A. and Wolf, K.E., Exploring the Analytical
Processes of Intelligence Analysts. in Proceedings of CHI, (2009).
Clayman, S. Defining Moments, Presidential Debates, and the
Dynamics of Quotability. Journal of Communication, 45 (3).
Collins, C., Viégas, F. and Wattenberg, M., Parallel Tag Coulds to
Explore and Analyze Faceted Text Corpora. in IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), (2009).

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]
[26]

[27]

De Longueville, B., Smith, R. and Luraschi, G., "OMG, from here, I
can see the flames!": A Use Case of Mining Location Based Social
Networks to Acquire Spatio-temporal Data on Forest Fires. in
Workshop on Location Based Social Networks (LBSN), (2009).
Diakopoulos, N., Goldenberg, S. and Essa, I., Videolyzer: Quality
Analysis of Online Informational Video for Bloggers and Journalists.
in Proceedings of CHI, (2009).
Diakopoulos, N. and Shamma, D.A., Characterizing Debate
Performance via Aggregated Twitter Sentiment. in Proceedings of
CHI, (2010).
Fisher, D., Hoff, A., Robertson, G. and Hurst, M., Narratives: A
Visualization to Track Narrative Events as they Develop. in IEEE
Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST),
(2008).
Franklin, B., Hamer, M., Hanna, M., Kinsey, M. and Richardson,
J.E. Key Concepts in Journalism Studies. Sage Publications, 2005.
Gregory, M., Chinchor, N., Whitney, P., Carter, R., Hetzler, E. and
Turner, A., User-directed Sentiment Analysis: Visualizing the
Affective Content of Documents. in Proceedings of the Workshop on
Sentiment and Subjectivity in Text, (2006).
Harcup, T. and O'Neill, D. What is News? Galtung and Ruge
Revisited. Journalism Studies, 2 (2). 261-280.
Havre, S., Hetzler, E., Whitney, P. and Nowell, L. ThemeRiver:
Visualizing Thematic Changes in Large Document Collections.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8 (1).
Kang, Y.-a., Görg, C. and Stasko, J., Evaluating Visual Analytics
Systems for Investigative Analysis: Deriving Design Principles from
a Case Study. in IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology, (2009).
Kovach, B. and Rosenstiel, T. The Elements of Journalism: What
Newspeople Should Know and the Public Should Expect. Three
Rivers Press, 2007.
Leskovec, J., Backstrom, L. and Kleinberg, J., Meme-tracking and
the Dynamics of the News Cycle. in Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), (2009).
Manning, C., Raghavan, P. and Schütze, H. Introduction to
Information Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Nagar, N.A. The Loud Public: Users' Comments and the Online
News Media. Online Journalism Symposium, 2009.
Pang, B. and Lee, L. Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis, 2008.
Pioch, N. and Everett, J., POLESTAR: Collaborative Knowledge
Management and Sensemaking Tools for Intelligence Analysts. in
Conference Information and Knowledge Management, (2006).
Pirolli, P. and Schneiderman, B., The sensemaking process and
leverage points for analyst technology as identified through
cognitive task analysis. in International Conference on Intelligence
Analysis, (2005).
Riloff, E. and Wiebe, J., Learning Extraction Patterns for Subjective
Expressions. in Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), (2003).
Rose, S., Butner, S., Cowley, W., Gregory, M. and Walker, J.,
Describing Story Evolution from Dynamic Information Streams. in
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(VAST), (2009).
Schudson, M. The Sociology of News (Contemporary Sociology).
W. W. Norton & Company, 2003.
Shamma, D., Kennedy, L. and Churchill, E., Conversational
Shadows: Describing Live Media Events Using Short Messages. in
Proceedings of ICWSM, (2010).
Shamma, D.A., Kennedy, L. and Churchill, E. Tweet the debates
ACM Multimedia Workshop on Social Media (WSM), 2009.
Starbird, K., Palen, L., Hughes, A. and Vieweg, S., Chatter on The
Red: What Hazards Threat Reveals about the Social Life of
Microblogged Information. in Proceedings of CSCW, (2010).
Wanner, F., Rohrdantz, C., Mansmann, F., Oelke, D. and Keim, D.,
Visual Sentiment Analysis of RSS News Feeds Featuring the US
Presidential Election in 2008. in Workshop on Visual Interfaces to
the Social and Semantic Web, (2009).

