A Closer Look at Note Taking in the Co-located Collaborative Visual
Analytics Process
Narges Mahyar, Ali Sarvghad, and Melanie Tory
University of Victoria

Figure 1. Examples of note taking activities during our observational study. Sometimes note takers are disconnected from group activities.

ABSTRACT
This paper highlights the important role that record-keeping (i.e.
taking notes and saving charts) plays in collaborative data analysis
within the business domain. The discussion of record-keeping is
based on observations from a user study in which co-located
teams worked on collaborative visual analytics tasks using large
interactive wall and tabletop displays. Part of our findings is a
collaborative data analysis framework that encompasses note
taking as one of the main activities. We observed that recordkeeping was a critical activity within the analysis process. Based
on our observations, we characterize notes according to their
content, scope, and usage, and describe how they fit into a process
of collaborative data analysis. We then discuss suggestions for the
design of collaborative visual analytics tools.
KEYWORDS: note taking, recording, collaboration, tabletop, wall
display, history, provenance.
INDEX TERMS: H.5.2 User Interfaces: evaluation; H.5.3 Group
and Organization Interfaces: CSCW.
1

INTRODUCTION

We discuss the significance of record-keeping activities during
collaborative visual analytics on interactive surfaces. The need to
support note taking and chart saving activities arose from
observations during a user study that we conducted to examine
collaborative visual analytics in the business domain.
Visual analytics tools help users in the business domain to
interactively explore relationships and trends in large datasets.
e-mail: {nmahyar, asarv, mtory}@cs.uvic.ca
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

Business intelligence tools have become commonplace for single
users working on desktop machines. By contrast, business users
often need to work together to solve problems and make
decisions, particularly when each user has unique expertise or
responsibilities. However, only a few collaborative visualization
tools have been developed (e.g. [3, 9, 31, 32]). Many of these
systems, such as ManyEyes [32], were designed to allow casual
users to explore and share data on the web.
We focus on co-located work by small groups of known
collaborators, as illustrated in Figure 1. We hope to enhance
decision making by designing software that facilitates
collaborative data analysis. Using such tools on large screen wall
or tabletop displays is promising since they are known to support
collaborative work. Our work offers suggestions about how to
effectively design tools to support group analytics activities and
record-keeping around large screens. Previous research has
proposed record-keeping and provenance techniques for
individual analysts, as well as large screen visualization tools for
co-located groups. However, these two topics have not been
brought together to design provenance tools specifically for group
work. This emerged as a critical need during our observational
study, prompting us to analyze note taking and other recordkeeping activities in depth in order to establish design
requirements. Preliminary results of our study were presented in a
workshop paper [14]. Here we contribute a complete description
of the study, a much more detailed presentation of the findings,
and an in-depth analysis of record-keeping requirements for colocated data analysis.
In this paper, the term visual representation refers to artifacts
that display data, visualization refers to the process of creating
and editing visual representations, and visual analytics refers to
the larger process of using visual representations and other
sources of information to form insight and make decisions. Our
findings indicate that record-keeping is a pivotal activity that is
carried out throughout a data analysis session. We propose a
categorization of notes based on their content, scope and usage,
and discuss how record-keeping fits into the visual analytics

171

process. We then discuss potential ways in which record-keeping
activities could be integrated into collaborative visualization tools
and present some design suggestions.
2

METHODOLOGY

We designed a user study to examine the process of co-located
visual analytics in a business context. The study was exploratory
in nature rather than designed to test a specific hypothesis. Our
goal was to better understand collaborative activities and
challenges that might suggest improvements for collaborative
analytics tools. Groups of users answered focused business
questions and participated in a competitive business scenario.
Their work was supported by visualizations of sales data on large
wall and tabletop displays.
2.1
Task
Each group completed two tasks, both using a sample e-fashion
dataset from Explorer [24]. It contained information about sales of
garments in eight states of the United States for three consecutive
years. It consisted of 9 columns and 3273 rows of data.
Task 1 consisted of six focused questions designed in a way that
users could learn important features of the visualization software.
An example question was, “How does the 2003 margin compare
to previous years?” Task 1 was intended primarily to help users
become familiar with the system. In Task 2, participants were
asked to assume the roles of three managers (representing
different states) and together determine a marketing budget for the
next year. They were told that rationale for the budget should be
based on information within the data set.
We received advice from business professionals and faculty
members in designing our tasks. Because our participants did not
own the data and were not familiar with it, we were concerned
about their engagement. Hence, we decided to familiarize them
with focused questions first, and then made the scenario
competitive to engage all group members in the analysis process.
2.2
Participants
Twenty-seven student participants took part in our study, divided
into nine groups of three. To simulate common work situations,
all the group members were required to know each other. To
mitigate the possible impacts of using students, we mainly
selected participants (7 out 9 groups) who were familiar with the
business domain (advanced BCom or MBA students). Participants
of the other two groups were computer science graduate students.
All users had experience with some kind of data analysis software
such as Microsoft Excel.

Figure 2. Partial screen shot of Explorer, depicting a comparison
chart that visualizes margin, quantity sold, and sales revenue over
category, filtered based on state (Texas) and city (Dallas).

172

2.3
Apparatus and Software
Identical rear-projected Smart DViT (digital vision touch) screens
were used, one in a wall configuration and the other in a tabletop.
Both had a size of 61.2” x 34.4” (70” diagonal) and four HD
projectors to create a total resolution of 3840 x 2160.
During our pilot studies we noticed that participants took notes
on the margin or back of the instruction sheet; therefore, we
decided to provide them with pens. We put pens on a table nearby
and informed participants that they were there if needed.
We used “Explorer” [24] (Figure 2) as our visual analytics tool.
Explorer allows users to interactively browse data, including
selecting variables, filtering, and creating different types of charts.
The tool was maximized to fill the screen. The software supported
a single input but each user had their own stylus so that they did
not have to share a stylus to interact with the system. Note that
Explorer was developed as a single user application. We therefore
expected some problems when using it collaboratively. We hoped
that observing these problems would suggest changes that would
better support group work. Using existing software enabled us to
conduct preliminary requirements analysis without first designing
a collaborative system.
2.4
Procedure
We began with a 10-15 minute introduction to Explorer.
Participants then spent approximately 30 minutes on task 1 and 40
minutes on task 2. We offered an optional five-minute break
between the two tasks. After task 2, participants spent
approximately 10 minutes to summarize and write down their
results. We asked participants to create a report of their results at
the end of task 2 to justify their decisions. Following the
computer-based tasks, we conducted an open-ended interview.
Four groups used a tabletop display, four used a wall display
and the ninth group used both. This gave us an opportunity to
obtain users’ feedback on a variety of display configurations.
Participants were allowed to arrange themselves freely around the
displays, but generally had to stand to interact with them. Chairs
were available near the tabletop and two large sofas were
available near the wall display where they could sit if desired.
2.5
Data Analysis
We gathered data in the form of recorded videos, interviews,
participants’ notes, screen logs and observations made by a live
observer. In total ~630 minutes of video and screen logs were
captured (~70 per session) plus ~20 minute interviews per session.
We had two coders coded and analyzed the data together. We
re-coded and re-analyzed data iteratively to refine
characterizations of collaborative processes activities and notes. In
the first pass we created form “I” to record chart types, values
mapped to axes, filters and time stamps from captured screen logs.
Videos were used to fill in form “II” containing positions of
participants around displays. In form “III” we recorded activities,
events, and issues each participant was engaged in during the
analysis session. Our main observation in the first pass was the
importance and prevalence of record-keeping. Therefore, in the
second pass we recorded time stamp, purpose and analysis phase
in which participants took notes or saved charts. We refined forms
“I” and “III” to capture this information. In the third and forth
passes we extensively analyzed and grouped user notes based on
their usage, scope and content. Moreover, role of each group
member (i.e. note taker, software controller or observer) and role
changes were recorded and added to form “III” in pass four.
Cumulatively, we spent nearly 2 months on analyzing gathered
information. Interview material was used to support and explain
observations from the recorded material.

3

FINDINGS

Given that we ran an exploratory study, we did not have any
particular hypotheses. However, we had anticipated problems
such as incorrect software orientation and inadequate awareness
of other users’ work. We had planned to concentrate on these
challenges, but based on our observations we found note-taking a
more interesting and yet less discussed obstacle to investigate.
3.1
Participants’ Collaboration and Use of Software
Based on our observations, group members were actively engaged
in the analysis process. Their analysis activities mainly consisted
of mapping and filtering data for new charts and having
discussions about them. At any given time only one of the group
members was controlling the software, but they all participated in
the cognitive process of analyzing the data. At times, users took
turns to obtain information needed individually.
Analyzing users’ positions confirmed Tang et al.’s [30] results.
Participants positioned themselves close to application controls
and areas containing information such as a legend. At any time,
the user who was closest to the widgets controlled the application;
participants changed positions to allow one another to interact
with the system. One of the impacts of the software not being
designed for large screens was non-equal interaction. For instance,
usually one person had to stand at a far corner to see a chart’s
legend and read it to the group. This likely impacted the groups’
work style (i.e. led to closely coupled work with little parallelism)
though we cannot be sure of the magnitude and significance of
these effects. Since the software layout dictated positioning, we
did not examine position data in further depth.
Typically one user assumed the role of note taker for the group
and other users assumed the role of data analysts. We observed
this phenomenon in eight groups. In one group (group 7), all three
participants actively took notes. Unlike role divisions observed in
prior research [11], this assignment of roles was usually not
discussed explicitly. When we asked some groups about how they
came up with their task division, they said it was based on their
knowledge of each other’s abilities. Role assignments typically
remained the same throughout the work session, but in one
instance the note taker changed part way through. In some
sessions where one person was in charge of note taking, other
members also took notes for themselves separately even though it
meant that they had to stop working. For instance, participants of
group 7 completely stopped working seven times in Task 2
because they were all taking personal notes. This clearly
demonstrates that participants need to take notes individually and
separately from the group.
3.2
Phases and Activities
We noticed a similar analytics process among all of the groups
that we observed. We characterized groups’ actions at two levels:
high level phases and low level activities, as shown in Figure 3.
Because this characterization is grounded by the particular data
that we collected, we cannot generalize the phases and activities
to other data analysis situations. However, similarity to other
frameworks [1, 11, 16, 21] suggests that many aspects of this
process probably occur outside the context of our study.
We identified four high-level phases: problem definition,
visualization, analysis, and dissemination. As shown in Figure
3, there are activities common to all phases such as recordkeeping and validation, and activities unique to each phase. We
explain each phase and their exclusive activities below. Common
activities are explained separately.
Our findings confirmed what Isenberg et al. [11] stated about
the non-linear temporal order of activities. In our study, we

observed that visualization, analysis, and dissemination occurred
in a variety of orders. Visualization and analysis phases were
strongly interrelated and quite often, participants moved back and
forth between these two phases. With a much lower frequency,
participants in a dissemination phase sometimes returned to
previous phases (e.g., to create a chart to include in their report).
3.2.1
Phase I: Problem Definition
Users always started by building a common understanding. For
example, they parsed the written description of the problem to
build a shared understanding, or posed a new question to be
answered. Having a consensus on what problem they were solving
was the first step in working collaboratively towards a solution.
3.2.2
Phase II: Visualization
We use the term visualization to describe a group of activities
resulting in a visual artifact (i.e. a chart). Visualization consisted
of mapping data dimensions to visual attributes, filtering data, and
creating a visual artifact. For instance, in order to reveal the trend
of sales revenue in 2003, participants discovered that they needed
to examine values of sales revenue for all the quarters of 2003.
Then they mapped “measure” to sales revenue and “dimension” to
quarter. Next they chose a “correlation” chart to see the trend of
sales revenue for 2001 to 2003. Finally, they applied filtering so
that only 2003 data were shown.

PROBLEM DEFINITION

VISUALIZATION
Mapping
Filtering

Parsing/Posing
Question

Creating
Visual Artifact

Record-Keeping
&
Validation
Creating Report/
Presentation

DISSEMINATION

Mining Visual
Artifact
Making
Comparisons

Information
Searching
Calculate
Values
ANALYSIS

Figure 3. Activities we observed within problem definition,
visualization, analysis, and dissemination phases of collaborative
visual analytics.

3.2.3
Phase III: Analysis
Analysis was a complex phase that included activities such as:
Examining visual artifacts,
Making comparisons by referring to historical information
such as notes or saved visual artifacts,
Calculating derived values through mathematical or
statistical operations, and
Gathering information from external resources (i.e.
accumulating information that is not available in the dataset,
perhaps from the internet or another person).
The most common activity in this phase was examining charts.
Participants worked together to extract information from the chart.
In order to achieve this, they made comparisons, calculations or

173

searched for information through external resources. For instance,
based on a chart depicting sales revenue for four quarters of 2003
for California, one group decided that they needed to create
similar charts for 2002 and 2001; then they calculated sales
revenue averages for all three years and compared values. They
repeated the same activities for Texas and New York to make a
decision on budget allocation.
Usually the product of this phase was a decision, an answer to a
problem, or a hypothesis. In this phase, collaborators often carried
out substantial discussion and negotiation to reach a consensus.
3.2.4
Phase IV: Dissemination
In the dissemination phase, participants used products of the
analysis phase to generate a semi-formal report of their results.
Reporting and presenting are very common activities in business,
such as presenting results to the Chief Executive Officer. We
observed that while participants were preparing a report they went
back to previous phases. This usually happened when they were
validating report material or to provide extra content for the
report, such as a chart or value.
3.2.5
Validation
Validation activities occurred throughout the entire process, and
were concerned with ensuring the correctness of results and a
common understanding. In the problem definition phase,
participants verified a common understanding of the problem by
posing questions. In the visualization phase, they verified the
correctness of a chart by double-checking filtering and mapping
of variables. In the analysis phase, they validated the acceptability
of a budget allocation by re-examining charts. In the
dissemination phase, participants checked the content of their
final report to ensure they were presenting correct material.
3.2.6
Record-Keeping
Record-keeping refers to saving any type of information for
further referral and use. In our study this information took the
form of charts saved by participants or notes that were written
down. Participants took notes in the first two phases to define the
strategy, saved values and charts during the analysis and
dissemination phases, and referred to their notes and saved charts
to facilitate analysis and report writing in the dissemination phase.
3.3
Record-Keeping Strategies
Our observations of record-keeping strategies showed that groups
could be divided according to two main approaches: Five groups
relied heavily on taking notes and saved only a few charts. Two
groups saved many charts and took few notes. Two other groups
recorded nearly equal numbers of charts and notes. We only focus
on the two extreme approaches. Table 1 shows the number of note
taking and chart saving actions by each group. We provide
statistics only for task 2, because task 1 did not require users to
create a report and therefore very few charts were saved.
We believe that note taking and chart saving approaches can be
considered and studied as two different strategies for recordkeeping for further analytical use. Note that the prevalence of the
note taking strategy over chart saving may be an artifact of our
experiment since the process of saving charts was rather
cumbersome. Because Explorer was not built with record keeping
as a focus, chart saving was inconvenient and required users to
select menu items and choose between various options. Charts
could only be saved as non-interactive images.
Two groups selected chart saving as their main strategy for
keeping important information. One of the groups saved all the
charts that they created during task 2 and at the end they created a

174

separate word processing document where they put all the charts
side by side for further analysis. One of the participants of this
group said “I wish we could have all the charts on screen to see
them side by side” which implies that the tool used for analysis
should have provided them with this functionality. The other
group just saved a number of charts that they thought were more
important. At the end they opened charts one by one for further
analysis. Note that other groups saved charts as well, but less
often and mainly for use in their reports.
Participants reused the saved charts mainly for two purposes.
One was for creating a report at the end of the analysis session (7
groups) and the other was for further analysis of data towards end
of the analysis session, after creating several charts (2 groups,
shaded gray in Table 1). Groups who saved charts for the second
purpose saved a larger number of charts. We cannot exactly
pinpoint the criteria different groups used to agree on the
importance of a chart. Future work is needed to determine if there
are any factors that can predict whether a chart is important
enough to be saved. One factor that likely impacts the number of
charts that are saved is the complexity of charts that a group
creates. For instance, users could create a chart where several
variables are mapped onto one axis instead of creating separate
charts for each variable.
The chart saving strategy suggests that tools should enable
users to save important artifacts and reuse them (e.g. as a history).
History items may also reduce the number of notes that need to be
taken since many findings are already recorded in the data
representations. We noticed that the overall amount of note
content taken by participants in group 2 was less than the other
groups. Based on our analysis of their activities, we attribute this
to the fact that group 2 saved a lot of charts as image files. Note
that these users still took some personal notes, so the ability to
save charts does not eradicate the need to take notes. It seems that
even the most sophisticated history mechanism is incomplete if it
does not provide users with the ability to take notes.
Table 1. Number of note taking and chart saving actions by each
group during task 2. Shaded groups relied heavily on saved charts
for analysis.

Group
Notes
Charts
3.4

1
8
≥4

2
4
22

3
7
≥8

4
7
12

5
20
3

6
8
≥8

7
11
7

8
9
2

9
6
2

Characterization of Note Taking Activities

3.4.1
Note’s Content
Based on our analysis of the notes taken by participants, we break
down a note’s high-level content into findings and cues. Findings
are recorded results of mathematical or statistical operations (e.g.
27% higher sales in New York, California’s revenue is $60000),
observations (e.g. Men’s wear sales are higher than women’s wear
in a graph) and decisions or outcomes of the analysis process (e.g.
allocating more budget to Texas).
A cue is anything noted by the user that is not directly extracted
from a visual representation. For instance, users in our study
wrote their interpretations of the questions in a concise form for
themselves, or they drew circles around keywords in tasks’
questions. Cues could be in the form of to-do lists or questions to
be asked /answered later on. For instance, one participant who had
assumed the role of California’s manager noted “t-shirts” as
reminder to look into California’s sales of t-shirts later on. With
respect to the visual analytics process described earlier, we
observed that findings were mostly recorded during the analysis
phase while cues were mostly taken during visualization.

Findings were also sometimes stored as saved charts rather than
written notes. We noticed that in task 1 (in which most users were
not saving charts), the amount of note taking was higher than in
task 2 (in which users were saving charts). Findings were most
commonly recorded in the analysis phase and cues in nearly all
phases.
At a lower level, notes typically contained one or more of the
following elements: numbers (e.g. data values), drawings (e.g.
flags, charts), text (e.g. questions, hypotheses, reminders), and
symbols (e.g. %, $). In addition to ordinary use of symbols (such
as $ for monetary values), participants used symbols to accelerate
the note taking process and thereby decrease distraction from the
main task. For instance, they used ↑ symbol to indicate the
increase of a value such as revenue.
3.4.2
Notes’ Scope
Based on the way that notes were shared we divide them into
group and personal notes. We consider a note to be a personal
note when it is taken for individual use and a group note when the
writer intends to share it with the group. Personal notes were not
necessarily private; in some cases, they were shared. For instance,
during task 2, participants shared personal notes to justify the
amount of the budget they were demanding for their state.
We noticed that the nature of the problem influenced the scope
of notes. During task 1 (which had a cooperative nature), usually a
participant took notes and shared them with other group members.
In contrast, in task 2 (which had a competitive nature),
participants tended to take notes individually during the analysis
phase and then referred to their notes during budget negotiations.
Figure 4 shows a group note. It has been nicely formatted and
contains calculated values. This was used as a summary to help
decide budget allocation. The tabular data made the analysis task
easier by saving important information; it seemed more
convenient and efficient to record this information than to revisit
previously created charts. The same person who was in charge of
note taking also created the final report.

Figure 4. A note that was taken for group use. It is nicely structured
and is comprised of information for all three rivaling participants.

In contrast, figure 5 shows notes taken by three participants of a
group. It can be clearly seen that the notes are less structured and
every participant just took notes of what they found important to
themselves (e.g., notes about their own state).
In general, group notes were more carefully organized than
personal notes, but this varied depending on the individual's note
taking style. Personal notes were not always organized or written
legibly or in a way that everybody could understand them at a
glance. Sometimes authors of personal notes used abbreviations or
symbols that could be interpreted only by the note taker. Possibly
they were writing as fast as possible to minimize distraction, since
taking notes was not their primary focus.

3.4.3
Notes’ Usage
Notes were used for a variety of different purposes, most
commonly to further analyze findings and facilitate the problem
solving process (analysis phase), validate or remind the person of
something (all phases), and create the final report (dissemination
phase). Users referred to notes mainly during the analysis phase.
Saved values, calculated percentages, drawn charts and other
information helped users to make comparisons and reach
decisions. Notes also facilitated the problem solving process by
recording the direction and sequence of the steps taken. This
could help users to more easily determine the next step. For
example, by recording the names of the charts created or values
calculated or observed, participants could determine the
completeness level of the task (e.g., what and how many more
charts were to be created). Figure 6 shows an example of recorded
information about steps taken and information gathered. It was
filled in gradually as information was found in various charts. The
figure shows the completed version, indicating that participants
have finished their calculations for all three states.

Figure 5. Three personal notes taken by participants in one group.
This group did not have a defined note taker.

3.5
Awareness with Respect to Note Taking
We noticed that the manual note taking process impacted
awareness among group members. This can be seen in Figure 1,
where note takers are disconnected from the other team members.
This is not necessarily unproductive, but it is possible that the tool
design forced this work style that might not be always desirable.
Sometimes participants lost a sense of what others were doing
while they were taking notes, and then had to catch up. For
example, the person who took the note in figure 4 was assigned

175

the role of note taker. He was sitting most of the time observing
others (who were exploring data and creating visualizations). He
therefore was unable to work directly with the application a lot of
the time. Although this division of roles may not have been
unproductive for the group, it did deprive one group member of
the opportunity to participate equally in analysis activities.

Figure 6. A participant organized information in a tabular format.
This note shows that the group has calculated values for all four
quarters and for all three states.

3.6
Wall Display versus Tabletop
In line with the literature [23], our study revealed that a wall
display could support larger groups of people and provide a
common view for presentations. On the other hand, the interactive
tabletop display offers potential for supporting formal and
informal collaborative activities, such as planning, designing, and
organizing. Most of the 8 groups working on only one type of
display mentioned that they preferred a wall display for audiencebased situations like presentation and a tabletop display for more
collaborative situations. The ninth group who used both displays
expressed similar preference towards wall and tabletop displays.
With regards to note taking, we observed that a note taker of a
group working on the wall display was more disconnected from
the group. This was partly because the note taker usually had to sit
or lean on a surface to take notes. In addition, often other users
obscured the screen by standing in front of it, so it was difficult
for the note taker to keep track of what was happening on the
screen. This was a less significant issue with the tabletop because
the note taker could stand side by side with the others.
4

RELATED WORK

First, we present work that addresses the collaborative visual
analytics process and requirements. We then discuss related work
that specifically highlights the importance of history mechanisms
and note taking during the course of analysis.
4.1
Collaborative Visual Analytic Process
While substantial research has been devoted to computer
supported cooperative work (CSCW) in general, collaborative
visual analytics is still under explored due to its unique
challenges. Researchers have identified the need for very flexible
tools [11, 22, 26]. This includes flexibility to change ordering of
activities, work styles (from closely coupled to independent), role
assignments, and workspace organization [10, 11]. We also
observed that activities did not occur in any consistent order,
confirming that flexibility is critical.
Several studies have examined how users analyze data to
characterize the processes and activities involved (e.g. [4]). More
relevant to our work are studies that consider analytic processes of

176

groups, by using software supporting collaborative work [16,
21],or by using paper-based tasks [11, 22]. Findings of previous
studies, regardless of whether the tasks were paper-based or
software-based, resulted in similar lists of activities. For instance,
Mark et al. [16] identified processes of parsing the question,
mapping variables, finding or validating a visual representation,
and validating the entire analytical process. Isenberg et al. [11]
identified processes of browsing, parsing, discussing collaboration
style, establishing task strategy, clarification, selecting, operating
and validating. These lists of activities bear strong resemblance to
our own characterization. For instance, our first phase “problem
definition” has been identified in previous work as “parsing” [11,
16] or “problem interpretation” [21].
In contrast to previous work, our framework captures the whole
process of a visual analytics session (as opposed to say, simply the
visualization or analysis phase) and breaks each phase down into
lower level activities. We believe this two-level structure provides
a useful way to think about the analysis process. We also highlight
record-keeping as a critical activity during all phases. Although
record-keeping has been previously mentioned as a relevant action
[1, 7, 28], its importance may have been underrepresented in
previous frameworks describing collaborative analytics processes.
4.2
Record-keeping
Many researchers have mentioned advantages of history tools and
their importance [6, 18, 19, 20, 23]. History tools enable users to
review, revisit and retrieve prior states [28]. They can also be also
used to create a report or presentation following analysis [6].
The ability to add metadata (annotation, notes) to a visual
representation has also been recommended [6, 8, 9] and
implemented [2, 7, 13, 29], as it is often difficult for data analysts
to remember previous findings and cues and reuse them
efficiently [17]. Both textual and graphical annotation of
visualizations may be necessary. Heer et al. [6] mentioned the
importance of annotations for distributed settings. Moreover,
previous research shows that notes “act as a bridge between the
analyses executed in the system and [a user’s] cognitive process”
[29]. Shrinivasan et al. [29] take annotation a step further by
automatically recommending related notes based on the current
analysis context. Our findings highlight note taking as a pivotal
activity during the course of analysis, emphasizing the importance
of including such provenance tools in visual analytics systems.
We emphasize that the vast majority of history / provenance
tools have focused on single-user systems. Although previous
work has postulated that history tools may be even more
important for collaborative work [5, 15], little guidance is
available to help build such tools effectively. Extending history
mechanisms to represent activities of multiple co-located users is
non-trivial due to issues of awareness, disruption, organization,
and so on. In a previous workshop paper [25], we hypothesized
how history tools might need to change to support multiple users.
In the next section, we use evidence from our observational study
to propose more specific design guidelines and considerations.
5

DISCUSSION

5.1
A Clear Need for Record-Keeping Support
Our main result is the importance of recording findings and cues
(as notes or saved charts). Although some previous research [7, 8,
9] has suggested allowing annotation of visualizations, our study
highlighted the importance of note taking as a critical activity.
Taking and using notes was a frequent activity in all phases of the
collaborative decision making process. Lack of support for
record-keeping had negative consequences such as disruption to

workflow and decreased awareness of group activity. The
importance and difficulty of record-keeping was somewhat
unexpected, as we did not tell participants that they should take
notes and expected the major bottleneck to be interaction
challenges with the single-user software. This highlights the need
to build explicit record-keeping support into collaborative
visualization tools. Recently, some research [13, 29] has
demonstrated how this can be done for single users, but work
remains to extend this idea to multi-user systems.
5.2
Impact of Task Nature on Note Taking
Our study further illustrated that the nature of the task affects both
the process of collaboration and the division of workspace. Task
1, which involved focused questions, encouraged a highlycoupled collaborative style of work, while task 2, which required
competition, led to a loosely-coupled collaborative work style. In
the interviews, most of our participants said that they would have
preferred to explore information for task 2 individually and then
later share their results. As a result, notes taken in task 1 were
public, while notes taken in task 2 had a combination of public
and private scopes. This finding emphasizes the need to support
both individual and jointly coupled activities as previously
suggested [11, 12, 22, 27]. More importantly for us, it suggests
that both group and individual record-keeping is necessary. An
effective collaborative analytics system should provide both
public and private records that are easy to distinguish, and enable
users to seamlessly switch between them.
5.3
Suggestions to Support Note Taking
How to design effective record-keeping functionality for colocated work is not entirely clear. Here we offer some
suggestions, which vary depending on the nature of the
collaboration, whether or not the record involves data (or is linked
to data), and whether the note is taken for group or personal use.
Though these suggestions are based on the results obtained in our
study, due to use of students as participants, the number of
participants, constraints of the software and other limiting factors,
research is needed to further assess these suggestions.
5.3.1
Integration Level for Notes and Saved Artifacts
Should notes be integrated with a history mechanism (i.e. along
with saved artifacts and system states) or kept as a separate
“notebook”? Our analysis suggests that either answer would be
too simplistic. Some notes, especially annotations and other notes
of findings, have a clear link to an artifact that helped to form the
insight. For example, a user might save a chart of revenue across
different states, note that revenue is highest in New York, or write
a reminder to later break down the New York revenue data by
year and quarter. In these cases, the record is either a particular
representation of data itself, or can be linked to one. Retaining this
link and enabling the user to return to the artifact and system state
would have a clear benefit. However, notes also served as cues
(e.g. reminders) or collected together findings from a variety of
sources; in these situations a notebook style is more relevant.
As a result, we suggest a hybrid model in which notes can be
collected together in notebook pages but parts of a note could link
to related artifacts, which might be stored in a chronological
history. This would ensure that users could easily refer to source
data when reviewing any given note. Artifacts could similarly link
to the notes associated with them, and might also be directly
annotated with drawings or text. We expect that such functionality
would also simplify the task of recording findings. For instance,
instead of writing down “Men’s wear has higher sales than
women’s wear”, the user could simply circle the male bar in a bar
chart showing sales broken down by gender.

Such notes could be captured on the shared display within
specialized notebook containers that ideally would support both
text and diagrams. Furthermore, these could be treated by the
system as if they were artifacts such as charts. For example, they
could potentially be added to a chronological history in the same
way that a chart would be added. This would capture the
development of the note over time, making it easier to understand
the process that was followed. This might be particularly useful
for helping a novice learn the process that an expert analyst
followed, or to help an analyst who is new to the project
understand what work was done by previous analysts. Finally,
because the number of notes and data artifacts can grow large
quite quickly, we believe that searching and filtering both types of
objects will be important.
5.3.2
Notes for group versus individual use
Group notes could take the form of a shared history/ notebook,
plus shared note containers or papers as described above. To keep
track of who did what, they might be spatially organized or colour
coded by user. Individual notes present a greater problem because
users may wish to keep their notes private or may want to avoid
the burden of viewing all other users’ notes. At the same time,
individual notes occasionally need to be shared. One possibility is
to provide private space within a shared display, if there is
sufficient screen real-estate and if the notes are not confidential.
Another alternative is to provide each user with a private display
such as a tablet or digital paper. These could be linked to the
common display to enable sharing. Ordinary paper notes or an
unlinked private display are also viable options, but are more
difficult to share with several people at once.
5.3.3
Record-keeping for different types of collaboration
We observed tightly coupled work, where a shared history /
notebook would probably suffice. For loosely coupled work,
participants may need to corroborate and combine the outcomes
of their individual work. In this case, it may be better to give each
person personal space to work independently, but also allow
sharing. Individual notes and history items that could later be
merged together could allow each user to track their individual
work and then later compare it to the work of others. Note that
although they allow private work, individual desktops may not be
the best solution here because they make sharing cumbersome.
5.4
Generalizability
Our results are subject to some caveats. We chose to focus on the
business domain, so our users were primarily business students.
We suspect that collaborative use of visualization tools will be
similar for other group decision-making tasks, but it is possible
that we observed some peculiarities unique to business. Secondly,
we chose to utilize existing visualization software, to ensure that
users could work with interactive and customizable
representations of data. However, our users’ behaviour may have
been influenced by the available technology, especially their
closely coupled work style and the tendency of most groups to
write notes rather than save charts. Also, although we triangulated
our results, additional coders may have led to higher reliability.
Finally, we examined a group size of three. Collaborative
processes are likely to differ for larger group or pairs.
6

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

We characterized phases and activities involved in collaborative
visual analytics for co-located groups. We also identified recordkeeping as a process that is intensively used by data analysts. We
characterized notes according to whether they were findings or
cues, and whether their scope was for personal or group use. We

177

also described how notes were taken and used within four
identified phases of data analysis. These analyses enabled us to
offer numerous suggestions of how to better support recordkeeping activities within visual analytics tools.
Additional studies are required to answer questions about how
exactly note taking support should be provided in collaborative
visualization systems. For instance, it is still unclear how we can
best support both individual and group note taking activities.
Another important consideration is the form of input/s to be used
for note taking in a shared display situation. Further studies
should also be conducted in other application domains. For
instance, in some disciplines, records of decisions need to be kept
for legal purposes and may therefore need to be more formal and
detailed. Further research is needed to investigate how these
diverse needs can be best supported within visual analytics tools.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank SAP and the Natural Sciences and Research Council of
Canada (NSERC) for funding this research.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, Readings In
Information Visualization: Using Vision To Think. Morgan
Kauffman publishers, Inc., San Francisco, USA, 1999.
[2] S. E. Ellis, and D.P. Groth. A collaborative annotation system for
data visualization. Proc. Working Conference on Advanced Visual
interfaces, AVI '04. ACM, New York, NY, pp. 411-414, 2004.
[3] C. Forlines, A. Esenther, C. Shen, D. Wigdor, and K. Ryall. MultiUser, Multi-Display Interaction with a Single-User, Single-Display
Geospatial Application, Proc. ACM Symp. User interface Software
and Technology, ACM, New York, NY, pp. 273-276, 2006.
[4] D. Gotz and M.X. Zhou. Characterizing users' visual analytic activity
for insight provenance. Information Visualization, vol. 8, Palgrave
Macmillan, pp. 42-55, 2009.
[5] J. Heer, F. van Ham, S. Carpendale, C. Weaver, and P. Isenberg.
Creation and collaboration: engaging new audiences for information
visualization. In A. Kerren et al., eds. Information Visualization,
LNCS 4950, Springer Berlin, pp. 92–133, 2008.
[6] J. Heer, J. Mackinlay, C. Stolte, and M. Agrawala. Graphical
Histories for Visualization: Supporting Analysis. Communication,
and Evaluation, IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics,
vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1189-1196, Nov. 2008,
[7] J. Heer, F.B.Viegas, and M. Wattenberg. Voyagers and voyeurs:
Supporting asynchronous collaborative visualization. Commun.
ACM, pp. 87-97, 2009.
[8] T. Isenberg, P. Neumann, S. Carpendale, S. Nix, and S. Greenberg,
Interactive Annotations on Large, High-Resolution Information
Displays. Proc. 2006 Confe. Compendium of IEEE VIS, IEEE
Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, pp. 124–125, 2006.
[9] P. Isenberg, and S. Carpendale, “Interactive Tree Comparison for
Co-located Collaborative Information Visualization”, IEEE TVCG,
vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 1232–1239, 2007.
[10] P. Isenberg and D. Fisher, “Collaborative Brushing and Linking for
Co-located Visual Analytics of Document Collections”, Proc.
EuroVis, Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1031–1038,
June 2009.
[11] P. Isenberg, A. Tang, and S. Carpendale. An Exploratory Study of
Visual Information Analysis. Proc. CHI 2008, ACM, New York,
NY, pp. 1217-1226, 2008.
[12] T. Jankun-Kelly, K.-L. Ma, and M. Gertz. A Model and Framework
for Visualization Exploration. IEEE Trans. Visualization and
Computer Graphics, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 357–369, 2007.
[13] N. Kadivar, V. Chen, D. Dunsmuir, E. Lee, C. Qian, J. Dill, C.
Shaw, and R. Woodbury. Capturing and supporting the analysis
process. Proc. IEEE VAST 2009, pp. 131-138, 2009.

178

[14] N. Mahyar, A. Sarvghad, and M. Tory, Roles of Notes in Co-located
Collaborative Visualization, Proc. Workshop on Collaborative
Visualization on Interactive Surfaces (CoVIS 2009, October 11,
2009, Atlantic City, USA), pp.13-16.
[15] G. Mark, K. Carpenter, and A. Kobsa. A Model of Synchronous
Collaborative Information Visualization. Proc. 7th Intl Conf.
Information Visualization, IV. IEEE Computer Society, Washington,
DC, 373, 2003.
[16] G. Mark, and A. Kobsa. The Effects of Collaboration and System
Transparency on CIVE Usage: An Empirical Study and Model.
Presence: Teleoper. Virtual Environ, vol. 14, no. 1, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp. 60–80, 2005.
[17] C.C. Marshall. Work Practices Study: Analysts and Notetaking.
Unpublished report, May 1990.
[18] C. Meng, M. Yasue, A. Imamiya, and X. Mao. Visualizing Histories
for Selective Undo and Redo, Proc. 3rd Asian Pacific Computer and
Human Interaction, APCHI. IEEE Computer Society, Washington,
DC, 459, 1998.
[19] K. O'Hara, and A. Sellen. A comparison of reading paper and on-line
documents. Proc. CHI, ACM, New York, NY, pp. 335-342, 1997.
[20] T. Oinn, M. Addis, J. Ferris, D. Marvin, M. Senger, M. Greenwood,
T. Carver, K. Glover., M.R. Pocock, A. Wipat, and P. Li. Taverna: a
tool for the composition and enactment of bioinformatics workflows.
Bioinformatics 2004, vol. 20, pp. 3045-3054, 2004.
[21] K.S. Park, A. Kapoor, and J. Leigh. Lessons Learned from
Employing Multiple Perspectives In a Collaborative Virtual
Environment for Visualizing Scientific Data. Proc. CVE 2000,
ACM, New York, NY, pp. 73–82, 2000.
[22] A. Robinson. Collaborative Synthesis of Visual Analytic Results.
Proc. IEEE VAST 2008, pp. 67-74, 2008.
[23] Y. Rogers and S. Lindley. Collaborating around large interactive
displays: Which way is best to meet?. Interacting with Computers,
vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1133–1152, 2004.
[24] SAP
Business
Objects,
Explorer
in
the
cloud,
https://create.ondemand.com/explorer.
[25] A. Sarvghad, N. Mahyar, and M. Tory, History Tools for
Collaborative Visualization, Proc. Workshop on Collaborative
Visualization on Interactive Surfaces (CoVIS 2009, October 11,
2009, Atlantic City, USA), pp.21-23.
[26] S. D. Scott, K. D. Grant, and R. L. Mandryk. System guidelines for
co-located collaborative work on a tabletop display. Proc.
ECSCW’03, K. Kuutti et al., Eds. ECSCW. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Norwell, MA, pp. 159–178, 2003.
[27] S.D. Scott, M.S.T. Carpendale, and K.M. Inkpen. Territoriality in
collaborative tabletop workspaces. Proc. CSCW, ACM, New York,
NY, pp. 294-303, 2004.
[28] B. Shneiderman. The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type Taxonomy
for Information Visualizations. Proc. IEEE Visual Languages, IEEE
Computer Society, Washington, DC, 1996.
[29] Y.B. Shrinivasan, D. Gotz, J. Lu. Connecting the Dots in Visual
Analysis. IEEE VAST, pp. 123-130, October 2009.
[30] A. Tang, M. Tory, B. Po, P. Neumann, S. Carpendale, Collaborative
Coupling over Tabletop Displays. Proc. the Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’06), ACM Press, New York,
pp. 1181–1290, 2006.
[31] F. Vernier, N. Lesh, C. Shen. Visualization Techniques for Circular
Tabletop Interfaces. Proc. Advanced Visual Interfaces, ACM, New
York, NY, pp. 257-265, 2002.
[32] F.B. Viegas, M. Wattenberg, F. van Ham, J. Kriss, and M. McKeon.
ManyEyes: a Site for Visualization at Internet Scale. Proc. IEEE
Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 13, no. 6, pp.
1121-1128, 2007.
[33] J.S. Vitter. US\&R: A New Framework for Redoing, SIGPLAN Not.
vol. 19, no. 5, ACM, NY, USA, pp. 168-176, 1984.

