Comparing Different Levels of Interaction Constraints for Deriving Visual
Problem Isomorphs
Wenwen Dou∗

Caroline Ziemkiewicz∗
William Ribarsky∗

Lane Harrison∗
Xiaoyu Wang∗

Dong Hyun Jeong∗
Remco Chang∗†

University of North Carolina at Charlotte∗

A BSTRACT
Interaction and manual manipulation have been shown in the cognitive science literature to play a critical role in problem solving.
Given different types of interactions or constraints on interactions,
a problem can appear to have different degrees of difficulty. While
this relationship between interaction and problem solving has been
well studied in the cognitive science literatures, the visual analytics
community has yet to exploit this understanding for analytical problem solving. In this paper, we hypothesize that constraints on interactions and constraints encoded in visual representations can lead to
strategies of varying effectiveness during problem solving. To test
our hypothesis, we conducted a user study in which participants
were given different levels of interaction constraints when solving
a simple math game called Number Scrabble. Number Scrabble is
known to have an optimal visual problem isomorph, and the goal
of this study is to learn if and how the participants could derive the
isomorph and to analyze the strategies that the participants utilize in
solving the problem. Our results indicate that constraints on interactions do affect problem solving, and that while the optimal visual
isomorph is difficult to derive, certain interaction constraints can
lead to a higher chance of deriving the isomorph.
Keywords: Interaction, Visual Isomorph, Problem Solving
1

I NTRODUCTION

In his insightful keynote address to the EuroVis 2009 conference,
Pat Hanrahan discussed how visualization plays a role as a system
of thought [3]. One remarkable topic of his talk is the use of visual problem isomorphs to make complex problem solving seem
simple and often trivial. The examples Dr. Hanrahan provided
demonstrated the idea that once the right visual representation of
the problem isomorph is found, solving that problem can be as simple as looking at the visual representation and identifying the right
answer immediately. Of particular interest to us is the example of
using a “magic square” as a visual isomorph to the Number Scrabble game (which is discussed further in section 2.1). It is clear that
by transforming the Number Scrabble game into a magic square,
this relatively difficult game of finding and adding multiple numbers becomes as simple as playing a game of tic-tac-toe.
This example is compelling because the process of encouraging
a user to discover a useful visual isomorph for a problem can be
thought of as the primary goal of visualization. However, the obvious question is, how does someone find the right visual isomorph
to a problem? Unfortunately, the answer to this question is not trivial or well-understood. Building on work in cognitive science and
diagrammatic reasoning [8], we argue that helping a user find a useful visual isomorph is not just a matter of presenting an appropriate
∗ e-mail:{wdou1, caziemki, ltharri1, dhjeong, rryan5, ribarsky, xwang25,
rchang}@uncc.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 24 - 29, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
978-1-4244-9487-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

Roxanne Ryan∗

Tufts University†

visual representation. Rather, people can best discover visual solutions to problems through interaction with visual representations.
Unfortunately, while visualization researchers understand how to
design visualizations to represent data, they have not exploited the
relationship between interaction and problem solving to the same
extent as cognitive scientists.
The goal of the research presented in this paper is therefore to
bridge the gap between the findings in the cognitive science community and the visualization community. Specifically, we acknowledge research in the cognitive science community showing that interaction plays a critical role in problem solving [8]. However,
given our emphasis on visualization, we do not simply seek to corroborate their existing findings. Instead, our interest lies at the intersection of these two fields where we look to understand how using
interaction to solve problems can lead to the identification of potential visual isomorphs.
First we extend the notion that interaction generally facilitates
problem solving. However, we further hypothesize that interactions with different constraints and amount of encoded information will lead to different solutions to the problem. In addition, we
hypothesize that during the problem-solving process, the different
constraints on interaction will lead to different types of isomorphs,
both visual and non-visual. Finally, we hypothesize that these different types of isomorphs have varying degrees of effectiveness in
solving the problem, which can be measured quantitatively.
To test our hypotheses, we conducted a user study in which 117
participants were given different types of interaction constraints
while developing strategies for the Number Scrabble game. We
chose to use the Number Scrabble problem because it is selfcontained and is known to have an optimal visual problem isomorph
in the form of the magic square [17]. The participants’ accuracy
and time in playing the game against a computer were logged and
tracked, and their strategizing session video-recorded. Based on the
data obtained from the study, we find that: (1) different constraints
on interactions do affect the participants’ performance while playing the game, (2) with more constraints, the participant has a higher
chance to derive the optimal visual isomorph (the magic square),
and finally, while not all participants were able to derive the optimal visual isomorph, (3) using visual isomorphs in general leads to
better performance than using non-visual isomorphs.
We begin by reviewing related work on interaction and problem
isomorphs in the context of problem solving. Next, we present our
experiment exploring the effect of interaction constraints on deriving visual problem isomorphs. We then discuss the implications of
our experimental results and limitations of the study.
2

R ELATED W ORK

Our conception of visualization as providing externalizations for
problem solving draws on work in visualization theory as well as
cognitive science. In particular, we study how visual representations can provide useful isomorphs of the information they visualize. Two problems or representations are isomorphic if they are
informationally equivalent but present that information in different

195

structures. As an example, we use the Number Scrabble problem
and its isomorphic magic square representation.
2.1

The Number Scrabble problem

The original Number Scrabble [17] is a game played by two people
with nine cards: ace through nine. The cards are placed in a row,
face up. The players draw alternately, one at a time, selecting any
one of the unselected cards. The objective of the game is for a
player to get three cards which add up to 15 before his opponent
does. If all nine cards have been drawn without either player having
a combination that adds up to 15, the game is a draw.
The main reason we chose to use the Number Scrabble game
is that there is a known visual isomorph of the problem called the
“magic square” (figure 1). Since the magic square visually represents all possible combinations of three numbers that can be added
up to 15 in a succinct manner, it can significantly help a player to
perform well at the game. In other words, once this visual isomorph is identified, the Number Scrabble problem is turned into a
much simpler tic-tac-toe game, which is played by two players who
take turns marking the spaces in a 3*3 grid. The number scrabble
game represents a large number of well-defined problems that show
how visual isomorphs can make evident what was previously true
but obscure [17].

Figure 1: 3x3 magic square

2.2

Isomorphs and diagrammatic reasoning

Simon defined problem isomorphs as problems whose solutions and
moves can be placed in one-to-one relation with the solutions and
moves of the given problem [17]. The key to isomorphism is that
even when two representations contain the same information, they
can still provide very different sets of operations for accessing and
inferring about that information, which can make a given problem
easier or harder to solve [13]. In our example, the magic square and
number scrabble are isomorphs of the same problem in that they
both contain all the information needed to play the game. However,
in number scrabble, the operations provided to the player to access
important information about the game—such as whether your cards
contain a winning combination—are mathematical. In the magic
square case, that information is contained in a visual operation:
seeing whether the cards form a line across the magic square grid.
Since the brain processes such visual operations faster than mathematical ones, the visual isomorph is more efficient in this case.
The idea that visual representations make certain operations
more efficient to perform is at the core of the theory of diagrammatic reasoning [2, 13]. However, efficiency is not the only measure of interest in visualization; our goal is to make information not
just accessible, but understandable. The distinction between these
goals is highlighted by Carroll et al. [1], who had participants solve
a design problem presented as one of two isomorphs: a spatial arrangement problem and a temporal scheduling problem. The spatial
isomorph was easier and faster for participants to solve and led to
fewer failures to understand the problem. That is, in the temporal
case there were several participants whose solutions did not follow the requirements of the task. Interestingly, when participants in
both cases were provided a simple graphical representation (a grid)
in which to work on their solution, the temporal case was as easy

196

to solve as the spatial one, but participants in the temporal case remained more likely to fail to understand the problem requirements.
The authors took this to mean that appropriate graphical representations can make problems easier to solve, but not necessarily easier
to understand.
Another way to interpret this is that there is more to designing a
visual isomorph than making information more efficient to access.
Much of the power of visual representations comes from how they
set constraints on interpretation and reasoning. Constraints inherent in visual isomorphs can encode constraints on the information
they represent, leading to a more direct preservation of information structure [15]. As Stenning and Oberlander [18] argue, these
constraints inherent to visual representations help to meaningfully
restrict the number and kinds of inferences that can be made about
a problem, focusing processing power on only valid cases. In this
way, visual isomorphs not only can make operations more efficient,
but can also model the constraints of a problem directly. This can
affect the difficulty of solving a problem by reducing the cognitive
load of remembering rules [12] or by encouraging different types
of strategies [4].
2.3

Interaction and problem solving

While visual representations can aid problem solving significantly
on their own, they gain even more power to model a problem when
interaction is introduced. Interaction is increasingly seen as central
to the process of reasoning with visualization [14, 16, 20]. Lending
weight to the intuition that interaction improves reasoning, Hundhausen et. al [5] found that interacting with an algorithm visualization produces better understanding than viewing an equivalent
animation.
We use the term “interaction” in the broad sense defined by Yi
et al.: “the dialogue between the user and the system as the user
explores the data set to uncover insights” [21]. In this sense, the
relationship between interaction and problem solving has been the
subject of much research by cognitive scientists in the field of distributed cognition [6]. In particular, David Kirsh has argued extensively that projection and interaction with external representations are fundamental to human reasoning [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. Kirsh
points to the pervasive use of external representations and interaction with the world in everyday problem solving, and identifies several functions performed by interaction in the reasoning process [8].
Of these, most relevant to our work is reformulation, or the ability
to restate ideas. Kirsh sees reformulation as a process that is frequently too complex to perform entirely in memory, and so is often
managed with external tools. Since reformulation is closely related
to identifying different problem isomorphs, we argue that this process can also be made easier through certain types of interaction.
3

H YPOTHESES

Our research objective is to investigate the question of how constraints on interaction affect problem solving through the derivation of visual isomorphs. We propose that in developing a strategy
for playing a game like Number Scrabble, participants will tend to
derive an isomorph for the problem that is easier for them to use
than the representation in the original game, and that the availability of different levels of interaction while strategizing will lead to
different types of isomorphs. If this is the case, it can help to clarify the relationship between interaction with visual representations
and reasoning. To what extent does the nature of a visual representation, and the type of interactions a user is allowed to perform
upon it, affect the kind of strategy that user develops for solving a
problem?
We therefore designed a study based on the aforementioned
Number Scrabble game due to its known optimal visual isomorph,
the magic square. In our study, we developed 5 different interaction
conditions, ranging from free-form to very restrictive, and studied

Figure 2: Number scrabble game interface

how strategizing under these conditions affects problem solving and
the development of isomorphs. In particular, we propose three interrelated hypotheses concerning interaction, problem solving, and
isomorphs:
1. Interactions and Problem Solving: We hypothesize that different types of interactions will affect the participants’ performance in playing the Number Scrabble game. Specifically,
we hypothesize that more constrained interactions can encode
more information, and will therefore lead to better problem
solving.
2. Interactions and Isomorphs: We hypothesize that the different constraints on interaction will affect the isomorphs generated by the participants. With higher constraints on interaction, a participant will be more likely to derive the optimal
visual isomorph (the magic square).
3. Isomorphs and Problem Solving: Based on Larkin’s definition on isomorphism [13], we hypothesize that not all isomorphs developed by participants will be visual, but that visual isomorphs will be more effective for playing the Number
Scrabble game.

1. Pre-test: During the pre-test session, the participants were
asked to play the Number Scrabble game six times against
the computer. To make sure that our participants did not start
developing strategies during the pre-test, we enforced a maximum time limit of 18 minutes to finish all six pre-test games.
Failing to meet the time limit resulted in a participant’s data
being dropped from analysis.
2. Strategizing: During the strategizing session, the subjects
were given 20 minutes to interact with the materials we provided under the different interaction constraints and were told
to look for a strategy that can help them play the game better.
3. Externalizing isomorphs: At the end of the strategizing session, all participants were given 2-3 minutes to make a “cheat
sheet” out of the strategy they developed so that they could
refer to it during the post-test session when they play Number
Scrabble again. This cheat sheet was a single sheet of paper
onto which participants were told they could write anything
they felt would help them play the game (in the case of the
pen and paper condition, this was a separate sheet from those
they wrote on during the strategizing session.) This gave us a
record of the isomorph used by participants in forming a strategy and reduced the cognitive load on participants during the
post-test. We gave them a very short amount of time to make
their “cheat sheet” so that they could not continue elaborating
on it after the end of the strategizing session.
4. Post-test: During the post-test session, participants were
asked to play the Number Scrabble game six more times
against the computer while consulting their “cheat sheet.” To
be consistent with the pre-test, and also to make sure that the
participants do not refine their isomorphs during the post-test,
18 minutes was set as the upper limit for playing all six games.
As in the pre-test, failing to meet the time limit resulted in a
participant’s data being dropped from analysis.

4 E XPERIMENT D ESIGN
The main factor of interaction constraint had five levels (no interaction, pen and paper, multiple sets of cards, single set of cards, and
boundary). Details of each constraint and design rationale will be
discussed in section 4.3. We used a between-subjects design with
repeated measures. Each subject is randomly assigned to one of the
five interaction constraint conditions which determines what interactions are available to them during their strategy session. Qualitative measures in our experiment are the types of isomorphs our
subject derived during their strategy session. Quantitative measures involved response time and scores on Number Scrabble games
played against a computer, using the game interface shown in Figure 2. The computer was programmed to play the game optimally
so that it never loses. While our subjects played the game against
the computer, we recorded the number of games tied or lost and the
time it took them to figure out the next move for response time. We
alternated who makes the first move between the subjects and the
computer for every game played.

After the post-test session, participants were asked to fill out a
questionnaire regarding how they arrived at their strategy and their
experience during the strategizing session. The investigators collected all the participants’ “cheat sheets” for further analysis of
the isomorphs they derived during the experiment. In addition, the
strategizing sessions were video recorded, which allowed us to examine how the interaction constraints affected our participants’ behavior during the process of searching for an isomorph.

4.1 Participants
We recruited a total number of 117 participants (86 Male, 31 Female) from introduction to computer science courses at our university. Participants’ age ranged from 18 to 40 with median of 25. Students were primarily undergraduates, and 80% were in computingrelated majors.

• Constraint #1 (no interaction): The participants were asked
to think about the problem in their head during the strategizing session to develop a strategy to help them play the game
better. The participants were not allowed to interact with any
materials.

4.2 Task
The experiment began with investigators introducing the Number
Scrabble game to the subjects based on a training script. The investigators were asked to play the game with the participants until
they fully grasped the rules. Next, the participants filled out a demographic form on age, gender and experience with mathematical
courses through a web interface. The rest of the experiment was divided into four major sessions: pre-test, strategizing, externalizing
isomorph, and post-test.

4.3 Interaction constraints
We went through multiple rounds of a refining process to design
the interaction constraint conditions used in our study. Our goal
was to design constraints that ranged from placing no limit on the
interaction to restricting the interaction a great deal.

• Constraint #2 (pen and paper): The participants were provided
with pen and paper to work out their strategy for the Number
Scrabble problem.
• Constraint #3 (multiple sets of cards): The participants assigned to this constraint were provided with multiple sets of
cards, with each set consisting of the numbers one through
nine. Each card is square in shape and made from paper with
the numbers printed on them. Within the strategizing session,
the participants were encouraged to organize the cards freely.

197

• Constraint #4 (single set of cards): The participants were further limited to interact with only one set of cards labeled with
the numbers one through nine.
• Constraint #5 (boundary): This is the most restrictive case.
Participants were presented with nine cards and a square space
only large enough to fit the cards in a grid, and were told to
confine their interactions to that space. Figure 3 shows this
condition.
In our study, the term constraint refers to not only confinement
of interaction space, but also the amount of resource a user can
have to externalize his/her mental states. Our conditions are designed so that “no interaction” serves as a control group and “pen
and paper” represents no limit on user interaction. Then, based on
both the original description of the Number Scrabble problem and
the optimal visual isomorph, we derived the other three interaction
constraints from “multiple sets of cards” to “boundary” by adding
more constraints on interaction each time, all of which encode some
information about the optimal visual isomorph of the problem.
5

(a) Partial magic square examples

R ESULTS

(b) Other visual isomorph examples

When analyzing the experimental data, we were concerned with the
impact of outliers due to random responses. Therefore, we trimmed
out the data of four participants whose response times were unusually fast during the pre-test. In addition, 11 of our participants
reached the 18-minute time limit during either pre- or post-test, thus
their data were dropped automatically since their missing data made
it impossible to compare fairly pre-test and post-test scores. As a
result, we have valid data from 100 participants with 20 subjects
under each interaction constraint.
5.1

Isomorph vs. Interaction constraint

Based on the strategies recorded on their cheat sheets, our participants developed a wide range of problem isomorphs during the
experiment. Some of these were visual while the others were either
mathematical or purely descriptive. We classified these isomorphs
into five different categories:

(c) Permuted isomorph examples
Figure 4: Isomorph examples

1. Magic square (Visual): The magic square isomorph.
2. Partial magic square (Visual): Same layout as the magic
square isomorph with different ordering or numbers.
3. Other visual isomorph: Visual isomorph but numbers are
not organized in a 3*3 matrix manner.
4. Permuted isomorph: All possible combinations of 3 numbers adding to 15.
5. Incomplete isomorph: Strategies that do not involve all 9
numbers.

Note that categories 1–3 are visual isomorphs of the Number
Scrabble problem while 4 and 5 are not. In addition, examples of
different types of isomorphs are shown in figure 4.
The distribution of different isomorphs developed by our subjects within each interaction constraint is shown in Figure 5. This
distribution supports our hypothesis in the sense that as the interactions become increasingly constrained (from pen and paper to
boundary), more participants developed visual isomorphs of the
number scrabble problem. More importantly, nine out of 20 subjects under the most restrictive constraint (boundary) discovered
the optimal visual isomorph (the magic square), while another six
subjects developed partial magic square isomorphs. In contrast,
only one out of 20 participants in either the no interaction condition or the pen and paper condition discovered any visual solution. A Pearson’s chi-square test of independence finds a highly
significant interaction between interaction constraint and isomorph,
χ 2 (16, N = 100) = 116.9, p < .001. Since 15 cells have an expected
count of less than five, we performed a Fisher’s exact test, which
also yielded a probability of p < .001.
5.2

Figure 3: Cards and Boundary

198

The effect of interaction constraints on Response
Time and Score

Results regarding time and score were analyzed statistically using
an analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s HSD (Honestly Significant Difference) test for pairwise comparisons. The

5.2.2

Figure 5: Distribution of isomorphs developed under five different
interaction constraints. The gaps divide visual isomorphs (1,2 and 3)
from non-visual isomorphs (4 and 5).

Score

If we consider mean scores on the pre-test and the post-test separately, it is clear that in general our participants scored higher
after the strategizing session under all five interaction constraints
(F(1, 1190) = 57.7, η p2 = 0.046, p < .001). More importantly, the
subjects in the more constrained interaction groups tend to score
higher than those in the less restrictive interaction groups.
For improved score (Figure 7), we observed a significant
main effect of interaction constraint type (F(4, 95) = 6.5, η p2 =
0.215, p < .001). Post-hoc tests showed that the improved scores
were significantly different between numerous pairs of interaction
constraints. To elaborate, the improved score for participants assigned to interaction constraint #5 (boundary) was significantly
larger than that for participants assigned to interaction constraint
#1 (no interaction), p = .001, constraint #2 (pen and paper) with
p < .01, and constraint #4 (one set of cards) with p < .01. Although
the result of other pairwise comparisons were not significant, we
saw a clear trend (Figure 7) that as the interaction constraints become more restrictive, the improvement of score increases except in
the case of constraint #4. We further analyze this unexpected “dip”
in the discussion section.

factor in our experiment was interaction constraint (five levels) and
the dependent variables were difference in response time and improved score.
Difference in response time was derived from the time it took
to decide which card to choose next at each move during a game.
Response time per game was defined as the average time it took
the participants to choose the next card during each game, T =
∑ ResponseTime/n, with n being the number of cards chosen following the opponent’s move during a specific game. Since both
the pre-test and post-test sessions comprise six games, difference
in response time thus was defined as IT = ∑6i=1 T (i, posttest) −
∑6i=1 T (i, pretest). In a similar vein, improved score was derived
from whether the subjects tied or lost to the computer during
each game, with tying counted as 1 point and losing as 0 points.
Thus improved score was defined as IS = ∑6i=1 S(i, posttest) −
∑6i=1 S(i, pretest).
5.2.1

Response time

We expected participants to choose the next card faster during the
post-test as the interaction constraints increased, since we hypothesized that they would be more likely to derive a better visual
isomorph similar to the “magic square”. However, we did not
observe a significant main effect of difference in response time
(F(4, 95) = 1.54, p = 0.097). Figure 6 (top) shows the difference
in response time under different interaction constraints. However,
interesting yet surprising findings emerged once we considered response time during pre-test and post-test separately. Figure 6 (bottom) shows the mean response time during both pre- and post-tests
under the five interaction constraints. It should be noted that participants in the no interaction condition had an unusually slow average
response time in the pre-test, which makes comparisons between
that condition and the others problematic. In general, however, we
found that most of our participants spent more time deciding which
card to choose next during the post-test, and participants under the
most confined constraints took the longest time, which ran counter
to our expectations. We discuss possible reasons for this in Section 6.4.

Figure 6: (top) Difference in mean response time; (bottom) mean
response time(pre vs. post test)

199

morph type in terms of difference in response time. We provided
further explanation in section 6.4.
6

D ISCUSSION

We start our discussion by addressing the key questions based on
our hypotheses:
6.1

Figure 7: Mean improved score

5.3

The effect of isomorphs on Response Time and
Score

Overall, the main effect of types of derived isomorph is significant
(F(4, 95) = 8.495, η p2 = 0.263, p < .001) on improved score (figure 8). Post-hoc tests showed that the improved scores for participants who derived the magic square isomorph is significantly
higher than for participants who derived partial magic squares at
p < .05, and significantly higher than those of all other participants
at p < .01. The result supports our hypothesis that the optimal solution does lead to much better performance in terms of accuracy.
Although the other pairs were not significantly different on mean
improved score, we saw a trend that as the isomorphs were further
from the optimal magic square, the mean improved score decreased.
We further performed a linear contrast between visual isomorphs (1,
2, 3) and non-visual isomorphs (4, 5) on improved score. The result
showed that the mean improved score for participants using visual
isomorphs was significantly larger than for those using non-visual
isomorphs (t(95) = 3.822, p < .001).
Unexpectedly, we did not observe a significant result of iso-

Figure 8: Mean improved score vs. Isomorph

200

Do more confined interaction constraints yield a
better chance of deriving a visual isomorph?

Yes, based on figure 5 and the chi-square analysis (section 5.1),
we observed that as the interaction constraints were increasingly
restricted, larger number of visual isomorphs were developed. In
addition, the strictest interaction constraints led to the highest number of the optimal visual isomorphs discovered. Nine out of 20
participants under constraint #5 (boundary) discovered the magic
square isomorph during the strategizing session and seven participants out of the remaining 11 discovered a partial magic square
isomorph. Based on further analysis of feedback about the interaction constraints, most participants under this condition found constraint #5 very helpful in their discovery of the visual isomorphs.
Many of them left comments such as, “It helped me visualize the
problem and make competitive moves.” Similarly, most subjects
under interaction constraints #3 (multiple sets of cards) and #4 (one
set of cards) felt that being able to manipulate the cards freely was
helpful. Thus both statistics and user feedbacks support the hypothesis that interaction constraints significantly affect the types of
isomorphs users are able to derive by altering the way participants
approach the same problem. In other words, the manipulation of
the isomorphs could be embodied in the interaction.
6.2

Does a more advanced visual isomorph outperform
a non-visual isomorph in terms of score?

Yes. We consider an isomorph as more advanced if it is more similar to the optimal visual isomorph (the magic square). Thus our
results summarized in Section 5.3 confirm that visual isomorphs
lead a greater increase in score compared to non-visual isomorphs.
What is more, within the group of visual isomorphs, the optimal
visual isomorph outperforms the other two significantly.
6.3

Does more confined interaction constraint always
yield larger improvements on score?

The short answer is: not always. As seen in Figure 7, the general
trend showed that as the interaction constraints became more restricted, the improved score tended to rise, with the exception of
constraint #4 (one set of cards). The low improved score in this
condition can be explained by considering Figure 5, which shows
that none of the participants under this condition derived a magic
square (red) or partial magic square (orange) isomorph. Without
more efficient visual isomorphs, it made sense that the subjects did
not do much better in their post-test compared to the pre-test. However, when we designed the five interaction constraints, we considered one set of cards as a highly restrictive constraint, thus we
expected better scores and more derivation of the optimal isomorph.
Based on the comments they left, many participants in this condition felt limited by only being able to interact with one set of cards
and wished they were given paper to write down combinations of
numbers they found to offload the burden of having to memorize
them. After the experiment, when we presented the magic square
isomorph to participants, most in this condition thought they were
close to discovering the optimal isomorph at some point during the
experiment. But without the extra boundary to further constrain
their interaction, it was hard for them to find the bridge between
one set of cards and the magic square. This finding highlights the
fact that more restrictive interaction constraints are not necessarily helpful unless they meaningfully encode information about the

problem. The single set of cards constrained interaction, but without the boundary this constraint did not by itself tell participants
anything about the nature of the problem.
6.4

Why is response time not a good measure?

Unexpectedly, we did not observe a significant result of isomorph
type in terms of both post-test response time and difference in response time. In fact, response times in the post-test were generally longer than in the pre-test, and participants who discovered the
optimal isomorph tend to take an especially long time responding
during the post-test. We contacted them afterwards about why they
made decisions more slowly during the post-test and found out that
instead of playing defensively using the magic square, they spent
more time thinking about how to beat the computer. Thus we can
infer that the bar this particular group of participants set was higher
than just “not to lose.” Overall, it may have been the case that participants in the post-test took a longer time because they were consulting their cheat sheets or otherwise thinking harder about their
strategy, as we encouraged them to do in the strategizing session.
Another reason we did not observe a significant result of different types of isomorphs on difference in response time is that the
search time for each of the visual isomorphs our subjects derived to
decide the next card might vary drastically. For example, searching
through a partial magic square might yield a much faster decision
than searching through a 9x9 matrix if the winning combinations
are covered by the partial magic square, but this might not necessarily be the case when the partial magic square does not contain the
needed combinations of three numbers adding to 15. Overall, since
there are many other factors involved in the difference in response
time (such as search time and self-expectation of performance), we
did not observe a strong causal relationship between types of isomorph and difference in response time.
7

A

NOTE ON THE VARIETY OF VISUAL ISOMORPHS

In section 5.1, we roughly categorized all the isomorphs our subjects developed during the study into five categories, including three
visual and two non-visual isomorph types. In this section we mainly
focus on the visual isomorphs discovered by the participants. It is
interesting to see that eight participants across interaction constraint
#3 (multiple set of cards) and #5 (boundary) developed a partial
magic square isomorph, and that 11 participants discovered other
forms of visual isomorph across interaction constraints #1, 2, 3 and
4. Within the partial magic square isomorph, there are many variations. Figure 4(a) illustrates a few of them, and we can see that
the variations are mainly caused by ordering. There are even more
variations under the “Other visual isomorph” category. One type of
variation was a decision tree, such as the examples in Figure4(b);
additionally, a few participants built a 9x9 matrix (Figure 9). To
see how this isomorph can be used in playing the Number Scrabble
game, refer to Appendix A.
In Figure 5, we can see a strong contrast between the types of visual isomorphs the participants generated. Most participants under
interaction constraint #5 (boundary) developed magic square-like
visual isomorphs during the strategizing session, while there were
a relatively larger number of participants under both constraints #3
and #4 who discovered more creative visual isomorphs (such as different forms of decision trees and node-link diagrams). Thus, there
seemed to be a trade off between interaction constraint and the creativity of the resulting visual isomorph.
8

I MPLICATIONS

AND

F UTURE W ORK

Our findings suggest that there is a clear connection between the
nature of interactions available in a visual representation and the
types of strategies users tend to develop when working with the
representation. While we have demonstrated this in the context of
a specific problem-solving scenario, we argue that our results have

Figure 9: A matrix-like visual isomorph

significant implications for the more general area of interaction with
visual representations with which visual analytics concerns itself.
In particular, this research suggests that degree of constraint is
an important dimension to consider when designing interactions for
visual analytics systems, although this is not a common way of talking about interaction design in visualization. In cases where a task
has an optimal solution path—for example, when there is a standardized procedure that analysts are expected to follow—highly
constrained interaction is likely to be a good way to guide a user
towards this procedure without the need for extensive training. In
situations where the designer needs to encourage creative solutions
to a problem, some middle ground between constrained and unconstrained interaction is likely to be more helpful. One strong implication of our findings, however, is that complete freedom of interaction may make problem-solving more difficult; encoding some
degree of boundaries into the interaction will likely help users to
understand the task in a more intuitive fashion.
In particular, when considering the core goals of visual analytics of identifying the expected and discovering the unexpected [19],
our findings would suggest that constraints in the user’s interactions
would have an impact. Specifically, the results of our study imply
that highly constrained interactions can impede the discovery of the
unexpected, but can also potentially guide the users to consistently
identifying the expected findings. In contrast, complete freedom in
an interactive visual analytics system has the potential to encourage
open-ended explorations that could lead to unexpected discoveries,
but users of such systems are likely to find different results in their
analysis each time. Although our findings do not directly inform the
design decision of the degree of constraints in a user’s interactions
in visual analytics system, we do believe that the relationship between the degree of constraint in interactivity and creativity should
be carefully considered when designing visual analytics systems.
As demonstrated by our results, the optimal visual isomorph indeed makes the Number Scrabble problem easier to solve. But as
mentioned in Section 2.2, efficiency is not the only measure of interest in visualization; our goal is to make information not just accessible, but understandable. In this context, it is worth mentioning
that we had one participant who discovered the magic square visual
isomorph but failed to realize that the nature of the game is just like
tic-tac-toe given the optimal isomorph. While one incident does not
warrant enough evidence to confirm or counter any existing theory,
it is an interesting phenomenon to consider.
Since the problem we considered has a known and clearly defined optimal visual isomorph, our designed interaction constraints
were geared towards this isomorph. Realizing the limitations of our

201

task, we certainly hope that this proof-of-concept could be generalized to more complex problems. The obvious next step is to examine how to design interaction constraints for problems that might
not have known optimal visual isomorphs.
9 C ONCLUSION
We have demonstrated that constraining user interactions indeed affects problem-solving through exploring the relationship between
interaction constraints, visual isomorphs, and problem-solving performance as measured by response time and score. Our results
showed that more confined constraints lead to better visual isomorphs, and better visual isomorphs result in large improvements
in scores on the Number Scrabble game. Our hypothesis is further
confirmed by a significant effect of interaction constraints on improved score. Overall, our results indicate that the manipulation of
isomorphs can be embodied in user interaction by imposing different constraints, and that certain interaction constraints can lead to
a higher chance of deriving a better visual isomorph for a problem.
With better visual isomorphs yielding higher performance, our results demonstrate that we indeed can improve the effectiveness of
problem solving activities by embodying information in user interaction.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thank Dr. Mark Faust for his valuable suggestions on the experimental design. This material is based in part upon
work supported by the International Program of the Department of
Homeland Security under grant number 2009-ST-108-000007. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Department of Homeland Security.
R EFERENCES
[1] J. M. Carroll, J. C. Thomas, and A. Malhotra. Presentation and representation in design problem-solving. British Journal of Psychology,
71(1):143–154, 1980.
[2] W. S. Cleveland and R. McGill. Graphical perception: Theory, experimentation, and application to the development of graphical methods. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 79(387):531–
554, 1984.
[3] P. Hanrahan. Systems of thought. Eurovis 2009 Keynote Address,
2009.
[4] J. R. Hayes and H. A. Simon. Psychological differences among problem isomorphs. In J. Castellan, D. B. Pisoni, and G. Potts, editors,
Cognitive Theory, volume 2. Erlbaum, 1977.
[5] C. Hundhausen, S. Douglas, and J. Stasko. A meta-study of algorithm
visualization effectiveness. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 13(3):259–290, 2002.
[6] E. Hutchins. Material anchors for conceptual blends. Journal of Pragmatics, 37(10):1555–1577, October 2005.
[7] D. Kirsh. The intelligent use of space. Artificial Intelligence, 73(12):31–68, 1995.
[8] D. Kirsh. Interaction, external representations and sense making. In
N. A. T. . H. van Rijn, editor, Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 1103–1108, Austin, TX,
2009. Cognitive Science Society.
[9] D. Kirsh. Problem solving and situated cognition. In The Cambridge
Handbook of Situated Cognition, pages 264–306, Cambridge, 2009.
Cambridge University Press.
[10] D. Kirsh. Projection, problem space and anchoring. In N. A. T. . H.
van Rijn, editor, Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, pages 2310–2315, Austin, TX, 2009. Cognitive Science Society.
[11] D. Kirsh and P. Maglio. On distinguishing epistemic from pragmatic
actions. Cognitive Science, 18(4):513–549, 1994.
[12] K. Kotovsky and N. Kushmerick. Processing constraints and problem
difficulty: A model. In K. J. Hammond and D. Gentner, editors, Proc.
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 1991.

202

[13] J. H. Larkin and H. A. Simon. Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth
ten thousand words. Cognitive Science, 11:65–99, 1987.
[14] Z. Liu, N. J. Nersessian, and J. T. Stasko. Distributed cognition as
a theoretical framework for information visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 14(6):1173–1180,
2008.
[15] S. E. Palmer. Fundamental aspects of cognitive representation. In
E. Rosch and B. B. Lloyd, editors, Cognition and Categorization,
pages 262–304. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1978.
[16] W. A. Pike, J. Stasko, R. Chang, and T. A. O’Connell. The science of
interaction. Information Visualization, 8, 2009.
[17] H. A. Simon. The Sciences of the Artificial. The MIT Press, 1996.
[18] K. Stenning and J. Oberlander. A cognitive theory of graphical and
linguistic reasoning: Logic and implementation. Cognitive Science,
19(1):97–140, 1995.
[19] J. J. Thomas and K. A. Cook. Illuminating the Path: The Research
and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. National Visualization
and Analytics Ctr, 2005.
[20] L. Tweedie. Characterizing interactive externalizations. In Proceedings CHI, pages 375–382. ACM Press, 1997.
[21] J. S. Yi, Y. a. Kang, J. Stasko, and J. Jacko. Toward a deeper understanding of the role of interaction in information visualization. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 13(6):1224–
1231, 2007.

A PPENDIX A
Figure 9 is a particularly interesting example of how our participants derived creative isomorphs. Here we explain how this isomorph can be used to assist with playing the Number Scrabble
game.
The matrix is designed to allow the user to quickly identify three
numbers that can add up to 15. For instance, if player 1 (the user)
chooses the number 5, the user will then focus on the row in the
matrix that starts with the number 5. If player 2 (the computer)
chooses the number 3, the user will be able to see that the cell that
intersects the row 5 with the column 3 contains a smiley-face. To
quickly identify the number that will compliment 5 and 3 for a sum
of 15, the user will then follow the same row (row 5) until she finds
the other smiley-face. In this case, the user will find the second
smiley-face under the column 7.
In addition, Figure 9 also suggests strategies for choosing the
best numbers in playing the Number Scrabble game. The right most
column, denoted as “Overall Combos” is a count of the number
of different types of glyphs in each row. For instance, in row 5,
there are four distinct types of glyphs (vertical-stripes, diagonalstripes, smiley-face, and a cross), which represents the number of
combinations of 15 that includes the number 5. The user of this
matrix will then choose the number 5 as the optimal starting move,
followed by 2, 4, 6, or 8 as the second-best alternative. Note that in
Figure 9, the user made a mistake and flipped the values for Overall
Combos between the rows 3 and 4. These strategies correspond
well to the magic-square isomorph in that the number 5 is always
at the center of the square, and the even numbers (2, 4, 6, and 8) at
the corners of the square.

