Pacific Graphics 2008
T. Igarashi, N. Max, and F. Sillion
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 7

Context Aware Terrain Visualization for Wayfinding and
Navigation
Sebastian Möser, Patrick Degener, Roland Wahl, Reinhard Klein

Abstract
To assist wayfinding and navigation, the display of maps and driving directions on mobile devices is nowadays
commonplace. While existing system can naturally exploit GPS information to facilitate orientation, the inherently
limited screen space is often perceived as a drawback compared to traditional street maps as it constrains the
perception of contextual information. Moreover, occlusion issues add to this problem if the environment is shown
from the popular egocentric perspective.
In this paper we describe an interactive visualization system that addresses these problems by reallocating the
available screen space. At the heart of our system are three novel visualization techniques: First, we propose a
non-standard perspective that allows to blend between the familiar pedestrian perspective and a standard map
depiction with reduced occlusion. Second, we derive an efficient deformation technique that allows an interactive allocation of screen space to areas of interest like e.g. nearby touristic attractions. Finally, a path adaptive
isometric perspective is proposed that reveals otherwise hidden facades in top-down views. We describe efficient
implementations of all techniques and exemplify our interactive system on real world urban models.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and Techniques - Interaction techniques

1. Introduction
Besides cellphones, navigation systems are definitely among
the most widespread applications of mobile devices today.
Along with their increasing popularity the computational
and graphical capabilities of such devices have scaled in the
last years to a level that makes interactive terrain and city
visualization feasible. In addition to the traditional map display, it is thus possible to render images from an egocentric
pedestrian perspective.
Clearly, both depictions have its advantages: In contrast
to maps, egocentric images show features from a familiar
perspective which facilitates their alignment with the environment. On the other hand, the geocentric map perspective
avoids occlusion and gives a better overview of the route. In
fact, a user study conducted in [CB05] showed that a combination of both map and egocentric image was clearly preferred. However, displaying both depiction side-by-side requires more screen space which is a precious resource on
mobile devices. Moreover, switching between the two interpretations demands veritable mental effort and thus diverts
the drivers attention.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

Figure 1: An image from our system blending between geoand egocentric perspectives. The parliament building on the
right appears rescaled according to a user query.

1854

Sebastian Möser & Patrick Degener & Roland Wahl & Reinhard Klein / Context Aware Terrain Visualization

Compared to printed street maps, the limited display size
and resolution allow navigation system to show only a small
portion of the route and its surroundings. While in principle
this does not hinder the driver to follow the predefined path,
the resulting lack of context information is often perceived
as a drawback. This disadvantage of navigation systems becomes more pronounced if the driver searches for certain
points of interest along the path like restaurants, hotels or
touristic sights. If, for example, the driver gets tired while
driving and searches for nearby hotel, the navigation system
has to scale the map in order to fit the drivers position and
potential hotels into the screen. However, at this higher scale
level important information near the drivers position or context information like the surroundings of the hotels are likely
too small to be recogizable.
In this paper we propose a terrain visualization system
that addresses these problems. We develop a novel projection that allows to blend between geocentric and egocentric
perspectives. In this way, both representations can be combined within a single image that allows an intuitive switching between map and egocentric perspective. We also devise
a map deformation technique that locally rescales features
according to their relative importance while preserving the
overall appearance. Based on this technique our system enhances the perceived context information by allocating more
screen space to important features or areas of interest while
shrinking less important regions. Finally, we also propose a
simple but effective means to exploit facade textures in geocentric perspectives. While ordinary aerial images show only
roof tops that are useless for earth bound navigation, we render buildings along the path from an appropriate isometric
perspective that reveals facade textures and thus facilitates
navigation. The contributions of this paper are in detail:
• a novel projection that enables blending between geo- and
egocentric perspectives
• an efficient map deformation to reallocate screen space to
features and areas of interest
• a simple scheme to arrange isometrically projected buildings along a path to reveal their facades
Finally, we also describe the efficient implementation of
each technique, such that it can be integrated into a real time
terrain and city visualization system.
1.1. Related work
Non-standard perspectives As an alternative to the standard perspective pinhole camera numerous non-standard
projection models have been proposed in the past. For artistic renderings blending of multiple views was proposed by
Agrawala et al. [AZM00] and Singh [Sin02]. The latter approach blends the projection matrices of several exploratory
views by linear interpolation which corresponds to a deformation of the surrounding space as introduced in [Bar84].
Several approaches to non-standard cameras are based on

this general space deformation concept which are nicely
summarized in a recent publication of Brosz et al. [BSSS07].
Instead of deforming the surrounding space, standard perspective projections can be generalized by using non-planar
projection surfaces (see [YM04] and references herein), 3D
lenses [YCB05] or non-linear ray tracing as introduced by
Gröller [Grö95] where lines of sight are traced through a
predefined force field by numeric integration. Designed with
the intention to give artists a maximal control over the resulting projection, the above approaches require the manual
specification of a large set of parameters as e.g. 3D force
fields for non-linear ray tracing. In contrast, the projection
proposed in this paper is specifically tailored to navigation
and wayfinding applications. It features a small set of intuitive parameters and requires very little computational effort
which enables interactive visualization on mobile devices.
In addition to the above non-standard camera models our
approach is also related to panoramic or pictorial map design. A recent example is the non-linear ray tracing based
method of Falk et al. [FSWE07]. In contrast to these methods
which are not suited for interactive visualizations, Takahashi
et al. [TYSN06] reduce occlusion of the upcoming parts of
the route in car navigation systems by considering only vertical scaling of the terrain. While their system yields good
results in alpine terrain, vertical scaling of buildings in an
urban environment is prohibitive. Clearly, buildings in the
foreground are important landmarks and thus vertical scaling destroys the local context.
Route Visualization While the standard 2D map perspective is still predominant in nowadays navigation systems,
Chittaro and Burigat showed in [CB05] that a combination
of both map and and photograph taken from a pedestrian
perspective is clearly superior. This result is further supported by the work of Rakkolainen and Vainio [RV01] who
stress the importance of salient landmarks in the images.
The method of Rakkolainen and Vainio as well as other
approaches e.g. [BC05, LGS03] use 3D renderings from a
pedestrian perspective instead of photographs.
To avoid occlusion problems methods for static visualizations of routes and driving directions traditionally resort to a
2D map like depiction: The line drive system [AS01] automatically abstracts and generalizes path to stylist drawings
that resemble hand drawn route maps. Similarly, the importance scaling scheme proposed in this paper reallocates
screen space to features while scaling unnecessary information down. However, in contrast to the line drive system, our
method also respects context information alongside the actual path. Patel et al. [PCSL06] extended the line drive system to generate personalized driving instructions by compressing well-known fragments of routes. The MOVE system described by Lee et al. in [LFHE05] also uses a similar map like representation but employs map generalization
techniques to scale the level of detail according to the current
driving environment or situation.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Sebastian Möser & Patrick Degener & Roland Wahl & Reinhard Klein / Context Aware Terrain Visualization

In order to combine the advantages of both pedestrian and
top-down view for navigation, Vallance [VC01] used a simple cylinder mapping. In this way it is possible to preserve
the local context and at the same time have the benefits of
an overview map. The perspective blending proposed in this
paper generalizes this idea to a larger class of deformations.
Importance Scaling Free form deformation enable an intuitive image editing by allowing the user to select and manipulate a set of features while maintaining the overall appearance. While most approaches aim at locally rigid deformations [IMH05], the method of Schiwietz et al. [SGW07] is
based on a physical model that also explicitly allows for local uniform rescaling. It is therefore possible to specify scaling constraints to image features. Although their algorithm
runs at interactive frame rates, the non-linear solver requires
substantial computational efforts. In contrast, we took in the
design of our importance scaling technique account to the
limited resources of mobile devices by strictly maintaining
a purely linear formulation. The resulting optimization requires thus only the solution of a single sparse linear system.
Our importance scaling is further related to work on signal adaptive texture mapping and texture optimization. In
[GSCO06] Gal et al. use a technique based on Laplacian
editing to improve the quality of texture images by enforcing locally rigid deformations on image features. The approaches of Sander et al. [SGSH02] as well as Balmelli et
al. [BTB02] warp texture images to allot more space to areas
with high intensity frequencies. Both methods require a nonlinear optimization to compute the actual deformation. Local
rescaling of images is also used in the design of cartograms,
i.e. maps which are deformed so that the area of certain features equals a prescribed mapping value. While most approaches to cartogram design work on polygonal areas, like
e.g. countries or states, there are some methods which can
handle per pixel data [GN04, EW95]. However, both methods also require expensive optimization which prevents their
use in an interactive system. Finally, in a recent work by
Böttger et al. [BPBD08] complex logarithmic maps are used
for detail-in-context visualizations. Similarly to logarithmic
maps our importance scaling also minimizes angle deformations but allows more control over the scaling of different
regions in the map.
2. Blended Perspective
The two main constraints for the design of more general perspectives are simplicity for the designer and comprehensibility for the user. Therefore, we restrict our method to the
blending of two perspectives which are only allowed to differ in pitch and observer height. This allows us to combine
terrestrial and aerial views in a more general manner and still
maintain intuitiveness for the observer. For simplicity we examine the dual surface deformation problem which reduces
to an interpolating curve problem (see Fig. 3). The canonical
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1855

solution for the interpolation problem is the hermite curve,
since we have derivatives at both ends of the curve.

Figure 3: Terrain deformation based on hermite curve.
Technically, starting with a given planar map domain
Ω ⊂ R2 , we first extend the hermite curve ψ : [0, 1] → R2
to a surface deformation γ : R2 → R3 using the tensor product with the right vector of the camera. To account for additional geometry like buildings, we then extend γ to a space
deformation Γ : R3 → R3 by setting
Γ(p) = γ(π12 (p)) + π3 (p)n(p)
where n(p) denotes the normal to the regular surface γ at a
point p. The above definition further relies on an appropriate
coordinate transformation π : R3 → R3 whose projections on
the first two and the third coordinate axes are denoted by π12
and π3 respectively. In our case we set π as the cartographic
projection which leads to the intuitive behaviour of a height
field draped over the deformed domain. Thus facades remain
perpendicular to the earth’s surface. Using the normals of the
deformed domain can lead to self intersections of buildings
if their heights exceed the radius of curvature. However, this
situation can be avoided by interactive parameter editing. In
the case of cities with lots of high buildings and skyscrapers
the buildings could be scaled appropriately.
In order to provide a usable interface, the operator can
specify the distances where the blended part of the perspective starts and stops in meters. The appearance of the terrain
can be interactively adjusted by moving the control points of
the hermite curve (see accompanying video).
For navigation systems there are three classes of blended
perspectives which are especially promising. These are presented in Fig. 2. The first (left image) employs an earth
bound, pedestrian perspective in combination with a top
down view, helping the user to orient quickly while presenting an overview of the route to come. This effect is enhanced
by changing the texture from aerial imagery to a street map.
The second set (center image) uses a pedestrian perspective
together with a view on the horizon. In addition to the local context the horizon may be helpful if landmarks, such as
skyscrapers or mountains are visible. Because of the curve
form a significant part of interpolation region is seen from
nearly straight above. In some cases the local context may
not be as important as clear views, e.g. while driving along
highways. Then the combination of a bird’s eye view and the
view on the horizon works well (right image).

1856

Sebastian Möser & Patrick Degener & Roland Wahl & Reinhard Klein / Context Aware Terrain Visualization

Figure 2: Effects of our non-linear perspective. Left: bending far distances to the viewer helps to get an overview. Center: an
S-shape deformation adds horizon information. Right: an inverse bend results in a top-down view augmented with the horizon.

3. Importance Scaling
In this section we propose a method to optimize the visibility of certain important map features. In our system features are specified by an additional map layer which assigns
each point a scalar value depending on its relative importance where zero corresponds to unimportant and high positive values to more important features. In practice, we generate the feature layer by rasterizing vectorized semantic map
entities, like roads, buildings or junctions corresponding to
a user query. In this way, the user can easily customize the
visualization according to her needs by selecting points of
interest e.g. nearby hotels or sights from a database. In this
work we concentrate primarily on the underlying visualization technique rather than the design of the query interface.
To optimize feature visibility we apply a deformation to
the original map such that features are scaled according to
their importance while preserving the maps overall appearance. More precisely, starting with a given planar map domain Ω ⊂ R2 and a feature map f : Ω → [0, 1] obtained as
just described, we search for a smooth deformation φ : Ω →
Ω that warps Ω into the deformed map space Ω .
To impose the scaling constraint we consider the derivatives ∂φ/∂d of φ in the directions d. The length of these
derivatives corresponds to the factor by which φ locally
scales features along the direction d. Moreover, it can be
easily shown (see e.g. [SSGH01]), that the average stretch
in length over all directions in a point p is given by
s(p) =

∂φ/∂u

2

+ ∂φ/∂v

2

1/2

where u, v ∈ R2 denote two arbitrary orthonormal directions.
Now, one way to impose the scaling constraint is to prescribe
at each point a local stretch F( f (p)), where F is some function that maps feature importance to local scales. To actually
compute such a map φ we would minimize the following
functional:
Z

Escale (φ) =

(F( f (p)) − s(p))2 d p

Ω

The problem with this approach is that the stretch s(p) in the
above equation is non-linear. Directly prescribing stretches

Figure 4: Left: Original (color corresponds desired scaling). Middle: Minimizing the scaling functional alone results
in high shape deformation. Right: This can be remedied by
adding a conformal term.

in this way will thus result in a non-linear optimization problem. However, for our application the computational demands of such an optimization are far beyond the limits of
mobile devices.
To enable an efficient solution we therefore resort to a different approach: First, instead of feature importance we consider the relative insignificance at a point p given by 1/ f (p).
To keep it well defined, we require that f > 0, which is not a
significant restriction as the value can be arbitrary small. We
can now equivalently require, that φ should shrink features
according to their insignificance. If φ is further constraint to
keeping the boundary δΩ fixed, more significant feature will
automatically stretch into the space, that was previously occupied by insignificant features. Precisely, we minimize the
following energy functional with respect to φ:
Z

Escale (φ) =

(s(p)/ f (p))2 d p

Ω

This formulation is indeed advantageous: as the squared
stretch is a quadratic expression in the directional derivatives, a discrete version of this minimization problem can in
fact be solved efficiently by a simple linear system.
While a minimization of the above functional leads to
the desired local scaling effect, the resulting map φ usually
shows large shape deformations (see Fig. 4). This is due to
the fact, that in each point the stretch along different direction may vary which corresponds to an anisotropic scaling.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Sebastian Möser & Patrick Degener & Roland Wahl & Reinhard Klein / Context Aware Terrain Visualization

Although importance scaling unavoidably distorts the length
of shapes, it is nevertheless possible to preserve angles locally. Mappings that locally resemble isotropic scalings are
called conformal and are well known to preserve the local
appearance of shapes. By virtue of these properties, conformal maps have been successfully applied in the context
of surface parametrization [FH05]. To enforce conformal
mapping we add the quadratic energy functional proposed
in [LPRM02] to our energy:
Z

Econ f ormal (φ) =

∂φ/∂u − R90 ∂φ/∂v

1857

Figure 5: Adaptive iso-projection reveals facades along the
path (original left)

2

dp

Ω

where R90 denotes a clockwise rotation by 90 degrees. As
shown in Fig. 4 minimizing the combined energy effectively
reduces local shape deformation. Please note, that the conformal term is only added as a regularization. Minimizing
the conformal energy alone will result in the identity map.
To discretize the above minimization problem we triangulate the domain Ω with a regular triangulation T and consider only piecewise affine mappings φ on T . For such mapping the derivatives and thus the stretch s are constant within
each triangle t ∈ T . We set up a sparse linear system (A, b)
whose columns are indexed by vertex coordinates (two coordinates per vertex) and add two rows for each triangle t
corresponding to the derivatives of the scaling energy
( f |t )−1 · ∂φ/∂u|t = 0,

( f |t )−1 · ∂φ/∂v|t = 0

(1)

where f |t denotes the average value of f on t. Solving
the resulting linear system in least squares sense is indeed
equivalent to a minimization of the above energy Escale as
can be verified by straightforward computation. Following
[LPRM02], we also add two further rows for each triangle
corresponding to the conformality condition.
Finally, the resulting system (A, b) has to be modified to
constrain boundary vertices. To this extent, we create an auxiliary matrix A pin that equals A but whose columns corresponding to boundary vertices are set to zero. Moreover,
we derive a matrix A f ree from A by simply dropping these
columns. Denoting a vector with the coordinates of all vertices by x0 , the constrained system is then given by
A f ree x = b − A pinned x0
As constraining the boundary can have a strong influence
on the resulting deformation, the choice of a proper map
section Ω is crucial. Theoretically speaking, the boundary
should be infinitely far away to annihilate its influence. To
minimize boundary influence and to keep the computational
overhead small, the map section Ω is chosen twice as large
as the bounding box of the current query.

4. Adaptive Isometric Projection
While a geocentric viewpoint provides a good overview and
avoids occlusion of the path, other important features like
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

building facades are hidden. In urban environments, however, these facades provide crucial landmarks for orientation. To alleviate this problem, we apply a shear to buildings
along the path to obtain an effect resembling the popular isometric perspective which is commonly used in 2D computer
games. Although standard isometric projection reveal two of
the four facades of an imaginary axis aligned building in a
top down view, this is usually insufficient for our needs. As
the view direction is constant for the whole scene, only, say
south and east facing facades are shown, whereas the route
can also pass buildings at north and west sides. These facades would therefore remain hidden using a single isometric projection.
A simple solution to this problem is to generalize the isometric perspectives by applying an individual shear for each
building along the path as shown in Fig. 5. More precisely,
we store for each point p ∈ Ω an additional normal displacement vector nd(p) ∈ R2 . The space deformation Γ is
then modified as follows: First, we map displacement vectors nd(p) into the local coordinate system at γ(p) and add
it, scaled by a user defined factor β, to the original normal:
n = n + β∇γ nd
and using this modified normal field we define
Γ (x) = γ(π12 (x)) + π3 (x)n
While the above modification does not influence shapes in
the map Ω, geometry like buildings is sheared according to
the displacement vector field nd.
Appropriate normal displacements have to point away
from the path without crossing each other. For most areas,
these can be obtained by computing the gradient directions
of the distance field d path to the current route. To limit the effect to buildings along the path, we only compute non-zero
displacements for points p ∈ Ω within a radius r0 and scale
them with 1 − (d path (p)/r0 ). As the distance’s gradient is
discontinuous at junctions, we applied an additional smoothing to the angular directions of the displacement vectors.
In this way, features near the path are tilted away from it
while geometry far off the path is not modified (see Fig. 6).
For blended perspectives we further weight the length of
nd(p) with the dot product of n(p) and view direction so that
the egocentric perspective in the near field is not influenced.

1858

Sebastian Möser & Patrick Degener & Roland Wahl & Reinhard Klein / Context Aware Terrain Visualization

Figure 6: Shearing decreases with distance to the path

In our implementation the operations necessary to compute the deformations Γ and φ are split into two groups. All
location dependent vertex transformations, that need to be
done in each frame, are evaluated on the GPU, while the
query dependent transformations i.e. the importance scaling
and normal displacements are precomputed in parallel on the
CPU and afterwards passed to the GPU. All three deformations are then applied consecutively in a vertex program. Finally the modified vertex is transformed back to world coordinates and perspectively projected.
5. Results
In this section we show several screen shots of our visualization system from a set of virtual tours through the center of
Berlin, Germany. A high quality aerial color image was used
as a ground texture with a texel size of 25cm. In addition,
our renderer uses a database of polygonalized buildings and
facade textures with texel size of approximately 7cm.
As argued in section 2 our perspective blending technique
allows to combine geo- and egocentric perspectives in several different ways. Despite this flexibility, Fig. 2 and the
accompanying video demonstrate that in all cases resulting
blending is intuitive so that the observer can easily grasp
topology and distances of roads and junctions. The images
generated using our non-standard perspective inherit the familiar earth bound perspective of egocentric images while
exhibiting less occlusion than those. At the same time they
provide a better overview over the route and its surroundings comparable to maps. As shown in the video, blending
parameters can be adjusted interactively using a simple intuitive user interface.
The images shown in Fig. 7 demonstrates the impact of
the proposed importance scaling in both a standard map perspective and a blended perspective: In each row, the original
undeformed map is shown on the left with highlighted feature map corresponding to different query results. As visible
in these examples the selected features and their surrounding
become larger and more visible. At the same time shapes are
locally very well preserved so that the maps remain recognizable. While for circular features the deformation is comparable to simple 2D lens effects, it is in general not possible
to achive similar results with lenses. One example constitutes the elongated railway track in the second query.
The benefit of the adaptive isometric projection is exemplified in Fig. 5. In the comparison the disclosure of facades

Figure 7: Three nearby sights highlighted before (top) and
after (middle) importance scaling. Bottom: Railway track
and stations before (left) and after (right) scaling.

along the path becomes apparent: the isometric projection
clearly shows more features and details which constitute important landmarks for orientation at junctions. Moreover, we
believe that such renderings are also useful for static route
visualizations as the additional landmarks are well suited to
verify that the right track is still followed.
Although the actual implementation of our system currently runs on a standard desktop computer (Core 2 Duo
processor, 2GB memory, Geforce 8800 GTX ) the proposed
underlying techniques demand only modest computational
power. On a single core the visualization currently runs at
more than 400 fps. Concerning the importance scaling, we
use a rather fine triangulation with about 40k triangles. Even
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Sebastian Möser & Patrick Degener & Roland Wahl & Reinhard Klein / Context Aware Terrain Visualization

at this size, the unoptimized setup of the sparse linear system
and its solution need less than a second on a single core using MATLAB’s sparse direct solver. The peak memory consumption was less than 75MB and can easily be halfed by
storing matrices in single precision.
The discussion in section 3 assumes a fixed map section
Ω and feature map f . However, as Ω is centered about the
current position, it has to be updated if the observer moves
and this in turn requires an update of the sparse linear system. Since solving the linear system is too expensive to be
computed every frame, it is reasonable to use a solution for
multiple frames and solve the linear system in an independent execution thread. Usually there are no noticeable artifacts when switching between solutions as Ω is anyway
chosen very large to minimize the influence of the boundary
(see section 3). If the user selects a different set of pointsof-interest, the feature map f has to be recomputed (which
amounts to the rasterization of a set of shapes). While the
actual costs for this update are negligible, the updated linear
system has to be solved which causes a small delay of less
than one second.
5.1. Evaluation
To evaluate influences on wayfinding of the proposed visualization techniques and their user acceptance in car navigation systems, we conducted a preliminary qualitative user
study with 10 participants.
Test setup For the tests we used our terrain rendering system with a standard projective camera at ground level to simulate the driving situation. The navigation device was simulated by rendering a small window with either the map or our
novel deformed views. In order to keep the focus of the participant on the road, the navigation aid was only displayed
while pressing a key.
As a test set, we used three example routes through the
city center of Berlin. The first two tasks were to follow two
predefined tracks of about 2 kilometer length containing several junctions. Once the navigation aid was a standard street
map view and once a blended perspectives view with adaptive isometric projections. In order to avoid bias because of
different route complexities, the navigation aids swapped after each test. In a third experiment, subjects were instructed
to choose one of several sights that lie nearby a given route.
In the first run with a street map where the sights were
marked and in a second run with perspective blending and
importance scaling of the highlighted sights.
After completing the driving tests, the subjects filled out
a questionnaire about their subjective impressions of the deformed 3D perspective. The questionnaire as well as screen
shots of the tests are available as a supplement to this paper.
Discussion In the questionnaire each of the three proposed
techniques was exemplified with two images and subjects
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Method
Perspective blending
Adaptive iso. projection
Importance scaling

confusing
µ
σ
4.8
0.42
4.9
0.32
3.8
0.63

1859

helpful
µ
σ
1.8
0.63
2.4
1.35
2.5
0.53

Table 1: Questionnaire results. Average (µ) and standard
deviation (σ) on a 1(strongly) to 5(not at all) scale.

were asked to rate on a five point scale their agreement with
two statements about the technique (1 means strong agreement, 5 not at all): “The shown effect is irritating/confusing”
and “The shown effect helped me to carry out the task”. The
average results and standard deviations are given in table 1.
Since our user study was performed with only 10 persons
recruited among students on the campus and family members ranging in age from 11 to 32 it is by no means representative. However, the results reveal some clear tendencies.
First of all, they suggest, that all three techniques are intuitive. Perspective blending and adaptive perspectives are not
perceived as irritating. Although the score for importance
scaling is slightly lower, subjects seem still to be quite decisive in their judgement, that the visualization is intuitive.
Concerning the second question, the figures indicate that
blended perspectives are very helpful for navigation. However, for the two other techniques participants failed to give
a decisive judgement on their usefulness. Regarding the importance scaling, seeing the actual sights was judged to be
helpful in the decision process. But since importance scaling does not avoid occlusion from a pedestrian point of view,
being unable to drive to a specific sight was perceived as a
drawback. We think that this problem can be alleviated by
providing a point and click interface, that allows the user to
easily add point-of-interests as way points to her route.
Finally, in the questionnaire subjects were asked about
their preferred representation. On a scale between 1 (streets
maps are preferred) to 5 (our representation is preferred) an
average score of 4.2 was achieved with 0.4 standard deviation. In particular in face of the fact that our representation is
new and unfamiliar to the participants while the use of standard street maps is commonplace and thus well trained, we
think that these results are very promising.
6. Conclusions
In this paper we presented three novel terrain visualization
techniques that improve the depiction of routes, facades and
nearby areas of interest for navigation assistance on mobile
devices. Using a simple but effective non-standard perspective, we can blend geo- and egocentric perspectives to combine the advantages of both viewpoints while maintaining
the ease of perception of a single view. We also proposed
a very efficient map deformation technique, that allows to
rescale features according to their relative significance. In

1860

Sebastian Möser & Patrick Degener & Roland Wahl & Reinhard Klein / Context Aware Terrain Visualization

this way, notoriously short screen space of mobile devices
can be used more effectively. To enhance the visibility of
facades in top-down views, we proposed path adaptive isometric perspectives. All three methods were integrated into
an interactive visualization system that runs a several hundred frames on a standard desktop computer. Finally, we also
pursued a preliminary qualitative user study which points to
a high user acceptance and intuitiveness of proposed visualization techniques.
A limitation of our present implementation is its memory consumption which is due to the huge amount of texture and building data. The presented Berlin city model requires about 800MB which hinders the application on mobile devices. In order to introduce scalability the new techniques need to be integrated into an appropriate level-ofdetail framework such as the one presented in [WMD∗ 04].
A general limitation of maps deformed by importance
scaling is the incorrect rendition of distances. By rescaling
geographic entities the viewer might get wrong impressions
on their actual distances. Annotating the distance of points
of interest to the current route certainly solves this problem
but also increases the visual complexity. In future work, we
would therefore like to explore other less intrusive visualizations of the actual distances.
References
[AS01] AGRAWALA M., S TOLTE C.: Rendering effective route
maps: improving usability through generalization. In SIGGRAPH (2001), pp. 241–249.

[FSWE07] FALK M., S CHAFHITZEL T., W EISKOPF D., E RTL
T.: Panorama maps with non-linear ray tracing. In GRAPHITE
(2007), pp. 9–16.
[GN04] G ASTNER M. T., N EWMAN M. E.: Diffusion-based
method for producing density-equalizing maps. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 101, 20 (2004), 7499–7504.
[Grö95] G RÖLLER E.: Nonlinear ray tracing: visualizing strange
worlds. The Visual Computer 11, 5 (1995), 263–274.
[GSCO06] G AL R., S ORKINE O., C OHEN -O R D.: Featureaware texturing. In Eurographics Symp. on Rendering (2006),
pp. 297–303.
[IMH05] I GARASHI T., M OSCOVICH T., H UGHES J. F.: Asrigid-as-possible shape manipulation. Trans. on Graphics 24, 3
(2005), 1134–1141.
[LFHE05] L EE J., F ORLIZZI J., H UDSON , E. S.: Studying the
effectiveness of MOVE: a contextually optimized in-vehicle navigation system. In ACM CHI 2005 (2005), vol. 1, pp. 571–580.
[LGS03] L AAKSO K., G JESDAL O., S ULEBAK J.: Tourist information and navigation support by using 3d maps displayed on
mobile devices. In Mobile HCI Workshop (2003).
[LPRM02] L ÉVY B., P ETITJEAN S., R AY N., M AILLOT J.:
Least squares conformal maps for automatic texture atlas generation. Trans. on Graph. 21, 3 (2002), 362–371.
[PCSL06] PATEL K., C HEN M. Y., S MITH I., L ANDAY J. A.:
Personalizing routes. In UIST (2006), pp. 187–190.
[RV01] R AKKOLAINEN I., VAINIO T.: A 3d city info for mobile
users. Computers and Graphics 25, 4 (2001), 619–625.
[SGSH02] S ANDER P. V., G ORTLER S. J., S NYDER J., H OPPE
H.: Signal-specialized parametrization. In Eurographics Workshop on Rendering (2002).

[AZM00] AGRAWALA M., Z ORIN D., M UNZNER T.: Artistic multiprojection rendering. In Rendering Techniques (2000),
pp. 125–136.

[SGW07] S CHIWIETZ T., G EORGII J., W ESTERMANN R.:
Freeform image. In Pacific Graphics (2007), pp. 27–36.

[Bar84] BARR A. H.: Global and local deformations of solid
primitives. SIGGRAPH 18, 3 (1984), 21–30.

[Sin02] S INGH K.: A fresh perspective. In Graphics Interface
(2002), pp. 17–24.

[BC05] B URIGAT S., C HITTARO L.: Location-aware visualization of VRML models in GPS-based mobile guides. In Web3D
(2005), pp. 57–64.

[SSGH01] S ANDER P. V., S NYDER J., G ORTLER S. J., H OPPE
H.: Texture mapping progressive meshes. In SIGGRAPH (2001),
pp. 409–416.

[BPBD08] B ÖTTGER J., P REISER M., BALZER M., D EUSSEN
O.: Detail-in-context visualization for satellite imagery. Computer Graphics Forum 27 (2008), 587–596.

[TYSN06] TAKAHASHI S., YOSHIDA K., S HIMADA K.,
N ISHITA T.: Occlusion-free animation of driving routes for car
navigation systems. TVCG 12, 5 (2006), 1141–1148.

[BSSS07] B ROSZ J., S AMAVATI F. F., S HEELAGH M. T. C.,
S OUSA M. C.: Single camera flexible projection. In NPAR ’07
(2007), pp. 33–42.

[VC01] VALLANCE S., C ALDER P.: Context in 3d planar navigation. Aust. Comput. Sci. Commun. 23, 5 (2001), 93–99.

[BTB02] BALMELLI L., TAUBIN G., B ERNARDINI F.: Spaceoptimized texture maps. Comput. Graph. Forum 21, 3 (2002).

[WMD∗ 04] WAHL R., M ASSING M., D EGENER P., G UTHE M.,
K LEIN R.: Scalable compression and rendering of textured terrain data. In WSCG (2004), pp. 521–528.

[CB05] C HITTARO L., B URIGAT S.: Augmenting audio messages with visual directions in mobile guides: an evaluation of
three approaches. In Mobile HCI (2005), pp. 107–114.

[YCB05] YANG Y., C HEN J. X., B EHESHTI M.: Nonlinear perspective projections and magic lenses: 3D view deformation.
Computer Graphics and App. 25, 1 (2005), 76–84.

[EW95] E DELSBRUNNER H., WAUPOTITSCH R.: A combinatorial approach to cartograms. In Symp. on Comp. Geom. (1995),
pp. 98–108.

[YM04] Y U J., M C M ILLAN L.: General linear cameras. In
ECCV (2) (2004), pp. 14–27.

[FH05] F LOATER M. S., H ORMANN K.: Surface parameterization: a tutorial and survey. In Advances in Multiresolution for
Geometric Modelling. 2005, pp. 157–186.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

