Eurographics Symposium on Geometry Processing 2008
Pierre Alliez and Szymon Rusinkiewicz
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 5

Surface sampling and the intrinsic Voronoi diagram
Ramsay Dyer, Hao Zhang, and Torsten Möller †

Abstract
We develop adaptive sampling criteria which guarantee a topologically faithful mesh and demonstrate an improvement and simplification over earlier results, albeit restricted to 2D surfaces. These sampling criteria are based on
functions defined by intrinsic properties of the surface: the strong convexity radius and the injectivity radius. We
establish inequalities that relate these functions to the local feature size, thus enabling a comparison between the
demands of the intrinsic sampling criteria and those based on Euclidean distances and the medial axis.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.5 [Computer Graphics]: Curve, surface, solid and object
representations

1. Introduction
A standard digital geometry representation of the surface of
a 3D object is a triangle mesh. The process of producing a
mesh from a known surface is called meshing. The vertices
of the mesh are sample points lying on the given surface.
Thus part of the meshing process involves sampling: placing sample points on the surface. A fundamental problem is
to determine the sampling density required for the mesh to
meet given accuracy requirements. At the most basic level
one demands topological consistency: the mesh is homeomorphic to the surface in question. Geometric criteria which
demand accurate positional and normal approximations usually assume that topological consistency has been met.
It is the fundamental question of topological consistency
that we address in this paper. This matter has certainly been
studied previously, mainly from two different perspectives:
the intrinsic and the extrinsic. On the one hand the surface
can be viewed as an abstract Riemannian manifold, possessing an intrinsic metric. No reference is made to the ambient
embedding space. A notable work in this vein is that of Leibon and Letscher [LL00], where the notions of injectivity
radius and strong convexity radius, well established in the
Riemannian geometry literature, were brought to bear on the
problem of surface sampling. However, these ideas have not
received a lot of attention in the geometry processing community. Thus the intrinsic viewpoint has not yet proven itself
to have practical utility for surfaces in 3D.

† GrUVi Lab, School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, BC, Canada. Email: rhdyer, haoz, torsten@cs.sfu.ca
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

The more common approach to surface sampling involves
measuring distances in the ambient Euclidean space. Since
the seminal work of Amenta and Bern [AB98], sampling
density on a smooth surface has typically been specified in
terms of the local feature size: the distance to the medial
axis. Their original sampling criterion is built upon the foundation laid down by Edelsbrunner and Shah [ES94], who defined a set of Voronoi diagram properties to characterize the
sample sets that yield a homeomorphic mesh. Amenta and
Bern then quantified a sampling density to ensure the needed
Voronoi diagram properties.
Contribution: We take the intrinsic approach, utilizing concepts previously exploited by Leibon and Letscher, to define
sampling criteria that ensure the required properties in the
Voronoi diagram. Our contribution to the existing theoretical framework on surface sampling is twofold:
• We obtain a significant relaxation in the sampling requirements over those obtained by Leibon and Letscher
[LL00, Lei99], and simplify the exposition.
• We establish inequalities relating local feature size to the
strong convexity radius and the injectivity radius, bridging
a gap between the extrinsic and intrinsic views on sampling criteria. In particular, we are now able to say what
extrinsic criterion is needed to ensure that a sample set
satisfies a given intrinsic criterion. This opens the door
to exploiting intrinsic analysis even when extrinsic methods are employed. It is shown that the extrinsic criterion
that is needed to satisfy our intrinsic sampling condition is
weaker than existing extrinsic sampling criteria for topological consistency.

1394

R. Dyer & H. Zhang & T. Möller / Surface sampling and the intrinsic Voronoi diagram

Related work: The literature on surface sampling is vast.
We mention here only recent works and those that have directly influenced our current work. The work of Boissonnat and Oudot [BO05], with its graceful exploitation of the
Voronoi-Delaunay duality in surface sampling, was an inspiration. A clear distinction between meshing and surface reconstruction was made in that work. Cheng et al. [CDRR04]
present a meshing algorithm with guaranteed topological
consistency which avoids explicit reference to the local feature size. The algorithm strives for a sparse sampling, but
there is no concise expression for the final sampling density.
Gao et al. [GGOW08] use an intrinsic sizing function, the
homotopy feature size (hfs), to mesh planar domains. The
hfs appears to be closely related to the injectivity radius discussed here.
Morvan and Thibert [MT04], as well as Hildebrandt et
al. [HPW06], have done a nice quantitative analysis of the
metric distortion between a smooth surface and a mesh that
approximates it. Although our work focuses more on the
qualitative local behaviour of geodesics, we did exploit these
works when it was necessary to bound geodesic lengths to
allow a comparison between intrinsic and extrinsic sampling
criteria. Dai et al. [DLYG06] have also recently produced a
geometric accuracy analysis. Their analysis is from the intrinsic viewpoint, using Leibon and Letscher’s work [LL00]
as the topological correctness foundation. The sampling conditions required by their main theorem (Thm 3), involve a
minimum amongst terms representing Leibon and Letscher’s
criterion and (larger) scaled extrinsic sizing functions. Thus
it can be both relaxed and simplified in light of our work.
Paper organization: The main body of the paper is organized into three sections. In section 2, we define the intrinsic Voronoi diagram and strong convexity and conclude
with Theorem 1, a new observation on how strong convexity
can enforce desirable topological properties in the intrinsic
Voronoi diagram. Section 3 reviews some sizing functions
that are related to variable sampling density requirements.
Our new sampling density requirements and the estimates on
the intrinsic sizing functions with respect to the local feature
size are presented in Section 4, where we go on to synthesize these results and enable a direct comparison between
extrinsic and intrinsic sampling criteria.
Notation: Throughout this paper, S will refer to a smooth,
compact, connected surface without boundary isometrically
embedded in R3 , and P will refer to a set of sample points
on S. Given two points p and q on S, dR3 (p, q) and dS (p, q)
denote respectively the Euclidean and geodesic distances between p and q. Likewise BS (x; r) = {y ∈ S|dS (x, y) < r} denotes the open geodesic disk centred at x, and BR3 (x; r) is an
open Euclidean ball. A closed disk/ball is indicated with a
bar: B¯ S (x; r). All geodesics and space curves are arc-length
parameterized. The length of a curve γ is ℓ(γ) and we abuse
the notation by identifying γ with its image. Thus for example, z ∈ γ means z ∈ γ([0, ℓ(γ)]).

2. The intrinsic Voronoi diagram
Geodesic curves: The notion of geodesic curves on S is
essential in our exposition. We use the following defining
characteristic: A geodesic on S is a curve γ ⊂ S that, when
viewed as a space curve γ ⊂ R3 , has its curvature vector parallel to the normal vector on S at all corresponding points
where the curvature of γ does not vanish. In particular, the
curvature of γ at x ∈ γ is bounded by the largest magnitude
of the principle curvatures of S at x.
Compact surfaces are geodesically complete; any two
points p, q ∈ S can be connected by a smooth curve γ of minimal length: ℓ(γ) = dS (p, q), and this curve is a geodesic (the
Hopf-Rinow theorem [dC92]). Also, for any z ∈ γ, the portion of γ between p and z is also a minimal geodesic between
p and z [dC92]. However, a minimal geodesic is not necessarily unique. If two points are sufficiently close together
we can be assured of a unique minimal geodesic between
them [dC92].
The intrinsic Voronoi diagram of a sample set P on S is
naturally defined without imposing restrictions on P.
Definition 1 (Voronoi diagram) The Voronoi cell of p ∈ P is
defined by V(p) = {x ∈ S | dS (p, x) ≤ dS (q, x), ∀q ∈ P}. The
set of Voronoi cells forms a covering of S called the intrinsic
Voronoi diagram (iVd) of P on S. Replacing dS with dR3 , we
obtain the restricted Voronoi diagram (rVd) on S.
2.1. The closed ball property
Edelsbrunner and Shah. [ES94] introduced the closed ball
property to describe those restricted Voronoi diagrams on
S whose dual, the restricted Delaunay triangulation (rDt),
is a simplicial complex homeomorphic to S. For a surface
without boundary, the property expresses three conditions:
1. each Voronoi cell is a closed topological disk (2-ball);
2. the intersection of two Voronoi cells is either empty or a
closed topological 1-ball: a single Voronoi edge;
3. the intersection of three Voronoi cells is either empty or
a single point (0-ball): a single Voronoi vertex.
General position: The closed ball property implicitly imposes a general position condition on the sample points in
that the intersection of more than three Voronoi cells must
necessarily be empty (otherwise there would be two Voronoi
cells whose intersection was a single point). No sampling
criteria based on sample density alone can guarantee that
the general position property is satisfied, but in principle and
practice such failures can be fixed with an arbitrarily small
perturbation; we will henceforth ignore this technicality.
Generality: Edelsbrunner and Shah. [ES94] showed that
the rDt is homeomorphic to S when the rVd satisfies the
closed ball property. Their proof looks at the topological
properties of the dual complex resulting from a Voronoi diagram satisfying this property. An examination of that proof
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

R. Dyer & H. Zhang & T. Möller / Surface sampling and the intrinsic Voronoi diagram

reveals that it does not rely on the specific metric employed
to generate the Voronoi diagram. In particular, we can apply the result to meshes constructed from the iVd: the iDtmesh is a triangle mesh whose edges connect samples that
are Voronoi neighbours (i.e., that share a Voronoi edge). To
every Voronoi vertex in the iVd, there corresponds a face in
the iDt-mesh. If the iVd satisfies the closed ball property, the
iDt-mesh is a manifold mesh homeomorphic to S.
Note the distinction between the iDt-mesh and the iDt itself: The intrinsic Delaunay triangulation (iDt) of P on S
is a triangulation of S formed by connecting, with minimal
geodesics, samples that are Voronoi neighbours. Although a
iVd satisfying the closed ball property guarantees a homeomorphic manifold iDt-mesh, whose edges are straight line
segments in R3 , it does not guarantee that the iDt itself is
well defined. In particular, there may be more than one minimal geodesic connecting a given pair of sample points. However, if the iVd also has the property that there is a unique
minimal geodesic between samples that are Voronoi neighbours, then the iDt exists and it is combinatorially equivalent
to the iDt-mesh.
Redundancy of condition 3: We have assumed that S is a
single component. We further assume that there are at least
four distinct samples in P. In this case, the third condition
of the closed ball property becomes redundant. Indeed, suppose that the first two closed ball conditions are satisfied
but the third is violated. Thus we have three Voronoi cells
V(p), V(q) and V(r) whose intersection includes two distinct points a and b. Then V(p) ∩ V(q) will be a Voronoi
edge, e, following condition 2, and a and b must necessarily
be its endpoints. Likewise, V(p) ∩ V(r) will yield another
distinct Voronoi edge, e′ , also with a and b as endpoints.
Since V(p) is a topological disk (condition 1), e and e′
make up its entire boundary. It follows that p has no Voronoi
neighbours other than q and r. Arguing similarly for q and r,
we conclude that there are only three samples on S.
Definition 2 (Well formed Voronoi diagram) A (restricted
or intrinsic) Voronoi diagram is well formed if it consists of
at least four samples and satisfies the first two closed ball
conditions.
2.2. Strong convexity
We seek a sampling criterion that guarantees a well formed
Voronoi diagram and thus a valid homeomorphic iDt-mesh.
To this end it is useful to examine the notion of convexity of
sets on a surface. In the planar setting a set A is convex if a
line segment connecting any two points in A lies in A. On a
surface, lines are replaced by geodesics.
There are several ways to extend the notion of convexity
to sets on a surface. We follow Chavel [Cha06]:
Definition 3 (Strongly convex set on surface) A set A ⊂ S
is strongly convex if for every p, q ∈ A,
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1395

1. there is a unique minimal geodesic γ in S connecting p
and q;
2. γ lies entirely within A;
3. no other geodesic connecting p and q lies within A.
The set A is convex if it satisfies only the first two conditions
above, but we are interested in strong convexity. Note that
there are many non-equivalent definitions of convexity and
strong convexity in the Riemannian geometry literature, so
care must be taken when referring to other works.
Note that the intersection of strongly convex sets is
strongly convex. Such sets are also contractible [dC92],
which implies the following useful observation:
Lemma 1 A strongly convex set is simply connected.
2.3. The closed ball property via strong convexity
As the sampling density increases we expect the Voronoi
cells to more closely exhibit the characteristics of those in
a planar Voronoi diagram. One notable characteristic of a
Voronoi cell in the plane is that it is convex. Voronoi cells
on a surface cannot share this property, however, because
Voronoi edges are not necessarily geodesics. To see this, let
p, q lie on a plane, in which
q
case their Voronoi boundary
is a straight line (a geodesic).
p
Now introduce a small bump
near p, between p and q, that is far from the original Voronoi
boundary, as shown in the figure. This will distort the originally straight boundary so that it is no longer a geodesic.
For a general surface, regardless of the sampling density, we
cannot expect Voronoi edges to be geodesics.
Therefore, we cannot demand convexity from the Voronoi
cells on S. However, a sufficient sampling density will ensure that the Voronoi cells are contained in strongly convex
neighbourhoods, which turns out to be a useful criterion.
Theorem 1 (Strong convexity and well formed iVd) If
∀p ∈ P there exists a strongly convex set U p ⊂ S with
V(p) ⊂ U p , then the iVd of P ⊂ S is well formed.
The proof of Theorem 1 relies on the following lemma.
Lemma 2 Suppose that Ω ⊂ S is a union of Voronoi cells that
is bounded by only two Voronoi cells, V(p), V(q) ⊂ S \ Ω
with V(p) ∩ V(q) ∩ Ω = ∅. Then Ω contains a geodesic γ
that cannot be contained in a strongly convex set.
Proof. Let a be a Voronoi vertex in V(p) ∩ V(q) ∩ Ω, and
let s ∈ P be a sample in Ω with a ∈ V(s). Let γas be a minimal
geodesic between a and s. Then we must have γas ⊂ V(s),
since otherwise, ∃w ∈ γas and u ∈ P with u = s and w ∈ V(u)
but w ∈ V(s). It follows that dS (a, u) ≤ dS (a, w) + dS (w, u) <
dS (a, w) + dS (w, s) = dS (a, s), contradicting a ∈ V(s).
We extend γas through s until it exits Ω at t. Let γ = γat
denote the resulting geodesic. Clearly, γ ∈ Ω. Without loss of

1396

R. Dyer & H. Zhang & T. Möller / Surface sampling and the intrinsic Voronoi diagram
q

a

γ

q

V(q)
s

p

(a)

Ω
t

b

a

α

γ

Ω

b

t

V(p)

q

V(q)

α

p

(b)

a

γ

V(q)

z

Ω

Up
V(p)

b

t
p

Up
V(p)

(c)

Figure 1: Ω is a region enclosed by the boundaries of V(p)
and V(q). (a) The geodesic γ is at least as long as the green
curve and cannot be contained in any strongly convex set. (b)
The minimal geodesic α must be contained in Up . If α does
not cross γ, then either Uq or U p contains a loop of minimal
geodesics (red+green curves) that encompasses γ. Assuming
it is U p , as shown, then U p cannot be simply connected and
not contain γ. (c) If α does cross γ, then U p (or Uq ) will
contain two geodesics between a and z.

generality, let t lie on the boundary of V(p); see Figure 1(a).
Note that if γ did not exit Ω, it would exceed the diameter of
S and be too long to reside in a strongly convex set.
Now note that both a and t lie on the boundary of V(p)
and, by our choice of s, dS (a, p) = dS (a, s), since a is a
Voronoi vertex. Also dS (t, p) ≤ dS (t, s). Thus γ is at least
as long as the path between a and t comprised of a minimal
geodesic between a and p and a minimal geodesic between
p and t, shown as the green curve in Figure 1(a). It follows
that γ cannot be a unique minimal geodesic between a and t
and so cannot be contained in any strongly convex set.
Proof of Theorem 1: Suppose that V(p) is not a topological
disk. By Lemma 1, U p is simply connected. Thus a homotopically nontrivial loop in V(p) is homotopically trivial in
U p , and so U p must contain a region Ω that is exterior to
but bounded on all sides by V(p). By an argument identical
to the proof of Lemma 2 we see that such an Ω cannot be
contained in a strongly convex set. Therefore V(p) must be
a topological disk.
Now suppose that V(p) and V(q) meet at more than one
distinct Voronoi edge. These cells then bound a region Ω as
described in Lemma 2. Consider the strongly convex neighbourhoods U p and Uq . Since V(p) ⊂ U p and V(q) ⊂ Uq ,
the intersection U p ∩ Uq must contain all Voronoi edges in
V(p)∩V(q). Also, since U p ∩Uq is strongly convex the minimal geodesic, α, between points a and b on distinct Voronoi
edges (see Figure 1(b)) must lie in U p ∩Uq .
Let γ be the geodesic in Ω that was constructed in
Lemma 2. Suppose that α does not cross γ. Then γ must
be contained in the region bounded by a loop of minimal
geodesics (a geodesic triangle in fact) involving α and either p or q. Assume it is p; refer to Figure 1(b). Now U p
must contain α, the minimal geodesic between a and p, and
the one between p and b. However, by Lemma 2, U p cannot
contain γ. We arrive at a contradiction to Lemma 1.

Thus α must cross γ. Let z be the first such intersection
that is encountered on a traversal of γ starting at point a and
assume that this portion of γ between a and z is contained in
a region bounded by a loop of minimal geodesics involving
p (green curves) and α (red curve); see Figure 1(c). But now
there are two geodesics between a and z; U p cannot contain
this portion of γ, but it is forced to if it is to contain α and
remain simply connected. Again a contradiction.

3. Sizing functions for surface sampling
Adaptive sampling criteria on surfaces generally impose restrictions on the sampling density based on local curvature
properties as well as semi-local properties relating to some
notion of the distance to “the other side” of the surface. We
refer to functions that can be used to modulate the sampling
density in this way as sizing functions. These functions take
positive values which can be thought of as having the units of
distance. Thus at each point on the surface, a sizing function
specifies a radius within which a certain proportion of representative samples is expected. The square of such a function
can, for example, be used to define a weighted area measure
for governing stochastic sampling.
We first present a natural hierarchy of familiar sizing functions that have extrinsic definitions and then discuss the
properties of some less familiar intrinsic sizing functions. In
Section 4.2 we find inequalities that bridge the gap between
representatives of these two sets of sizing functions.

3.1. A natural hierarchy of extrinsic sizing functions
We will make use of the following definition:
Definition 4 (medial ball and medial axis) Given a closed
set C ⊂ R3 , e.g., a surface, a medial ball is an open ball
B ∈ R3 \C that is maximal with respect to inclusion (i.e., no
other open ball can contain B). If p ∈ C is contained in the
closure of B, we say B is a medial ball at p. The medial axis
of C is the closure of the set of centres of all the medial balls.
Local feature size: The local feature size (lfs) at a point
x ∈ S, denoted by ρ f (x), is the distance from x to the medial
axis of S. It was introduced by Amenta and Bern [AB98]
and one would be hard pressed to find a subsequent paper on
surface sampling that does not mention it. For this reason we
will go to some lengths to compare our sampling criteria to
those that are expressed in terms of the lfs.
The lfs is particularly convenient to work with because it
enjoys the property of Lipschitz continuity,
ρ f (x) − ρ f (z) ≤ dR3 (x, z),

(1)

allowing us to bound ρ f (x) in terms of a nearby ρ f (z).

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

R. Dyer & H. Zhang & T. Möller / Surface sampling and the intrinsic Voronoi diagram

Local reach: Each point x ∈
ρ (x)
R
S is associated with two medial
balls, one on each side of the ρ (x)
f
surface; one of them may have
infinite radius. These balls are
medial axis
tangent to S at x. The radius,
ρR (x), of the smaller of the two Figure 2: lfs vs. local reach.
medial balls at x is called the
local reach at x. It is the distance from x to the medial axis
along a direction normal to S at x. It was introduced by Federer [Fed59] where it was observed that it is a continuous
function on S. It is bounded below by the lfs for all x ∈ S.

More commonly encountered than the local reach is its
global lower bound. The reach of S is ρR = inf p∈S ρR (p).
The reach is important because it specifies the maximal constant thickness of a tubular neighbourhood of S for which
the natural (orthogonal) projection onto S is well defined.
Specifically, if UρR ⊂ R3 is given by {m ∈ R3 |dR3 (m, S) <
ρR }, then the projection ξ : UρR → S can be defined by specifying ξ(m) to be the unique point on S that is closest to m.

Maximal curvature: The maximal curvature at x ∈ S is the
maximum of the absolute values of the two principal curvatures: κ(p) = max{|κ1 (p)| , |κ2 (p)|}. The associated sizing
function, the maximal curvature radius, is given by the radius of the associated osculating sphere: ρκ (p) = 1/κ(p).
Since the smallest medial ball at x can never exceed the
size of the osculating sphere at x, we have ρR (x) ≤ ρκ (x).
Although the maximal curvature is continuous, it can vanish. Thus ρκ (x) is not bounded nor even well defined everywhere. However, for its principle employment as an upper
bound on the lfs, we may interpret ρκ (x) = ∞ at those points
where the maximal curvature vanishes.
Gaussian curvature: The Gaussian curvature is the product of the principle curvatures: G(x) = κ1 (x)κ2 (x). The
Gaussian curvature radius, defined by ρG (x) = 1/ G(x),
is the associated sizing function. Like the maximal curvature
radius, the Gaussian curvature radius suffers from a problem
of definition when the Gaussian curvature is non-positive.
Read ρG (x) = ∞ when G(x) ≤ 0. We have ρκ (x) ≤ ρG (x).
The hierarchy: For all x ∈ S we have the relations
ρ f (x) ≤ ρR (x) ≤ ρκ (x) ≤ ρG (x).

1397

tory textbook on Riemannian geometry, e.g., [dC92], may
be consulted for further details on the statements made here.
3.2.1. Strong convexity radius
On the plane, convexity has to do with the shape of a set, but
on a surface, the strong convexity condition also limits the
size of the set. For example a geodesic disk is not strongly
convex in general. Consider a geodesic disk on a cylinder. If
the radius of the disk exceeds one quarter the circumference
of the cylinder, then there will be points on the disk whose
shortest connecting geodesic leaves the disk.
Definition 5 (Strong convexity radius) The strong convexity radius (scr) at a point x ∈ S is defined as
ρsc (x) = sup {ρ | BS (x; r) is strongly convex ∀r < ρ} .
It can be shown [dC92] that for any x ∈ S, ρsc (x) > 0. The
scr is an intrinsic quantity, and in general, if x is in a region
of high curvature, ρsc (x) will be small. However, Gaussian
curvature alone is not sufficient to characterize the scr. Consider again the example of a cylinder. The scr at any point
will be no greater than 1/4 the circumference of the cylinder, but the Gaussian curvature radius is unbounded.
There are no continuity results for the strong convexity radius. However, it is worth mentioning that Klingenberg [Kli95][1.9.9] has a definition of strong convexity in
which a further axiom is imposed: A set A is strongly convex in Klingenberg’s sense if it satisfies the axioms of Definition 3 and further has the property that any geodesic disk
B contained in A is also convex. It easily follows that the resulting scr is 1-Lipschitz. It is shown that the scr is always
positive even with this additional axiom.
3.2.2. Injectivity radius
An explanation of the injectivity radius requires a brief description of the exponential map. We denote by Tx S the tangent plane of S at x. The exponential map at x is a smooth
mapping expx : Tx S −→ S that takes X ∈ Tx S to the point
γX ( X ) ∈ S, where γX is the geodesic emanating from x
with tangent vector X/ X . Restricted to a small enough
disk in Tx S, expx is a diffeomorphism onto its image [dC92].

(2)

Of the four sizing functions represented here, the latter two
are useful primarily for theoretical analysis; their definition
is too local to be used as a sizing function for a sampling
criterion. Unlike the other three, the Gaussian curvature is
truly intrinsic, but it fits comfortably into this hierarchy with
the extrinsic functions.
3.2. Intrinsic sizing functions
We now present intrinsic sizing functions which embody
standard concepts in Riemannian geometry. An introducc 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Definition 6 (Injectivity radius) The injectivity radius at
x ∈ S is the supremum of the radii for which expx is injective:
ρi (x) = sup {ρ | expx is injective on BTx S (0; r) ∀r < ρ} .
The function ρi (x) is continuous on S [Cha06]. One of the
most useful properties of ρi (x) follows from the definition:
if dS (x, p) < ρi (x), then there is a unique minimal geodesic
γ between x and p and it will be the only geodesic between x
and p that is contained in BS (x; ρi (x)). By the first axiom of
Definition 3, the radius of a strongly convex disk cannot exceed the injectivity radius of the centre. Thus ρsc (x) ≤ ρi (x).

1398

R. Dyer & H. Zhang & T. Möller / Surface sampling and the intrinsic Voronoi diagram

Note that the image under expx of any disk D centred
at 0 in Tx S is exactly a geodesic disk, and that if the radius of D is less than ρi (x), then the image of D will
be a topological disk. However, it is incorrect to say that
ρi (x) is the largest radius for which the geodesic disk centred at x is an embedded topological disk. Indeed, as the
radius increases, there are two ways that the exponential
map can fail to be injective. One is if the disk wraps
around and merges with itself to create nontrivial topology.
But the other situation that
can occur is that the Jaz
cobian of expx may bex
x
come degenerate. Suppose
this happens at a point
z. The concentric geodesic Figure 3: Two ways the expocircles centred at x will be nential map can fail to be injecsmooth provided their ra- tive.
dius is less than ρi (x), however the circle through z may have a cusp. If γ is the minimal
geodesic joining x to z we say that z is a conjugate point to
x along γ (and vise versa: it is reciprocal). For all points y
on γ between x and z, the minimal geodesic between x and
y will be a portion of γ. However, for all points on the extension of γ past z, γ will not be a portion of the minimizing geodesic [Cha06]. Thus z ∈ BS (x; ρi (x)). More generally, if an open neighbourhood V of x is the bijective image
of expx |U for some U ⊂ Tx S, then V contains no conjugate
points and hence, by the inverse function theorem expx |U is
a diffeomorphism onto V .
A geodesic loop is a geodesic that starts and ends at the
same point. A closed geodesic (sometimes called a periodic
geodesic) is a geodesic loop γ whose tangent vectors agree
at its endpoints: γ′ (0) = γ′ (ℓ(γ)). Returning now to the case
where a change in the topology of the image of expx occurs,
it can be shown that there will be a geodesic loop starting and
ending at x. The midpoint of this loop is the closest point to
x at which expx fails to be injective [Cha06].
If we extend a geodesic γ from x, there will be a closest point z ∈ γ beyond which γ is no longer a minimizing
geodesic. The set of all such points is called the cut locus
of x and it is compact [dC92]. The assertions made above
are summarized by a theorem [Cha06][III.2.4, p.118] due to
Klingenberg:
Lemma 3 (Klingenberg) If q is the point on the cut locus of
x that is closest to x, then q is either
(i) conjugate to x along a minimal geodesic connecting
them, or,
(ii) the midpoint of a geodesic loop starting and ending at x.
3.2.3. Intrinsic sampling radius
There are no sampling criteria based exclusively on the injectivity radius. We give a sampling criterion, Corollary 1,
that is based on the scr alone, but by combining the two sizing functions we are able to relax that criterion.

Definition 7 (Intrinsic sampling radius) The intrinsic sampling radius at x ∈ S is given by
1
ρm (x) = min ρsc (x), ρi (x) .
2

Clearly, ρm (x) ≤ ρsc (x) ≤ ρi (x). In Section 4.2, we establish
a relationship between these quantities and the lfs.
4. Relating extrinsic and intrinsic sampling criteria
In this section we examine the relationship between intrinsic
sampling criteria based on the scr or the intrinsic sampling
radius and extrinsic ones based on the lfs. We show that for
any ε > 0, there exists an ε f > 0 such that any sample set P
that satisfies the extrinsic criterion:
∀x ∈ S

∃p ∈ P such that p ∈ BR3 (x; ε f ρ f (x)),

(3)

will also satisfy the corresponding intrinsic criterion:
∀x ∈ S

∃p ∈ P such that p ∈ BS (x; ερm (x)).

(4)

We begin by observing in Section 4.1 that the strong convexity condition of Theorem 1 immediately yields a sampling criterion of the form (4), employing ρsc (x) rather than
ρm (x) as the sampling radius. Subsequently we obtain a
weaker criterion using ρm (x). We then proceed to find an
explicit extrinsic criterion (3) that is sufficient to meet this.
A first step in this direction is to form an estimate on the
intrinsic sampling radius based on the lfs. In particular, we
seek a constant C such that
ρm (x) ≥ Cρ f (x) for any x ∈ S.

(5)

Both ρ f (x) and ρm (x) become smaller as the local maximal curvature becomes larger. However, ρ f (x) also becomes
smaller when geodesically distant points of the surface become close in the ambient space —- a property that ρm (x)
does not possess. Thus although the lfs may be bounded
above by the intrinsic sampling radius, we cannot hope to
find a constant that would allow us to reverse the inequality
in Equation (5). For this same reason, without further qualifications, we can never guarantee that any intrinsic sampling
(4) will satisfy a given extrinsic criterion (3).
In Section 4.2, we obtain an estimate for the constant C
in Equation (5). In equation (3), distances to the sample set
P are measured in the ambient space, whereas the intrinsic conditions (4) are specified with respect to geodesic distances on the surface, which are larger in general. So the
next step is to put an upper bound on the geodesic distance
between a point x ∈ S and a nearby point p ∈ P ⊂ S in terms
of the Euclidean distance between them. This is done in Section 4.3. Finally, in Section 4.4 we develop an explicit relationship between the ε of Equation (4) and the ε f of Equation (3) and we use this relationship to compare the sampling
criteria derived in Section 4.1 with more familiar extrinsic
sampling criteria for meshing and surface reconstruction.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

R. Dyer & H. Zhang & T. Möller / Surface sampling and the intrinsic Voronoi diagram

4.1. Intrinsic sampling criteria
Theorem 1 ensures that if the Voronoi cells can be contained
in strongly convex neighbourhoods, then a valid homeomorphic iDt-mesh can be constructed. We can use the strong
convexity radius to define a sampling density that will guarantee the conditions of Theorem 1.
Corollary 1 If ∀x ∈ S there exists a p ∈ P such that p ∈
BS (x; 12 ρsc (x)), then the iVd of P on S is well formed.
Proof. For any V(p), choose x ∈ V(p) that is at a maximal geodesic distance from p. The triangle inequality yields
V(p) ⊂ BS (x; ρsc (x)) and Theorem 1 applies.

Note that this sampling condition ensures more. If we
choose x to be a Voronoi vertex, then the associated samples
must all lie within BS (x; 21 ρsc (x)) and so there are unique
minimal geodesics between them. Thus Corollary 1 can be
strengthened to apply to intrinsic Delaunay triangulations:
Corollary 2 If ∀x ∈ S there exists a p ∈ P such that p ∈
BS (x; 12 ρsc (x)), then the iDt of P on S exists.

By contrast, Theorem 1 itself is not apriory sufficient to ensure that the iDt itself exists. Thus the above sampling condition is stronger than the condition imposed by Theorem 1.
Compared to Corollary 2, the sampling criterion of [LL00]
is more complicated. Also it requires at least that there be a
p ∈ P such that p ∈ BS (x; 15 ρsc (x)).
4.1.1. A weaker criterion
One observation that comes up in the demonstration of
Corollary 2 is that if we have a sampling criterion that demands only that a sample lies within the strong convexity
radius of any point on S, then we are guaranteed that there
will be a unique minimal geodesic between any two samples
that are Voronoi neighbours. So the question arises, in this
case where the ε has been doubled from 12 to 1: Is the iVd
still well formed? This would imply the existence of the iDt.
We have not obtained an affirmative answer to this question. However, we are able to ensure that the iVd is well
formed provided no point on the surface is as far as its intrinsic sampling radius from the nearest sample point. To facilitate this result, we borrow some terminology from Boissonnat and Oudot [BO05]:
Definition 8 (pseudo-disks) A family {Bi } of topological
disks on S are pseudo-disks if for any two distinct disks Bi
and B j , their boundaries either do not intersect, or they intersect tangentially at a single point, or they intersect transversely at exactly two points.
Qualitatively pseudo-disks intersect each other in the manner expected of Euclidean disks:

1399

p
Let Ci = ∂Bi . Each of these circles is
composed of two arcs joining p and q.
Choose a consistent orientation on the
circles and consider the three arcs emenating from p. One of these arcs must
q
be inside one of the two other disks, but
outside of the other. Suppose this arc belongs to C2 (blue
in figure), and that it is inside B1 and outside B3 . Since the
intersections are transversal, the other arc on C2 must be outside B1 , but inside B3 . Thus C2 is contained in B1 ∪ B3 .

The following lemma is an improvement and simplification of its namesake in [Lei99]:
Lemma 5 (Small circle intersection) For x ∈ S and r <
ρm (x), the disks BS (x; r) are pseudo-disks.
Proof. Let Cx = ∂BS (x; rx ) and Cy = ∂BS (y; ry ) be geodesic
circles with rx < ρm (x) and ry < ρm (y) and x = y. If
Cx and Cy intersect tangentially at z, then by the Gauss
lemma [dC92][p.69], the minimal geodesics γxz and γyz connecting x and y with z must have parallel tangent vectors at
z. It follows that x, y and z all lie on a common geodesic γ.
If γ′xz (rx ) = −γ′yz (ry ), then ℓ(γ) = rx + ry < 12 (ρi (x) +
ρi (y)). It follows that either x ∈ BS (y; ρi (y)), or y ∈
BS (x; ρi (x)) and γ is the unique minimal geodesic connecting x and y. If there were another interstection at w = z,
then α = γxw ∪ γyw would be a path between x and y with
ℓ(α) = rx + ry , contradicting the minimality of γ.
If on the other hand γ′xz (rx ) = γ′yz (ry ), then either x ∈ γyz
or y ∈ γxz . Assume the former. Then ry = rx + dS (x, y). Now
if there is another intersection at w, this same equality must
apply and we conclude that x ∈ γyw . But a radial geodesic
of length ry from y can only meet Cy once, and assuming
dS (x, y) > 0, there is only one such geodesic that contains x.
Therefore we must have w = z. Thus if Cx and Cy intersect
tangentially at z, there can be no other points of intersection.
Now suppose that Cx and Cy intersect transversely at z.
Then D = BS (x; rx ) ∩ BS (y; ry ) = ∅. Because it is strongly
convex, D must be a single connected component bounded
by an arc of Cx and an arc of Cy . It follows that Cx and Cy
must intersect transversely at another point distinct from z,
and that there can be no further transverse intersections.
Lemmas 4 and 5 provide an obstruction to neighbouring
Voronoi cells sharing more than two Voronoi vertices. This
yields our main sampling result:
Theorem 2 The iDt of P on S exists if
∀x ∈ S

∃p ∈ P such that p ∈ BS (x; ρm (x)).

Lemma 4 (Three circles) If B1 , B2 , and B3 are pseudo-disks
whose boundaries all intersect at p and q, then one of the
disks is contained in the union of the other two.

Proof. The sampling condition implies that there is a
unique minimal geodesic between samples that are Voronoi
neighbours. It remains to prove that the iVd is well formed.

Proof. It is sufficient to show that the boundary of one of
the disks is contained in the union of the other two disks.

Since p lies within the injectivity radius of each x ∈
V(p), there is an open neighbourhood V of V(p) that is

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1400

R. Dyer & H. Zhang & T. Möller / Surface sampling and the intrinsic Voronoi diagram

the diffeomorphic image under exp p of some U ⊂ Tp S (see
Section 3.2.2). This implies that V(p) is contractible (use
exp p ◦ t · exp−1
p , t ∈ [0, 1]). Thus V(p) is a topological disk.

p and q are conjugate along γ, then

It remains to show that V(p) and V(q) cannot share more
than a single Voronoi edge. If this were the case, we would
have a region Ω, as in Figure 1(a), that is bounded completely by V(p) and V(q). Suppose that the Voronoi vertices a and b were both on the boundary of V(s) ⊂ Ω. Consider the geodesic circles centred at a and b and with radius
dS (a, s) < ρm (a) and dS (b, s) < ρm (b), respectively. Since a
and b are Voronoi vertices, these two circles would have to
intersect at p and q in addition to s, contradicting Lemma 5.

For case (ii) of Lemma 3 there is an extension to open
curves of a famous theorem by Fenchel that we can exploit.
Let γ be a smooth space curve from p to q. Let v be the vector
from p to q in R3 . Denote by α and β the angles ∠(γ′ (0), v)
and ∠(γ′ (ℓ(γ)), v) respectively, and let kγ (t) = γ′′ (t) be
the curvature of γ at γ(t). Then the inequality, which is referred to in [Top06][p. 56] as the Fenchel-Reshetnyak inequality, states that

Suppose then that the Voronoi vertices a and b are on the
boundaries of V(s) ⊂ Ω and V(v) ⊂ Ω, respectively. By hypothesis, V(p) and V(q) share more than a single Voronoi
edge. Therefore there are at least four Voronoi vertices in
V(p) ∩ V(q). Let c be such a Voronoi vertex, distinct from a
and b. Consider the three disks centred at these Voronoi vertices and with radii such that their respective three closest
samples lie on the boundary. These three disks are pseudodisks, and their boundaries intersect at p and q. Thus by
Lemma 4 one of these disks, say Ba , is contained in the
union of the other two. However, Ba has a third sample, s, on
its boundary, contradicting the fact that all three disks must
have empty interiors. Thus the iVd must be well formed.
Since the injectivity radius is never smaller than the scr,
we are assured that the conditions imposed by Theorem 2
are at least as weak as those demanded by Corollary 2. For
the comparison with the lfs which we develop next, the result
of Theorem 2 is twice as good.

4.2. A lfs estimate on the intrinsic sampling radius
In this section we arrive at Theorem 4, one of the main results of this paper. By producing a relationship (10) between
the intrinsic sampling radius and the lfs, it opens the door
for comparing intrinsic and extrinsic sampling criteria. We
exploit curvature bounds established in the Riemannian geometry literature. Two facts, Lemmas 6 and 7, which respectively give insight into case (i) and (ii) of the Klingenberg
Lemma 3, enable us to get an estimate on the injectivity radius. With the addition of a result from Chavel, Lemma 8,
we obtain an estimate on the scr.

∃z ∈ γ such that

Z

γ

ρG (z) ≤

ℓ(γ)
.
π

(6)

kγ (t) dt ≥ α + β.

The Fenchel-Reshetnyak inequality applies to non-closed
curves, however, if we have γ(0) = γ(ℓ(γ)) = p, then we can
break γ into two pieces and obtain a curvature bound by applying Equation (6) to each piece.
Choose a point q on γ and let γ1 be the portion of γ from
p to q and let γ2 be the remaining portion from q back to p.
Denote the associated initial and final angles by α1 , β1 and
α2 , β2 respectively. Then β1 + α2 = π and
Z

γ

kγ (t) dt =

Z

γ1

kγ1 (t) dt +

Z

γ2
′

kγ2 (t) dt ≥ α1 + β1 + α2 + β2

≥ (π − ∠(γ′ (0), γ (ℓ(γ)))) + π.
All we can assert about (π − ∠(γ′ (0), γ′ (ℓ(γ)))) is that it is
positive. Thus for an arbitrary loop curve γ we have that the
total curvature is greater than π. It follows that there must be
some point on γ where the curvature is greater than π/ℓ(γ).
Applied to geodesics, this gives us the following:
Lemma 7 (Fenchel, Reshetnyak) On a geodesic loop γ,
∃z ∈ γ such that

ρκ (z) <

ℓ(γ)
.
π

We obtain an estimate on the injectivity radius:
Theorem 3 (Injectivity radius estimate) For all x ∈ S
ρi (x) ≥

π
ρ f (x).
2+π

Proof.
In the first case of Lemma 3, we have from
Lemma 6 and Equation (2) that there exists a point z
in B¯ S (x; ρi (x)) with ρ f (z) ≤ ρG (z) ≤ ρi (x)/π. Using the
Lipschitz continuity of lfs (1), we have ρ f (x) ≤ ρ f (z) +

To tackle case (i) of Lemma 3, a theorem [Cha06][II.6.3,
p.86] attributed to Morse and Schönberg states that if q is
conjugate to p along a geodesic γ and the Gaussian
√ curvature
along γ is bounded above by G, then ℓ(γ) ≥ π/ G. In other
words, ℓ(γ) ≥ π infz∈γ ρG (z), and since γ is a compact set,
there will be a point that attains the bound. Thus we can
state the theorem in a more convenient form:

In the second case, we have by Lemma 7, a z in
B¯ S (x; ρi (x)) with ρ f (z) ≤ ρκ (z) ≤ 2ρi (x)/π, and Lipschitz
π
)ρ f (x). Taking the smaller of
continuity yields ρi (x) ≥ ( 2+π
the two bounds gives our estimate on ρi (x).

Lemma 6 (Morse, Schönberg) If a geodesic γ connecting p
to q contains a point conjugate to one of its endpoints, or if

Our estimate on the scr is based on a theorem in
[Cha06][IX.6.1, p.404] which gives a global lower bound

dS (x, z) ≤

ρi (x)
π

π
+ ρi (x), and so ρi (x) ≥ ( 1+π
)ρ f (x).

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1401

R. Dyer & H. Zhang & T. Möller / Surface sampling and the intrinsic Voronoi diagram

for the scr in terms of global bounds on the injectivity radius and the Gaussian curvature. The following lemma is
extracted from Chavel’s proof:
Lemma 8 (Chavel) Let xpq be a geodesic triangle consisting of geodesics γ1 , γ2 and γ3 connecting xp, pq and qx
respectively. Suppose there is a constant r0 > 0, such that
ρG (z) ≥ r0 on BS (x; ρi (x)). Suppose also that ∑3i=1 ℓ(γi ) <
min{2ρi (x), 2πr0 }. Then
γ2 ⊂ BS (x; ρ),
where ρ = max{dS (x, p), dS (x, q)}.
This result, together with Lemmas 6 and 7, yields the main
result of this section:
Theorem 4 (scr estimate) For all x ∈ S,
ρsc (x) ≥

(i) the minimizer γ connecting p and q is not unique, or
(ii) in addition to γ, there is another geodesic α connecting
p and q and contained in BS (x; r), or
(iii) γ is not contained in BS (x; r).
Case (i) cannot happen if dS (p, q) < max{ρi (p), ρi (q)},
and possibility (ii) is eliminated if BS (x; r) ⊂ BS (p; ρi (p))
for any p ∈ BS (x; r). Thus we eliminate the first two cases if
we ensure that ρi (p) ≥ 2r for all p ∈ BS (x; r).
If ρi (p) < 2r, then by the Klingenberg Lemma 3 either
(a) there is a z ∈ BS (p; 2r) ⊂ BS (x; 3r) that is conjugate to p
along a minimizing geodesic, or
(b) there is a geodesic loop in BS (p; 2r).
In case (a), the Morse-Schönberg Lemma 6 gives us a z ∈
BS (x; 3r) with ρ f (z) ≤ 2r
π . The Lipschitz continuity of lfs
yields ρ f (x) ≤ ρ f (z) + dS (x, z) ≤ 2r
π + 3r. Thus
π
ρ f (x).
2 + 3π

(7)

In case (b), the Fenchel-Reshetnyak Lemma 7 yields a z ∈
BS (x; 3r) with ρ f (z) < 4r
π . Again using Lipschitz continuity
to bring the lfs bound to x, we obtain
r>

π
ρ f (x).
4 + 3π

r>

1
2

π
ρ f (x).
1+π

2r
π,

(9)

By (8), the smaller of the three estimates, we have that
π
ρ f (x), and
BS (x; r) is strongly convex whenever r ≤ 4+3π
we obtain the theorem by the definition of the scr.
Since the constant in the scr bound is less than half of that
of the injectivity bound, we can use it also as a bound on the
intrinsic sampling radius. Thus for all x ∈ S
π
ρ f (x).
4 + 3π

ρm (x) ≥

(10)

4.3. Bounding geodesic lengths

π
ρ f (x).
4 + 3π

Proof. Consider the geodesic disk of radius r centred at x.
There are three ways in which BS (x; r) can fail to be strongly
convex: There exist p, q ∈ BS (x; r) such that either

r≥

BS (x; 2r) with 2πρG (z) < 4r. This would imply ρ f (z) <
and the Lipschitz shuffle to x yields

(8)

Thus if we ensure that r is smaller than the bounds (7) and
(8) then cases (i) and (ii) cannot happen and we need only
consider case (iii). For this we turn to Chavel’s Lemma 8.
Consider the geodesic triangle xpq consisting of minimal
geodesics, with notation as in Lemma 8. By hypothesis we
now have ρi (x) ≥ 2r, so ∑3i=1 ℓ(γi ) < 4r ≤ 2ρi (x). Thus the
conditions of Lemma 8 are satisfied unless there is a z ∈
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Since Euclidean distances between two points never exceed
the geodesic distances, p ∈ BS (x; ρ) implies p ∈ BR3 (x; ρ).
However, we need to make claims about the containment of
points within geodesic disks, given their presence within a
Euclidean ball. Estimates on dS (x, p) relative to dR3 (x, p),
for x, p ∈ S sufficiently close, are provided in the works
of [MT04] and [HPW06]. We follow the terminology and
notation of the former.
We exploit the projection mapping, ξ : UρR → S discussed
in Section 3.1. The relative curvature, ω(m), at a point m ∈
UρR is defined as
dR3 (m, ξ(m))
.
ρκ (ξ(m))

ω(m) =

From the definition of UρR , dR3 (m, ξ(m)) ≤ ρR (ξ(m)), so
Equation (2) gives ω(m) ≤ 1.

Suppose that p ∈ BR3 (x; ε f ρ f (x)) and let I =]x, p[ be the
open Euclidean line segment between x and p, and let ω =
supm∈I ω(m). Then according to [MT04]:
ℓ(ξ(I)) ≤

1
d 3 (x, p).
1−ω R

(11)

If γ is a minimal geodesic between x and p, then dS (x, p) =
ℓ(γ) ≤ ℓ(ξ(I)) gives us the needed bound.

Since ξ takes m to the closest point on S, we have, for
all m ∈ I, dR3 (m, ξ(m)) ≤ 12 dR3 (x, p) ≤ 12 ε f ρ f (x). For the
denominator of ω we have ρκ (ξ(m)) ≥ ρ f (ξ(m)), and by the
Lipschitz continuity of lfs (1), ρ f (ξ(m)) ≥ (1 − ε f )ρ f (x).
εf
Thus ω ≤ 2(1−ε
. For the estimate to be usable, we need
f)
ω ≤ 1, so we demand ε f < 2/3.
Plugging this estimate into (11) together with dR3 (x, p) <
ε f ρ f (x) yields the needed bound on the geodesic length:

Lemma 9 If p ∈ S ∩ BR3 (x; ε f ρ f (x)), with ε f < 2/3, then
p ∈ BS (x; ε˜ ρ f (x)) for
ε˜ ≤

ε f (1 − ε f )
1 − 32 ε f

.

1402

R. Dyer & H. Zhang & T. Möller / Surface sampling and the intrinsic Voronoi diagram
Relating extrinsic and intrinsic sampling criteria

extrinsic εf

0.25

Us
[LL00]
[AB98]
[BO05]

0.2

0.15
0.1

0.05
0
0

0.5

intrinsic ε

1

Figure 4: The ε for intrinsic sampling (4) is on the horizontal axis. The required ε f for equation (3) is on the vertical
axis. Sampling criteria from other works are compared.

The estimates on the injectivity radius and the scr in Section 4.2 can probably be tightened. The constant in Equaπ
π
if it can
to 12 1+π
tion (10) may be improved from 4+3π
be shown that: if distinct geodesics α and γ connect p and q,
ℓ(α)+ℓ(γ)
. Furthen there is a point z ∈ α ∪ γ with ρR (z) ≤
2π
thermore, we would no longer rely on Lemmas 6, 7, or 3.
Although the statements of Theorems 1 and 2 make sense
in higher dimensions, their proofs are not easily extended.
However, extending the proofs of Theorems 3 and 4 may
require no more than a reworking of Section 3.1.
References

4.4. Extrinsic criteria meeting intrinsic demands

[AB98] A MENTA N., B ERN M. W.: Surface Reconstruction by
Voronoi Filtering. In Symp. Comp. Geom. (1998), pp. 39–48.

Equipped with Equation (10) and Lemma 9 we determine
that if P satisfies equation (3), then it will also satisfy equation (4) provided that

[BO05] B OISSONNAT J.-D., O UDOT S.: Provably good sampling
and meshing of surfaces. Graphical Models 67, 5 (2005), 405–
451.

ε f (1 − ε f )
Putting C

π
= ε 4+3π
,

1−

3
2εf

≤ε

π
.
4 + 3π

we get

3
ε2f − (1 + C)ε f +C ≥ 0,
2
an inequality that will be satisfied whenever ε f is smaller
than the smaller of the two positive roots.
For our sampling criteria of Theorem 2, ε = 1, yielding C ≈ 0.234 and ε f ≤ 0.204 is required. This compares well with existing lfs sampling requirements for topological consistency. For example, ε f ≤ 0.1 is required in
[AB98]. In [BO05], a loose ε-sample is required to have
ε ≤ 0.091. A loose ε-sample only requires samples to lie
within BR3 (c; ερ f (c)) when c is a vertex of the rVd. According to Corollary 4.10 of that work, such a sampling will be
an ε f -sampling in the sense of Equation (3) for ε f ≈ 0.161.
These comparisons are summarized in Figure 4.
5. Conclusions
Through an analysis of the iVd, we improved upon the sampling criteria of [LL00, Lei99]. By deriving inequalities relating the injectivity radius and the strong convexity radius to
the local feature size, we have enabled comparison between
sampling criteria in the intrinsic and extrinsic domains.
The indication is that sharper bounds may result from an
intrinsic analysis even if an algorithm is based on an extrinsic model. However, we have not demonstrated that the
new sampling conditions are sufficient to ensure that the
iDt-mesh is a substructure of the 3D Delaunay tetrahedralization. Since good convergence properties of the iDt-mesh
have been demonstrated [DLYG06], this would put it on a
more or less equal footing with the rDt. It is known that
the rDt and the iDt-mesh are not necessarily combinatorially
equivalent, regardless of sampling density [DZM07].

[CDRR04] C HENG S.-W., D EY T. K., R AMOS E. A., R AY T.:
Sampling and meshing a surface with guaranteed topology and
geometry. In Symp. Comp. Geom. (2004), pp. 280–289.
[Cha06] C HAVEL I.: Riemannian Geometry, A modern introduction, 2nd ed. Cambridge, 2006.
[dC92] DO C ARMO M. P.: Riemannian Geometry. Birkhäuser,
1992.
[DLYG06] DAI J., L UO W., YAU S.-T., G U X.: Geometric accuracy analysis for discrete surface approximation. In Geometric
Modeling and Processing (2006), pp. 59–72.
[DZM07] DYER R., Z HANG H., M ÖLLER T.: Voronoi-Delaunay
duality and Delaunay meshes. In Symp. Solid and Physical Modeling (2007), pp. 415–420.
[ES94] E DELSBRUNNER H., S HAH N. R.: Triangulating topological spaces. In Symp. Comp. Geom. (1994), pp. 285–292.
[Fed59] F EDERER H.: Curvature measures. Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc. 93 (1959), 418–491.
[GGOW08] G AO J., G UIBAS L. J., O UDOT S. Y., WANG Y.:
Geodesic delaunay triangulation and witness complex in the
plane. In Symp. on Discrete Algorithms (2008), pp. 571–580.
[HPW06] H ILDEBRANDT K., P OLTHIER K., WARDETZKY M.:
On the Convergence of Metric and Geometric Properties of Polyhedral Surfaces. Geometriae Dedicata 123, 1 (2006), 89–112.
[Kli95] K LINGENBERG W. P. A.: Riemannian Geometry, second ed. Walter de Gruyter, 1995.
[Lei99] L EIBON G.: Random Delaunay triangulations, the
Thurston-Andreev theorem, and metric uniformization. PhD thesis, UCSD, 1999. arXiv:math/0011016v1.
[LL00] L EIBON G., L ETSCHER D.: Delaunay Triangulations and
Voronoi Diagrams for Riemannian Manifolds. In Symp. Comp.
Geom. (2000), pp. 341–349.
[MT04] M ORVAN J.-M., T HIBERT B.: Approximation of the
normal vector field and the area of a smooth surface. Discrete
& Computational Geometry 32, 3 (2004), 383–400.
[Top06] T OPONOGOV V. A.: Differential Geometry of Curves
and Surfaces. Birkhaäuser, 2006.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

