Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2008
A. Vilanova, A. Telea, G. Scheuermann, and T. Möller
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 3

Generating Color Palettes using Intuitive Parameters
Martijn Wijffelaars1,2 , Roel Vliegen1 , Jarke J. van Wijk2 and Erik-Jan van der Linden2
1 MagnaView
2 Eindhoven

BV, Eindhoven, the Netherlands
University of Technology, the Netherlands

Abstract
Color is widely used in data visualization to show data values. The proper selection of colors is critical to convey
information correctly. In this paper, we present a technique for generating univariate lightness ordered palettes.
These are specified via intuitive input parameters that are used define the appearance of the palette: number of
colors, hue, lightness, saturation, contrast and hue range. The settings of the parameters are used to generate
curves through CIELUV color space. This color space is used in order to correctly translate the requirements
in terms of perceptual properties to a set of colors. The presented palette generation method enables users to
specify palettes that have these perceptual properties, such as perceived order, equal perceived distance and equal
importance. The technique has been integrated in MagnaView, a system for multivariate data visualization.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): http://www.acm.org/class/1998/ I.3.8 [Computer
Graphics]: Applications

1. Introduction
Color is used in all areas of visualization, including cartography, information visualization and scientific visualization.
The prime application is to encode data, but it is also used to
highlight certain aspects or for aesthetical purposes. In this
paper, we focus on the use of color for data encoding, and
especially for ordered univariate data. Here, a scalar value is
mapped to a color, either by using a continuous function or
via a discrete mapping. The resulting ordered set of colors is
called a palette. Selecting the right combination of colors in
a palette is critical for conveying information correctly.
This task is not trivial. A number of sometimes conflicting requirements have to be met, moreover, the functional
characteristics of the human visual system have to be taken
into account. Experts can achieve optimal results by carefully hand-picking colors; for non-experts this is often too
difficult and time-consuming. A simple solution is to provide the user with a number of standard palettes. However,
none of these may be deemed optimal for the application
under consideration, and hence a custom palette has to be
created.
In this paper, we propose a model for the automated synthesis of palettes. Users are provided with a limited set of
intuitive parameters, which they can use to quickly gener-

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

ate a wide variety of proper palettes. We attempt to produce palettes with a similar quality as carefully manually
designed palettes.
In section 2 we present an overview of manually designed palettes and methods for creating palettes. In section 3 we formulate our objectives. In section 4 we present
our palette generation model. Colors follow from sampling a
curve through the CIELUV color space. In section 5 we show
the integration of the technique in the visualization application MagnaView and present the results of our user study.
Finally, the results are discussed and possibilities for future
work are presented in section 6.
2. Related work
There are three main requirements for proper univariate ordered palettes [Tru81, Lev96, Bre99]:
1. The colors display a perceived ordering;
2. The perceived color distances are representative of the
intended distances;
3. The colors are perceived as equally important.
An example of a palette that fails in all these aspects is the
widely used rainbow color map [BT07]. Besides these general requirements, other visualization-specific requirements

744

M. Wijffelaars et al. / Generating Color Palettes using Intuitive Parameters

have to be satisfied. For instance, red roads on a red background are invisible, or, perceptual steps between consecutive colors need to be higher if the spatial frequency of the
visualization is high.

[RO86]. This, however, introduces a new problem. These
color spaces use device independent colors, therefore care
must be taken to use only colors that fall within the gamut
of the used device, i.e., within displayable color space (Figure 2).

2.1. Brewer palettes
The best results are produced by experts that carefully select
the most appropriate colors. Prime examples are the palettes
designed by Cynthia Brewer [Bre99, Bre05], which are often used and highly respected in the visualization community. We therefore consider them as reference prototypes for
automatically generated palettes.
The Brewer set of palettes is large, but finite. For a number of hues no palettes are provided, and also, palettes with a
large number of colors up to continuous palettes are not supported. Furthermore, deviations from these palettes might be
needed such that the palette colors do not interfere with the
other colors used in the visualization. To provide a larger set
of palettes, automated generation is required.
2.2. Color systems
Many visualization toolkits have implemented some method
for palette generation. These methods are mostly based on
the RGB, HSV (also known as HSB) or HLS (also known as
HSL and HSI) color systems. In these color systems paths
are defined, mostly via lines or curves, along which the
palette colors are sampled. One of the most sophisticated in
this category is PRAVDAColor [BRT95].
These color systems can be used to generate palettes that
display a perceived ordering, but the perceived color distances are not representative for the intended distance. This
requires a color system that is perceptually uniform, i.e., colors having equal values in certain dimensions should have
equal perceptual properties in that dimension. As an example, two colors of lightness value 50 are perceived as equally
light. Figure 1 shows examples of non perceptual uniformity
of the HLS space.

Figure 2: The RGB cube, the HSV cone, the HLS doublecone and displayable CIELUV space
2.3. Sampling color space
Others have used the CIELUV or CIELAB color space as the
basis of a palette generation method [Lev96, RO86, ZH06,
ZM06, Pha90]. Some use sampled straight lines to define
their palettes. However, then the irregularly shaped color
spaces can not be used to their full potential. For instance,
the only way to achieve maximum lightness contrast with
a straight line is to go from black to white, creating a gray
scale. Some use line segments to solve this. This, however,
introduces discontinuities in the first order derivative of the
path. The sharper the bends in the path, the more attention
is drawn towards these discontinuities, thereby violating the
equal importance requirement.
All palette generation methods referred to above use color
keys to specify their palettes. To generate a proper palette,
i.e., one that fits the requirements stated in the beginning of
section 2, the color keys have to be chosen carefully. Therefore, the user is required to have experience in the field of
creating color palettes. This is reflected in a recent paper by
Zhang and Montag [ZM06] which states:
"The construction of color schemes is a subtle task
and the design process is mostly ad hoc."
Furthermore, they give no solution on how to prevent the
path from exiting displayable color space.
3. Overview

Figure 1: Examples of non perceptual uniformity in HLS.
Left: Three colors of equal lightness. Middle: Two pairs of
colors with equal hue distance. Right: Two pairs of colors
with equal lightness distance.
A solution is to use a color system based on human perception, such as CIELUV or CIELAB [cie86]. The CIELUV
system is recommended in additive light source conditions,
the CIELAB system for use under reflected light conditions

Our aim is to aid the user such that he can only generate
palettes that satisfy the given requirements, while still being
able to fine-tune a palette to a visualization and to his preferences.
Our solution is to use a curve instead of line segments.
This way, it is possible to utilize the complete lightness range
and have no abrupt bends in the path. Furthermore, we propose to help the user by specifying palettes using a limited
set of intuitive parameters, rather than color keys. The first
three are hue, saturation and brightness, in accordance with

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Wijffelaars et al. / Generating Color Palettes using Intuitive Parameters

745

Figure 3: The volume of displayable colors in CIELUV space, three hue slices of CIELUV space generated with PaletteView and
the triangle that approximates the boundary of the displayable colors of a hue slice
the intuitive dimensions of color spaces. Further parameters
are the number of colors of the palette, the cold/warm parameter that controls the perceived color temperature, and the
contrast parameter that defines the overall lightness contrast
of the palette. These parameters make it possible to fine-tune
palettes to visualization-specific requirements; for instance,
a palette in a certain lightness range ensures that white text
is always clearly visible, or, using a palette with lowly saturated colors makes it possible to highlight other aspects of
the visualization with saturated colors.
4. Model
In this section, we give a short introduction to the CIELUV
color space, then analyze Brewer palettes within that space.
Based on this analysis, we propose a model for generation of
single-hue palettes, which is extended to a multi-hue model.
4.1. CIELUV
The CIEXYZ system forms the basis of CIELUV. The XYZ
coordinates of a given color stimulus can be calculated by
measuring its spectral power distribution with a spectrophotometer. Via multiplication with an RGB-matrix, the XYZ
coordinates can be converted to RGB and back.
The XYZ space is not perceptually uniform. To make it
more uniform, CIEXYZ is transformed to CIELUV. Via a further transformation, CIELUV can be converted to LCHuv ,
yielding the intuitive dimensions lightness, saturation and
hue. LCHuv makes it possible to specify a color in both
perceptual and meaningful terms. For more information on
the conversion of colors between color systems we refer
to [cie86, Lin].
During the development and testing of our palette generation technique CRT monitors were used, since they have
superior color reproduction to LCD displays. However, the
color palettes can be calibrated to other monitors by changing parameters in the color space conversion formulae, such
as gamma, reference white, and the RGB-matrix.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

It is possible to specify a color in LCHuv outside the displayable color space of a monitor, i.e., if its corresponding
RGB value is not in the range of [0..1]3 . By clamping the
RGB components back to that range, a displayable color is
obtained. We aim to use LCHuv values that are within displayable color space, to avoid the irregularities that result
from color clamping.
Figure 2 (right) shows the RGB-cube, representing the
displayable colors, transformed to CIELUV space. To investigate color spaces, we developed an application called
PaletteView. This application generates slices from color
spaces shown in four seperate viewports. Figure 3 contains
three such slices, each showing the displayable colors of a
single hue. Note that each hue slice has a different shape, in
contrast with hue slices of HSV or HLS. The CIELUV slices
better match our perception, because the most saturated colors of each hue reside at different lightness levels; yellow
colors are saturated at high lightness values, blue colors at
low lightness values. The example colors in Figure 1 that
have equal lightness in HLS, have a lightness value of 60, 97
and 46 in CIELUV space.
We use the convention LCHuv (60, 20, 270) to denote a
color of a certain color space, in this case a LCHuv color
with lightness 60, saturation 20 and hue 270. To convert a
color c to a certain color space we use the notation RGB(c),
which gives the RGB coordinates of c. A color component
is obtained by adding a suffix, e.g., c.L yields the lightness
of c.
4.2. Brewer palettes in CIELUV
To analyze the Brewer palettes within the CIELUV color
space, the RGB coordinates of their colors are converted to
LCHuv space. Figure 4 (left) shows three single-hue palettes
of Brewer, with lightness on the vertical axis and saturation
on the horizontal axis. Based on the plots, a number of observations can be made:
• As the palettes increase in lightness, the saturation increases and then decreases. This indicates that for a clear

746

M. Wijffelaars et al. / Generating Color Palettes using Intuitive Parameters

Figure 4: Left: Three Brewer palettes plotted in LCHuv space with PaletteView. Center: The RGB cube with all MSCs.
∗
Right: Colors at equal distance according to ∆Euv
, CIE94, CIEDE2000, and the L function.

order to be perceived a monotonic saturation increase or
decrease is not necessary. We observed that as long as the
saturation changes are not too abrupt, they do not violate
the order or the equal importance requirements.
• The palettes do not increase linearly in CIELUV lightness;
the lighter colors are closer to each other than the darker
colors.
• The Brewer palette paths have saturation peaks at a different lightness levels. The shape of the path follows from
the shapes of the hue slices in CIELUV space.

γ stands for the gamma value, un and vn denote the (u, v)
coordinate of the reference white, and mi j denotes a value of
the RGB-matrix.

4.3. Displayable colors of a hue
Our approach for palette generation is to define a continuous
path through color space, sampled at uniform color distance
intervals, to obtain a discrete palette with finite numbers of
colors.
We first consider the space available for a path of a single
hue. A hue slice of displayable color space in CIELUV can be
characterized by three points: white, black and the MSC(h),
i.e., the Most Saturated Color of a hue. The MSC is not at
equal lightness and saturation for each hue (Figure 3). The
triangular surface spanned by black, white and the MSC, is
an approximation of the displayable color space of a certain
hue. Using this triangular surface, only a small portion of
the displayable color space is not used, and little clamping is
required to make all colors displayable.
All MSCs lie on edges of the RGB cube characterized by
one RGB component at value 0, one at value 1, and one variable component (Figure 4 center). To calculate the MSC of a
given hue h, first the correct edge is determined, next the
intersection point between this edge and the CIELUV hue
plane belonging to h is calculated. In Figure 4 (center), for
MSC(280) holds that G = 0, B = 1, next R can be calculated
by
(αu +βv )(m

+15m +3m )−(4αm

+9βm )

R = − (αun +βvn )(mBX +15mBY +3mBZ )−(4αmBX +9βmBY )
n

n

RX

RY

RZ

RX

RY

1
γ

,

where α = − sin(h) and β = cos(h) [Wij08]. Furthermore,

Figure 5: Left: the CIELUV displayable color volume with a
cylinder that defines all colors of similar saturation. Right:
the corresponding saturation slice generated with PaletteView. The path of the MSCs of all hues is shown, indicating
the lightness of each MSC.
4.4. Single-hue sequential palette model
The triangular surface that approximates the displayable colors of a given hue, is used as the basis for the path on which
all colors of a palette are sampled. The path can be specified
using the following intuitive control parameters:
•
•
•
•
•

N: number of colors, (N = ∞ for continuous palettes);
h: the main hue;
c: the overall lightness contrast;
s: saturation;
b: brightness.

For reference the complete single-hue sequential palette
model is given in table 1. The points p0 , p1 and p2
define the triangular surface, defined by LCHuv (0, 0, h),
MSC(h) and LCHuv (100, 0, h). We define the continuous
curve Cseq as two quadratic Bézier curves using (p0 , q0 , q1 )
and (q1 , q2 , p2 ) as control points (Figure 3). This yields a
path from black, through a range of colors of equal hue, to
white.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

747

M. Wijffelaars et al. / Generating Color Palettes using Intuitive Parameters

Figure 6: Changing the curve with saturation, brightness and contrast parameters

Table 1: Single-hue sequential palette model.
i
Pseq [i] = Pseq ( N−1
),

i ∈ [0..N − 1]

Pseq (t) = Cseq ( T (L(t)) ),

t ∈ [0..1]

L(t)

= 125 − 125 · 0.2(1−c)b+tc ,

Cseq (t) =
Figure 7: Left: seven palettes made by Brewer. Right: seven
generated palettes with varying contrast
The saturation parameter s controls the tension of curve
Cseq ; if s = 0 then Cseq is a straight line from p0 to p2 , if
s = 1, Cseq is a path from p0 to p1 to p2 (Figure 6). The
brightness parameter b determines the starting position of
the curve. The lightness contrast parameter c determines the
length of the curve (Figure 6). In the Brewer palettes the
lightness contrast is related to the number of colors in the
palette. The default value for c, c = min(0.88, 0.34+0.06N),
approximates this relation (Figure 7).

T( ) =

B(p0 , q0 , q1 , 2t),
B(q1 , q2 , p2 , 2(t − 0.5)),

t ∈ [0..1]
t ≤ 0.5
t > 0.5

0.5B−1 (p0 .L, q0 .L, q1 .L, ),
0.5B−1 (q1 .L, q2 .L, p2 .L, ) + 0.5,

≤ q1 .L
> q1 .L

B(b0 , b1 , b2 ,t) = (1 − t)2 b0 + 2(1 − t)tb1 + t 2 b2
√
b −b + b21 −b0 b2 +(b0 −2b1 +b2 )v
B−1 (b0 , b1 , b2 , v) = 0 1
b0 −2b1 +b2
p0 = LCHuv (0, 0, h)
p1 = MSC(h)
p2 = LCHuv (100, 0, h)

q0 = (1 − s)p0 + sp1
q1 = 12 (q0 + q2 )
q2 = (1 − s)p2 + sp1

Default values:
s = 0.6, b = 0.75, c = min(0.88, 0.34 + 0.06N)

4.5. Distance function
In an ideal perceptually uniform model, colors at equal parameter distance have an equal perceived distance. Although
CIELUV and CIELAB are better than the simpler models, still
distance functions are used to calculate the perceived distance between two colors. The CIE has defined several dis∗
tance functions: ∆Euv
, CIE94 and CIEDE2000 [cie86, Lin].
However, neither of these yielded satisfactory results, which
is shown in Figure 4 (right). Therefore, it is necessary to introduce a new distance function L, for use with our palette
definition. Based on the colors of the Brewer palettes in Figure 4 (left), L transforms the color space in such a way that
palette colors are closer to each other in CIELUV when their
lightness is high, and further apart when their lightness is
low. The L function considers only the L component of the
colors, since lightness is the dominant perceptual compo-

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

nent that produces an ordering in a sequential palette. Points
on curve Cseq , which is comprised of two quadratic Bézier
curves, can now be found analytically. First the lightness of
a color is calculated with L(t), since Cseq .L now is equal
for all parameter settings. Then, T is used to calculate the
curve parameter value that belongs to this lightness. Using
this value the corresponding saturation and hue are calculated with Cseq .
4.6. Multi-hue and diverging palettes
Multi-hue palettes make it easier to detect to which cluster a certain color belongs, because of the gradual change
in hue [SKR99, Lev96, BT07]. By analyzing the Brewer
palettes with PaletteView, we found out that many palettes

748

M. Wijffelaars et al. / Generating Color Palettes using Intuitive Parameters

move towards yellow as they get lighter, even most singlehue palettes. A reason for this is that yellow colors can be
saturated at a high lightness (Figure 5). We make use of this,
when generating multi-hue palettes, by shifting the top point
p2 towards a bright point pb , defined as yellow. Parameter
w controls how close the top point p2 is to pb . However, the
resulting point could lie outside the triangular surface that
approximates displayable colors. Therefore, Smax calculates
the maximum saturation for a color of a certain lightness and
hue; it projects the color back to the triangular surface, and
preserves its lightness and hue value. The hues are interpolated using the shortest path on the color circle, for instance,
mixing hues 60 and 340 yields 20. Since moving colors
towards yellow makes their appearance warmer and moving them away colder, we call the w parameter cold/warm.
Table 2 shows the multi-hue model as an extension to the
single-hue model of Table 1. With this model, a wide range
of multi-hue palettes can be generated.

hue range (Figure 10). The number of colors is derived from
the data. The type of data is used for selecting between sequential and diverging palettes; for instance, unsigned numerical data is assigned a sequential palette and signed numerical data a diverging palette.

Brewer also specifies diverging palettes. A diverging
palette is created by concatenating two sequential palettes,
with a combined neutral point. The neutral point is white or
gray in case of single-hue palettes and moves towards the
bright point pb as w increases for multi-hue palettes. Figures
9 and 10 show examples of generated diverging palettes.
Table 2: Multi-hue sequential palette model.
p2 .L = 100(1 − w) + w · pb .L
p2 .S = min(Smax (p.L, p.H), w · s · pb .S)
p2 .H= (h + αM) mod 360
M = (180 + pb .H − h) mod 360 − 180
Smax (l, h ) = α(pmid .S − pend .S) + pend .S
where
α = (pend .L − l) / (pend .L − pmid .L)
pmid = MSC(h )
LCHuv (0, 0, h ),
l ≤ pmid .L
pend =
LCHuv (100, 0, h ), l ≥ pmid .L
Default values:
pb = LCH(RGB(1, 1, 0)), w = 0

5. Results
We have implemented our palette generation technique
in the visualization application MagnaView [Mag], that
visualizes multivariate data using generalized treemaps
[VvWvdL06]. Each tile in the treemap is assigned a color
based on a mapping between a data attribute and a color
palette.
Novel users can select preset palettes that we defined using the parameters hue, lightness, saturation, contrast and

Figure 8: User interface for editing palettes in MagnaView.
Experienced users can alter all parameters of the (preset)
palettes using sliders that show the possible palette appearances for all values of a dimension (Figure 8). This way, the
user can see beforehand how changing a certain parameter
will affect the palette. Because it is important to see a set
of colors in context [MSK04], our aim is that the user can
see the colors in the visualization change when the palette
is changed; however, we have not implemented this yet. Our
palette generation technique can only generate palettes that
satisfy the three palette requirements, therefore users can
only create proper palettes, while still having a wide range
of possibilities. If needed, expert users can still set all colors
individually.
5.1. User Study
We performed an informal user study that consisted of two
parts. The first part was intended to evaluate the slider interface described above and the second part to test the aesthetical qualities of the generated palettes. The latter was included in order to find the most appealing default palettes
for MagnaView. Fifteen test subjects with normal color vision participated in the user study, of whom seven were
MagnaView employees and eight were individuals who had
never used MagnaView before. In the first part of the user
study, the test subjects were given a short introduction to
the MagnaView application. Next, they were given five tasks
that each corresponded to a different visualization. The tasks

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Wijffelaars et al. / Generating Color Palettes using Intuitive Parameters

749

Figure 9: Pairs of palettes of which the left palettes are defined by Brewer, and the right palettes are generated with Pseq .
ranged from adjusting the colors to make white text clearly
visible to adjusting the palette to make it fit with a given
visualization and the surrounding colors. The tasks were intended to familiarize the test subjects with the palette editing user interface, without explicitly explaining them how to
change the colors. After the tasks were completed, the subjects were questioned about their experience with the palette
editing user interface.
We noted that most subjects start by experimenting with
the sliders. The result of this is that many subjects quickly
learn how each slider affects the palette appearance. Several
users noted afterwards that not all of the slider captions were
clear to them, especially since the native language of none of
the test subjects was English. However, the visual clues provided by each slider aid the users in learning its meaning.
In some particular situations changing a slider influences the
palette appearance very little or not at all; examples of this
are the hue slider if saturation is low, the brightness slider
if contrast is high, and the cold/warm slider if the hue is
yellow. Some users encountered these situations early on,
which increased the time needed to learn the workings of
the user interface. However, most users were able to create
the palettes they desired after a learning period of about 10
to 15 minutes.
In the second part of the user study, the aesthetical qualities of the generated sequential palettes were investigated.
We acknowledge that aesthetics is just one aspect, and we
are not sure if there is a relation with functional usability.
Nevertheless, the experience at MagnaView is that for most
customers aesthetics is important, and therefore this experiment was executed to provide us with more insight in this.
For the experiment, a set of 48 palettes was formed by combining all sequential Brewer palettes of nine colors with 9color generated palettes. The palettes were applied to a visualization in MagnaView and shuffled in three different orders
to avoid ordering effects. Each participant was shown one of
the three batches of 48 visualizations and had to rate each
palette solely on its aesthetical properties, ranging from 1 to
5, from ugly to beautiful.
Two categories scored significantly higher than the others: the Brewer single-hue palette category (average rating

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

of 3.44), and the generated palettes having a w-value of 0.25
(3.40). We conclude that the generated palettes have a similar aesthetic quality to the hand-picked Brewer palettes. We
also conclude that to generate an aesthetic palette, a w-value
of around 0.25 is best. The palette that received the highest rating on average was a blue, generated palette with a
score of 4.04. Furthermore, we evaluated the hue preferences
of the participants by looking at the ratings of the singlehue palettes. The blue palettes scored highest with 3.75, followed by green and cyan. A more detailed description of the
numbers and findings of this user study can be found elsewhere [Wij08].
6. Conclusions
We have presented palette models that provide a flexible way
of generating palettes for visualizations. By simplifying displayable CIELUV color space we are able to make better use
of the irregularly shaped color space. We presented exact
specifications of palettes instead of giving mere guidelines
on palette generation. The palette appearance can be altered
using high level intuitive parameters, which facilitates the
palette design process.
We have paired our generated palettes to the Brewer
palettes on Figure 9 to show that the generated palettes come
close to the palettes designed by hand by an expert. Furthermore, our user study showed that palettes with a low w-value
are rated equivalently to the highest rated Brewer palettes.
The multi-hue parameter makes it possible to generate a
wide variety of multi-hue palettes. However, to make the
lighter colors more saturated the lightness of the top point is
decreased by a small amount, decreasing the used lightness
range. This effect can be seen on the three pairs of sequential palettes on the right of Figure 9; the top colors are not
as light as their Brewer counterparts. Further research on the
multi-hue palettes might make it possible to create palettes
with equal colorfulness, that utilize the complete lightness
range. We did not find a simple solution to this problem.
Our palette definition makes it possible to define palettes
in an intuitive and exact way. This definition can be used to
automatically adapt palettes to fit certain situations. The pos-

750

M. Wijffelaars et al. / Generating Color Palettes using Intuitive Parameters

Figure 10: Examples of generated palettes, taken from the set of preset palettes.
sibilities to use this definition to further automate the palette
generation process is suggested for future work.
The PaletteView application for color space exploration
can be obtained for research purposes from MagnaView B.V.
Please contact info@magnaview.nl.
References

[Pha90] P HAM B.: Spline-based color sequences for univariate, bivariate and trivariate mapping. In IEEE Visualization, Proceedings of the 1st conference on Visualization (1990), pp. 202–208.
[RO86] ROBERTSON P. K., O’C ALLAGHAN J. F.: The
generation of color sequences for univariate and bivariate
mapping. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 6,
2 (1986), 24–32.

[Bre99] B REWER C. A.: Color use guidelines for data
representation. In Proceedings of the Section on Statistical Graphics (1999), pp. 55–60.

[SKR99] S PENCE I., K UTLESA N., ROSE D. L.: Using
color to code quantity in spatial displays. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 5, 4 (1999), 393–412.

[Bre05] B REWER C. A.: Designing better maps. A Guide
for GIS Users. ESRI Press, 2005.

[Tru81] T RUMBO B. E.: Theory for coloring bivariate
statistical maps. The American Statistician 35, 4 (1981),
220–226.

[BRT95] B ERGMAN L. D., ROGOWITZ B. E., T REINISH
L. A.: A rule-based tool for assisting colormap selection.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Visualization 1995 Conference (1995), pp. 118–125.
[BT07] B ORLAND D., TAYLOR R. M.: Rainbow color
map (still) considered harmful. Computer Graphics and
Applications, IEEE 27, 2 (2007), 14–17.
[cie86] Colorimetry second edition. CIE Publication No.
15.2 (1986).
[Lev96] L EVKOWITZ H.: Perceptual steps along color
scales. International Journal of Imaging Systems and
Technology 7, 2 (1996), 97–101.
[Lin]
[Mag]

L INDBLOOM B. J.: www.brucelindbloom.com.
http://www.magnaview.com.

[MSK04] M EIER B. J., S PALTER A. M., K ARELITZ
D. B.: Interactive color palette tools. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications 24, 3 (2004), 64–72.

[VvWvdL06] V LIEGEN R., VAN W IJK J. J., VAN DER
L INDEN E.-J.: Visualizing business data with generalized treemaps. Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12, 5 (2006), 789–796.
[Wij08] W IJFFELAARS M.: Synthesis of Color Palettes.
Master’s thesis, Eindhoven University of Technology,
dept. Math. and Comp. Science, the Netherlands, 2008.
[ZH06] Z EILEIS A., H ORNIK K.: Choosing color palettes
for statistical graphics. Research Report Series / Department of Statistics and Mathematics, Wien, Wirtschaftsuniv., 41 (2006).
[ZM06] Z HANG H., M ONTAG E. D.: Perceptual color
scales for univariate and bivariate data display. In Proceedings of the 30th International Congress on Imaging
Science: ICIS ’06 (2006), pp. 115–118.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

