Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2008
A. Vilanova, A. Telea, G. Scheuermann, and T. Möller
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 3

Navigation and Exploration of Interconnected Pathways
M. Streit1 and M. Kalkusch1 and K. Kashofer2 and D. Schmalstieg1
1 Institute

for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Austria
2 Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Austria

Abstract
Visualizing pathways, i. e. models of cellular functional networks, is a challenging task in computer assisted
biomedicine. Pathways are represented as large collections of interwoven graphs, with complex structures present
in both the individual graphs and their interconnections. This situation requires the development of novel visualization techniques to allow efficient visual exploration. We present the Caleydo framework, which incorporates
a number of approaches to handle such pathways. Navigation in the network of pathways is facilitated by a hierarchical approach which dynamically selects a working set of individual pathways for closer inspection. These
pathways are interactively rendered together with visual interconnections in a 2.5D view using graphics hardware acceleration. The layout of individual graphs is not computed automatically, but taken from the KEGG
and BioCarta databases, which use layouts that life scientists are familiar with. Therefore they encode essential
meta-information. While the KEGG and BioCarta pathways use a pre-defined layout, interactions such as linking+brushing, neighborhood search or detail on demand are still fully interactive in Caleydo. We have evaluated
Caleydo with pathologists working on the determination of unknown gene functions. Informal experiences confirm
that Caleydo is useful in both generating and validating such hypotheses.
Even though the presented techniques are applied to medical pathways, the proposed way of interaction is not
limited to cellular processes and therefore has the potential to open new possibilities in other fields of application.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User
Interfaces and J.3 [Computer Applications]: Life and Medical Sciences

1. Introduction
In biomedicine, so-called pathways are used to model cellular processes and to describe their states and transformations.
An example of a fundamental pathway is the Citric Acid Cycle where a series of chemical reactions perform a conversion of fats, proteins and carbohydrates to energy. Pathways
are represented as directed, attributed graphs: Nodes represent enzymes or chemical compounds, and edges represent
reactions or signals. It is characteristic for pathways that
nodes can be involved several times within the same pathway, or in multiple pathways. One enzyme can for instance
catalyze multiple reactions. Nodes can also represent complete pathways, leading to a recursive definition of the graph.
A good definition of pathways as graphs is given in [KS07].
Traditionally, pathways are printed on large posters. The
design of such a poster constitutes a huge effort, and the result is widely used in the community. Figure 1 shows the
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

popular metabolic network published by Roche Applied Science [Mic99]. Important about these hand-crafted visualizations is the encoded meta-information in the layout. The
layout conveys structure that is not evident from the graph
topology or graph attributes. Illustrators use grouping or annotations (cf. figure 2) to convey meta-information that is
essential for understanding and memorizing the pathways.
Posters are still widely-used as an inexpensive, static
way of presenting pathway networks. However, the handling of huge posters is obviously tedious. Pathway
databases such as KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes) [Kan06] and BioCarta (http://www.biocarta.
com) are therefore quickly replacing traditional paper based
representations. One example can be seen in figure 2, which
is thought to be behind Long Term Depression.
KEGG and BioCarta decompose the huge connected networks into smaller pieces relating to one individual pathway.

952

M. Streit & M. Kalkusch & K. Kashofer & D. Schmalstieg / Navigation and Exploration of Interconnected Pathways

Figure 1: Section of the Roche Metabolic Network. The
graph is hand-routed. The poster comes with a booklet which
contains an index that provides the mapping from entity to a
sector on the poster.

static pathway layouts into fully interactive representations,
which can be manipulated through techniques such as linking+brushing, neighborhood search or detail on demand. We
address the problem of browsing through the hierarchical
graph definition and managing the working set of relevant
pathways by a set of hierarchically linked views. A study
carried out by [SND05] identified the visualization of interconnectivities as a significant requirement for pathway research. We propose a 2.5D representation of the pathway
working set, which makes inter-pathway connections evident and maximizes the use of screen real estate while avoiding clutter. While interaction and presentation retain the simplicity of 2D, we use 3D graphics acceleration to assemble
the final visualization. Initial trials with pathologists indicate that our approach is well suited to typical problems of
pathway analysis, such as finding missing or invalid relations in the network or the determination of unknown gene
functions.
2. Related Work
2.1. Visualization of Pathways

Figure 2: KEGG pathway map modeling Long Term Depression. Remarkable are the structures in the background picture of the graph which provide important meta-information.

The graph information of such a pathway is encoded in explicit form, but meta-information is still only available in
raster image format and can only be used if the layout is retained. Moreover, online browsing of the pathway databases
is complicated by the fact that nodes can occur multiple
times within one pathway or in multiple related pathways.
Therefore researchers must typically consider a working set
of pathways at once, including the interconnections between
pathways. Traditional visual exploration techniques, such as
the hyperlinked navigation, do not support 1:n connections
very well.
Our contribution is a set of techniques for fast and easy
navigation inside the network of connected graphs. Caleydo
is an interactive system for visual exploration of metabolic as
well as signaling pathways. It respects the meta-information
available in the hand-crafted pathway layouts but turns the

A straightforward approach for the visualization of pathways
is treating the whole network as one huge graph. Because of
the high degree of interconnectedness, [Roj03] suggests the
visualization of the pathway network as a 3D graph. MetNetVR [YWCND06] goes a step further by presenting a hierarchical visualization in a 3D CAVE environment. These
3D approaches suffer from the common problem that the
user can easily get confused in a purely abstract, but complex 3D environment. In particular there is no obvious threedimensional subspace in the data that can be used for natural organization of the domain. Moreover, Virtual Reality
environments such as a CAVE are expensive. We believe
that more constrained 2.5D methods are better suited to organize pathways. We were inspired by the work presented
in [Dwy05, BDS04] where similar pathways are stacked on
top of each other to visually differentiate them. However,
their methods do not provide solutions for showing relations among the layers. In contrast, our approach uses the
additional relation afforded by 2.5D to link multiple ordered
pathway layers.
The high degree of data complexity makes it indispensable to use some sort of multiple coordinated views [NS00].
SimVis [PKH04,DGH03] is a good example for a framework
that successfully applies the concept of linking+brushing between several views. A trend-setting strategy of connecting
data entities by drawing edges between several views was
presented in [SA06]. These concepts work well for a small
number of connected views. However, since each pathway
graph is a separate view, the space for placing the views sideby-side on the screen is the restricting factor. These considerations led us to adopt a 2.5D layout where the additional
ordinal dimension can be used to manage and arrange the
view representations.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Streit & M. Kalkusch & K. Kashofer & D. Schmalstieg / Navigation and Exploration of Interconnected Pathways

Since KEGG and BioCarta use nested pathways (i. e.,
pathways as nodes inside pathways), the problem of visualizing multiple pathways can also be interpreted as a problem of browsing hierarchical graphs. [KS07] addresses this
issue by combining multiple pathways in a single network
that supports interactive level of detail change by expanding and collapsing the pathways from/to single nodes. While
the system partly solves the users needs in terms of navigation, the relations between the graphs depicted by connecting
lines still get cluttered easily.
2.2. Automated Layouting of Pathways
Independently of whether the chosen graph visualization
techniques operate in 2D or 3D, a layout for the graph needs
to be provided. Considering the complexity of the graphs,
this task is a challenging research topic on its own. One of
the first attempts to dynamically model metabolic pathways
was done by Karp et al. starting in 1994 [KP94]. As pathway
networks became more and more diversified and complex
over time, graph drawing approaches needed to be employed
and enhanced. In 2001 Becker et al. proposed an algorithm,
that builds on the ideas of Karp and enhances them by including topological structure [BR01].
Even with a perfect layout, handling visualizations of
huge graphs is challenging. A very large and dense representation is overwhelming and does often not allow easy
discrimination of focus and context. Our work with life scientists revealed that they manage the complexity by memorizing patterns of well known pathways. Frequently pathways are immediately recognized by the user because of
a particular layout, such as circularly arranged nodes. The
MetaViz tool proposed by Bourqui et al. [Bou07] that creates
a metabolic network using multiple pathways takes this fact
into account. Moreover this valuable work also addresses the
duplication problem of nodes by clever clustering and overlapped drawing of the graphs. However, recently contextual
information such as localization of the compound in the cell
or cellular structures have found their way into pathway layouts. For example, consider the pathway in figure 2, which
denotes the cell border as two bold horizontal lines. BioCarta even draws pathways in a cartoon like style (cf. part
3 in 3). This trend towards a massive incorporation of metainformation is a strong argument against the application of
automatic drawing and layouting in pathway networks.
2.3. Gene Mapping
Since the human genome as well as the genome of many
other species is completely sequenced, the main thrust of
scientific effort has moved towards the identification of gene
functions [Pel01]. One used tool for the identification of
gene functions are DNA microarrays [SSDB95]. A microarray analyzes a full genome profile from a tissue sample for a
certain point in time. These so-called gene-expressions rate
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

953

the activation of every analyzed gene with a numeric value.
Microarray analysis can only measure transcription of genes
and not the absolute expression value. Therefore the measured values are relative values that can only be compared to
one another.
Pathways operate on the level of enzymes which are encoded by one ore more genes. The relation of enzymes to
genes makes it important to display the pathway together
with the current regulation of its encoding genes. Standard
gene mapping approaches such as [LA02, TMK03, Mle05]
present a vector of color coded gene-expressions, one for
every gene associated with an enzyme. Commercial genetic
data mining tools such as GeneSpring (Agilent Technologies, Inc., USA) and PathwayStudio (Ariadne Genomics,
Inc., USA) use a static mapping of gene-expression data onto
pathways. However, these approaches do not support the interactive visualization of relations among several pathways.
3. Methods
In this section we describe a combination of methods that
allow efficient interactive exploration of pathway databases.
The user operates with objects on two levels of granularity,
individual pathways with a recognizable layout, and individual enzymes, which are manipulated to find identical or
adjacent enzymes. In the following sections we describe the
handling of the layout, the manipulation of pathways with
the “jukebox“ concept, the neighborhood visualization and
the gene-expression mapping tools.
All methods presented in this paper are integrated in the
Caleydo visualization framework (http://www.caleydo.
org). The system is written in Java and supports various
types of 2D and 3D representations. 3D rendering is implemented using the Java OpenGL library (JOGL). The framework supports linked views as well as system-wide synchronized interaction.
3.1. Superimposing Pathway Textures
Hand-crafted, annotated pathways with high recognition
value are readily available in the KEGG and BioCarta
databases. Rather than discarding this information in favor
of a computer-generated layout, we use the pathway textures
directly as an image-based background. Interactive representations of the nodes are overlaid so that the blended results have a uniform appearance. The pathway visualization
is rendered as a flat 3D model with OpenGL, applying the
pre-filtered pathway image as a texture to the ground plane.
This allows seamless scaling of the visualization as well as
arbitrary 2D and 3D transformations, which we employ in
the jukebox as described in the next section.
3.2. Jukebox View
For the navigation inside the set of interconnected pathways
we propose a four-stage concept:

954

M. Streit & M. Kalkusch & K. Kashofer & D. Schmalstieg / Navigation and Exploration of Interconnected Pathways

Figure 3: The jukebox view combines a textual list menu for browsing related pathways by name (1) with an interconnected
pathway stack (2), an area designated for a detailed examination of a graph (3) and a memo pad (4).

1.
2.
3.
4.

Pathway pool list
2.5D stacked layer view
Graph under interaction view
Memo pad

Figure 3 shows the four stages of the jukebox setup annotated in a screenshot. The setup works analogous to a jukebox where audio records can be selected from a larger collection and loaded to the turntable. A list of pathways is presented as a textual list containing the pathway names. By
selecting an entry in the list the graph is loaded to the intermediate level where a predefined number of graphs is shown
in a 2.5D stacked layer view. The third stage shows a large
pathway for interactive inspection.
Caleydo employs a stack of graphs arranged in a 2.5D
layout to densely pack pathway information in the available
screen space, but also relate multiple planar graphs to one
another. Individual pathways are scaled down and also compressed due to the orthographic (tilted) view. However, signature features and proportions familiar to the expert are retained, which makes the pathways still highly recognizable
despite the compression. The relations between elements in
different pathways are visualized using straight lines among
the layers [Str07]. This approach is related to the VisLink approach [CC07] where the concept of inter-plane edge propagation was generalized from a graph specific towards a visualization independent solution. In contrast to VisLink the

jukebox setup provides a solution for managing related 2D
visualizations in a hierarchical way.
In the context of pathways, the connection lines among
layers enable a fast identification of identical nodes in the
whole network. Stage 3 in figure 3 shows the gene IL3 that
is selected by the user in the IL 3 signaling pathway pathway. Consequently all representations of that specific gene
are highlighted and interactively connected. Selecting a particular gene allows the user to quickly determine its global
relevance to various aspects of the working set. Circumstances where a gene appears in multiple pathways as part
of an identical chain of reactions can also be discovered.
The user can then choose a different pathway from the stack,
which is exchanged with the pathway in the main interaction
view. Moving a pathway up or down the hierarchy to another
jukebox stage is visually supported by animated transformations [Sho85]. We found that users value the continuous transitions when the complex networks, which are scattered over
multiple pathway views, demand their full attention.
There are multiple reasons why an entity can be represented multiple times in a set of pathways. One reason are
layouting considerations. Another possibility is that a particular gene is catalyzing a specific reaction in a large variety
of biological processes in the cell. As a consequence, genes
appear several times in various pathways. Without global selection it is hard to identify such situations. We therefore
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Streit & M. Kalkusch & K. Kashofer & D. Schmalstieg / Navigation and Exploration of Interconnected Pathways

955

provide a mechanism that automatically searches the whole
pathway pool for the selected entity. The resulting pathways
are shown in the pathway list (stage 1) by displaying their
names plus a score which is based on how often selected
genes occur in that particular pathway. According to this
score the most relevant pathways (e.g. highest score) are
moved to the stacked pathway view, from where the user
can continue to explore inter-pathway relationships.
For larger-scale problems, the automatic management of
the stack based on a least frequently used policy can create the undesirable situation that a pathway vanished from
the stack, but is later needed again and must be manually
retrieved. We therefore provide the memo pad, an area of
the screen where the user can place important pathways for
semi-permanent safekeeping. Storing and retrieving pathways works by simple drag and drop (see stage 4 in figure
3). The memo pad does not only store the graph, but also the
current selection of nodes, so that a particular working state
can be completely restored instantaneously. The memo pad
and the stacked pathway view are complementary: While the
memo pad is designated to hold pathways persistently, the
2.5D layered view is a volatile stack that may be changed
during the dynamic loading of dependent pathways.

3.3. Neighborhood Visualization
Algorithms for the calculation of adjacencies in graphs and
their visualization are well researched. They are mostly applied to single, planar graphs. We implemented neighborhood visualization of arbitrary depth among the pathway
boundaries. As mentioned before, nodes in pathways can be
part of the same graph multiple times as well as be incorporated in other pathways. Caleydo combines the dynamic
loading of dependent graphs with the highlighting of adjacencies. After the user selects a node the system presents all
pathways that contain this entity. We apply Dijkstra’s algorithm to all instances of the entity in the selected working
set of pathways. As a result the neighborhood is propagated
throughout all involved graphs. This extended adjacency visualization allows a comprehensive exploration among multiple pathways as shown in figure 4. Searching the neighborhood in all pathways simultaneously is extremely important,
since it enables the user to visually reveal hidden biological dependencies and to detect reaction cascades in several
pathways without stepping through all pathways manually.
The internal graph data structure facilitates the implementation of this approach. We manage a single master graph
holding all logical data entities. At the first occurrence during the parsing of a pathway a data entity is created and inserted into the master graph. All visual representations are
then registered with the entity in the master graph. Each further occurrence in the visual representation of another graph
is only added to the corresponding list of representations.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 4: The view shows the propagation of a signal in
several pathways.

3.4. Pathway Gene-Expression Mapping
The enzyme nodes in the pathways represent special proteins
that perform certain tasks in the cell. These enzymes can
be encoded by several genes. Vice versa, a single gene can
be involved in the encoding of multiple enzymes. This n:m
relation between enzymes and genes must be considered in
the design of the graph data structure.
Moreover, it is common that gene-expressions are collected in a time-series experiment. Hereby the numeric regulation value of a gene in a tissue probe is sampled at different

Figure 5: The expression of gene-expression experiments,
a snapshot of the regulation of genes at a certain time, are
mapped onto the pathways. In this case a three part timeseries experiment is color coded directly onto the nodes.

956

M. Streit & M. Kalkusch & K. Kashofer & D. Schmalstieg / Navigation and Exploration of Interconnected Pathways

points in time. Such a dataset can be shown as a bar of color
coded icons (figure 5). If multiple genes contribute to the encoding process of that enzyme, a star layout is used. Nodes
that have multiple gene mappings available are depicted in a
predefined color in the pathway. When a mouse-over action
above the enzyme node is triggered an animated star containing the requested information about the genes is opened.
3.5. Integrated Meta-Data Browser
The predominant part of the time when working with pathways and genetic data is consumed by the investigation of
meta-data. This knowledge is essential to understand the
complex networks and processes. Following a detail on demand technique all nodes in our system are linked to an
information browser. The browser is connected to major
database websites and shows detailed information about
genes, enzymes, protein structures and other entities. In addition the system provides publications about chosen entities on demand in a designated publication browser. To
achieve that we pack the selected data entity in a search
query on PubMed, an extensive citation source that accesses
MEDLINE and other life science journals. In contrast to the
well established linked meta-information browser where the
browser is a passive data output facility, we implemented active ID and name parsing of all system-wide known entities.
In our medical use case the system detects pathways as well
as genes in selected hyperlinks inside the integrated browser.
Pathways are opened instantly. Genes or enzymes that were
found are highlighted throughout the system. The system dynamically searches all pathways that contain the entity and
loads them to the jukebox.
4. Use Case
In the following a use case is presented to explain the requirements of the system from the perspective of a life scientist. During the design phase of Caleydo the users were
highly integrated in the requirements elicitation.
The gene pool can be divided into several subsets. A part
of the genes, called disease genes, are known to be involved
in one or more diseases. Others are accurately referred to
as candidate genes because they are suspected to be at least
one of the causing factors of a disease. Others are widely
unknown in their function. This observation is reflected in
our use case which assumes that the user has a predefined
set of candidate genes.
The user starts by loading the gene-expression experiment
data into the system. Each experiment consists of a complete
snapshot of a genome. The gene data can stem from humans
as well as other organisms, such as mice or rats. One tissue snapshot is called experiment. A common data base for
analysis could consist of healthy human tissue, tissue from
various cancer patients as well as tissue from a cultured carcinoma in an animal model.

Before the gene-expression data is mapped onto the pathways, statistical preprocessing needs to be applied to the
data. Our partners are primarily interested in highly differentiated gene-expression values. In our context, differentiated
refers to e.g. a high expression value for the healthy tissue
and a low one for the carcinoma tissue. Therefore the overall
gene pool of several thousand entities is filtered. Although
statistical analysis is part of the Caleydo system, it is not in
the scope of this paper. The set of suspect genes are automatically mapped to all KEGG and BioCarta pathways. By
selecting the genes in the linked heatmap view, the system
performs the dynamic loading of pathways in the jukebox
setup where the entity is involved. Usually the user knows
certain pathways well, while other pathways are unfamiliar.
By performing a detailed inspection of the biological context, the life scientist aims for deducing new gene functions
related to the examined disease. The integration of the adjacency visualization among single pathway boundaries supports this process significantly.
In this phase, the user switches between the pathways by
using the jukebox’s functionality. During this process, the
already filtered candidate gene set is further reduced by entities that were found to be irrelevant in the experiment’s context. For example, a gene might perform house keeping functions in the cell, that are well known and therefore not interesting for the current analysis. In another biological context,
i.e. in another pathway, the same gene carries out completely
different tasks that could be of great interest. This analysis
style is only possible with a system that supports the visual
exploration like Caleydo does.
Figure 6 provides an exemplary workflow documented by
a series of 4 screenshots. First the user triggers a search action for the PTK2 gene that is, according to the statistical
analysis, suspected to be relevant for a disease from which
the experimental tissue samples are taken. The system loads
all pathways, that contain the selected gene, to the jukebox
setup (cf. part a in figure 6). The user starts to investigate the
Erb signaling pathway in detail. Obviously the PTK2 gene
is located at the end of a signal cascade. By performing the
in-depth adjacency visualization, previously unknown relationships emerge (cf. part b). By switching to the Focal Adhesion pathway from the top of the stack (see part c) the user
can further investigate the neighboring genes. In part d, the
user selects an adjacent enzyme of PTK2 on which multiple
genes are mapped. The system again performs the dynamic
pathway search and loads a new set of pathways into the
jukebox setup.
5. Discussion
When working in biomedicine one has to keep in mind that
the underlying data is imperfect. Relations inside pathways
are extracted from scientific publications. Therefore pathways are subjects to a constant update process: new relations
appear, existing connections are changed or invalidated, and
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Streit & M. Kalkusch & K. Kashofer & D. Schmalstieg / Navigation and Exploration of Interconnected Pathways

many entities and relations are currently still unknown. Also
the data mapping of genes to enzymes is incomplete or even
incorrect. The user must be aware that the data visualization
is only a snapshot of the current state of knowledge.
Although the presented methods have the potential to facilitate the knowledge acquisition in huge relational networks the system is subject to restrictions. A good portion of
the pathways has a size and complexity which is suitable for
our design. However, some of the graphs are degenerated in
size, which is problematic for the stacked visualization. The
mixing of extraordinary small graphs with big graphs can be
aesthetically displeasing, and even disturb the user’s ability
to interpret the visualization. These effects can be mitigated
by adaptive scaling, but only to a limited degree.
We tested the jukebox setup in multiple configurations
varying in the degree of scene customization permitted to
the user. It turned out that the most restrictive setup was perceived best. While a rotation of the pathway stack can give a
better perception of the line connections between the layers,
most of the users’ became disorientated. According to that
result the stack planes are tilted in a fixed angle of 60 degrees
and the camera cannot be altered by the user. During the tests
with expert users we turned off the connection lines between
the graph planes in the stacked visualization while only using linking+brushing for highlighting the selected nodes. A
predominant part of the users complained about the missing
edges between the layers. A user study could further investigate whether linking+brushing or the direct connection of
selected entities in the scene leads to better results in perception. Furthermore user tests showed that the maximum stack
size should not exceed five planes. Otherwise users began to
feel overwhelmed by too many graphs at the same time. Nevertheless this restriction of the stack is inherently absorbed
by the jukebox’s hierarchical staging concept.
Another open issue is the determination of a reasonable
color coding. One widely-used color scheme for visualizing gene-expression values ranges from red (high regulated
gene) over yellow (mean) to green (low regulated gene). The
binding of 2/3 of the RGB color space exhausts the possible
uses of color for conveying additional information.
It is in the nature of information visualization that the
available number of pixels is a restricting factor. We run the
system on a high resolution multi-projector wall as well as
on various desktop setups. The usual work environment of
expert users that deal with pathways are clinical facilities
and laboratories where the technical resources are limited.
Only a few of them will have access to expensive multiprojector facilities. We are therefore investigating the combination of multiple monitors with a low-cost video projector
for a physical focus+context representation.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

957

6. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we have presented an efficient way of navigating and exploring a network of interlinked multiple graphs to
discover previously unknown knowledge. The system itself
is capable of visualizing all kind of networks that are split
up into interconnected sub-graphs. Therefore the proposed
way of interaction with these graphs lends itself to the application to other domains. In the field of software design our
approach could help to understand the complexity of huge
software systems. A network of UML diagrams consists of
entities like classes, objects and others. Similar to pathways
these software engineering graphs can contain identical entities multiple times as well as diagrams can be contained in
other diagrams. These properties open promising possibilities in this field of application. Also economical processes as
well as social networks fit the presented techniques.
7. Acknowledgements
The authors want to thank Kurt Zatloukal and his team from
the pathology group at the Medical University of Graz for
the close and fruitful collaboration. We would also like to
express our gratitude to Alexander Lex for his valuable input. This research was partly funded by the FIT-IT program
of the Austria research funding agency FFG and the Austrian
Genome Program (GEN-AU).
References
[BDS04] B RANDES U., DWYER T., S CHREIBER F.: Visualizing related metabolic pathways in two and a half dimensions. In Graph Drawing (2004), pp. 111–122.
[Bou07] B OURQUI ET AL .: Metabolic network visualization eliminating node redundance and preserving
metabolic pathways. BMC Systems Biology 1, 29 (2007).
[BR01] B ECKER M. Y., ROJAS I.: A graph layout algorithm for drawing metabolic pathways. Bioinformatics
(Oxford, England) 17 (2001), 461–7.
[CC07] C OLLINS C., C ARPENDALE S.: Vislink: Revealing relationships amongst visualizations. IEEE Trans. Vis.
Comput. Graph. 13 (2007), 1192–1199.
[DGH03] D OLEISCH H., G ASSER M., H AUSER H.: Interactive feature specification for focus+context visualization of complex simulation data. In Data Visualization
(Grenoble, France, 2003), pp. 239–248.
[Dwy05] DWYER T.: Two and a Half Dimensional Visualisation of Relational Networks. PhD thesis, The University of Sydney, 2005.
[Kan06] K ANEHISA ET AL .: From genomics to chemical genomics: new developments in kegg. Nucleic acids
research 34 (2006), D354–7.
[KP94] K ARP P. D., PALEY S. M.: Automated drawing of
metabolic pathways. In Processdings on Bioinformatics
and Genome Research (1994).

958

M. Streit & M. Kalkusch & K. Kashofer & D. Schmalstieg / Navigation and Exploration of Interconnected Pathways

[KS07] K LUKAS C., S CHREIBER F.: Dynamic exploration and editing of kegg pathway diagrams. Bioinformatics 23 (2007), 344–350.
[LA02] L INDROOS H., A NDERSSON S.: Visualizing
metabolic pathways: comparative genomics and expression analysis. Proc. of the IEEE 90 (2002), 1793–1802.
[Mic99] M ICHAL G.: Biochemical Pathways. BiochemieAtlas. Spektrum Akademischer Verlag, 1999.
[Mle05] M LECNIK ET AL .: Pathwayexplorer: web service
for visualizing high-throughput expression data on biological pathways. Nucl. acids res. 33 (2005), W633–7.
[NS00] N ORTH C., S HNEIDERMAN B.: Snap-together
visualization: a user interface for coordinating visualizations via relational schemata. In Advanced Visual Interfaces (Palermo, Italy, 2000), pp. 128–135.
[Pel01] P ELLEGRINI ET AL .: Computational method to
assign microbial genes to pathways. Journal of Cellular
Biochemistry. Supplement 37 (2001), 106–9.
[PKH04] P IRINGER H., KOSARA R., H AUSER H.: Interactive focus+context visualization with linked 2d/3d scatterplots. In Coordinated & Multiple Views in Exploratory
Visualization (CMV) (2004), pp. 49–60.
[Roj03] ROJDESTVENSKI I.: Metabolic pathways in three
dimensions. Bioinformatics 19 (2003), 2436–2441.
[SA06] S HNEIDERMAN B., A RIS A.: Network visualization by semantic substrates. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12 (2006), 733–740.
[Sho85] S HOEMAKE K.: Animating rotation with quaternion curves. In Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques (1985), pp. 245–254.
[SND05] S ARAIYA P., N ORTH C., D UCA K.: Visualizing
biological pathways: requirements analysis, systems evaluation and research agenda. Information Visualization 4
(2005), 191–205.
[SSDB95] S CHENA M., S HALON D., DAVIS R. W.,
B ROWN P. O.: Quantitative monitoring of gene expression patterns with a complementary dna microarray. Science 270 (1995), 467–70.
[Str07] S TREIT M.: Metabolic Pathway Visualization Using Gene-Expression Data. Master’s thesis, Graz University of Technology, 2007.
[TMK03] T OYODA T., M OCHIZUKI Y., KONAGAYA A.:
Gscope: a clipped fisheye viewer effective for highly complicated biomolecular network graphs. Bioinformatics 19
(2003), 437–438.
[YWCND06] YANG Y., W URTELE E. S., C RUZ -N EIRA
C., D ICKERSON J. A.: Hierarchical visualization of
metabolic networks using virtual reality. In Virtual Reality
Continuum and its Applications (2006), pp. 377–381.

Figure 6: The series of screenshots depicts an exemplary
part of the visual exploration process in Caleydo. In (a) the
system presents the pathways for the PTK2 search query.
By investigation of the adjacencies in the graph stack the
user can identify other genes connected to PTK2 which are
not present in the local pathway context (b). In (c) the user
switches to the topmost graph in the stack. (d) shows multiple genes mapped on a neighboring enzyme.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

