DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2008.01193.x

COMPUTER GRAPHICS

forum

Volume 27 (2008), number 8 pp. 2169–2177

Tangible Heritage: Production of Astrolabes on a Laser
Engraver
G. Zotti
Institute of Computer Graphics & Algorithms, TU Wien, Austria
gzotti@cg.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
The astrolabe, an analog computing device, used to be the iconic instrument of astronomers during the Middle
Ages. It allowed a multitude of operations of practical astronomy which were otherwise cumbersome to perform in
an epoch when mathematics had apparently almost been forgotten. Usually made from wood or sheet metal, a few
hundred instruments, mostly from brass, survived until today and are valuable museum showpieces. This paper
explains a procedural modelling approach for the construction of the classical kinds of astrolabes, which allows a
wide variety of applications from plain explanatory illustrations to three-dimensional (3D) models, and even the
production of working physical astrolabes usable for public or classroom demonstrations.
Keywords: Procedural modelling, astronomy, cultural heritage, astrolabe, post script
ACM CCS: I.3.5 [Computer Graphics]: Computational geometry and object modelling – geometric algorithms,
languages and systems, I.3.8 [Computer Graphics]: Applications

1. Introduction
The Planispheric Astrolabe, an ingenious computing device,
the origin of which lies somewhere in the Near East of the
later 4th century, used to be the representative instrument of
astronomers and astrologers alike in the later medieval and
renaissance period, and is frequently seen on contemporary
paintings of scholarly environments and scientific activity.
Unlike the Armillary Sphere, which was a three-dimensional
(3D) model of the (geocentric) universe, the astrolabe maps
the sky onto a flat disk that rotates over another disk with
an intricate pattern of arcs that represents local horizontal
coordinates, so that the sky situation for a specific date can
be seen. On the reverse side, the instrument provides an
altitude meter, and this combination allows many practical
astronomical operations, of which the determination of time
from a single altitude measurement of the sun or a star appears
to have been the most common.
After further development by early Arab mathematicians
and astronomers, the astrolabe saw wide distribution in the
cultural region of early Islam, where the practical determination of prayer times depending on solar altitude was imc 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and
Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Published by Blackwell Publishing,
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main
Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

portant for every believer. It was then introduced to Europe
via Moorish Spain around the year 1000. Rare until about
1300, it has seen a sharp production peak in Europe in the
late 16th century, but was quickly thereafter replaced by the
telescope as observing instrument, while its quick, but not
overly accurate results were abandoned in favour of those
available by the then rapidly emerging mathematical procedures. In Europe, it was still described in books on astronomical instrument making well into the 18th century. In Islamic
countries, it was widely used until the late 19th century, and
has been manufactured there until only a few decades ago.
Today tourists are sometimes offered instruments which are
sold as astrolabes, but which are unfortunately usually badly
constructed and therefore useless.
Astrolabes are frequently shown in exhibitions as masterpieces of early Islam or European Renaissance instrument
making. In all its strict construction and functionality, there
was some artistic freedom for ornaments, dedications or adorations. Original instruments are typically unaffordable, however, and also good brass reproductions are difficult to make
and therefore costly.

2169

This paper was selected from the Cultural Heritage Stream
of Eurographics 2007

2170

G. Zotti / Tangible Heritage: Astrolabes from the Laser Engraver

For most of the applications the astrolabe has been used
for, it has been superseded by more modern instruments, and
some of the questions of everyday life it helped to answer
in the medieval period are no longer even posed today. So
visitors in a museum usually are confronted with an instrument that looks appealing to most, but is hard to understand
because the basic astronomical applications are no longer
commonly used in today’s mechanized world.
The seemingly complicated arrangement of lines and circles on most astrolabes is mostly derived directly from the
stereographic projection. Traditional construction manuals
typically contain long tables of precomputed values like circle centres and radii, but sometimes even omitted the description of basic construction principles in the understanding that the executing craftsman is not interested in the latter.
Of course, these manuals can still be followed to manually
add up all the lines and circles in a CAD drawing, a process
which however appears rather tedious and repetitive. Also, a
manually drawn instrument will only show one instance of
an astrolabe, usable for a given period, and would have to be
redone for another to take, e.g. precession (motion) of stars
into account.
This paper describes a procedural modelling approach for
the astrolabe, which is in its essence a two-dimensional (2D)
map of the sky, in an expressive widely available graphics
language: PostScript. All of the classical diagrams and scales
from original instruments found in the literature have been
analyzed and implemented and are again available for practical study. For explanations, variants of the finished diagrams
can be shown which add the necessary construction lines,
so that the construction process will be immediately clear
from figures in the same style as the finished drawings. The
resulting astrolabe figures can be printed, or used as basis
for a working virtual 3D instrument for cultural heritage applications in a medieval setting, and even physical models
have been created from the same code by controlling a laser
engraver/cutter. These real-world instruments are usable for,
e.g. museums, where visitor groups could be demonstrated
hands-on how to operate these instruments. The year 2009
has been declared ‘International Year of Astronomy’ by UNESCO, and we expect a series of exhibitions and seminars
on the history of astronomy, where these instruments can be
used.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: the section on
related work focuses on procedural modelling in the domain
of cultural heritage applications, followed by some pointers
to construction descriptions for astrolabes. Then follows a
functional description of the instrument which explains the
various features that may be available and the advantages
of using a programmed approach. Some construction details
and their implementation are described afterwards, followed
by a section on practical production of astrolabes with a
laser engraver/cutter. The discussion concludes with potential
other applications and future work.

2. Related Work
2.1. Procedural modelling
Procedural modelling is frequently used in large scenes like
urban visualization, when (mostly artificial) structures are
too complex to be modelled completely in detail, and where
on the other hand lots of buildings share similar structure.
A limited set of rules for building construction can yield a
wide variety of acceptable buildings that overall results in an
acceptably realistic model of a large urban area.
In the area of cultural heritage, Birch et al. [BBJ∗ 01] describe such a system that allows the rapid generation of simple house models. These can be used as ‘vernacular’ buildings that fill the scene between more interesting buildings
which have to be modelled in detail.
Wonka et al. [WWSR03] describe the modelling of buildings and M¨uller et al. [MWH∗ 06] of complete large urban
areas with the help of shape grammars. These allow the generation not only of buildings and cities with simple ground
plans, but M¨uller et al. also show a large model reconstruction of ancient Pompeii that can be encoded in a limited set
of rules.
Another application of procedural modelling is the encoding of regularly structured architectural detail. The traditional way of creating a detailed model in multiple resolutions would start with a highly detailed mesh, and automatic
polygon reduction schemes would provide different levels of
detail, probably losing the architectonic intent and providing a non-optimal mesh. Havemann and Fellner [HF04] explain the procedural construction of gothic church windows
and their efficient implementation in their Generative Modeling Language (GML). Later, from the same group, Berndt
et al. [BFH05] present their overall solution for an extremely
compact shape representation that encodes 3D shapes with
only a few control polygons plus functions in GML, which is
capable of creating the final mesh in the required resolution
by Catmull/Clark subdivision. Their solution is thus optimal
for transferring complex geometric 3D models also in a web
application if bandwidth is limited, and if the models are
reasonably regular to be described by geometric procedures.
Berndt et al. present again windows of gothic cathedrals as
excellent examples where this approach works very well. The
GML syntax is very similar to Adobe PostScript [Ado90], a
stack-based programming language mostly used for printers
or as graphics file format best suited for vector graphics.
The current role of procedural modelling for digital cultural heritage is also described in (AG07, section 5.1).

2.2. Astrolabes
From medieval times, several manuscripts and printed texts
on astrolabe construction survived and are topic of high

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

G. Zotti / Tangible Heritage: Astrolabes from the Laser Engraver

2171

tic sheet with a horizon mask rotates over a map of the sky
visible for a certain geographical latitude, with the celestial
pole of the respective hemisphere as map centre. Scales on
the borders of both disks allow the user to align a time of day
with the date of interest, and the horizon mask then shows the
sky visible at that date and time. In contrast, on the astrolabe,
the horizon table is on the lower fixed disk, while the star
map rotates above. Durable transparent materials were not
available for astrolabes, so the star map was constructed in
a grid-like fashion, hence its name rete (lat. ‘(spider-)net’;
yellow in Figure 1). The star map must include the annual
path of the sun, i.e. the ecliptic, which by the stereographic
projection is mapped onto a circle that lies excentric on the
rete and shows degree marks for the signs of the zodiac. The
stars are marked as end points of pointers, arrows, flames,
leaves or similar shapes which grow from the struts of the
rete. A disadvantage of the stereographic projection is the
high degree of distortion far from the centre of projection, so
the star map on the astrolabe was almost always limited to
the range of declinations the sun can reach, and the (usually)
southern part of the sky was missing.

Figure 1: Front of a panispheric astrolabe. The parts are
described in Section 3.
interest by linguists and historians of mathematics and astronomy alike (e.g. [Cha91, Lor05, St¨o13]).
The first modern large study on surviving astrolabes, and
still a valuable reference, is [Gun32]. [Mic47] is often cited
as best 20th century source of construction details, although
some issues remain open. [Sau84] explains construction and
use also of other variants of the astrolabe. Good photographs
of old instruments can be found in [WW98].

The horizon tablet had to be constructed for the geographic
latitude of the observer, so most astrolabes have several interchangeable plates, or tympans, which are all stored inside
the flat cylindrical body, or mater, of the instrument. Only
one tympan is visible at a time, and can show an – at first
glance – exceedingly rich assortment of circle segments,
which are explained in Section 4.2 below.
On European instruments, above the rete there was a rule,
or index, helping to read the various marks.
On the back, astrolabes showed a variety of additional
scales and nomogramms. The only compulsory scale was an
altitude scale on the outer border, which together with the
backsight, or alhidade, allowed measurements of stellar or
solar altitudes. Other scales are described in Section 4.4.

Recently, the Web allows access to images of collections
of old instruments [Oxf06], general information [Mor05] and
even a Java application [Pow]. An online catalogue has been
under construction for years [Kin02]. Also, there are several
individuals who build brass replica of certain instruments, or
metal astrolabes in classical style without copying a specific
model.

To determine time, a stellar or solar altitude was measured,
then the rete was rotated until the star pointer or solar position
on the zodiac was on the correct almucantarat. The index was
placed on the solar position on the ecliptic and pointed to the
correct time on the limbus.

3. Description of the Astrolabe

The original astrolabes were typically made from wood
or brass plate. The plain drawings were transferred and engraved or etched on the plate, then the outlines had to be cut,
and the parts were assembled on a central axis, so that rete,
index and alhidade could be rotated.

The astrolabe consists of several distinct parts which must
be present on any usable instrument. Their fabrication allows some artistic freedom, although their construction must
adhere to strict mathematical rules. The construction of the
astrolabe is based on the stereographic projection which was
invented by Hipparchos (second century BC).
The front side (Figure 1) is a predecessor of the planispheric star map which is still widely used by today’s amateur
astronomers. On a modern planisphere, a transparent plas-

4. Construction and Implementation
From today’s point of view, the construction is simple and
requires only secondary school mathematical capabilities; so
due to space limitations, we can show only the explanatory
geometric figures (which are also result of the modelling

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2172

G. Zotti / Tangible Heritage: Astrolabes from the Laser Engraver

Figure 2: Rete: (a) Stereographic construction. For demonstration, the image is rotated clockwise, and half of the tangential
plane is also shown face-on with a modern-style star map – (b) designed for the epoch 2000; (c) with star positions automatically
subject to precession, the basic rete design can be used for several centuries (here: 1400), but with some aesthetical limitations.
Note, e.g. the elongated star pointers on the right side, where also some stars have crossed the carrier fretwork.
effort) and few formulae, and must refer the reader to e.g.
[Mic47] or [Sau84] for more construction details.
All parts of the astrolabe have been implemented as a set
of native Encapsulated PostScript (EPS) graphic files. Aside
from still being a de-facto standard in the printing domain,
PostScript is a Turing-complete programming language in
its own right, and is reasonably simple to be used directly,
without the help of another program that would precompute
auxiliary values, for the generation of 2D graphics when
nothing more is required and the final image is mostly prepared for print. The astrolabe is in its essence a flat model of
the heavens and is entirely constructed of straight lines and
circle segments, which are also available as native PostScript
operators. Moreover, PostScript provides clip and fill operators, so that an area bounded by a defined path can be either
excluded from further change, or filled with a single colour
(or a colour gradient, or even a pattern). Native PostScript
programming is in fact everything that is required to create
the intricate line art typical for this kind of instrument.
In our case, the EPS files consist of three parts: at the start
of the file, a configuration block allows the setting of a wide
variety of parameters that activate the required features and
influence their final appearance. For example, geographic latitude is the key parameter that controls the final result of the
horizon plate (see Figure 4). Or, depending on whether the
user wants to create a ‘Western’ (European) or ‘Eastern’ (Islamic) instrument, different diagrams can be selected for the
back, with some more switches that influence details in the finally drawn diagrams. The pastel colouring, if activated, emulates the 17th century style of coloured copperplate-printed
astrolabes. Also linear distortions caused by some printers
can be compensated by pre-scaling factors, so that circles
will be printed correctly.

Then follows the part where numerous procedures are defined. Some are purely general astronomical computations
after [Mee98], others fulfil generalized high-level PostScript
drawing operations like typesetting of letters along a circle,
and finally there are plotting functions that draw the required
diagrams and make use of the previously defined functions.
The final part is again the actual page description, which,
by evaluation of the configuration variables, calls the required
plotting functions with the correct parameters.

4.1. The star map or rete
The construction is performed with the aid of a sphere (the
celestial sphere) and a tangential plane, usually on the North
Celestial Pole (Figure 2(a); the rare southern projection uses
a tangent plane on the South Celestial Pole, and such an
instrument can be created as well. Medieval astronomical
clocks usually used this kind of projection). The celestial
sphere is seen from the outside, and from the point where the
sun is placed at the beginning of spring (vernal equinox). The
ecliptic (annual path of the sun) therefore is shown projected
as an inclined line. The angle of inclination is the obliquity of
the ecliptic, about ε = 23.44◦ , but slowly changing in time,
with a value closer to 24◦ seen in antique sources.
With the eye point on the South Celestial Pole (SCP), draw
lines through the equator endpoints to mark radius r 0 , and to
the extrema of the ecliptic diameter to mark radii e 1 and e 2 on
the tangential plane. These three radii are the most important
sizes on the astrolabe, and their ratio depends on the exact
value of ε. When the projection sphere has radius r = 1, the
other dimensions can be derived from triangular relations as
2 cos ε
2 cos ε
and e2 = 1−sin
.
r0 = 2, e1 = 1+sin
ε
ε

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

G. Zotti / Tangible Heritage: Astrolabes from the Laser Engraver

Next, we draw the projection of the ecliptic, i.e. a circle
2
1
around point (0, −e) where e = e2 −e
.
of radius re = e1 +e
2
2
Along this circle, the sun moves during the year by about
one degree per day. The ecliptic has to be partitioned into
the 12 signs of the zodiac and marked for each degree of
ecliptical longitude λ. Because the stereographic projection
causes strong distortions for areas on the sphere far from the
tangential point, the star map usually is cut off at the southern
solstice radius e 2 .
A star map would be incomplete without stars. While their
right ascension α maps directly to polar angle counterclockwise from the First Point of Aries ϒ, their declination (latitu2 cos δ
. If we just want
dinal coordinate) δ maps to radius rδ = 1+sin
δ
a functional model and print the rete on transparent material,
we can now draw a star map in today’s usual style, representing the constellations with stick figures and star symbols of
different sizes, depending on their magnitudes (brightness),
like in the top half of Figure 2(a).
However, the classical astrolabe was made from metal or
wood, so we must construct a rete as fretwork or tracery that
allows to see the underlying tympan for operation. Depending
on instrument size, about 10–30 stars should be included on
such a rete. This is the part that allows most artistic freedom
but needs most manual decisions, however, so that many
different styles of rete artwork are possible.
As a design aid, we first can print the modern star map
that includes the ecliptic circle. As mechanical requirement,
we have to find a way to connect the ecliptic circle to the
rotational centre (pole). Most classical instruments therefore
provide a horizontal strut from ϒ to the First Point of Libra .
Also frequently seen are an outer circle along e 2 , and a part of
a circle that follows the equator. Apart from these elements,
we can now freely add struts that should run through parts
of the sky map, so that no bright stars are occluded. The
struts can be straight or form a complicated tracery, but they
should be balanced so that the centre of gravity is still the
centre of rotation, because a disbalance will cause errors
when the astrolabe is used for an altitude measurement and
should hang vertically. From the auxiliary struts or tracery,
we can now grow the star pointers which, depending on the
overall style, are usually formed as flames or leaves.
Stellar positions are not fixed for eternity, but over decades
and centuries change, mostly due to precession, caused by the
wobble of the Earth’s axis and visible as slow shift (1 degree
in about 72 years) of all stars parallel to the ecliptic. Therefore, any rete will be outdated within a few decades after
production. Here, another critical advantage of the procedural modelling approach comes into play: the star positions
are computed from stellar coordinates which are stored for a
standard epoch inside the EPS file, and a configuration variable in the file header is set to the year of interest, so that
coordinates for that year are computed by the PostScript interpreter, from which the points on the rete are finally derived.

2173

The pointers on the instrument presented here are defined as
pairs of native PostScript spline curves, where the roots are
at fixed locations on the rete struts, the endpoints are the star
positions which are subject to precession, and the control
points, which are chosen with artistic freedom so that the
whole star pointer shows an elegant sweep, are subject to
half the precession effect.
But even with this generalisation, a single rete tracery
design can only work for a few centuries at best: if we leave
the roots of the star pointers at fixed positions on the struts,
precession would for epochs too far from the design epoch
bend the star pointers into an unelegant shape (Figure 2(c)),
and sometimes the star positions cross the rete struts. For
an instrument far from the design epoch, the star pointers
must therefore have to be rooted at different positions on the
struts, and even some struts may have to be relocated to avoid
occlusion of a star. Obviously, selection of the respective root
points depends on the epoch parameter.
4.2. The horizon plates or tympans
The astrolabe’s second essential part is the horizon tablet or
tympan, which has to be constructed depending on the geographical latitude ϕ where the instrument shall be used for.
All lines on classical tympans are constructed geometrically,
so individual instruments differ only in the selection of line
categories and their densities, which can also be selected in
the file header. To increase usability, most astrolabes contain
several exchangeable plates constructed for different latitudes. For classical instruments, the execution of this drawing
required mathematical skills from the craftsman, and has also
been very time consuming and therefore costly. In contrast,
when the line art is encoded in constructional procedures, the
program will immediately ‘draw itself’ to provide a correctly
constructed plate for any latitude required.

4.2.1. Horizon, altitude and azimuth circles
The basic construction of the horizon plate starts in the same
way as the construction of the rete to find circles r 0 , e 1 , e 2 .
Because the earth is reduced into the centre of the projection sphere, the observer’s horizon, a tangential plane on the
earth’s surface, is reduced to an inclined plane through the
sphere’s centre (Figure 3). Again, we draw lines through the
extreme points of this horizon diameter on the sphere to reach
points a 0,N and a 0,S , the north and south points, respectively,
of the horizon circle. Similarly, to draw a circle, or almucantarat, for altitude h above the horizon, we first draw its
projection in the celestial sphere, then project its extreme
points from the SCP towards the projection plane to find the
intersections from which the circle can be drawn.
Traditionally, up to three twilight lines can be found below the horizon circle. In PostScript, it is easy to not only

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2174

G. Zotti / Tangible Heritage: Astrolabes from the Laser Engraver

rise to sunset) was split in 12 parts of equal length, as was
the night. In summer, daylight hours were thus longer than
night-time hours, and vice versa in winter. At the equinoxes,
day and night hours were of equal length, hence the names
equal hours or equinoctial hours for the hours that we use today. The unequal hours were counted from sunrise or sunset,
respectively. The astrolabe is capable of determining at least
these two systems of time. Only when mechanized clocks
were introduced and were usually capable of displaying only
the equal hours, the other traditional systems were abandoned
within a few decades (Zin67, p.17).

Figure 3: Stereographic construction of altitude circles in
the tympan.

Although the sun is needed to determine the unequal hour,
the lines are usually drawn not in the part of the tympan above
the horizon, but in the lower part, to avoid further cluttering
of the already dense mesh of arcs in the area representing
the sky. To read the daytime, the solar nadir (antisolar point)
was found on the ecliptic opposite the real position with the
use of the index.
The traditional way of construction for the unequal hour
lines was as follows: first, the parts of the circles e 1 , r 0 and
e 2 that lie below the horizon were split in 12 parts of equal
length. Then, each triplet of split points was connected with
a circular arc. Although this is just an approximation of the
correct solution where the diurnal circle for every declination
should be split in 12 parts, the error is in the range of the line
width up to about latitude ϕ = 50◦ . This similarity can be
best shown by comparing approximate and correct lines on
the same tympan (see Figure 4).
Two other time reckoning styles counted equal hours from
sunrise, or sunset, respectively. Such hour lines are just rotated copies of the horizon and can be seen in the lower part
of Figure 1.

4.3. The case or mater
Figure 4: Tympans (shown halved) for latitudes 13◦ and 62◦ ,
with different features activated. Note the different results for
the Unequal Hour lines for traditional (dotted) and correct
(dashed) construction for latitudes ϕ > 50◦ !

This part consists of a flat disk and a thicker ring (limbus) with
degree or time scales mounted on its outside. The flat disk
serves as carrier for the engravings of the back, see section
4.4. The limbus is circular, but with a decorated protrusion
(throne) where a shackle is attached, so that the astrolabe can
be hung vertically for altitude measurements.

draw these circles as lines, but we can fill the regions with
approximate twilight colours (Figure 4).
4.4. The back or dorsum
The construction of the azimuth arcs is sketched in
Figure 6.
4.2.2. Unequal hour lines
In antiquity and the Middle Ages, several systems of reckoning time were used in parallel. The most important was the
system of unequal hours, where the bright day (from sun-

The back of the astrolabe may carry a wide range of diagrams, and differs strongly between European and Persian
instruments. Due to space limitations we can merely name
the classical European diagrams shown in Figure 5 and must
again refer to [Mic47] or [Sau84] for details.
The altitude scale along the outer border is used in combination with the alhidade (backsight) to measure altitudes.

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

G. Zotti / Tangible Heritage: Astrolabes from the Laser Engraver

2175

slide. For higher durability, such an instrument can be laminated. Better for handling and practical experience, however,
is the production of rigid instruments.

Figure 5: Dorsum: typical late 14th century instrument.

Inscribed, there is the zodiac with its regular partition into
12 signs of 30 degrees each. Further inside, a calendar circle
is drawn, which can be either concentric with irregular day
marks, or excentric with regular day marks, to map the irregular speed of the (geocentric) sun during the year. The placement of the excentric circle is determined from the length
of the seasons (Mic47, p.76), and is also variable over the
centuries. The calendar and ecliptic have to be aligned properly so that for every day of the year the sun’s position on
the zodiac can be determined. For an instrument that shows
the Julian calendar (i.e., before 1582), spring begin (0◦ ϒ)
was not on March 21, but up to 10 days earlier. The exact
amount of rotation is computed from astronomical literature
[Mee98].
The Shadow Square, with its sides usually split in 12 parts,
basically is a tangent scale for altitude measurements.
The Unequal Hours Diagram in the right upper quadrant
provides a direct way to determine the unequal hour from
a single measurement of solar altitude. The quadrant for
Unequal/Equal Hours Conversion (upper left) can be found
mostly on later instruments.

5. Production for Hands-On Experience: Cardboard
and Laser Woodcutting
For practical demonstrations, the cheapest solution is a simple print on cardboard as has also been done in the original
period, where the rete can now also be printed on an overhead

A 2kW CO 2 laser engraver/cutter with xy table proved to
be an ideal tool for our purposes. It works in two modes of
operation: first, the line art is burned into the material in a
scanline mode, then the contours of the parts (with a certain colour code) are cut in direct xy pen plotter mode. The
line style of contour lines of the astrolabe are defined in the
cutlines procedure, which is redefined when the lasercut
switch is active. Also, the setting of lasercut invalidates any
colour settings or fill operations. Unfortunately, the machine
is not capable of cutting metal, so it was decided to use modelling plywood as base material. All parts were imported
into a standard vector graphics drawing program, and the
machine was used as printer where the driver dialogue in this
case also controls different laser power and pulse settings
for different materials. The sequence of cutting operations is
directly taken from the EPS file, so that the necessary care
can be taken that the machine first cuts holes, then the outline. The engravings are done in quite high resolution (300 or
600 dpi), which takes however more than an hour for an A3
sized wood plate. The lasercut parts have to be further assembled, which is an easy weekend job for do-it-yourselfers.
The tympans are printed on a regular colour laser printer on
decorative paper, so that many different tympans for different
latitudes can be provided inside the mater. A decorative screw
is used as polar axis to keep all parts together.

6. 3D Modelling
The EPS programs can also be used as basis for 3D models
for various applications in the cultural heritage domain. The
transformation into a 3D model is currently done in standard
3D modelling software, where bitmaps of the drawings can
be used as textures and bump/displacement maps alike (the
engraved lines were usually filled with dark ink), and the
outline curves are extruded into flat objects. The components
are joined along the axis, where rete, index and (on the reverse
side) alhidade can rotate.

7. Discussion and Future Work
The instruments presented here are not reproductions of existing old instruments. They show an original design, which
however must follow the basic construction principles of
the stereographic projection. For simpler use or explanatory purposes, a modern star map on overhead transparency
can replace or augment the classic rete, and a wide variety
of printed paper horizons (tympans) can be included in the
mater.
To test star coordinates for instruments of medieval times,
old star catalogues from the literature [Kun66] have been

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2176

G. Zotti / Tangible Heritage: Astrolabes from the Laser Engraver

Figure 6: The procedural astrolabe implementation can be used for a multitude of purposes, from technical illustrations to 3D
models and even to control a laser engraver/cutter for the production of working instruments.
entered, and a modern-style star map can easily be plotted
for any of them, so that a researcher of old manuscripts could
have an instrument at hand that provides the same functionality, coordinates and data (albeit different appearance) as the
original author probably had when writing.

Technical report, EPOCH: European Research Network on Excellence in Processing Open Cultural
Heritage, 2007. Online: Available at http://privaterepository.epoch-net.org/deliverables/epoch_
d211_ra_v10_200107.pdf.

An important group of instruments are Universal Astrolabes which do not need a tympan for every latitude, but are
capable of solving problems for any latitude, although they
are generally more difficult to operate. Also, the classical
Persian astrolabe design includes several other diagrams that
suit everyday needs of Muslim believers. These instruments
have already been constructed and will be built on the laser
engraver in the near future.

[BBJ∗ 01] BIRCH P. J., BROWNE S. P., JENNINGS V. J., DAY
A. M., ARNOLD D. B.: Rapid procedural-modelling of architectural structures. In VAST ’01: Proceedings of the
2001 Conference on Virtual Reality, Archeology, and Cultural Heritage (New York, NY, USA, 2001), ACM Press,
pp. 187–196.

Acknowledgments
Thanks go to the Institute for Forming and Laser Technology
of the Vienna University of Technology, especially Ferdinand
Bammer for his support with the laser engraver. The 3D
model (Figure 6) was created by Andrea Weidlich.
References
[Ado90] ADOBE SYSTEMS, INCORPORATED: PostScript Language Reference Manual, second edition. AddisonWesley, 1990. (Red Book).
[AG07]

ARNOLD D., GESER G.: D 2.11: Research Agenda.

[BFH05] BERNDT R., FELLNER D. W., HAVEMANN S.: Generative 3D models: A key to more information within less
bandwidth at higher quality. In Web3D ’05: Proceedings
of 10th International Conference on 3D Web Technology
(New York, NY, USA, 2005), ACM Press, pp. 111–121.
[Cha91]

CHAUCER G.: A treatise on the astrolabe, ca. 1391.

[Gun32] GUNTHER R. T.: Astrolabes of the World. The Holland Press Ltd., London, 1932. (Reprint 1976).
[HF04] HAVEMANN S., FELLNER D. W.: Generative parametric design of Gothic window tracery.In Proceedings 5th
International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeological and Cultural Heritage (VAST 2004) (2004), CAIN K.,
CHRYSANTHOU Y., NICCOLUCCI F., SILBERMAN N., (Eds.), Eurographics, pp. 193–201.

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

G. Zotti / Tangible Heritage: Astrolabes from the Laser Engraver

[Kin02] KING D.: A catalogue of medieval astronomical
instruments to ca. 1500. Online: Available at http://
web.uni-frankfurt.de/fb13/ign/instrumentcatalogue.html, 2002.
[Kun66] KUNITZSCH P.: Typen von Sternverzeichnissen in
Astronomischen Handschriften des Zehnten bis Vierzehnten Jahrhunderts. Otto Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, 1966.
[Lor05] LORCH R. (Ed.): Al-Fargh¯an¯ı: On the Astrolabe
(ca.856–857). Franz Steiner Verlag, Wiesbaden, 2005.
[Mee98] MEEUS J.: Astronomical Algorithms, second edition. Willmann-Bell, Inc., Richmond, Virginia, 1998.
[Mic47] MICHEL H.: Trait´e de L’Astrolabe. GauthierVillars, Paris, 1947.
J.
E.:
Astrolabes
website.
[Mor05] MORRISON
http://www.astrolabes.org, 2005. Access 04/2007.
[MWH∗ 06] M¨ULLER P., WONKA P., HAEGLER S., ULMER
A., GOOL L. V.: Procedural modeling of buildings.
In SIGGRAPH ’06: ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers
(New York, NY, USA, 2006), ACM Press, pp. 614–
623.

2177

[Oxf06]
OXFORD MUSEUM OF THE HISTORY OF SCIENCE:
The astrolabe: An online resource. Available at
http://www.mhs.ox.ac.uk/astrolabe/, 2006.
K.:
Java
astrolabe.
Available
[Pow] POWELL
at
http://www.autodidacts.f2s.com/astro/index.
html.
[Sau84] SAUNDERS H. N.: All The Astrolabes. Senecio Publishing Company Ldt., Oxford, England, 1984.
[St¨o13] STO¨ FFLER J.: Elucidatio Fabricae Ususque Astrolabii. Oppenheim, 1513.
[WW98] WEBSTER R., WEBSTER M.: Western Astrolabes.
Adler Planetarium & Astronomy Museum, Chicago, 1998.
[WWSR03] WONKA P., WIMMER M., SILLION F., RIBARSKY
W.: Instant architecture. In SIGGRAPH ’03: ACM SIGGRAPH 2003 Papers (New York, NY, USA, 2003), ACM
Press, pp. 669–677.
[Zin67] ZINNER E.: Deutsche und Niederl¨andische Astronomische Instrumente des 11. bis 18. Jahrhunderts,
secondnd edition. C. H. Beck’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung,
M¨unchen, 1967.

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

