Eurographics Symposium on Geometry Processing 2008
Pierre Alliez and Szymon Rusinkiewicz
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 5

Discrete Distortion in Triangulated 3-Manifolds
Mohammed Mostefa Mesmoudi1 and Leila De Floriani2 and Umberto Port2
1 Institut
2 Department

Universitaire de Formation des Maîtres de Créteil, University Paris XII, France
of computer Science, University of Genova, Via Dodecaneso n 35, 16146 Genova, Italy

Abstract
We introduce a novel notion, that we call discrete distortion, for a triangulated 3-manifold. Discrete distortion naturally generalizes the notion of concentrated curvature defined for triangulated surfaces and provides a powerful
tool to understand the local geometry and topology of 3-manifolds. Discrete distortion can be viewed as a discrete
approach to Ricci curvature for singular flat manifolds. We distinguish between two kinds of distortion, namely,
vertex distortion, which is associated with the vertices of the tetrahedral mesh decomposing the 3-manifold, and
bond distortion, which is associated with the edges of the tetrahedral mesh. We investigate properties of vertex
and bond distortions. As an example, we visualize vertex distortion on manifold hypersurfaces in R4 defined by a
scalar field on a 3D mesh. distance fields.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: I.3.5 [Computational
Geometry and Object Modeling]:

1. Introduction
Curvature plays a crucial role to understand the geometry
and the topology of a surface. For analytic surfaces, the
mathematical background is well developed [Gra93, Spi79].
We find, thus, notions of geodesic, normal, principal, mean,
Gaussian and total curvatures. All of them give a precise description of the local geometric shape of a surface in any
direction.
For discrete polyhedral surfaces, many approaches exist
to estimate curvature [GG06]. Such approaches can be either computationally intensive, or suffer from the approximation errors or from convergence problems. For instance,
the sphere, which has a constant analytic Gaussian curvature,
may have a large range of curvature values when computing
it by using one of the discrete approaches [GG06,MDDP07].
In 1986, Troyanov [Tro86] proposed a rigorous mathematical approach to define a discrete curvature for singular flat
surfaces. He called it concentrated curvature. Recently, the
same notion has been introduced by some authors under the
name of angle deflection (see Section 2). Concentrated curvature measures angle deficit or excess at a point on the surface with respect to the flat situation on the Euclidean plane.
It can also be seen as the disc area distortion for a given radius with respect to the Euclidean plane.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

Here, we introduce a novel notion that we call discrete
distortion for a triangulated 3-manifold (generally embedded in a higher dimensional space). We distinguish between
two kinds of distortions: vertex distortion for vertices of
a triangulated three-manifold and bond distortion for its
edges. Discrete distortion naturally generalizes the notion of
concentrated curvature: discrete vertex and bond distortions
measure how the space is locally distorted and curved with
respect to the Euclidean geometry of the three-dimensional
space. This is characterized by solid and dihedral angles
deficit or excess around a vertex and around an edge with
respect to the flat situation.
Discrete distortion can also be seen as discrete approach
to Ricci curvature, known in the differentiable case, for manifolds [And05, Eis49]. In general relativity it is known that
massive planets curve and distort the fourth-dimensional
space-time and a non-Euclidean geometry is induced. Many
interesting physics laws and phenomena have been discovered, namely on the geometric structure of the universe
(black holes, white fountains, gravity, gravitational lenses,
light behavior, ...). Distortion due to gravity is expressed
through Ricci tensor which is the Laplacian of a Riemannian
metric tensor of the manifold. Ricci tensor is used in Einstein
field equation, the main equation in relativity that describes
how matter and energy distort the space-time, and also in

1334

Mohammed Mostefa Mesmoudi & Leila De Floriani & Umberto Port / Discrete Distortion in Triangulated 3-Manifolds

geodesics equations. Ricci flow [And05] has been recently
used by Perelman to solve the most challenging Poincaré
conjecture [Tao06].
Ricci curvature, also called scalar curvature, associates
with each point of a manifold a scalar value that characterizes how distorted is the manifold around the point. Roughly
speaking, Ricci curvature measures the degree of volume
distortion of regions in the manifold with respect to the Euclidean space [Eis49, Gro81]. This is exactly what we are
interested in. From our discrete viewpoint, planets in space
can be assimilated to vertices in a triangulated shape, where
edges correspond to the gravity links between planets, their
satellites and stars. The mass of such objects define a scalar
field over the vertices of the triangulation. Hence, we have all
the ingredients to measure volume distortion of such space
with respect to static Euclidean space. In Section 5, we give
some examples illustrating this idea.
In geometric modeling, we often deal with discrete data
and with 2- and higher-dimensional scalar fields. In the 2D
case, many approaches exit to study the structure of surfaces corresponding to the data or to the scalar fields. In the
third and the fourth dimensions, we are facing several technical and theoretic problems (complex data structures, error control, convergence problems, visualization limitation,
discretizing smooth notions, etc.). In this work, we are interested in the local topology of triangulated 3-manifolds.
An example of a 3-manifold in 4D space is the graph of
a discrete 3D scalar field defined over a tetrahedralized
three-dimensional domain D in R3 . In this case, the graph
representation of the field is a tetrahedral hypersurface in
R4 . Another example is provided by the tetrahedral isosurfaces extracted from four-dimensional scalar fields, i.e.,
time-varying 3D scalar fields [LDS04, WB96, WB98]. In
this case, the 4D domain of the field is discretized through
a mesh of 4-simplices, and the iso-surfaces are tetrahedral
meshes embedded in 4D space. A special interesting case
is that of dynamic implicit shapes, i.e., implicit shapes defined through volumetric distance fields which vary over
time. Such implicit surfaces are defined through a discretization of the distance field on a 4D grid, at whose vertices the
signed distance over time from the surface is maintained. In
this case, the implicit surface, i.e., the iso-surface at level 0,
which is extracted through a generalization of the marching
cube algorithm, is a tetrahedral mesh embedded in R4
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we discuss related work on curvature estimation. In Section 3, we review fundamental notions related to
spherical geometry. In Section 4, we review briefly the basic
idea behind the concept of concentrated curvature. In Section 5, we introduce the notion of discrete vertex and bond
distortions for combinatorial 3-manifolds. We discuss some
of their properties and we illustrate them through examples.
In Section 6, we investigate relations between bond and vertex distortions. In Section 7, we illustrate vertex distortion by

considering data sets representing 3D scalar fields. In Section 8, we draw some concluding remarks, and we discuss
current and future work as well as possible applications of
distortion.
2. Related Work
Two major approaches exist in literature to estimate curvature over triangulated surfaces: analytic methods and discrete methods, see [GG06]. Analytic approaches are based
on interpolating the mesh vertices by smooth functions (generally by quadratic functions) and compute their curvatures analytically [GS03]. Analytic methods seem to perform quite well, but they depend on the interpolation approach, they are computational intensive, and, thus, not suitable for large-size triangulated surfaces.
Discrete approaches are numerous and basically use discretization of derivatives of Gauss-Bonnet formula, or of
Euler formula. Linearization of first and second derivatives is used in the first discrete approach to approximate,
with some error estimations, curvature values [MW99]. Issues related to discrete approaches are error estimation and
control, convergence problem over small areas or irregular meshes (see, for more details and discussion, [MDB02,
GG06, MDDP07]).
Concentrated curvature has been recently used by some
authors [AER05, AC06] under the name of angle deflection and by [MDDP07] to define a discrete approximation
of Gauss curvature. In [MDDP07] also a comparative study
with the deficit angle method, mostly used in literature, has
been performed. A purely combinatorial approach to concentrated curvature has been introduced in [BP06].
In the last century characterization and classification of 3manifolds has been a challenging problem [TW84, Thu97].
Ricci curvature is the most natural tool used to measure the
distortion of the manifold [And05, Eis49]. Forman [For02]
generalized Ricci curvature to cell complexes. Forman approach is purely combinatorial and based on the analysis of
the action of the combinatorial Laplace operator on p-chains.

3. Background Notions
In this Section, we review some notions related to spherical
geometry that we need in order to develop the material of
this paper. A sphere S2 endowed with the restriction of the
Euclidean metric of R3 is a metric space of constant curvature. The geodesic path (i.e., the shortest path) between two
points A and B on S lies on the largest circles on S connecting
A and B. When A and B are diametrically opposite, then the
shortest path is not unique (in this case, there is an infinity
of large circles (meridians) connecting A to B). This latter
property differentiates essentially spherical geometry from
Euclidean and hyperbolic geometries, where a geodesic segment connecting two given points is unique.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Mohammed Mostefa Mesmoudi & Leila De Floriani & Umberto Port / Discrete Distortion in Triangulated 3-Manifolds

Given three points A, B and C on a sphere, a geodesic triangle ∆ = (ABC) can be formed by three geodesic arcs connecting these points (see Figure 1). Assume that S2 is the unit
sphere and let a, b and c be the (geodesic) edges of triangle ∆
that are opposite to vertices A, B, and C, respectively. Arcs a,
b and c are, respectively, apposite to angles BOC, AOC and
AOB where O is the center of S2 . If there is no ambiguity
and for the sake of simplicity we can, respectively, identify
arcs a, b and c to these angles. Since S2 is a unit sphere, then
the measures of the above angles centered at O are equal to
the lengths of their respective opposite arcs. From point A let
us consider the tangent lines to arcs AB and AC. Let B , C
be, respectively, the intersection of [OB) and [OC) with these
tangent lines. We suppose here that b and c are different from
π/2. Triangles OAB and OAC are rectangle at A. We have
AC
OA
OA
tan c = AB
OA , tan b = OA , OB = cos c and OC = cos b . The
−−→ −−→
inner product OB • OC is equal to OB · OC cos a. On the
−−→ −
−−→ −
→ −→
→ −→
other hand we have OB = OA + AB and OC = OA + AC .
Simple computation and simplification of the previous inner
product gives
cos(A) =

cos a − cos b cos c
sin b sin c

(1)

where A is the dihedral angle at A (i.e., angle between planes
generated by OAB and OAC, this is also equal to angle between half-tangent lines at point A). When b or c is equal to
π/2, simple computation shows that formula 1 is still available.
Other trigonometric relations are available for spherical
triangles, see [RG07]. Relation (1) allows us to compute
solid angles within tetrahedron at each of its vertices (i.e.,
trihedral angles of vertices). Indeed, Gauss-Bonnet theo-

1335

This result is known as Girard’s theorem [Pol99]. The solid
(i.e., trihedral) angle at vertex O is then equal to the area of
triangle ∆ within the unit sphere (i.e., ρ = 1), as shown in
Figure 1(b).
4. Concentrated Curvature
In this Section, we discuss how concentrated curvature for
surfaces is defined for singular flat surfaces and in particular for piecewise triangulated surfaces (for further details,
see [Tro86]). Concentrated curvature describes the topology
of a surface through an equivalent of Gauss-Bonnet theorem.
Also, it does not depend on the local geometric shape of the
surface.
A singular flat surface is a surface endowed with a metric
such that each point of the surface has a neighborhood which
is either isometric to a an Euclidean disc or to an Euclidean
cone of angle Θ = 2π. Points satisfying this latter property
are called singular conical points. As a simple example, we
consider a regular tetrahedron. Each point in the interior of
a face has a Euclidean neighborhood. A point on an edge
has also a Euclidean neighborhood formed by the union of
two identical half discs on each adjacent face. For a vertex
v of the tetrahedron, the union of the identical three sectors
centered at v drawn on faces forms a neighborhood which is
isometric to a cone of summit v and angle 3 π3 = π = 2π. The
tetrahedron is thus a singular flat surface. In the same manner, any piecewise linear triangulated surface has a structure
of a singular flat surface. All vertices with a total angle different from 2π (or π for boundary points) are singular points.
This means that almost all vertices of a triangulated surface
are singular conical points.
Let Σ be a (piecewise linear) triangulated surface and let
p be a vertex of the triangulation. The total angle Θ p at p is
given by the sum of angles at p of all triangles in its one-ring
neighborhood.

(a)

Definition 1 [Tro86] Let point p be in the interior of the
surface. The value K(p) = 2π−Θ p is called the concentrated
Gaussian curvature at p. If p belongs to the boundary of the
surface, then K p = π − Θ p .

(b)

Figure 1: Geodesic triangle on a sphere (a) seen as a trihedral angle at a vertex of a tetrahedron (b).
rem applied to ∆ gives ∆ Km ds + ∂∆ kg (m)dl = 2πχ(∆) −
∑3i=1 αi , where (αi )3i=1 are the external angles at vertices A,
B and C and χ is Euler characteristic of triangle ∆. Angles are
computed on tangent planes at vertices. Since edges of ∆ are
geodesic arcs, then the geodesic curvature of each arc is null.
Hence, Gauss-Bonnet formulas becomes
∆ Km ds + 0 =
2π − (π − A + π − B + π − C). On the other hand, since the
triangle lies on a sphere, then ∆ Km ds = ρ12 Area(∆), where
ρ is the radius of S. Hence, we have
Area(∆) = (A + B + C − π)ρ2 .

(2)

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

5. Discrete Distortion
In this Section, we introduce first the notion of distortion
for 3D scalar fields, and then we extend it to tetrahedralized
shapes embedded in R4 . We assume here that the shapes are
combinatorial 3-manifolds. This means that the boundary of
the one-ring neighborhood (i.e.,the link) of each vertex is
either a combinatorial sphere or a combinatorial disc.
Let f be a 3D scalar field defined over a discrete set of
points distributed in a domain D in R3 . A piecewise linear
interpolation of f is obtained considering a decomposition
of D into a tetrahedral mesh with vertices at the given data
points. For a vertex p, the value f (p), added to the Cartesian

1336

Mohammed Mostefa Mesmoudi & Leila De Floriani & Umberto Port / Discrete Distortion in Triangulated 3-Manifolds

coordinates (x p , y p , z p ) of p, can be seen as an elevation of
point p to a point p = (x p , y p , z p , f (p)) in R4 . The elevated
domain D in R4 , image of domain D, is a hypersurface embedded in R4 . Let {T1 , · · · , Tn } be the set of tetrahedra in the
star of p (i.e., the tetrahedra incident in p) and {T1 , · · · , Tn }
be their elevated images by f in R4 . For each tetrahedron
Ti (resp. Ti ) (i = 1, · · · n) we compute in the same manner the
trihedral angle Si at p (resp. Si at p).
Definition 2 We define vertex distortion at p associated with
scalar field f the quantity

O. For tetrahedron Oabg, we have: A = 1.5625 steradians,
G = 1.5625 steradians, B = 1.9106 steradians. Hence, the
trihedral angle at O in tetrahedron Oabg is given by
S1 = A + G + B − π = 1.8941 steradians

In the same way, we show that all other tetrahedra in the
elevated star St (O) have the same trihedral angle at O as
S1 . Their sum ∑12
i=1 Si = 22.7297 steradians give the total
solid angle at O, which is different from 4π. Then, the vertex
distortion at O is given by
12

n

D(p ) = 4π − ∑ Si , if p is an internal vertex,

(3)

n

n

∑ Si − ∑ Si , if p is a boundary vertex,

i=1

(4)

i=1

Below, we present an example on how to compute distortion at a vertex. Let us consider a point O = (0, 0, 0)
whose one-ring neighborhood (i.e., its star), that we denote
as St(O), is a cube abcde f gh (see Figure 2(a)) where
a(1, −1, −1); b(1, 1, −1); c(1, 1, 1); d(1, −1, 1);
e(−1, −1, 1); f (−1, 1, 1); h(−1, −1, −1); g(−1, 1, −1).
Let f be a scalar field defined over vertices of St(O) by
f (O) = 0;

D(O) = 4π − ∑ Si = −10, 1633

(6)

i=1

i=1

D(p ) =

(5)

f (a) = f (c) = f (e) = f (g) = 0.01;

Similarly, we introduce the notion of distortion around the
edges of the mesh by computing the defect of total dihedral
angle around the edge in the elevated image by a scalar field
in R4 with respect to the total dihedral angle around the edge
in the original (non elevated) shape in R3 . We call it the bond
distortion around the edge.
In general, for an internal edge e, the total dihedral angle
Θe is different from 2π and hence there is a distortion of
space around edge e. Thus we have:
Definition 3 Bond distortion around an edge e, the quantity
D(e) defined by
D(e) = 2π − Θe , if e is an internal edge,

(7)

D(e) = θe − Θe , if e is a boundary edge.

(8)

f (b) = f (d) = f ( f ) = f (h) = 10000.
Values have been selected to be significantly different in order to highlight the dependency of distortion on the choice
of the triangulation. For simplicity, we keep the same names
for vertices in the elevated domain St (O) corresponding to
St(O) in R4 . We choose the following tetrahedra to form a
triangulation of St(O): oabg, oagh, obcg oc f g, og f e, ogeh,
oahe, oade, oacd, oacb, oc f e, ocde, as shown in Figure 2(a).

where θe is the total of dihedral angles around edge e in the
original shape in R3 .
Let us consider the example shown in Figure 2(a). Edge
Oa has six incident tetrahedra Oabg, Oagh, Oabc, Oacd,
Oahe and Oaed. All dihedral angles at Oa are equal to
A = 1.5625. Then, the total angle is ΘOa = 9.3753 < 2π.
Edge Ob has three incident tetrahedra, namely Obag, Obac
and Obcg, in which the dihedral angles are all equal to
B = 1.9106. Then, the total angle is ΘOb = 5, 7319. Hence,
the bond distortions at edges Oa and Ob are given by
D(Oa) = −3.0921

D(Ob) = 0.5513

(9)

Note that bond distortion values are alternatively positive
and negative.
(a)

(b)

Figure 2: (a): an example of a 3D scalar field over a cube
abcde f gh which is the star of its center O; (b): a different
triangulation of the same cube.

Theorem 1 When the scalar field f is the restriction of an
affine transformation over the vertices of a triangulation,
then the distortion is null at any internal vertex and any internal edge of the elevated image.
Proof of this Theorem can be found in [MDPA08].

To compute the trihedral angle at vertex O for each tetrahedron, we compute first the angles at O for each triangular
face of the tetrahedron. Then, we use relation (1) to compute the dihedral angles between faces incident at vertex

In particular, a domain with a constant scalar field is distortion free in R4 . This means that, at any elevation, the natural and the stable situation corresponds to null distortion.
For other scalar fields distortion is not, generally, null, but
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Mohammed Mostefa Mesmoudi & Leila De Floriani & Umberto Port / Discrete Distortion in Triangulated 3-Manifolds

it depends on the behavior of f . This is an important property that characterizes locally the geometry of the elevated
domain in R4 .
The notions of vertex and bond distortions introduced
above can be applied to any tetrahedralized 3-manifold. Vertex and bond distortions can respectively be defined by relations (3) and (7) at any internal vertex or edge of the tetrahedral mesh. We note that, for boundary vertices and edges,
we have not a reference shape in R3 that serves to compare
deficit or excess angles. For such a case we adopt the following definition.
Definition 4 For a boundary vertex p or a boundary edge e
on a combinatorial 3-manifold, we define vertex and bond
distortions by relations
n

D(p) = 2π − ∑ Si ,

D(e) = π − Θe ,

(10)

i=1

1337

is adjacent to two faces, while the corresponding dihedral
angle in the decahedron is less than π. Hence, the total dihedral angle around edge [AA] is less than 2π. Consequently,
bond distortions around edges [AA] and [BB] are not null.
Property 1 The distortion value at a vertex, or at an edge,
depends on the triangulation of the star of the vertex or of
the edge, respectively.
To illustrate the property above, let us consider the following
example. We consider the example in Figure 2(b), where we
keep the scalar field f as in the example in Figure 2(a), and
change only the triangulation of St(O). We consider tetrahedra Oabh, Obgh, Obg f , Ob f c, Ogh f , Oh f e, Oahd, Ohde,
Oabd, Obcd, Oc f d, Od f e. The same computation as in the
example in igure 2(a) gives S1 = 0.00028. All other tetrahedra have the same trihedral angle at O. Thus, the total angle
at O is S = 12S1 = 0.0034 = 4π and the distortion value at
O is equal to

where Θ is the sum of all dihedral angle around e.
Vertices and edges that have non null distortion can be
considered as singularities.
In Figure 3(a,b), an example is shown of two (singular) flat combinatorial three-manifolds (three-dimensional
tori embedded in R4 ). Each torus is obtained by topological identification of opposite faces of a cubic and a decahedron shapes. Identification operations are illustrated by arrows. Interesting geometric properties of three-dimensional
tori are discussed in [Thu97]. The torus in Figure 3(a) is distortion free (i.e., it has no singularity) since the total solid
angle at any point is equal to 4π steradians. The torus in in
Figure 3(b) has two singular points A and B. Vertex A has a
positive distortion and B has a negative one. Furthermore,

D (O) = 4π − 0.0034 = 12, 5629.

(11)

This shows that the choice of triangulation has an important impact on distortion. Comparing this latter example with
the previous one, we see that, although the triangulation of
the cube does not change its geometrical structure in R3 , its
elevated domain in R4 depends heavily on the tetrahedra selected. We compute, in the same way, vertex distortion at O
among all possible triangulations of the cube. We obtain a
sequence of all possible distortion values that we sort in an
increasing order. We have
−10.16 < −6.38 < −2.59 < 1.2 < 4.99 < 8.78 < 12, 56
The value 1.2 corresponds to the minimal absolute value
of all possible distortion values at O. We call it the optimal
vertex distortion of O. Also, for bond distortion, a similar
result holds, that is the bond distortion at an edge depends
on the triangulation of in its star.

Figure 3: In (a), a 3-dimensional flat torus without any singularity. In (b), a singular flat three-dimensional torus.
each edge [BB] on the horizontal faces for both examples in
Figure 3(a,b) is adjacent to four faces (top face, down face
and two lateral faces on polyhedra). Hence, the total dihedral angle around edge [BB] is equal to 2π in the torus in
Figure 3(a) and is larger than 2π in the torus in Figure 3(b),
since the dihedral angle incident at edge [BB] in the cube is
equal to π/2, while the dihedral angle incident at edge [BB]
in the decahedron is greater than π/2. Edge [AA] in the torus
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Depending on the triangulation, a tetrahedralized shape
may have different distortions. The optimal distortion values
correspond to a situation where the geometry of the shape
is the closest one to the Euclidean geometry of R3 . Hence,
distortion can be considered as a measure of the quality of
the mesh. The analogous of this fact for scalar fields defined
on surfaces is to minimize the curvature on the surfaces. It
is proven that minimizing the total absolute curvature is NPhard, see [BG05] but local optimization can be performed
following some criteria, see [DHSJL00]
Moreover, we think that for molecules, chemical reactions
tend to optimize the distortion for the resulting molecules.
The nearest one to 0 corresponds to the most stable state.
Significant non-null values of distortions may lead to a rupture in the molecule geometric structure. We are currently
collaborating with particle physicists to validate these hypotheses.

1338

Mohammed Mostefa Mesmoudi & Leila De Floriani & Umberto Port / Discrete Distortion in Triangulated 3-Manifolds

6. Interaction between Vertex and Bond Distortions
In this Section, we investigate the relation between vertex
and bond distortion.
Theorem 2 Distortion at a vertex p is the sum of all bond
distortions around edges incident to p. We have
D(p) =

∑

D(e),

(12)

e∈St(p)

where St(p) is the one-ring neighborhood of p.
Proof of this theorem can be found in [MDPA08].
Corollary 1 If bond distortion around all edges incident to
an internal vertex p are null, then the vertex distortion at p is
also null.

Figure 4: (a): star of a vertex O bounded by a regular icosahedron; (b): deletion of two adjacent tetrahedra; (c): topological stitching of the remaining faces: OAB with OAD, and
OCB with OCD, and splitting of two adjacent faces through
a path [EG]∪[GF]. (d): insertion and stitching of the deleted
tetrahedra through the gap.

This is a direct consequence of Theorem 2 above.
Property 2 The reverse of Corollary 1 is not true.
To illustrate the above property, let us consider a vertex
O whose star St(O) is a regular icosahedron in R3 (see Figure 4(a)). The distortion at O and the bond distortion around
edges incident at O are thus null. The solid angle at O of each
π
of the 20 identical tetrahedra in St(O) is equal to 4π
20 = 5
steradians. Each edge in St(O) belongs to five tetrahedra.
Then ,the dihedral angle around each edge is equal to 2π
5
radians.
We select two adjacent tetrahedra OABD and OBCD, as
shown in Figure 4(b). We identify the remaining faces OAB
with OAD, and OCB with OCD. Clearly, the obtained polyhedron cannot be isometrically embedded in R3 . Then, we
duplicate two adjacent faces through a path of two adjacent
edges [EG]∪[GF] (see Figure 4(c)). We obtain a gap through
which we introduce tetrahedra OABD ∪ OBCD and we glue
their faces with the corresponding faces of the gap. This operation cannot be done in R3 since the total angle around
an edge in R3 is equal to 2π. The surrounding angle around
edges 0E and OF becomes 2π + 2π
5 . The surrounding angle
around edge OG2 (see Figure 4(c)) is still equal to 2π since
we get five tetrahedra around this edge. The surrounding angle around edge OG1 becomes 8π
5 < 2π, since we get only
four tetrahedra around this edge. In the new icosahedron the
total solid angle around O is still equal to 4π. Hence the, new
icosahedron has a null distortion at vertex O but is distorted
around edges OA, OB, OC,OE,OG1 ,OF.
7. Visualizing Vertex Distortion on 3D Scalar Fields
In this Section, we illustrate the behavior of vertex distortion for 4D tetrahedralized hypersurfaces representing a 3D
scalar field. We visualize isosurfaces for the original scalar
field and the distortion field. and we also show we visualize planar slices of the data set. The range of colors used for
visualization goes from blue for low values to red for high
values. Green is used for mean values.

The example we consider here is related to Density Functional Theory (DFT) whose principal aim is to study electron density in material in order to understand the chemical
bonds between atoms in a molecule and hence characterize
the material properties. Some tendencies cannot be visible
only if we understand the behavior of the density derivative. Discrete distortion interprets well the behavior of the
electron density, which is directly related to the behavior
of derivatives. Electron density is computed by solving the
Schrodinger
¨
equation facing two major problems: the first is
diagonalizing huge matrices and the second, control intrinsic computation errors of exchange and correlation energy
which has a deep impact on electron density analysis.
In Figure 5, we show the electron density in the Buckminster Fullerene molecule (also known as the Buckyball).
The molecule is composed of 60 carbon atoms arranged in
the form of a soccerball, or truncated icosahedron. Density
range is [0; 255]. The representation we show is computed
on a coarse tetrahedral approximation of the data set composed of 35937 vertices and 163840 tetrahedra, which has
been obtained from a multi-resolution representation based
on a nested tetrahedral hierarchy. In Figure 6, we show the
behavior of distortion for the same data set through isosurfaces of meaningful distortion values. Note that the distortion values range from -16.12 to 12.56. When distortion values are close to zero, a large part of the cubic domain is
filled with the corresponding isosurfaces, which means that
the electron density field is flattened and goes to 0 tangentially. This is similar to the behavior of a Gaussian density
bell. In Figure 7, we show some plane slices of the data sets
showing density and distortion. We can clearly see from all
these pictures how distortion follows the behavior of the density field.
8. Concluding Remarks
We have presented a new notion of distortion for threedimensional manifolds embedded in the 4D Euclidean
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Mohammed Mostefa Mesmoudi & Leila De Floriani & Umberto Port / Discrete Distortion in Triangulated 3-Manifolds

Figure 5: Isosurfaces for electron density of Buckminster
Fullerene molecule for decreasing field values to show the
behavior of the field; the density values are 190, 175, 140
and 90, from top to bottom, and from left to right

1339

Figure 7: Plane slices of electron density of Buckminster
Fullerene molecule and of the distortion

from such a model based on some accuracy criterion decided
by the user. The iso-surfaces extracted from such representation are tetrahedralized shapes in 4D space. Our first objective is to segment such iso-surfaces based on the value of
distortion and on an algorithm which computes the Morse
decomposition for the graph of 3D scalar fields [DDM03].
We are planning to apply the same segmentation approach,
based on distortion, to analyze implicit surfaces evolving
over time.
On the theoretical side, we are planning to investigate possible relations between discrete distortion
and discrete Laplace-Beltrami and other known intrinsic
parameterization-independent differential operators.

Figure 6: Isosurfaces for the distortion of electron density of
Buckminster Fullerene molecule corresponding to distortion
values equal to 7, 2, 0 and -4.5, from top to bottom, and from
left to right.

space. This notion characterizes, as the curvature for a surface, the local geometry of a 3D manifold.
In the case of 3D scalar fields, distortion characterizes
the dependence of the hypersurface geometry on the choice
of the triangulation of the three-dimensional domain of the
field. Hence, distortion can be used as a criterion to optimize, following the requirements of the application domain,
the choice of a tetrahedralization of a 3D shape. From this
viewpoint, distortion serves also as measure of the quality of
the mesh [She98].
We are currently working on a multi-resolution representation for time-varying 3D scalar fields based on hierarchical meshes. Variable-resolution iso-surfaces can be extracted
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

As discussed in the paper, distortion may have other important applications in physics and chemistry. Indeed, the
standard model of the matter structure is a discrete 3D
model following which atoms are linked by bonds to form
molecules. Many issues exist in understanding the mechanism of a chemical reaction. Distortion gives a completely
new approach to understand these matter reactions. Phenomena like ferromagnetism, ferro-electricity, X-ray diffraction,
thermal expansion can be understood and explained using
our approach. Moreover, negative expansion coefficients of
materials is naturally justified. Details about all these statements can be found in [MDPA08]. The basic idea is the analysis of the phenomena by means of embedding them in the
fourth dimensional space and comparing with the resulting
projection in our ambient space. Of course, other applications of distortion are possible, namely in Density Functional
Theory (DFT), or in 3D medical 3D imagery. We are currently working on some of these applications with other scientists in order to validate our model.
Acknowledgements
This work has been partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grant CCF-0541032, by the MIUR-

1340

Mohammed Mostefa Mesmoudi & Leila De Floriani & Umberto Port / Discrete Distortion in Triangulated 3-Manifolds

FIRB project SHALOM under contract number RBIN04HWR8 and by the MIUR-PRIN project on "Multiresolution modeling of scalar fields and digital shapes". The
authors want to thank Kenneth Weiss for the tetrahedral
meshes Describing the Buckyball data set. The authors are
grateful to the anonymous reviewers for the many useful
comments and suggestions.
References

[LDS04] L EE M. L., D E F LORIANI , S AMET H.:
Constant-time navigation in four-dimensional nested simplicial meshes. In Proceedings Shape Modeling International (2004), pp. 221–230.
[MDB02] M EYER M., D ESBRUN M., BARR P. S.: Discrete differential-geometry operator for triangulated 2manifolds. In Proceedings of VisMath’02, Berlin, Germany (2002).

[AC06] A KLEMAN E., C HEN J.: Practical polygonal
mesh modeling with discrete gaussian-bonnet theorem.
In Proceedings of Geometry, Modeling and Processing,
Pittsburg (2006).

[MDDP07] M ESMOUDI M., D E F LORIANI L.,
DANOVARO E., P ORT U.:
Surface segmentation
through concentrated curvature. In Proceedings of International Conference on Image Analysis and Processing,
IEEE Computer Society (2007), vol. 1, pp. 671–676.

[AER05] A LBOUL L., E CHEVERRIA G., RODRIGUES
M.: Discrete curvatures and gauss maps for polyhedral
surfaces. In Workshop on Computational Geometry, the
Netherlands (2005).

[MDPA08] M ESMOUDI M. M., D E F LORIANI L., P ORT
U., A NBER A.: Distortion for three-combinatorial manifolds. In Technical Report DISI-2007-08-09,University of
Genova, Italy (2008).

[And05] A NDERSON M. T.: Géométrisation des Variétés
de Dimension 3 via le Flot de Ricci. Société Mathématique de France, Gazette, 103 (2005), 25–40.

[MW99] M ANGAN A., W HITAKER R.: Partitioning 3D
surface meshes using watershed segmentation. IEEE
Transaction on Visualization and Computer Graphics 5,
4 (1999), 308–321.

[BG05] B UCHIN M., G IESEN J.: Minimizing the total absolute gaussian curvature in a terrain is hard. In CCCG
(2005), pp. 195–198.
[BP06] BAUES O., P EYERIMHO N.: Geodesics in nonpositively curved plane tessellations. Advanced in Geometry 6 (2006), 243–263.
[DDM03] DANOVARO E., D E F LORIANI L., M ESMOUDI
M.: Topological analysis and characterization of discrete
scalar fields. In "Theoretical Foundation of Computer
Vision, Geometry, Morphology and Computational Imaging" Dagstuhl (2003), vol. LNCS 2616, pp. 386–402.
[DHSJL00] DYN N., H ORMANN K., S UN -J EONG K.,
L EVIN D.: Optimizing 3d triangulations using discrete
curvature analysis. In Mathematical Methods for Curves
and Surfaces: Oslo, Tom Lyche and Larry L. Schumaker
˝
(eds.) (2000), p. 135U146.
[Eis49] E ISENHART L.: Riemannian geometry. Princeton
Univ. Press, 1949.
[For02] F ORMAN R.: Bochner’s method for cell complexes and combinatorial ricci curvataure. Journal of Discrete and Computational Geometry (2002), 1–52.
[GG06] G ATZKE T., G RIMM C.: Estimating curvature on
triangular meshes. International Journal on shape Modeling 12 (2006), 1–29.
[Gra93] G RAY A.: Modern Differential Geometry of
Curves and Surfaces Introduction to Computer Graphics.
CRC Press, 1993.

[Pol99] P OLKING
J.:
The
area
of
a
spherical triangle, girard’s theorem.
url:
http://math.rice.edu/ pcmi/sphere/gos4.html (1999).
[RG07] ROUSSEAU J.-J., G IBAUD A.: Cristallographie
Géométrique et Radiocristallographie. Dunod edition,
2007.
[She98] S HEWCHUK J.: Tetrahedral mesh generation by
delaunay refinement. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry (Minneapolis, Minnesota),Association for Computing Machinery (1998), pp. 86–95.
[Spi79] S PIVAK M.: A comprehensive introduction to differential Geometry. Houston Texas, 1979.
[Tao06] TAO T.: Perelman’s proof of the poincaré conjecture: a nonlinear pde perspective. Avalable on ArXiv
website, arXiv:math/0610903v1 (2006), 1–42.
[Thu97] T HURSTON W.: Three-dimensional geometry
and topology. Vol.1, Princeton University Press, 1997.
[Tro86] T ROYANOV M.: Les surfaces euclidiennes à singularités coniques. L’enseignement Mathématique 32
(1986), 79–94.
[TW84] T HURSTON W., W EEKS J.: The mathematics
of threedimensional manifolds. Scientific American 251
(1984), 108.

[Gro81] G ROMOV M.: Structures Métriques pour les Variétés Riemanniennes. Cedic-Fernand Nathan, 1981.

[WB96] W EIGLE C., BANKS D.: Complex-valued contour meshing. In Proceedings IEEE Visualization (1996),
pp. 173–180.

[GS03] G ARIMELLA R., S WARTZ B.: Curvature estimation for unstructured triangulations of surfaces. Los
Alamos National Laboratory LA-03-8240 (2003).

[WB98] W EIGLE C., BANKS D.: Extracting iso-valued
features in 4-dimensional scalar fields. In Proceedings
IEEE Visualization (1998), pp. 103–110.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

