Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2008
A. Vilanova, A. Telea, G. Scheuermann, and T. Möller
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 3

Abstractive Representation and Exploration of Hierarchically
Clustered Diffusion Tensor Fiber Tracts
Weri Chen †1
1 State

Song Zhang ‡2

Stephfan Correia §3

David S. Ebert ¶

4

Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, 2 Mississippi State University, 3 Brown University, 4 Purdue University

Abstract
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) has been used to generate fibrous structures in both brain white matter and muscles. Fiber clustering groups the DTI fibers into spatially and anatomically related tracts. As an increasing number of fiber clustering methods have been recently developed, it is important to display, compare, and explore the
clustering results efficiently and effectively. In this paper, we present an anatomical visualization technique that
reduces the geometric complexity of the fiber tracts and emphasizes the high-level structures. Beginning with a
volumetric diffusion tensor image, we first construct a hierarchical clustering representation of the fiber bundles.
These bundles are then reformulated into a 3D multi-valued volume data. We then build a set of geometric hulls
and principal fibers to approximate the shape and orientation of each fiber bundle. By simultaneously visualizing
the geometric hulls, individual fibers, and other data sets such as fractional anisotropy, the overall shape of the
fiber tracts are highlighted, while preserving the fibrous details. A rater with expert knowledge of white matter
structure has evaluated the resulting interactive illustration and confirmed the improvement over straightforward
DTI fiber tract visualization.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional graphics and realism I.3.5 [Computer Graphics]: Curve, surface, solid, and object representations

1. Motivation
Water molecules in biological tissue engage in apparently
random Brownian motion or water diffusion. This diffusion
process is constrained by the structures in the biological tissues such as neural fibers or muscle fibers. Therefore, it is
possible to reconstruct these fibrous anatomical structures
from the diffusion information. With an MRI scanner, diffusion information from biological tissues can be gathered in
vivo in the form of the diffusion tensors [BML94].
Tractography methods reconstruct fibrous structures such
as neural fibers in the human brain from the DTI
† chenwei@cad.zju.edu.cn. This work was done while Wei Chen
was a visiting scholar at Purdue university.
‡ szhang@cse.msstate.edu.
§ stephen_correia@brown.edu
¶ ebertd@purdue.edu.
The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

data [BPP∗ 00]. However, overly dense fiber models can
appear visually cluttered thereby impeding identification
of specific tracts of interest. Fiber clustering techniques
have been developed to overcome this problem by bundling
the spatially and anatomically related DTI fibers into
tracts [OW05,MMH∗ 05]. These tracts are identified by neuroscientists as representing anatomical structures with high
probability [ZCL08]. While the clustering methods group
the fibers into meaningful bundles with their own boundaries, their display can still suffer from visual clutter which
may impede the selection of specific fiber structures. Recognition of specific fiber tracts can also be hindered by the lack
of visual boundaries between them.
To address these problems, we seek to simplify the fiber
tracts by focusing on the location, shape, and connectivity of
the major anatomical structures. We reduce the complexity
of the fiber models in three aspects. First, the fibers are hierarchically grouped into a set of bundles with a proximitybased clustering algorithm. Second, for each fiber tract, we

1072

Chen et al. / Abstractive Representation and Exploration of Hierarchically Clustered DTI Fibers

build an approximate geometric shape and generate a set of
principal fibers that are used to depict the overall shape and
orientation of the tract. Our third scheme is an interactive
multi-valued volume illustration system, which allows the
users to choose the appropriate level in the hierarchy, the
clusters and the models to display. Rather than using standard geometric rendering, we employ volume rendering to
display the mixed scene. One main reason is that many interesting features are contained in a volume data, e.g., the
property volume. It would be straightforward and effective
to directly visualize it using volume rendering. Meanwhile,
converting geometric lines into a volume data would make
the entire rendering pipeline seamless. Although fibers can
be displayed as polygon models, representing fibers with
a volume data makes the performance independent of the
number of fibers. Interactive volumetric exploration through
the data provides both a comprehensive view to understand
the global layout of the fiber tracts and the fiber tract geometry, as well as the local properties such as the individual
fiber connectivity. Figure 1 shows our visualization results of
a normal human brain with unclustered DTI fibers, clustered
DTI fibers, geometric hulls and geometric hulls with principal fibers inside. Based on our results, a neuropsychologist
can easily make an annotation (Figure 1 (d)).

2. Related Work
Diffusion Tensor Imaging Visualization A wide range of
methods have been developed in the last decade for DTI
visualization [JH04, WH06, PB07]. The DTI fibers encode
the direction of fastest diffusion in the tensor field and also
convey the connectivity information, which is important for
anatomical studies. These fibers are shown to correlate with
fibrous structures in the biological tissues [SHWF98]. Recently developed fiber clustering methods group the DTI
fibers into the fiber tracts based on some similarity measure
between the fibers [MVvW05]. Different clustering methods have been applied, such as spectral clustering [BKP∗ 04]
and hierarchical clustering [ZCL08]. DTI fibers have been
visualized with both surface model [ZDL03] and volume
rendering [WKZL04]. When the fiber density is high, DTI
fiber visualization can suffer from visual cluttering which
makes it difficult to readily identify specific tracts of interest and slows down the user interaction. Accordingly,
efforts have been made to generate evenly-spaced DTI
fibers [VBvP04, MSE∗ 05], wrap groups of DTI fibers into
hulls [ESM∗ 05], and accelerate the fiber display rendering
with graphics hardware [PFK07, MSE∗ 06].
This paper aims to provide effective representation and interaction of the DTI fibers. Our work on the geometric hull
is similar to the one introduced by Enders et al. [ESM∗ 05].
However, the geometric hull we proposed is generated directly from the DTI fibers instead of from a center line and
a set of boundary curves, thus avoiding assumptions on the
geometry of the fiber bundles. The purpose of the principal

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Visualization of the DTI fibers of a normal human brain with (a) unclustered DTI fibers, (b) clustered DTI
fibers, (c) geometric hulls, and (d) geometric hulls with principal fibers inside. (d) was annotated by a neuropsychologist. A: Anterior; P: Posterior; S: Superior; I: Inferior.

curves is to capture the needed level of abstraction, which
is different from the goal of the evenly-spaced streamline
methods. Our results show that the principal curves complements the geometric hull by providing details on fiber bundle
orientation while limiting visual cluttering. In summary, our
approach aims to alleviate the visual cluttering problem by
focusing on illustrating the main features of the fiber tracts
while providing sufficient details and context.
Scientific Illustration The main goal of scientific illustration is to communicate information effectively using a painting or image by highlighting important features while suppressing insignificant details. In terms of the data source,
previous work can be roughly classified into two categories.
The first one directly visualizes a measured data set without
changing the data set itself [ER02]. To simulate the appearances of certain artistic styles or concepts, some approaches
make full use of transparency and texture [Int97], visibility [CSC06], or object deformation [CLE07]. The second
category is designed to artificially generate an additional
data set using different techniques. For instance, Schussman
and Ma [SM04] proposed to sample the illumination of lines
into an anisotropic voxel representation based on spherical
harmonics for depicting extremely dense and thin line data.
Weiskopf and his colleagues [WSE07] employed appearance texture to illustrate the line structure of an unsteady
3D flow. Other researchers explored topology [STS07], line
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Chen et al. / Abstractive Representation and Exploration of Hierarchically Clustered DTI Fibers

1073

pattern [Int97], surface [GIS03], or solid texture [LE05] to
convey the information in a measured data set efficiently.
General solutions for visualizing the fiber tracts represent the
fiber connectivity with simple geometry like streamlines or
streamtubes. Our approach advances this simplification by
introducing both a hierarchical organization for fibers and a
shape approximation to each clustered bundle.

pared to some optimization-based algorithms such as spectral clustering methods [BKP∗ 04], single-linkage algorithm
ensures a minimum distance threshold between clusters and
the hiearchical structure of the clusters natually assists the
exploration of the clustering results at the different levelsof-abstration. These clusters can then be visualized with geometric hulls (Section 4.2) and principal fibers (Section 4.3).

3. Data

Figure 2 shows four levels on the hierarchy generated
from the first data set with polygonal rendering. Some
anatomical structures such as the cingulum bundles (indicated by yellow arrows) are clearly visible and distinct from
other fibers in (c), but are broken into multiple bundles in
(a), (b), and merged with other anatomical bundles in (d).

A Siemens Symphony 1.5T scanner was used for imaging.
Three slice packets of diffusion-weighted images were acquired sagittally and interleaved to acquire a data volume
of 128 × 128 × 90 with a voxel size of 1.7 × 1.7 × 1.7 mm.
This data is then scaled to a volume of 256 × 256 × 180 with
a voxel size of 0.85 × 0.85 × 0.85 mm. The Siemens MDDW
protocol was used, with two b values (0, 1000) in 12 directions. Diffusion tensor images were calculated [BML94].
DTI fibers were generated by uniformly seeding in the
data volume with a high seeding density of 1/0.85mm3
and jittering in order to cover the entire data volume without aliasing artifacts. The DTI fibers were then culled
to remove those that were too similar to others (distance threshold = 0.85 mm, minimum distance threshold =
0.475 mm) [ZDL03]. We used two data sets from normal
subjects in this paper. The first data set (normal 60-year old
female) generated 7,223 fibers, and the second data set (normal 81-year old male) generated 2,406 fibers.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

4. Method
We first construct a hierarchical clustering of fiber bundles
(Section 4.1). These bundles are then reformulated into a 3D
multi-valued volume data, which provides a hierarchical abstraction of the input diffusion tensor image. We also build
a set of geometric hulls in Section 4.2 and principal fibers
(Section 4.3) to approximate the shape and orientation of
each fiber bundle. We then merge the hierarchical clustering
model, the geometric hulls, the principal curves, and other
data volume into a single display volume (Section 4.4). By
simultaneously visualizing and exploring the multi-valued
volume data, the geometric hulls and other property volumes
(Section 4.5), the overall shape of the fiber tracts are highlighted, while preserving the fibrous details.
4.1. Hierarchical Clustering
The DTI fibers for each subject were clustered using a modified single-linkage algorithm [ZCL08]. The distance between two fibers A and B was defined as a thresholded average distance: D(A, B,t)= max(d(A, B,t), d(B, A,t)), where
d(A, B,t) = meana∈A,minb∈B a−b >t minb∈B a − b , and a
and b are evenly spaced sample points on A and B.
The single-linkage algorithm produced a hierarchy of
clusters. The hierarchy was then cut at different levels
with different clustering distance thresholds. Lower distance
threshold produces more and smaller clusters: higher distance threshold produces less and bigger clusters. Comc 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 2: The hierarchical clustering results on the first data
set with the distance thresholds at (a) 0.5 mm, (b) 2.0 mm, (c)
4.0 mm, and (d) 5.0 mm. The left and right cingulum bundles
are shown with yellow arrows in (c).
4.2. Smoothed Geometric Hulls
For each cluster, we collect all vertices and build a geometric hull by means of the alpha shape algorithm [EM94]. An
alpha shape is a concrete geometric object that is uniquely
defined for a particular point set. Given a finite point set and
an alpha, the alpha shape of the point set is a polytope, which
is neither necessarily convex nor necessarily connected. The
alpha value of zero leads to a geometric hull that tightly
bounds a point set. We construct such a geometric hull for
each fiber cluster and represent it as a triangle model due
to two reasons. On one hand, the concept of alpha shapes
formalizes the intuitive notion of shape for spatial point set
data, and is especially suitable for the point sets of fibers.
On the other hand, alpha shapes are generalizations of the
convex hull, and can approximate concave objects.
The geometric hull effectively represents the shape of the
fiber bundle and provides a rough sense to the size and shape
of the underlying fiber bundle. Due to the complexity of the

Chen et al. / Abstractive Representation and Exploration of Hierarchically Clustered DTI Fibers

1074

vertex distribution of the fiber bundles, the geometry of the
built hull is ill-defined, as shown in Figure 3 (b). In practice, we employ the Poisson surface reconstruction technique [KBH06] to refine the hull. We first densely sample
the boundary of the alpha shape hull into a set of points associated with their normals. The point set is then used as a
guidance field to reconstruct a smooth triangle model within
given accuracy (Figure 3 (c)).

(a)

(b)

(2) Denote ni as the vertex number of Ci and pick it to be
proportional to the arc length of Ci , i.e., ni = c(λEi − λB
i )
for certain constant c.
j
j
j
(3) For j = 1, 2, . . ., ni : Vi = f (λi ) + εi , where λ1i = λB
i ,
j
ni
E
λi = λi , {λi , j = 2 . . ., ni − 1} is a set of different valj
ues that are uniformly distributed over (λ1i , λni i ), and εi
are independent identically distributed samples from the
normal distribution with mean 0 and variance σ2 I.
Without any assumption of the parametric form of f , we
propose to estimate f with a modified principal curve algorithm. The standard principal curve algorithm [HTF01] extracts a dominant curve from a set of points by computing the
parameters of f . It cannot be applied to a group of curves because it handles the problem on the basis of points and does
not consider the line length. Instead, we regard a set of points
belonging to a curve as a group, and only estimate the λ values for two end points, compute the λ values for the rest of
points based on the arc length. The new algorithm is stated
as two iterative steps:
fˆ(λ) ← E(Vi j |λ(Vi j ) = λ)
ˆ f (V j ) ← arg min V j − fˆ(λ )
λ
i
i

(1)
2

λ

ˆ f (V j ) =
λ
i

(c)

(d)

Figure 3: (a) A fiber cluster; (b) The geometric hull of the
fiber bundle; (c) The refined hull with Poisson reconstruction
technique; (d) The composition of the refined hull and the
fiber bundle. (b) and (c) are rendered with polygonal models.
4.3. Principal Fibers
Effective visual exploration requires efficient abstraction of
the underlying data. Because the tracked fibers are densely
located and in a limited space, it is quite difficult to have
a clear picture of the entire fiber cluster structures without
careful investigation. On the other hand, although the geometric hulls can be used to simplify the fiber bundles, they
do not indicate the spatial orientations of the fiber bundles
in many situations. Therefore, an additional shape proxy for
abstracting the complex fiber bundles is required.
Our solution is to compute one or several principal fibers
for constructing a canonical representation of all tracts
within a fiber bundle. We assume that all fiber tracts within
the bundle {C1 , C2 , . . ., Cm } are independent and identically
distributed samples from a smooth principal fiber tract C =
f (λ) parametrized by λ ∈ [0, 1]. More specifically, each tract
j
Ci represented by a sequence of vertices {Vi } is generated
from the following generative model:
E
(1) Sample two values λB
i and λi uniformly from [0, 1],
without loss of generality, λB
<
λEi .
i

j
i/ i

ˆ f (V ni ) − λ
ˆ f (V 1 )
λ
i
i

j = 1, ni

(2)

j = 2, . . . , ni−1

where E denotes the expectation, i is the arc length of Ci ,
j
j
and i is the arc length from the first vertex to Vi . Equation (1) is known as the self-consistency property, which
states that f (λ) is the average of all points that have the parameter value λ. The first formula of Equation (2) computes
the λ values for two end points of the underlying curve. The
λ values of other points are estimated with the second formula of Equation (2).
Similar to standard principal curve algorithm, the modified algorithm presented in Equations 1 and 2 has no guarantee of global optimality, and the estimator fˆ is sensitive to
its initial value. In simple cases where all fibers in a bundle
are similarly oriented, the first principal component would
be a good choice (Figure 4 (a)). However, a bundle may contain fibers that can be visually distinguished into two or more
subsets (Figure 4 (b)). Such complicated structures may not
be captured by a simple principal fiber.
Intuitively, this problem can be partially solved by using a
local version of the above technique to find a principal fiber
for every local region. Note that the low hierarchies of the
hierarchical clustering structure are generated with a small
threshold, and it is reasonable to assume that the fiber tracts
of each fiber bundle in the low hierarchies have the similar orientation and can be represented by one principal fiber.
Therefore, we first build a principal fiber for each cluster in
an appropriately low hierarchy (in our case, the third hierarchy). For each of the higher hierarchies, we then simply unite
the principal fibers of its child nodes as its principal fibers.
In summary, the algorithm for computing the principal fibers
is as follows:
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Chen et al. / Abstractive Representation and Exploration of Hierarchically Clustered DTI Fibers
1: For adequately low hierarchies, build a principal fiber

for each cluster with the modified algorithm.
2: For each cluster of each higher hierarchy (e.g., from
the third to the highest hierarchy), employ the principal
fibers of its child nodes as its principal fibers.
3: For each principal fiber of each cluster, use its nearest
fiber on the cluster to represent the principal fiber.
4: For each principal fiber, assign a special identification.
The third step of this algorithm yields an approximated
principal fiber tract that is one of the input fibers. This
scheme avoids adding additional fibers to the initial fiber
tracts. The identification produced in the fourth step is used
to generate a compact multi-valued volume as described in
Section 4.4. Figure 4 (d) illustrates our results for fiber bundles in three consecutive hierarchies.

(a)

(b)

1075

the cluster identification s of each fiber, which will be used
to identify different clusters during visual exploration. For
each hierarchy, we can generate a multi-valued volume. To
encode the principal fibers in the entire hierarchically clustered model, we do not generate a volume for every hierarchy. Instead, we represent all fiber tracts in a multi-valued
volume and identify the principal fiber tracts as an integer
l. This value is first initialized as zero for each fiber tract.
We assign each hierarchy h with an integer 2h and check the
status of each fiber. If the ith fiber is the principal fiber of
certain hierarchy h, we accumulate the corresponding integer 2h to its identification li . We choose a maximum of 8
levels on a hierarchical clustering model, and we can use an
unsigned char to encode this identification.
Other associated properties of the input DTI image can
be packed into the multi-valued volume, such as the T2weighted data from which we can distinguish between water,
white matter, and air regions, or the fractional anisotropic
data that records the anisotropy of each data point. Table 1
summarizes the encoded values.
Property
The filtered distance, d
The direction of the tracts, v
The magnitude of the tract direction, g
The cluster of each tract, s
The principal fiber tract identification, l
The T2-weighted image of each voxel (optional)
The fractional anisotropy of each voxel (optional)

Format
1 byte
3 bytes
1 byte
2 bytes
1 byte
1 byte
1 byte

Table 1: The encoded information in the multi-valued volume
4.5. Visual Exploration of the Multi-Valued Volume
(c)

(d)

Figure 4: (a) Fibers with similar orientation (the principal
fiber is shown in red); (b) Fibers with distinguishable orientations (the principal fibers are shown in red); (c) Several
fiber bundles; (d) Principal fibers on the fiber bundles in (c).
4.4. The Multi-Valued Volume
We build the multi-valued volume based on the hierarchically clustered fiber model, which acts as the structural guidance. The volume has the same or larger resolution as that of
the input DTI data. Similar to [WKZL04], we voxelize each
fiber into a list of voxels using the 3D Bresenham algorithm
and filter the distances from each voxel to the fiber tract with
a 3D Gaussian kernel, which spans two or three voxels. The
filtered distance d and the direction vector v of each fiber
play the same roles as the density and gradient in a standard
volume rendering algorithm as they provide the shape and
lighting information respectively. Thus, they are the primary
values stored in the multi-valued volume.
The third value recorded in the multi-valued volume is
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

We encode the resulting multi-valued volume with two or
three four-channel volume textures. To display the geometric hulls and the volume within a pipeline, we design a twophase algorithm. In the first stage, we peel the geometric
hulls into a list of depth layers [Eve01] under given lighting and viewpoint. The depth and color information of all
layers are encoded as two sets of textures, whose sizes are
the same as that of the frame buffer. The second stage renders the multi-valued volume with a 3D texture-slicing algorithm. For each fragment rasterized from each slice, we
compare its depth with the depth stored in each geometric
layer. If the current slice is the nearest one to the layer, we
composite the color from the geometric layer with that of the
multi-valued volume. In this way, the contributions from all
geometric layers are orderly composed with the multi-valued
volume. Figure 5 demonstrates the advantage of this scheme
with a phantom fiber model and six geometric models.
The popular illumination model for delineating the line
structures is the one proposed in [Ban94]:
C = ka + Ct (kd (

m

1 − (v · L)2 ) + ks (

n

1 − (v · H)2 )), α = αt (3)

where ka , kd , and ks are the coefficients for ambient, diffuse,

Chen et al. / Abstractive Representation and Exploration of Hierarchically Clustered DTI Fibers

1076

(a)

(b)

Figure 5: (a) Order-false result; (b) Order-correct result.

and specular components. (Ct , αt ) is the color and opacity
determined from the user-adjustable 2D transfer function
that is dependent on the density and gradient magnitude.
Three vectors v, L, and H are the fiber tract direction, the
light direction, and the halfway vector between the lighting
and viewing directions. m and n denote the excess-brightness
diffuse and shininess exponents respectively.
To flexibly depict the used-selected clusters and the principal fiber tracts in the given hierarchy, we modify the line
illumination model presented in Equation 3 as follows:
C = sgn(l − lu )(ka + Cs (kd (

m

1 − (v · L)2 ) + ks (

n

1 − (v · H)2 )))

α = αs αt

(4)

where (Cs , αs ) denotes adjustable color and opacity of the
cluster s, to which the current fragment belongs. l is the principal fiber tract identification of the underlying fragment,
and lu = 2hu is an integer computed from the user-specified
hierarchy hu . The function sgn(l − lu ) is used to display the
principal fiber tracts of the selected hierarchy.
Figure 6 compares the effects between the standard Banks
model and our scheme. It is apparent that clarifying clusters with different colors greatly facilitates the discrimination among different clusters. Thus, our approach is superior
to the method proposed by Wenger et al. [WKZL04], which
can only offer the effect with Equation 3. In addition, by
comparing a sequence of multi-valued volumes that are generated with different hierarchies, we can gain a rough idea
on the hierarchical cluster structure, as demonstrated in Figure 6 (b-d). For example, the left and right cingulum bundles
identified by the yellow arrows in Figure 6 (b) are broken
into multiple pieces. They are approximately grouped into
two distinct fiber bundles in Figure 6 (c), and are merged
into one fiber bundle in Figure 6 (d).
For other property volumes, their contributions are mixed
with those from the fiber tracts and the geometric hulls in the
fragment level. We adopt the traditional volume illumination
model to illuminate them:
C = ka + Ct (kd (N · L) + ks ((N · H)n ),

where N denotes the gradient vector.

Figure 6: (a) Rendering the fiber bundles (2, 406 fibers)
of the multi-valued volume using the Banks model (Equation 3); (b-d) The results with the modified model (Equation 4). All tracts are displayed (i.e., lu is set to be zero). The
hierarchies for (b-d) are 6, 8, and 9 respectively.

α = αt

(5)

5. Results
We have implemented the proposed approach on a PC with
an Intel 2.2 GHZ CPU, 1.5G RAM and nVidia Geforce
8800 video card. The entire visualization pipeline was implemented with NVidia Cg shader model 4.0.
A neuropsychologist with strong knowledge of white matter architecture evaluated our results. We asked him to try to
identify the layout, shape, orientation, and fibrous details of
the fiber tracts that correlate with the brain anatomy. He observed the unclustered DTI fibers, the clustered DTI fibers,
the geometric hulls, and the geometric hulls with principal
curves. With unclustered DTI fibers, he was able to identify the orientation of the brain and the layout of large white
matter fiber tracts such as the cingulum bundles, parts of the
corpus callosum, and a few other larger bundles such as the
forceps minor that stand out from their surrounding bundles
due to their location and trajectory. However, he had trouble
discriminating between other fiber bundles, especially those
with partly adjacent trajectories (e.g., inferior longitudinal
and occipitofrontal fasciculus). With clustered DTI fibers,
he was able to identify more fiber tracts that correlate with
the brain anatomy; however, the visual clutter from crowded
fibers often hindered the identification of the overall shape
and boundary of the tracts. With geometric hulls and principal curves presentation, he was able to identify the overall
layout and shapes of the fiber tracts with greater ease, and
at the same time he was able to identify the orientation of
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Chen et al. / Abstractive Representation and Exploration of Hierarchically Clustered DTI Fibers

1077

the individual tracts. He also noted that the increased speed
of interaction over the previous DTI fiber visualization helps
getting more perspectives on the model and facilitates the
recognition of the anatomical structures. He used our visualization to annotate some fiber tracts in Figure 1 (d).
Due to the video memory limitation, we set the resolution
of the multi-valued volume as 2563 . For a fundamental configuration (Table 1), each voxel consumes 8 bytes, leading to
a total amount of 128 M bytes. The memory consumption for
each depth layer is approximately 2 M bytes. Generally, four
layers are appropriate for displaying all geometric hulls. The
rendering performance is heavily dependent on the number
of slices and the depth layers. The geometric hulls have to be
rendered multiple times in the first stage to extract all layers.
Note that this extraction only happens when the viewing or
lighting configuration is changed. With a frame buffer resolution of 500 × 500 and the texture slicing number of 1, 000,
the average performance is around 2 fps.
Figure 7 shows the results using geometric hulls for the
second data set. The left image solely depicts all hulls at
a given hierarchy level (with distance threshold at 3.6 mm),
while the right one mixes the principal fiber tracts to enhance
the perception to the orientation of the clusters.

Figure 8: The comprehensive visualization of the fiber tracts
with geometric hulls, principal fibers, and the fractional
anisotropy volume. The second data set was used.

Second, we create an abstractive representation with geometric hulls and principal curves, which greatly reduces the
complexities of the input DTI volume data set.
6. Conclusions

(a)

(b)

Figure 7: The abstractive visualization of the fiber tracts using (a) geometric hulls only, and (b) geometric hulls with
principal fibers inside. The second data set was used.
When we selectively combine the geometric hulls, the
fiber tracts, and an anisotropy volume, the multi-valued volume visualization provides a comprehensive visualization
and interactive analysis experience. Figure 8 demonstrates
the results. Anatomical features such as the cingulum bundles, inferior longitudinal fasciculus, and the U-fibers are
identified by a neuropsychologist in the picture.
Our approach shares the similar idea of [WKZL04] for
representing the fibers with a volume with two significant
differences. First, we employ a robust hierarchical clustering
approach to give the volume a schematic classification. The
identification information can be used to enhance the visualization with different coloring schemes for the background
and the fiber bundles. The jump among different hierarchies
benefits the understanding of the global cluster structure.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

In this paper we introduce methods for simplifying and abstracting complicated DTI fiber tracts toward achieving an
insightful illustration of these tracts. A neuropsychologist
evaluated the system, and the results indicate that the abstraction of the fiber tracts as well as the multi-valued volume provides a potentially valuable tool for better understanding the white-matter anatomy from these tracts. This
work can benefit hypotheses testing about the cognitive and
behavioral correlates of white-matter tracts in both healthy
and diseased brains.
In the future, we expect to explore more abstraction techniques. The current solution for computing principal fiber
tracts only works for simple fiber bundle. We plan to design a
more robust algorithm for extracting multiple principal fiber
tracts from a complex fiber bundle.
7. Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Nvidia for equipment donations.
This work is partially supported by NSF of China (No.
60503056), the NOAA Northern Gulf Cooperative Institute (NA06OAR4320264 06111039), the Research Initiation Program, Mississippi State University, the NIA PAR03-056, the Alzheimer’s Association (NIRG-03-6195), the
Ittleson Fund, Brown University, NSF Grants 0081581,

1078

Chen et al. / Abstractive Representation and Exploration of Hierarchically Clustered DTI Fibers

0121288, 0328984, and the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security.
References
[Ban94] BANKS D. C.: Illumination in diverse codimensions. In
Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH (1994), pp. 327–334.
[BKP∗ 04] B RUN A., K NUTSSON H., PARK H.-J., S HENTON
M., W ESTIN C.-F.: Clustering fiber traces using normalized
cuts. In MICCAI (2004), pp. 368–375.
[BML94] BASSER P., M ATTIELLO J., L E B IHAN D.: Estimation
of the effective self-diffusion tensor from the NMR spin echo.
Journal of Magnetic Resonance, Series B 103, 3 (March 1994),
247–54.
[BPP∗ 00] BASSER P. J., PAJEVIC S., P IERPAOLI C., D UDA J.,
A LDROUBI A.: In vivo fiber tractography using DT-MRI data.
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine 44 (2000), 625–632.
[CLE07] C HEN W., L U A., E BERT D. S.: Shape-aware volume
illustration. Computer Graphics Forum (Special Issue of Proceedings of Eurographics) 27, 3 (2007), 705–714.
[CSC06] C ORREA C., S ILVER D., C HEN M.: Feature-aligned
volume manipulation for illustration and visualization. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12, 5
(2006), 1069–1076.
[EM94] E DELSBRUNNER H., M ÜCKE E. P.: Three-dimensional
alpha shapes. ACM Transactions on Graphics 13, 1 (1994), 43–
72.
[ER02] E BERT D., R HEINGANS P.: Volume illustration: Nonphotorealistic rendering of volume models. In Proceedings of
IEEE Visualization (Boston, USA, October 2002), pp. 253–264.
[ESM∗ 05] E NDERS F., S AUBER N., M ERHOF D., H ASTREITER
P., N IMSKY C., S TAMMINGER M.: Visualization of white matter tracts with wrapped streamlines. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 2005 (2005), pp. 51–58.
Interactive order-independent trans[Eve01] E VERITT C.:
parency. Interactive order-independent transparency. Technical
report, NVIDIA Corporation. (May 2001).
[GIS03] G ORLA G., I NTERRANTE V., S APIRO G.: Texture synthesis for 3D shape representation. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 9, 4 (2003), 512–524.
[HTF01] H ASTIE T., T IBSHIRANI R., F RIEDMAN J.: The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. Springer Verlag, 2001.
[Int97] I NTERRANTE V.: Illustrating surface shape in volume data
via principal direction-driven 3D line integral convolution. In
Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH (1997), pp. 109–116.
[JH04] J OHNSON C. R., H ANSEN C. D.: Visualization Handbook. Academic Press, June 2004.
[KBH06] K AZHDAN M., B OLITHO M., H OPPE H.: Poisson surface reconstruction. In Proceedings of the Fourth Eurographics
Symposium on Geometry Processing (2006), pp. 61–70.
[LE05] L U A., E BERT D.: Example-based volume illustrations.
In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization (2005), pp. 655–662.
[MMH∗ 05] M ADDAH M., M EWES A. U. J., H AKER S., G RIM SON W. E. L., WARFIELD S. K.: Automated atlas-based clustering of white matter fiber tracts from DTMRI. In MICCAI (2005).

[MSE∗ 05] M ERHOF D., S ONNTAG M., E NDERS F., H ASTRE ITER V. P., FAHLBUSCH R., N IMSKY C., G REINER G.: Visualization of diffusion tensor data using evenly spaced streamlines.
In Vision, Modelling and Visualization (VMV) (2005), pp. 79–86.
[MSE∗ 06] M ERHOF D., S ONNTAG M., E NDERS F., N IMSKY
C., H ASTREITER P., G REINER G.: Hybrid visualization for
white matter tracts using triangle strips and point sprites. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12, 5
(2006), 1181–1188.
[MVvW05] M OBERTS B., V ILANOVA A., VAN W IJK J. J.: Evaluation of fiber clustering methods for diffusion tensor imaging. In
IEEE Visualization (2005), pp. 65–72.
[OW05] O’D ONNELL L., W ESTIN C.-F.: White matter tract
clustering and correspondence in populations. In MICCAI
(2005).
[PB07] P REIM B., BARTZ D.: Visualization in Medicine. Morgan
Kaufmann, 2007.
[PFK07] P ETROVIC V., FALLON J., K UESTER F.: Visualizing
whole-brain DTI tractography with GPU-based tuboids and LoD
management. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 13, 6 (2007), 1488–1495.
[SHWF98] S COLLAN D., H OLMES A., W INSLOW R., F ORDER
J.: Histological validation of myocardial microstructure obtained
from diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging. American
Journal of Physiology 275 (1998), 2308–2318.
[SM04] S CHUSSMAN G., M A K.-L.: Anisotropic volume rendering for extremely dense, thin line data. In Proceedings of
IEEE Visualization (2004), pp. 107–114.
[STS07] S CHULTZ T., T HEISEL H., S EIDEL H.-P.: Topological
visualization of brain diffusion mri data. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 6 (2007), 1496–1503.
[VBvP04] V ILANOVA A., B ERENSCHOT G., VAN P UL C.: DTI
visualization with stream surfaces and evenly-spaced volume
seeding. In Eurographics/IEEE Symposium on Visualization
(2004), pp. 173–182.
[WH06] W EICKERT J., H AGEN H.: Visualization and Processing
of Tensor Fields. Springer, 2006.
[WKZL04] W ENGER A., K EEFE D., Z HANG S., L AIDLAW
D. H.: Interactive volume rendering of thin thread structures
within multivalued scientific datasets. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 10, 6 (2004), 664–672.
[WSE07] W EISKOPF D., S CHAFHITZEL T., E RTL T.: Texturebased visualization of unsteady 3D flow by real-time advection
and volumetric illumination. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 13, 3 (2007), 569–582.
[ZCL08] Z HANG S., C ORREIA S., L AIDLAW D. H.: Identifying white-matter fiber bundles in DTI data using an automated
proximity-based fiber-clustering method. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics (2008). In Press.
[ZDL03] Z HANG S., D EMIRALP C., L AIDLAW D. H.: Visualizing diffusion tensor MR images using streamtubes and streamsurfaces. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 9, 4 (2003), 454–462.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

