The Neuron Navigator:
Exploring the Information Pathway through the Neural Maze
Ching-Yao Lin*, Kuen-Long Tsai†, Sheng-Chuan Wang‡, Chang-Huain Hsieh§,
Hsiu-Ming Chang¶, Ann-Shyn Chiang**
*†‡§

¶**

National Center for High-performance Computing,
Taiwan

Brain Research Center,
National Tsing-Hua University, Taiwan

(a)
Fig. 1. (a) NNG draws neurons using tracing lines

ABSTRACT
Recent advances in microscopic imaging technology have enabled
neuroscientists to obtain unprecedentedly clear images of neurons.
To extract additional knowledge from the tangled neurons, for
example, their connective relationships, is key to understanding
how information is processed and transmitted within the brain.
In this paper, we will introduce our recent endeavor, the Neuron
Navigator (NNG), which integrates a 3D neuron image database
into an easy-to-use visual interface. Via a flexible and userfriendly interface, NNG is designed to help researchers analyze
and observe the connectivity within the neural maze and discover
possible pathways. With NNG’
s 3D neuron image database,
researchers can perform volumetric searches using the location of
neural terminals, or the occupation of neuron volumes within the
3D brain space. Also, the presence of the neurons under a
combination of spatial restrictions can be shown as well. NNG is a
result of a multi-discipline collaboration between neuroscientists
and computer scientists, and NNG has now been implemented on
a coordinated brain space, that being, the Drosophila (fruit fly)
brain. NNG is accessible through: http://211.73.64.34/NNG.
e-mail:chingyao@nchc.org.tw
e-mail: a00xj600@nchc.org.tw
e-mail: river.wang@nchc.org.tw
e-mail: chhsieh@nchc.org.tw
e-mail: hmchang@life.nthu.edu.tw
e-mail: aschiang@life.nthu.edu.tw
IEEE Pacific Visualisation Symposium 2011
1 - 4 March, Hong Kong, China
978-1-61284-934-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

(b)
(b) Neuropils can be drawn transparently.

KEYWORDS: neuroscience, 3D image database, neuro-image
visualization, connectivity search
1

INTRODUCTION

The functions of the brain reside on the network of neurons
within the skull. Imaging of single neurons in three dimensional
space is now possible due to recent advances in microscopic
imaging technology. Neuroscientists are now able to acquire clear
images of the complicated neuron structures that were previously
unobtainable. However, the ability to process the images and
extract meaningful information from the tremendous amount of
data posts another great challenge for the modern neuroscientist.
Studying the systemic neuroanatomy of the brain’
sarchitecture
is the foundation for understanding how the brain works and how
the information is processed and transmitted within. The brain of
the Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly) is a convenient model for
studying brain structure/function relationships because it is
relatively small in size as compared to the human brain (which
contains many million more neurons and, as such, is too large and
complicated to study) yet it is still capable of sophisticated
behavioural expression. Also, the Drosophila’
s genetic
background has been thoroughly studied and its brain has strong
similarities to mammalian brains [1].
Whenever possible, researchers have used 3D visualization
tools to assist them in analyzing complicated data. It has recently
been shown that a systemic collection of 3D images for single
neurons within the Drosophila brain is feasible. Also, a unified
coordinate system for the locations of these neurons has been
constructed as part of this project. To further produce meaningful
results, a modular 3D image database has also been constructed in

35

a standardized brain space of Drosophila [2]. The primary task
now is how to manage these tens of thousands of neurons so
researchers can select an ensemble of neurons and reveal their
functional significance. Until now, knowing how the neural
signals are transmitted within the neural network and through
what neurons they travel were questions that could not be
answered because the proper tools to mine such large quantities of
data did not exist.
In a unified and coordinated space, the spatial relationships
among the neurons can be easily queried and searched if a proper
database has been constructed. We have processed more than
10,000 individual neuron (from [2]) to construct a 3D neuron
image database. The database stores the volumetric and tracing
line information, as well as the positions of terminals and somas
of neurons.
It is impossible to understand the neural network without
knowing the details of the connections between the objects. For
this project, we developed a novel system called the NeuronNavigator (NNG) to help biologists and neuroscientists analyze
and process neuron data. The cross-platform NNG was built up
with a visual interface and integrated with the above mentioned
database.
The visual interface allows users to visualize and interact with
the data (Fig. 2). Through the interface, users may query the
whole coordinated brain space to find out relationships among
neurons and brain parts. A tolerance region has been set to
determine the connectivity among the neurons. Using this
specially designed interface, researchers can even look for
neurons that pass through a single or multiple Regions Of Interest
(ROI) or relay neural connections through terminals of neurons.
NNG’
squery interface accepts text and graphic queries and the
results are shown as networks of neural skeletons within the 3D
brain space.
2

MANAGING NEURON IMAGES

There are currently several software packages available, such as
Amira [3] and ImageJ [4], that are able to process neuron images.
However, these packages are mainly used to classify and process
image data for visualization. They are good visual analysis tools
but they are not designed to help researchers explore the patterns
of neuron networks hidden within the images.
An image database or a digital atlas may facilitate
neuroscientists to study the complicated neural structure/function
relationships. The first fly brain database was first reported in
1995 [5], although rather primitive at that time. The demand for
use of image databases to analyze neuron populations is
increasing [6-10]. Recent advances in computer hardware and
software have made this task feasible. As an example, the small
family of neurons in C. elegans has already been completely
categorized, although not in a physiologically relevant 3D space
as of yet [11].
Research regarding the use of neuron image databases to find
the connective relationships between neurons is rare. XANAT is
an early program that allows users to graphically query
anatomical connections within the brain. With XANAT, users
can find connectivity information by specifying the brain Region
Of Interest (ROI) [6]. However, the images that XANAT uses are
from the subdivision of the brain rather than at the neural level.
BrainGazer recently introduced more advanced query techniques
with their software which allows users to sketch arbitrary paths
and immediately obtain nearby objects [12]. Section 6 contains a
detailed discussion between NNG & BrainGazer.
An ideal brain atlas should incorporate several basic
characteristics such as the ability to accurately represent details in
3D, a powerful interface for searching and visualizing data, and

36

broadband internet access [8]. Once a reliable neural brain
network is established, the functional module can be hypothesized
according to the results from other studies including behavioral
and physiological methods [13].
The Spatial Database Management System (SDBMS) can be
used to manage and process image data of normalized and unified
neuron image data sets. SDBMS is a database management
system that includes additional capabilities for handling spatial
data. It also offers spatial data types (SDTs) in its data model and
query language [14].
The main application area driving research in SDBMS is
Geographic Information System (GIS). GIS can be used to
compute the shortest path from one node to another, as an
example, when it is used to analyze the connectivity between two
cities. GIS has also been applied to 2D-3D hybrid building models,
and indoor routing in the buildings can be performed using other
applications [15].
SDBMS can be applied to many different domains besides GIS.
For example, in the medical domain, doctors can use it to
recognize similar conditions in different patients [16] [17].
Molecular biologists use SDBMS to compare the topologies of
different genomes through a system which supports semantic and
analytical queries and image content mining [18]. Also, SDBMS
can be used to issue queries such as “
Display the locations of all
data registered to the cerebellum of a rat”or “
Retrieve data based
on the location by selecting a brain region” [19]. Also,
astronomers use SDBMS to interactively explore data in the
system, searching and analyzing the stars among the galaxies [20].
As long as objects can be situated in a unified space, SDBMS can
be used to help researchers better understand the information.
3

SYSTEM DESIGN

The main objective of the NNG is to uncover the knowledge
hidden within the scattered neurons. With an unprecedented
number neuron images data sets on hand (10,000, and counting),
the challenge is how to best organize the data and provide
researchers a friendly environment in which to observe and
analyze the data. The tools provided in NNG, which include
visualization, interaction and a query system, ease the user’
s work

Visual Interface
Query Interface
Query:
- Boolean Query
- Spatial Query
- Innervation Query
- Inside Query
- En Route Query
- Across Query
3D Picking Interface

Visualization
Neuropils
- Mesh
Neurons
- Tracing Line
- Terminals
- Terminal Density Map
Semi-Transparent Effects

Network

3D Neuron Image DB
- Process Data
- Build DB
- Accept Query
- Return Query Result
Fig. 2. NNG architecture overview

while finding neuron connectivity and innervation patterns.
Fig. 2 shows an overview of the architecture of NNG which
consists of two main modules: (i) the visual interface at client site,
and (ii) the backbone image database. The client site visual
interface is built on two components--the query interface and the
visualization interface. The query interface handles the query
commands from the user. The query results can be shown in a list
table or directly in the scene. Here, data are presented in different
ways and allows direct interaction with the data. The 3D neuron
image database stores the spatial data and other information
regarding the neurons and neuropils. The 3D neuron image
database accepts the query commands and returns the results. The
database does not need to reside on the same system as the
interface - via a network, it is possible to access the database
remotely.
Categorized neurons were generated by engineering the green
fluorescent protein (GFP), under the control of a specific gene
into the Drosophila embryos. Through a specific gene promoter,
the expression of the GFP protein is associated with several
genetic features (e.g. for different neurotransmitters or sexual
dimorphic genes). By observing the presence of the GFP protein
and the expression of the gene, the function of the neurons is
illustrated. The GFP images were acquired using confocal
microscopy. The category under which the neurons fall is
determined by the production of the gene it is involved in.
MARCM [21] is used to reveal not only single neurons, but also
their birth time during developmental stages.
3.1
3D Neuron Image Database
A simple way to query the correlation between elements taken
from the volumetric data of neuron images is to use a database to
store the spatial information, this is crucial for the functionalities
described below. Although the neurons are rendered using tracing
lines, the neuron spatial information stored in the database
includes not only terminals, but also voxels of neuron images data.
The Drosophila brain contains up to 130,000 neurons, thus, the
total size of the volumes representing the neurons is very large.
The question then becomes how to most efficiently store and
retrieve the data in the database.
All of the neuron images stored in the NNG’
s 3D Neuron
Image Database have been pre-processed and normalized. The
images are put into unified and standardized Drosophila brain
space; therefore, SDBMS is suitable for this case. Several types of
data were acquired after pre-processing, including the original
volume data, neural information (e.g. the normalized coordinates,
neuron names, etc.), and the tracing lines. The 3D Neuron Image
Database stores all the information to create a hybrid 3D image
database. It is composed of two main tables--the Neuroinformation table and the 3D Neuro-space table. The Neuroninformation table contains indices of the neurons, normalized
coordinates, filenames, and the other information. The 3D Neurospace table contains both the 3D coordinates of the occupied
voxel of the neurons and the terminals of the tracing lines.
Neurons are categorized according to the possible neurotransmitters (Cha, Gad, vGlut, Trh, TH, and Tdc2) used and some
characteristic genes (e.g. sexual dimorphic Fru).
In order to create the 3D Neuron Image Database, a unit voxel
in the standardized fruit-fly brain space is predefined according to
a tolerance region that is set by the user to determine whether a
connection appears or not. In our setting, the dimensions of a unit
voxel are 2 x 2 x 2 pixels, and the dimensions of standardized
brain space are 1944 x 1222 x 740 pixels. The standardized brain
space is divided by the unit voxel (see Fig 3(a), but the grids in
Fig. 3(a) do not represents the real size of a unit voxel). Then
every neuron’
s image data is processed to find the corresponding

Fig. 3 (a)
Brain space is divided
by unit voxel, the grids
are not at the actual
size of the unit voxel,
just conceptual.

Fig. 3 (b)
Corresponding tracing
line of Fig 3(a)

Neuron Information
Neuro-Info table
Index

Type

Bounding box
Coordinate..

Volume
File

Lineset
File

Terminal
Amount

1

2

000567

/
…

/
…

10

2

4

000395

/
…

/
…

15

3

…

…

…

…

…

Neuro-Space table
X

Y

Z

Volume Index

Terminal Index

0

0

0

12

1-4 2-3

0

0

1

1

1-5

0

0

2

2

2-4

…

…

…

…

…

Fig. 3. 3D Neuron Image Database

occupied voxels in the standardized brain space. A new record is
inserted into the table if any of the occupied voxels are not in the
table. The record includes the coordinate of the unit voxel and the
index of the neuron. If the unit voxel already exists in the table,
then the index of the neuron that corresponds to the record is
added. The locations of the terminals of the tracing lines are also
recorded into the table (See Fig 3). Finally, the normalized
coordinates and other information, such as the file location, are
saved in a different table (See the Neuro-Info table in Fig. 3).
These tables are generated using a MySQL database. The MySQL
database can be easily accessed through network, so the database
can reside in remote machine.
After the database is created, a friendly interface for the user to
submit queries and observe query results is needed. While
querying spatial connectivity, the user often has to choose a
neuron of interest or a spatial region in the 3D display and then
submit a query. We have designed the visual interface to help
users perform such queries and observe the query result.
3.2

Visualization

3.2.1
Neuron and Neuropil Rendering
The stacked images acquired with confocal microscopy are
volumetric by nature; volume visualization seeming to be the
most popular way to render neuron image data [12] [22]. However,

37

when rendering as little as tens of neurons volumetrically, even
when the blending function is enabled to create a semi-transparent
effect, the occlusion effect sometimes prevents the user from
being able to view the intertwined neuron structure. With NNG,
loading, unloading and displaying hundreds of different neuron
image data sets from the query results at the same time is a
common task. Frequently loading and unloading such a large
amount of neuron volume images will dramatically reduce the
system’
sperformance.
For the purpose of real-time interaction and display, the neuron
images are pre-processed to generate tracing lines. The technique
used in this paper is described in [23]. The NNG renders the
neurons in tracing lines. The tracing line color is chosen according
to the neuron-transmitter category which the neuron belongs to.
Another advantage of using tracing lines in the way is that the
user is able to identify the terminals of the neurons which are
located at the end of the branches of the tracing lines. NNG draws
spheres to indicate the terminals. The somas are drawn as larger
spheres (Fig. 1 (a)). With terminal location information, the user
is able to query connecting neurons that pass through specific
terminal areas.
To render the neuropils, the image data was pre-processed to
create a triangular mesh representation. The number of triangles
of each individual neuropil was scaled down to around 4,000. In
situations where rear neuropils are hidden behind other neuropils,
NNG utilizes a depth peeling algorithm [24] that allows the user

Fig. 4. Render of the terminals of dTdc2 in point clouds. The
two central bands from the fan-shaped body are easily seen.

generate pattern effects (e.g. see Fig. 4) that can be easily
recognized. Researchers can use the terminal map to compare
relationships between the terminals’spatial distributions and the
shapes of the neuropils. In terminal map mode, a clipping plane or
slab can be enabled to observe the terminal distribution in a
particular slice. The terminals appear more and less concentrated
in regions where the neuropils are located. This suggests that
terminals determined by neural traces may be neurologically
meaningful.
The terminal density map (Fig. 5) uses spheres of different sizes
and colors to represent the spatial distribution of terminal density.
If users are interested in finding the neurons that pass through
high-density regions, they can use the mouse to pick that target
sphere, and then send query to the database to obtain the result.
3.3
Query Interface
NNG’
sspecial capability is in finding correlations between
neuron connectivity. By linking this functionality with the
interface, we improve the usability and accessibility requested by
neuroscientists.
3.3.1

Text Query Interface
The text query interface allows
the user to input query commands.
It can be a single object or
combination query that uses
binary operators to associate
multiple objects together for more
advanced queries. The object can
be a neuron, a neuropil, or a
spatial ROI box.
NNG provides five operators,
Fig. 6. Query UI
AND, OR, NOT, INSIDE, and
INTERSECTION.
The
capabilities of the query function are explained in the next section.
Fig. 6 shows the text query interface. To input an object, the user
simply types in the object’
sname using a keyboard or doubleclicks the desired object on the screen and the name of that object
automatically fills the text query field.
3.3.2
Graphics Interface
NNG provides several ways for the user to directly interact with
the data. The user can use the mouse to perform basic operations
such as rotation, translation, and zoom simply by clicking and
dragging it. The user can also acquire the name of the neuron
simply by moving the mouse cursor over it, as well as other
information such as neuro-transmitter and gene information by
clicking the neuron in annotation mode.
The user is able to use the mouse to adjust the position and
shape of the ROI box. The ROI box can be elongated or shortened
by dragging any of the three front-faced facets while in box
editing mode. This is a very convenient way for the user to assign
and adjust the box position.
4

Fig. 5. Terminal Density Map. The sphere size represents the
density at the location, click the sphere to query neurons

to render neuropils semi-transparently. (Fig. 1 (b))
3.2.2
Terminals and Terminal Density Map
NNG incorporates a special and unique visualization tool, the
terminal and density map of terminals, which renders all of the
terminals in point clouds. Using the neuron tracing line
information, NNG can render terminals whose distribution can

38

NEURON CONNECTIVITY QUERY

NNG incorporates various query techniques to help
neuroscientists find hidden patterns within neuron images. The
neurons in the query results can be displayed on the visualization
interface to let users examine them and verify their results.
Users can also set the query option by terminals or by volume
(see bottom of Fig. 6). The 3D neuron image database stores not
only the image volume information, but also the terminals’
location information acquired from the neurons’tracing lines.
Query by terminals will only look for neurons which possess

7(a) Intersection query- The user adjusts the ROI box to enclose
the upper region of the mushroom body and then submits query

8(a) The query results of mb & MB. Too many scattered neurons
make it difficult for the user to identify specific neurons.

7(b) Only the neurons passing through the intersection
are returned. This figure only shows part of the results.
Green : Fru, Yellow: Cha, Orange: vGlut. Fru, Cha, and vGlut
represent different genetic drivers.
Fig. 7.

8(b) By enabling the across box, the user can find the neuron(s)
passing through the specific region (from 8 (a)).
Fig. 8.

b.

terminals located inside of the target object. On the other hand,
query by volume will examine the voxels in the database to find
the neurons which have voxels that meet the query criteria.
NNG’
squery technique design is quite unique. In this section,
we will go into more detail r
e
ga
r
di
ngNNG’
squery functions’
capabilities. In the following description, Oi represents an object
in the scene which can be a neuron, a neuropil, or a ROI box.
a.

Single Object Query: The basic query is the single object
query. It is used when the user is interested in finding what
neurons or neuropils are connected to a specific object.
The object can be a neuron, neuropil, or a ROI box. When
the user performs a single object query, the database will
return all the neurons or neuropils which have spatial
intersections with the object. For example, “
MB”is shown
in the query command field in Fig. 6. When the user
presses the “
GO”button to send the query, the query
results will show the neurons that have terminals located
within MB (i.e. right-side mushroom body)

c.

d.

Boolean Query: Using a Boolean operator, the user can
combine multiple single object queries to perform more
sophisticated queries. The following shows some examples:
i. O1 & O2 :
Find the neurons/neuropils passing through both O1 and
O2,s
uc
ha
s“
OG & og”
ii. (O1 AND O2 ) OR (O3 AND O4)
The union of two AND query results
iii. (O1 AND O2) NOT O3 :
Find the neurons/neuropils passing through (O1 and O2)
but not passing through O3
“Inside”Query: When the user wants to know which
neurons or neuropils are located within a ROI, he can
specify a ROI box and submit an Inside Query. The
database will return the neurons or neuropils which are
completely enclosed within the ROI box.
“Intersection” Query: An interesting challenge for
neuroscientists is to locate the neurons which connect
through a specific region of neuropil or neuron. NNG’
s
Intersection Query allows the user to find the neurons
passing through the intersecting region of two objects. For
example, the alpha and alpha
’
s lobe of the mushroom body
may have different functional significance in terms of

39

a

b

c

d

e

f

(a) The user selects a starting object, “
dlp”in this example, and then clicks on it to send a query. The left side of the display is the list of
neurons that connect to dlp. (b) The user selects one neuron from the list. (c) The user defines a terminal box. When the user hovers the
mouse cursor above the terminal in Innervation mode, a terminal box appears. The user can adjust the size of the box using the mouse
or keyboard. (d) The user queries the connecting neuron passing through the terminal box and selects the next desired neuron from the
results. (e) The user defines the other terminal box for the next query. (f) This time, the user queries for connected neuropils and
neuropil “
AL”is returned. The query sequence is listed on the right side of the display.
Fig. 9. The sequences for the Innervation query operation.

e.

f.

memory processing and storage [25]. The user may use the
ROI box to enclose regions of the mushroom body in part
or in whole. The query will only return the neurons
passing through that intersecting region enclosed in the
ROI box and the target mushroom body. (Fig. 7)
“Across”Query: In the aforementioned query techniques,
queries often result in return of too many clustered neurons
from the database. When this happens, the user may have
difficulty identifying the spatial distribution of the neurons
or finding specific neuron (i.e. one that passes through a
specific location). In this case, the user can further filter
the query results by specifying an across box. As a result,
NNG will only show the neurons which pass through the
box. The user can use the mouse to move and adjust the
shape and size of the box. The shown neurons that pass
through the across box are updated in real-time according
to the new location and cover region of the across box (Fig.
8).
“En route”query: This query is useful when the user
wants to find the mid-way point connection between two
objects. For example, say there are three objects, O1, O2,
and O3. When the user wants to know the route from O1 to
O3 going through O2, he can perform an En route query.
The En route query actually performs two queries and
returns the union results of those two queries. The user can
also achieve En route Query using a combination of
Boolean Queries. The following shows the formula of En
route Query:
((O1 AND O2) NOT O3) OR ((O3 AND O2) NOT O1)

40

g.

5

“Innervation” Query: Innervation Query is a novel
querying technique that allows the researcher discover the
neural circuit path within the fruit fly brain step-by-step.
The user begins the Innervation Query by selecting a
starting object and then sends the query by clicking the
object on the screen. The query results are then shown on
the screen and the user can select the next query object
from the set of connected objects of the results. NNG
allows users to quickly preview each resulting neuron by
passing the mouse cursor over the list. This helps the user
decide which one to choose next. The user can also specify
the region around a particular terminal of the neuron when
the mouse cursor hovers over that terminal. A terminal box
centered on the selected terminal will appear which allows
the user to query the neurons passing through that terminal
box. By repeating these steps, the user can reach the target
object. NNG helps the user build neuron circuit pathways
step-by-step and one-by-one (See Fig. 9. and supplemental
video for demonstration). All innervation query operations
are performed interactively on the screen.
IMPLEMENTATION

NNG’
s user interface was developed using Java and SWT [26].
The 3D scene is rendered by OpenGL (JOGL) and GLSL. Taking
advantage of Java’
sma
n
yfeatures and benefits, NNG is a crossplatform application which has been tested in both the Windows
and Linux 32-bit and 64-bit environments. The 3D Neuron Image
database is a MySQL database which can reside in a remote
location and communicate with the client-site application over the
Internet, hence reducing the workload of the client’
s machine.

This system also allows groups of neuroscientists from around
the world to work together to analyze the same data, NNG will be
accessible via a web interface.
6

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this research, we developed a novel application that integrates a
visual interface with a 3D neuron image database. This new
development combines the strengths of a friendly visualization
interface and the power of query-based database operation which
could help neuroscientists uncover information pathways within
thousands of neurons (see supplementary videos for
demonstration). Using fruit-fly brain images, while still of
substantial research value, might only be the starting case: in
future research, various neuron image datasets using unified
coordinate space can be used by NNG, for example, that of a bee
or a mouse.
BrainGazer developed by Bruckner et al. [12], has provided
several basic query techniques. Their Path Query allows the user
to sketch an arbitrary path using the mouse cursor on top of the
visualization and obtain nearby objects immediately. However,
the user is not able to specify the path between two specific
regions. NNG’
s AND operation allows the user to select two
objects (which can be neuropil, neuron, or ROI box) and find the
connecting neurons between these two objects. When the across
box is enabled, only the neurons passing through the specific
regions will be shown. NNG can find the connections not only by
volume, but also by terminals. A combinatorial graphic
management together with Boolean Query technique provided by
NNG also gives users the previously unseen flexibility to narrow
down the query results. Another unique feature of NNG is its
ability to find a hypothetical information pathway within the fly
brain step-by-step. Typical use of the Innervation query is shown
in Fig. 9.
The handling of volumetric images is extremely
computationally demanding. When developing NNG, the main
concern we wanted to address was how to be able to easily
manipulate and analyze more than 10,000 neuron image data sets
in an efficient manner and how to handle the growing amount of
data collected. To address all of these concerns, we implemented
the tracing line representation in NNG. Tracing lines provide a
simple and fast way to render neurons (although still approximate).
We compared the terminals derived from the tracing lines with the
results from the real volume data and found the terminals on
tracing lines are greater than may be discerned visually from the
volume. Therefore, we have built in a tolerance (i.e. a size of the
unit space) when creating the database. If the user wants to verify
the results in the original volume data, we include a link to call an
external volumetric image viewer. Though the Innervation query
is useful, it only allows users to specify the starting object, after
which they must locate the target object step-by-step. In the future,
we will integrate a path-finding algorithm to address this issue and,
as a result, save the user much time and effort.
The handlings of the female and male neuron images are
separate. Currently, the 3D neuron image database stores
information from about 10,000 female fruit-fly neurons and 3,000
male fruit-fly neurons. The figures and examples used in this
paper are from the female data. The user can specify whether they
want male or female data in the program argument and NNG will
load different datasets and database tables accordingly. The ability
to locate and compare corresponding male and female fruit-fly
neurons is ongoing. Currently, we are looking for workable

algorithms for the geometric transformation between the male and
the female fruit-fly brain space.
The reliability and the significance of the neural connectivity in
NNG rely exclusively on the image accuracy in the preprocessing
stage (e.g. 3D warping). After a batch processing job warps
thousands of neuron image sets into the standardized fruit-fly
brain, NNG can easily identify mis-warped neurons. When
looking into the terminal distributions of NNG, an out-of-thebrain border terminal might be representative of an error.
The application of the graph theory to the analysis of neuron
connectivity is an emerging research topic recently [27]. Once the
database has been established, we are able to locate neighbors of
all neurons and neuropils. One of our next objectives will be to
build the correlation maps between the neurons for graph analysis.
Currently, the system does not contain data on dendrites and
axons, thus, the connections between the neurons are undirectional. Dendrite and axon information will be available in the
near future and we have reserved the directional flag for this in the
database already. With directional information, the neuron
information pathway will be more realistic in terms of functional
significance.
NNG has also incorporated a web-interface that allows
researchers from all over the world to access. NNG is now
integrating with another fly brain image database also, both of
which will be publicly accessible once completed (Anyone who
may be interested in NNG, please go to: http://211.73.64.34/NNG
to register).
NNG is the result of an inter-disciplinary collaboration between
computer scientists and neurologists. Experts in theoretical neural
computation will become involved in its further development in
the future. Considering its current achievements and future
developments, the Neuron Navigator will continue opening doors
to new and different areas of research.
7

NEUROLOGICAL INSIGHT

The significance of NNG to neuroscientists is that it provides a
flexible apparatus to investigate the structure of neural network
with an ensemble of single neurons in the whole brain, currently
for Drosophila.Fore
xa
mpl
e
,wi
t
ht
he“
a
c
r
os
s
”s
e
a
r
c
h
,i
ti
ssimple
to retrieve long range commissural tracts connecting the medulla
(part of the optical lobe responsible for processing visual signals)
on both sides of the brain (Fig. 10). These commissural tracts
have been known since 1976 in studying the anatomy or
development of the central nervous system in Drosophila and
other insects [28] but no extrapolation of the circuit has been
made due to the difficulties in visualize more than one neurons in
one anatomical study in 3D, let alone to reconstruct them from
separate observations. With the aids of NNG, it is quite straight
forward to focus on one particular commissural tract and then to
find out other neurons connected with the terminals of the tract
(Fig. 10). These neurons communicate through the commissural
tracts and may be responsible for the reciprocal modification of
visual singles for the proper weighing of signals coming from
different directions. Further electrophysiological of genetic
investigations may precede on those NNG identified candidate
neurons up/down-stream the commissural neuron for their real
functional significance. Eventually, NNG may become a
computer-aided test board for neural circuitry.

41

Fig. 10. Many long range commissural tr
act
smaybef
oundbet
weenmedul
l
aswi
t
ht
he“
acr
oss”sear
ch(
9(a)) on two sides of the Drosophila
br
ai
n.Thedor
salmostonemaybesel
ect
edbyr
est
r
i
ct
i
ngt
he“
acr
oss”boxandt
henneur
onsconnect
edt
hr
oughi
t
st
er
mi
nal
smay be found
and selectively visualized in the viewer (9(b)). Blue cubes represent the connection sites of the commissural neuron with other neurons.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Chao-Chun Chuang, Chang-Wei Yeh,
and Jian-Ming Wann from the NCHC for their efforts in
processing the image data and the setup of the web-interface. We
also would like to thank the NCHC’
s VIML Team
(http://viml.nchc.org.tw) for their support in developing the image
processing tool which assisted us greatly in creating the image
database.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]

42

J. D. Armstrong and J. I. van Hemert, "Towards a virtual fly brain,"
Philos Transact A Math Phys Eng Sci, vol. 367, pp. 2387-97, Jun 13
2009.
Chiang, A.-S., et al “
Three-dimensional reconstruction of brain-wide
wiring networks in Drosophila at single-cell resolution,”Current
Biology doi:10.1016/j.cub.2010.11.056 2010
Visage Imaging, Amira, http://www.amira.com
T. J. Collins, "ImageJ for microscopy," Biotechniques, vol. 43, pp.
25-30, Jul 2007.
Armstrong JD, et al., “
Flybrain, an on-line atlas and database of the
Drosophila nervous system,”Neuron, Jul, 15(1):17-20, 1995
M. Chicurel, "Databasing the brain," Nature, vol. 406, pp. 822-5,
Aug 24 2000.
W. A. Press, et al., "A graphical anatomical database of neural
connectivity," Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci, vol. 356, pp.
1147-57, Aug 29 2001.
D. C. Van Essen, "Windows on the brain: the emerging role of
atlases and databases in neuroscience," Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, vol. 12, pp. 574-9, Oct 2002.
A. W. Toga, "Neuroimage databases: the good, the bad and the
ugly," Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 3, pp. 302-9, Apr 2002.
H. Peng, "Bioimage informatics: a new area of engineering biology,"
Bioinformatics, vol. 24, pp. 1827-36, Sep 1 2008.
Iwasaki Lab. “
Neural Network of the Nematode C. elegans”
,
http://ims.dse.ibaraki.ac.jp/research/C_elegans_en.html
S. Bruckner, et al., "BrainGazer-visual queries for neurobiology
research," IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, vol. 15, pp. 1497-504, Nov-Dec 2009.
S. R. Olsen and R. I. Wilson, "Cracking neural circuits in a tiny brain:
new approaches for understanding the neural circuitry of
Drosophila," Trends in Neurosciences, vol. 31, pp. 512-20, Oct 2008.

[14] R. H. Guting, "An introduction to spatial database systems," The
VLDB Journal, vol. 3, pp. 357-399, 1994
[15] H. Kim, et al., "A SDBMS-Based 2D-3D Hybrid Model for Indoor
Routing," presented at the Proceedings of the 2009 Tenth
International Conference on Mobile Data Management: Systems,
Services and Middleware, 2009.
[16] E. H. Herskovits and R. Chen, "Integrating data-mining support into
a brain-image database using open-source components," Advances in
Medical Sciences, vol. 53, pp. 172-81, 2008.
[17] S. H. Joshi, et al., "Interactive exploration of neuroanatomical metaspaces," Front Neuroinformatics, vol. 3, p. 38, 2009.
[18] S. Zhang, et al., "A Practical Approach for Microscopy Imaging
Data Management (MIDM) in Neuroscience," presented at the 15th
International Conference on Scientific and Statistical Database
Management, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 2003.
[19] M. E. Martone, et al., "The cell-centered database: a database for
multiscale structural and protein localization data from light and
electron microscopy," Neuroinformatics, vol. 1, pp. 379-95, 2003.
[20] A. S. Szalay, et al., "Designing and mining multi-terabyte astronomy
archives: the Sloan Digital Sky Survey," presented at the
Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD international conference on
Management of data, Dallas, Texas, United States, 2000.
[21] T. Lee and L. Luo, "Mosaic analysis with a repressible cell marker
for studies of gene function in neuronal morphogenesis," Neuron,
vol. 22, pp. 451-61, Mar 1999.
[22] H. Peng, et al., "V3D enables real-time 3D visualization and
quantitative analysis of large-scale biological image data sets,"
Nature Biotechnology, vol. advance online publication, 2010.
[23] P. C. Lee, et al., "A semi-automatic method for neuron centerline
extraction in confocal microscopic image stack," in Biomedical
Imaging: From Nano to Macro, 2008. ISBI 2008. 5th IEEE
International Symposium on, 2008, pp. 959-962, May 2008
[24] L. Bavoil and K. Myers, "Order Independent Transparency with
Dual Depth Peeling," NVIDIA OpenGL SDK, 2008.
[25] A.C. Keene andS.Wa
dde
l
l“
Dr
os
ophi
l
aol
f
a
c
t
or
yme
mor
y:s
i
ngl
e
ge
ne
st
oc
ompl
e
xne
ur
a
lc
i
r
c
ui
t
s
,
”Na
t
ur
eRe
vi
e
wsNe
ur
os
c
i
e
nc
e
,
vol 8, pp. 341-54, May 2007
[26] SWT: The Standard Widget Toolkit, http://www.eclipse.org/swt/
[27] E. Bullmore and O. Sporns, "Complex brain networks: graph
theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems," Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 10, pp. 186-98, Mar 2009.
[28] W. Pereanu, et al, “
Development-based compartmentalization of the
Drosophila central brain”
. The Journal of Comparative Neurology,
518: 2996-3023, 2010.

