Visualization of Individual’s Knowledge by
Analyzing the Citation Networks
Tze-Haw Huang and Mao Lin Huang
Faculty of Information Technology
University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
{thhuang@it.uts.edu.au, maolin@it.uts.edu.au}
Abstract
Visual analysis of knowledge domain is an emerging
field of study as science is highly dynamic and constantly
evolving. Behind the scene, a knowledge domain is
formed and contributed by enormous researchers’
publications that describe the common subject of the
domain. There is large number of significant activities
have been carried out to visualize and identify the
knowledge domains of research projects, groups and
communities. However, the research on visualizing the
knowledge structure at individual level is relative
inactive. It is difficult to track down the individual’s
contribution to the subject and the degree of the
knowledge they possess.
In this paper, we are attempting to visualize the
individual’s knowledge structure by analyzing the
citation and co-authorship relational structures. We try
to analyze and map author’s documents to the knowledge
domains. By mapping the documents to knowledge
domain, we obtain the skeleton of knowledge structure of
an individual. Then, we apply the visualization technique
to present the result.
Keywords--co-authorship,
visualization, information analysis

information

1. Introduction
Gaining the knowledge is the cognitive process of
integrating experience, perception and reasoning into a
representation which reflects the author’s confidentiality
of understanding the subject domain. In academic
research, the approach of proofing the author’s
understanding of the knowledge is by transforming the
knowledge into document that is also known as scientific
literature and publishes it to a particular knowledge
domain for knowledge sharing across community
boundaries. Discovery and mapping the knowledge
structure has also gained enormous awareness in
academic research. Mapping knowledge is one of
emerging topic in KVD [3] that uses sophisticated data
mining analysis and visualization techniques to fairly
identify the research areas, experts and etc.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

The advance of Internet in late ninety has made
virtually any information ubiquitous with aim to promote
knowledge sharing and idea exchanging as a result the
scientific publications has grown exponentially in the
mean time. There were various scientific literature search
engines such as DBLP and SCSI have maintained
enamors dataset of categorized publications grouping
into knowledge domains, these high volume of data has
intrinsic raised the interest of researchers to explore the
knowledge experts within the domains and visualizing
the knowledge structure and boundary of experts across
domain. Visualization techniques are critical to explore
the individual knowledge acquisition and identification
of active knowledge experts in which have always
interesting
the
government
bodies,
research
organizations and laboratories as they are persistently
searching for experts for purpose of research funding and
award cutting-edge project.
Intrinsically, attempting in the visualization of the
knowledge and experience of an individual is complex as
it involves the collection and analysis of scientific
literatures grouping by an author in order to build the
skeleton of individual’s knowledge boundary. The ability
to map the knowledge involves database mining and
document analyzing. More importantly, the effective
presentation sense to transform the abstract data into
intuitive way.
We are neither focusing on identifying the most
cited, influential authors nor does scientific collaboration
in general in face these topics have already received
widely discussion. Instead, we were searching for
approaches to present an individual researcher’s
knowledge structure by analyzing the given documents.
It is possible that an individual’s knowledge is spawned
across domains that is also known as knowledge
branching.
This paper is organized as follow in Section 2, we
introduced the approaches that we used to pre-processing
the document and mapped a document into knowledge
domain. In Section 3, we presented the knowledge
structure analysis visualization and finally a conclusion
in Section 4.

2. Knowledge Mapping
Figure 1 illustrates a framework of the knowledge
mapping, which consists of five steps:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

document mining
LSA
KD mapping
knowledge quality analysis
knowledge structure analysis

Google
Schelor

DBLP

Document Mining

LSA

K D Mapping

Knowledge Quality Analysis

K nowledge Structure Analysis

Figure 1: Fraction of RFCD

2.1 Data Source
The dataset used for analyzing and visualization
were ported from the well-known online DBLP
(http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/~ley/db/), which is
one of the largest Computer Sciences bibliographic data
source available on the Internet. It provides information
on major computing journals and conference proceedings
between year 1936 and 2006. The distinctive advantage
of DBLP over another scientific bibliographic database
such as CiteSeer is the easily identification of authors.
DBLP provides full author names in a publication and
CiteSeer uses only the initial of authors which will often
cause confusions when multiple result-set has been
returned when querying on an author name and also
performing insert operation to the database that violates
the constraints. Thus, the decision was made to use
DBLP as our preference of dataset.
A summary of statistics of DBLP studied is given in
Table.1

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Number of authors
Number of papers
Average authors per paper
Average papers per author
Conference accepts most
papers

442,886
678,296
2.40
3.67
Communications of
the ACM, 6892

Table.1: The statistics studied was based on DBLP
and as a benchmark. Please note the data collected
by DBLP may not be complete.

2.2 knowledge Domain Classification via RFCD
Scientific knowledge is disseminated in many
domains. A knowledge domain is a content of particular
knowledge or an area of expertise that scientists learn
about which is easily accessible with information offered
in structured and consistent way. Thus, a collection of
texts, files and images does not form a knowledge
domain unless the various bits of information found are
integrated and related.
Our knowledge domain classification is based on
Australia Research Fields, Courses and Disciplines
Classification (RFCD) [4] as shown in Figure.1 which is
the collective name for a set of related classifications and
the research activities were classified according to the
field of research undertaken and it is generally reflects
the overall structure of disciplinary fields. The RFCD is
organized in a hierarchical structure with 24 divisions,
139 disciplines and 898 subjects, in Figure 2 has shown
the subset of RFCD structures. The rich set of research
area classification provided by RFCD is sufficient to
cover the majority of identifiable knowledge domains.

2.3 Text Pre-Processing
Building blocks of mapping scientific document to a
knowledge domain require the data mining and
development of pre-defined vocabularies. By given a
corpus of published document di with a set of document
keywords {wi , j , j = 1,..., j = N } where wi , j represents
a keyword that summarized the content of document to a
subject domain. The keywords may come in many forms
such as verbs, norms or adjectives, in order to reduce all
forms of the word to a base or stemmed form, we applied
Porter stemming algorithm [2] on wi , j by removing the
suffix to reduce the related words to the same stem (i.e.
networking Æ network).
The purpose of preliminarily applying word
stemming on each keyword is to improve the matching
efficiency by reducing the number of unique words in
keyword population µ and facilitate the automatic
document to subject domain mapping process.

Figure 2: Fraction of RFCD

2.4 Latent Semantic Analysis
A document is a collection of words that composed
together to describe a particular knowledge. Latent
semantic analysis (LSA) has been used to relate the
knowledge domain to a document; it is a technique in
natural language processing by extracting and
representing the contextual meaning of words by
statistical computation to a corpus of text. LSA utilizes
SVD [6] that is a matrix decomposition technique for
uncovering latent data structures while removing noise.
SVD is defined as below and the results were shown in
Figure 3 and 4.

A = USV T

(1)

Where A is the decomposed term-document matrix,
U and V are orthogonal and S is a diagonal matrix.

Figure 3: Co-Word Matrix

Figure 4: Co-Word Matrix

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

We adopted the SVD to obtain the document to
knowledge domain mapping by treating document as
knowledge domain and the keywords as terms. The termdocument matrix A is constructed from a given corpus of
a scientific document which gives the relationship
between terms and documents. LSI transforms this into a
relationship between the terms and concepts. Each
concept is a vector and the elements within it were
assigned the weight. The most significant words found
would be used to identify to which knowledge domain
that this document is most suitable mapped to.
Applying the technique on the document published
by an author, the function will return the knowledge
domain the input document is most likely mapped to. We
could obtain the knowledge domains possessed by an
individual or more precisely the knowledge and research
experience possessed and classified by knowledge
domains as described in (1).

rfcd = LSA(d k 1........d kn )

(2)

where a set of corpus d k1 ........d kn from a document
is analyzed using SVD with the most likely mapped
RFCD code is suggested and in fact, a RFCD represents
a knowledge or research domain. Thus, the overall
knowledge structure of an author is therefore given by:
N

RFCSs ∈ ∑ flsa (di , k1....d i , kn )

(3)

i =0

2.5 Knowledge Quality Analysis
By applying the derivatives in Section 3.4, we have
obtained the skeleton of one’s knowledge structure by
mapping the document to RFCD. It is difficult to
determine the knowledge ranking of an author simply by
counting the number of documents in each RFCD
grouping. The quality of the knowledge should be
determined by the citations received instead of quantity.
Scholars often cited the published work of others in
their own research work to gain supportive evidence of
their work. Such citations can be used to estimate the
impact of scientific publications of an author. The wellknown indicator for the quality of a publication is its
impact factor [5] which provides a quantitative unit for
each journal proportional to the average number of
citations per paper published in the previous two years
by Thomson ISI in the Journal Citation Report (JCR).
Unfortunately, conference proceeding publications were
not covered by JCR. Nevertheless, Google Scholar
makes it possible to easily access citation data of over
millions of publications and authors.
The assumption behind the use of citation count to
measure the knowledge quality is that citation generally
reflects the utilization, contribution and quality of a
scientific
publication
in
international
aspect.
Furthermore, the publication venue is also an important

factor that should be taken into account when
considering the author’s knowledge quality analysis.
Beginning with this measure, we could picture
enhancing our estimate of the important journals as
follows. Suppose we have concluded, by counting
citations, that the journals Science and Nature are highly
prominent. Then if we are comparing two more obscure
journals which have received roughly the same number
of citations as one another, and we discover that one of
these journals has received many citations from Science
and Nature, we may wish to elevate its ranking. In other
words, it is better to receive citations from an important
journal than from an unimportant one. We can see this
phenomenon on the WWW as well: counting the number
of links to a page can give us a general estimate of its
prominence on the Web, but a page with very few
incoming links may also be prominent, if two of these
links come from the home pages of Yahoo! and Netscape.
Defining such a richer notion of importance, or
prominence, contains an intrinsic element of circularity:
it arises from the fragile intuition that a node is important
if it receives links from other important nodes. Several
measures incorporate this basic circular notion, and each
contains a method for capturing the implicit equilibrium
that this circularity encodes.

Figure 5: Citations received for each document
Similarly, in Figure 7 presents a historical view of
acknowledge by citation of individual document. These
citation analyses of document enhance the view towards
the author’s past work recognition.

3. Visualization

3.2 Knowledge Structure

In previous section, we have grouped the documents
into knowledge domains of an author. In this section, we
would present the result using various visualization
approaches.

The skeleton of an individual has emerged; we used
a 3D orbit view to present the knowledge structure of an
individual. The center is a knowledge core with textures
attached as shown in Figure.8. We had used a most
appropriate texture to represent each RFCD. The
knowledge core in the center of the 3D graph reveals the
knowledge combinations of an author by corresponding
textures.
Figure 9 presents a knowledge structure of an
individual derived from the analysis in Section.2. Each
node in the graph represents a publication which is a
portion of knowledge of an author that he or she
possesses and the coloring was used to differentiate the
RFCD in order to identify the node for which knowledge
that it belongs to. The color for each RFCD was not predefined instead it has been assigned randomly to each
newly identified RFCD. The size of node represents the
citation count received over time and their distance
towards the knowledge core reveals the quality.
The node closes to the centre or knowledge core
suggests the publication has received the widely
acceptance by citations. It also suggests that the author
has the strong understanding of the knowledge in that
domain. However, the size of the nodes close to the
knowledge core might not be relative larger than other
nodes scattered around the graph as we have
implemented the quality fairness by taken the quality of
cited papers by other authors into consideration. For
example, if a publication has been cited by other authors
of whom publication has been published to influential
venues or journals then a stronger weight would be
assigned as a result of stronger weight a node’s

3.1 Citation Structure
We used 2D ring to visualize the change of citations
received by a document over time. Number of citations
received by a document of an author reveals the
importance of the document in the published venue of
domain. The author’s knowledge has been acknowledged
as established and thought by others when creating new
knowledge.
Figure.5 shows the citations received for all the
documents mapped to knowledge domain of an author
over time. Comparison between citations received could
be used to identify the area of knowledge that an author
has mostly acknowledged in author’s knowledge
structure. For example, suppose an author has expertise
in two knowledge domains as a result of grouping
documents published by applying the knowledge
mapping technique described in Section.3. By comparing
the citations received over time across knowledge
domains that could help to understand an author’s main
knowledge stream.
In Figure 6, we present a view of all the citations
received by knowledge domain.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

coordinate would be placed near the center as shown in
Figure 9 which presents an author possesses knowledge
structure of four areas of research knowledge domains by
analyzing the publications and mapped into
corresponding RFCDs.

Figure 8: Knowledge Core

Figure 6: Citation received for a knowledge domain

Figure 9: Knowledge Core

4. Conclusion

Figure 7: Citation received of a document

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

We aimed to apply the visualization techniques,
information retrieval and mapping approaches developed
to the context of visualizing knowledge structure of
research expertise. The study of identifying knowledge
experts and important papers at knowledge domain level
had been widely discussed and those serve as foundation
of our work. However, instead of exploring general level
knowledge structures, we focusing on researching the
knowledge structure at individual level by analyzing and
grouping publications into well defined knowledge
domains.
The research result also suggests the potential of
applying information indexing and retrieval in the field
of knowledge visualization. We have employed such
approach to map the document into well defined RFCD
that each code in fact represents a classified knowledge
domain. It automates the process of mapping the
document semantics to pre-defined domain definitions.
However, the pre-requisite is that the domain definition
must be pre-defined for a document to know which
domain that it should map to.
In the research, we have contributed to the
visualization of individual knowledge domains and
mapping of document into knowledge domain using
RFID code by applying various semantic analysis

techniques. In the meantime, we are also investigating
the feasibility of extending the research into visualizing
the entire knowledge structure of a domain.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]

C. Chen and R. J. Paul, “Visualizing a Knowledge
Domain's Intellectual Structure”, IEEE Comput. 34(3),
pp65-71, March, 2001.
M. Porter. An algorithm for suffix stripping. Program,
14(3):130-137, 1980.
KVD
RFCD - http://www.arc.gov.au/apply_grants/rfcd_codes.
htm
T. Opthof, “Sense and nonsense about the impact factor”,
Cardiovasc Res 1997, 33(1), pp1-7
Berry, M. W, “Large-scale sparse singular value
computations” Int. J. Supercomputer, vol. 6, no. 1, pp.
13–49, 1992
W. Ke, K. Borner, and L. Viswanath, “Major
Information Visualization Authors, Papers and Topics in
the ACM Library”, IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (INFOVIS'04).
C. Chen and L. Carr, “A Semantic-Centric Approach to
Information Visualization”, International Conference on
Information Visualization, pp 18-23, 1999
T.K. Landauer, P.W. Foltz and D. Laham, “Introduction
to Latent Semantic Analysis”, Discourse Processes, 25,
pp259-284, 1998
S. Wasserman and K. Faust, “Social Network Analysis
“,Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994
M. Newman, “Scientific Collaboration Networks: I.
Network Construction and Fundamental Results”,
Physical Review E, 64(1):016131, 2001.
Yoshikane. Fuyuki, Nozawa. Takayuki and Tsuji. Keita,
”Comparative Analysis of Co-authorship Networks
Considering Authors' Roles in Collaboration: Differences
between the Theoretical and Application Areas”,
ISSI 2005, July, 2005, vol.2, p.509-516.
C. Cotta, J.J. Merelo, “The Complex Network of
Evolutionary Computation Authors: an Initial Study”,
Physics/0507196, 2005
E. G. Berkowitz and M. R. Elkhadiri, “Creation of a
Style Independent Intelligent Autonomous Citation
Indexer to Support Academic Research”, Proceedings
15th Midwest Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive
Science Conference, pp. 68-73, 2004
A. Goldenberg and A. Moore, “Bayes Net Graphs to
Understand Coauthorship Networks KDD”, Workshop
on Link Discovery: Issues, Approaches and Applications,
2005
B. Aleman-Meza, M. Nagarajan, C. Ramakrishnan, A.
Sheth, B. Arpinar, L. Ding, P. Kolari, Anupam Joshi, and
T. Finin, “Semantic Analytics on Social Networks:
Experiences in Addressing the Problem of Conflict of
Interest Detection”, WWW 2006, Edinburgh, Scotland
P.A. Chirita, A. Damian, W. Nejdl and W. Siberski,
“Search Strategies for Scientific Collaboration
Networks”, CIKM 2005, Bremen, Germany
B. Lee, M. Czerwinski, G. Robertson, B. B. Bederson,
“Understanding Eight Years of InfoVis Conferences
Using PaperLens”, INFOVIS'04, Vol 0, pp216.3
Z. Huang, H.C Chen, F. Guo, J.J Xu, S. Wu, W.H Chen,
"Visualizing the Expertise Space," hicss, p.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

10038b, Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS'04) - Track 1, 2004.

