Integrated 3D Multimedia Web Based Application in Biology: A Prototype
Amirrudin Kamsin
Faculty of Computer Science & Information Technology
University Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur.
{Email: amir@um.edu.my}
Abstract
Since the middle of 1990s, Malaysia has already
showed its commitment and emphasis on the idea of
Information and Communication Technology (ICT).
Malaysia’s Multimedia Super Corridor (MSC) is being
developed in order to satisfy the country’s ambition to
achieve the fully developed status by the year 2020.
Recent studies showed that online learning for secondary
students had become more established and accepted as a
standard way of learning nowadays. Educators are
always being encouraged to incorporate technology into
their classroom teaching. 3D interactions with
multimedia elements relatively allow the learners to
learn and grasp the lessons being taught much faster
than in a normal classroom. The use of computer
training tools where the student can interact with a
computer model can give good feedbacks. 3D analytical
approach is especially useful in determining the
fundamental molecular events using a web-based,
visually-oriented system that allows efficient querying of
gene expression. The implementation of VRML is
perceivably efficient and effective method for conveying
molecular models over the net. In molecular science, 3D
impressions and conceptions are elementary in order to
transfer and understand further complex structural
information. A prototype of an Interactive 3D
Multimedia Learning Tool in Biology was created in
order to provide users with a 3D element multimedia
study environment in Biology subject. The prototype
contains three main divisions which are the 3DiC,
animations and tutorials. It allows users to learn and
study about the biological cells and animations in an
interactive and interesting 3D environment.

1. Introduction
The importance of computer and online education is
conspicuous in our country. Barely study and memorize
information from the text books and teacher’s notes are
no longer an effective way to gain a thorough
understanding about a certain topic or subject. Since the
launching of Smart Schools in Malaysia in 1997,
students in our country have been urged to foster the

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

knowledge, skills, and attitudes appropriate for success
in the Information Age. The Smart Schools are
characterized by a self-directed learning, self-paced
learning and learning that is continuous and reflective.
The existence of Interactive 3D Multimedia Learning
Tool in Biology enables students to do so. As the
demand on educations and technologies increase laterally
nowadays, this learning tool not only enables students to
learn effectively by themselves but also help them to
solve problems of the lack of professional educators in
conducting the topic. Cell is the basic and fundamental
topic in biology and should be fully understood before
the students could proceed to other and more
complicated topics pertaining to this subject.

2. Project Motivation
2.1 Purposes of the Study
i)

Enable users to learn biology in an interactive,
effective, interesting and attractive
environment.

ii) Provide users with a clear and appropriate idea
about the structure of cell and processes
involved, which are the basic and fundamental
studies in biology, before users can proceed to
other topics in biology subject.
iii) Provide an electronic-based learning
environment according to the concept of smart
school which was launched since July 1997 in
Malaysia.

2.2 Research Objectives
i)

To study the conservative teaching style and
learning tools available nowadays in schools.

ii) To study as well as refer to the other interactive
3D biology learning tools available nowadays
and figure out what sort of improvements can
be done.

iii) To make a comparison between interactive 3D
multimedia learning tool with the other
conservative teaching tools in school.

2.3 Scope and Limitations
i)

This project is mainly targeted for SPM level
students at Form 4. Therefore the ease of use
and legibility of the project are considered.

ii) This project covers the structure of cell and
processes that happens in cell. It concentrates
on the basic of biology studies including the
content of a living cell, mitosis and meiosis
processes, as well as the replication process of
DNA, transcription process of RNA synthesis
and translation process of protein synthesis in
nucleus.
iii) This learning tool is a web-based application
and involving interactive 3D visualization of the
cell structure and processes using VRML.

3. Literature review
Most research efforts in online learning tend to
concentrate on the delivery of content relegating to a
lesser role the contexts, the activity-rich, interaction-rich
and culturally rich learning environments that the use of
technology is making possible and where new principles
and practices apply. Learning contexts are still little
understood and investigated worldwide [3]. In fact,
beyond the delivery of content, interaction and activity,
the learning “contexts”, should be taken into account as
well which will bring our country towards the forming of
completely renewed social and cultural frameworks that
our education is calling for and technology is now
capable of offering us. A significant part of the future of
learning and education - the most important part of it - is
to be found on context, that is, on making learning
happen within activity rich, interaction rich, and
culturally rich social environments that never existed,
that the intelligent use of technology is making possible,
and where completely different paradigms apply [3].
Interactive 3D Multimedia Learning Tool and other
online educational portals nowadays basically
implementing a same simple model [3] of learning
contexts that relates the learner with content and context
within a learning event as below:i)

ii)

Learning Event
This is referring to a situation or
environment where an individual learns.

an

Content
This is the information that has been structured
and encoded into text or multimedia materials
or any other means and appears to be useful
knowledge and details for users.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

iii)

Context
This is the set of circumstances that are relevant
for the learner to view knowledge when
referring to content.

Interactive 3D multimedia allows two-way
interaction with multimedia course material, another
computer, or another user with direct response to the
input, as opposed to one-way communication from TV,
video, and other non-responsive media involving 3Dimension objects or even text. Interactive attributes
commonly include data or text entry, mouse input, touch
screens, voice commands, video capture, and real-time
interaction.
An interactive multimedia system is a
communication system making sense by means of a
plurality of codes, e.g. text, graphics, sound, images and
video - a sense that can not be produced separately by a
single code. Furthermore the physical influence of the
system has to be an intended and integrated part of the
semantic system. It is a multimedia system in which
related items of information are connected and can be
presented together.

3.1 Interactive 3D Virtual Multimedia Helps in
Teaching and Learning
Interaction is a must in order to enhance motivation,
communication, and an assorted range of skills and
intellectual development in the distance educational
process [9].
In conclusion, it is clear that 3D interactions with
multimedia elements allow the learners to develop their
understanding faster than in a normal classroom. The
user interface is one of the most important parts as all
interaction is done using it, and therefore it must be
intuitive, understandable, easy to use, and all
functionality needed by the user must be accessible with
it [2]. Furthermore, the use of computer training tools
where student interacts with a computer model is
inexpensive, remote and good feedback [1].

3.2 Interactive 3D Virtual Multimedia
Application Helps in Biology Education
3D analytical approach is especially useful in
determining the fundamental molecular events a webbased, visually-oriented system that allows efficient
querying of gene expression [6]. The embracement of 3D
virtual interfaces is becoming more widespread
nowadays [7]. The implementation of VRML is a very
efficient and powerful method for conveying molecular
models over the net. In molecular science 3D
impressions and conceptions are elementary in order to
transfer and understand further complex structural
information. [10]. Multimedia has the capability of
providing bioscience education novel learning
environments and literacy applications to boost student

interest, involve students actively in the research process,
improve their critical thinking and problem solving
skills, and develop conceptual, clearly and thoroughly
understanding of biological topics.
Besides, multimedia also enables students to assess
their own understanding with immediate guided
feedback. This guided feedback encourages students to
reevaluate their analysis and data interpretation by
directing them back to their problems or where the
mistakes occurred, which makes use of cyclical
(repetitive) learning and effectively sharpen students’
problem solving skills. Multimedia is becoming an
important tool for faculty in the biological sciences due
to some conceptual and functional of educational
complexity that in fact cannot or very hard to be
conveyed appropriately by using traditional teaching
methods [8]. The 3D structure of such complex
conformation is very crucial in many vital biological
mechanisms, like replication, transcription or regulating
[5].

4. System Design
Systems design is the process or art of defining the
hardware and software architecture, components,
modules, interfaces, and data for a computer system to
satisfy specified requirements. One could see it as the
application of systems theory to computing. Some
overlap with the discipline of systems analysis appears
inevitable. [4]
Object-oriented analysis and design methods are
becoming the most widely used methods for system
design. The UML has become the standard language
used in Object-oriented analysis and design. It is widely
used for modeling software systems and is increasingly
used for designing non-software systems and
organizations.

Figure 1 System Flow Chart

Figure 2 3DiC Index Page

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

In animation page, the system provides several processes
such as:
i) Structure of Cell
ii) Process of Mitosis and Meiosis
iii) Process of RNA Synthesis Transcription, Protein
Synthesis Translation and DNA Replication.
This page enables the users to comprehend about the
several processes through these embedded 3D
animations. Users are allowed to download the animation
for further viewing and learning purposes. Users are free
to turn on and off the audio option as preferred.

5 Discussion and Future enhancements
5.1 System Strength
Figure 3 3D Interactive Page
3DiC page provides the virtual cell that enable users
to interact with it while learning. When users click on a
certain part of the cell, a popup window with a detail
description will be displayed. Besides, users are able to
zoom in to see the components inside the cell. Users are
allowed to download the VRML file here for further
viewing and studying purposes. Besides bacteria, there
are 3 more virtual cells provided here which include the
virus cell, animal and plant cell.

i)

ii)

4.1 Animation Page

iii)

iv)

Figure 4 Animation Page

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Easy access
This Interactive 3D Multimedia Learning Tool in
Biology was developed as an online web-based
system which allows the users to access the
system from anywhere and at anytime they want.
User-friendliness
The system was developed using VRML which
works well with the Internet Explorer browser and
Cosmo Player. Explanation of the ways of using
and implementing the Cosmo Player are provided
on the website. Thus, the Graphical User Interface
(GUI) provides users with an easy environment to
work on. A standard set of GUI control objects
such as command buttons has been applied.
Furthermore, users only need to click on links and
menu buttons available on the site without keying
any command or value.
Interactive 3D Multimedia
The information is delivered using an interactive
3D multimedia environment. This way of
information delivery is interesting and easy to
attract the user’s attention. Multimedia elements
such as animation, audio, image and text are the
main aspects that have been embedded into this
system, thus provide a fun and enjoyable learning
environment for users.
Well – stored Data in Database
There is an administrator login page where
administrators are able to add new admin
members, view and update their records. An
administrator’s role here is that they are
dynamically able to view and delete user records,
add new questions into the tutorial questions bank
and also view as well as update feedback sent by
users. The database is protected with a password
and the security of this system is guaranteed.

5.2 System Limitation
i) Limited information
The topic only focuses on biological cells and
processes. Dull and limited information are
provided on the site.
ii)

No interactivity between users and users
The system provides only interactivity between
users and the system but no interactivity
between users themselves.

iii)

Heavy interactive 3D VRML files
Some of the interactive 3D files on the site
exceed 10MB which are considered huge or
heavy for a web-based application.

5.3 Future Enhancement
i)

ii)

iii)

Widen topics
Topics can be expanded to cover all the topics
covered by syllabus for upper secondary
schools’ students. More quick tips and useful
information can be provided in more interesting
way in order to help learners in exam as well as
retrieving the knowledge effectively.
Create forum
Either a chat room or a forum can be created to
enable users to interact among each others.
They can share their knowledge and opinions
online and form a discussion group to make the
site more interactive and improve the learning
curve.
Improve in modeling techniques
More effort can be given during modeling
process where each and every single step in
modeling should be taken into account. For
example, avoid using too much polygons and
extended primitives in order to reduce the
VRML file size after the models been exported
from 3D Studio Max. Editing meshes on the
lesser primitives the better.

Conclusion
In conclusion, it can be said that the Interactive 3D
Multimedia Learning Tool in Biology has met its
objectives as a 3D Virtual Reality application with
various multimedia elements for educational purposes.
The system is easy to learn and use, yet interesting, fun
and attractive to capture the attention of students.
The entire development of this system was not an
easy task. However, with the proper selection and use of
software used, it has helped to expedite the development
process thus made the development process much
simpler. 3D Studio Max was used for the modeling and
animation part. While the phpMyAdmin Database

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Manager has made the work of data storing faster and
less complicated.

Acknowledgements
This system was developed by Chin Siaw Khim and
Heng Yee Leng. There were final year students at the
Faculty Computer Science & Information Technology,
University Malaya in 2005.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]

Adolfo Guzman & Leonid Sheremetov. 2000,
‘Applying EVA to tailored virtual, distance, on-line
education via Internet’, IEEE.
Anja Le Blanc, Bunt J. & Kwok Y. 2005, ‘The Virtual
Learning Space – An Interactive 3D Environment’,
ACM.
Antonio Dias de Figueiredo. 2005, ‘Learning Contexts:
a Blueprint for Research’. Interactive Educational
Multimedia, no. 11, pp. 127-139.
B. Bob, O. Allen, S. Marc San, S. Bruce, R. Venkatesh,
GemStone Systems, Inc. Persistant Java Objects in 3
tier architectures. retrieved January 8, 2006, from
http://www.sunlabs.com/forest/com.sun.labs.pjw3.4_pd
f.pdf#search='system%20architecture%203%20tier'
Herisson J., P.-E., Gros, Ferey N., Magneau O. &
Gherbi R. 2004, ‘DNA in Virtuo: Visualization and
Exploration of 3D Genomic Structures’, ACM.
Kristina A.C., David B.K. & Michael R.E. 1999, ‘The
genetics of cancer – a 3D model’. Nature Genetics
Supplement, vol. 21.
Marsh T. 1999, ‘Evaluation of Virtual Reality Systems
for Usability’. CHI '99 extended abstracts on Human
factors in computing systems, pp. 61-62.
Susanne M.B. Paige West J. & Walter E.B. 2002,
‘Cancer Cell Biology: A Student-Centered Instructional
Module Exploring the Use of multimedia to Enrich
Interactive, Constructivist Learning of Science’, Cell
Biology Education, vol.2, pp. 35-50.
Tarusikirwa, M.C. 2004, ‘Technology for Instruction in
Distance and Open Learning: Experiences from
Matebeleland North Region, Zimbabwe’, Malaysian
Online Journal of Instructional Technology, vol. 1, no.
1.
Vollhardt H. & Brickmann J. 1995, ‘3D Molecular
Graphics on the World Wide Web’. World Scientific
Publishing.

