The Research About Xuan-Paper Model in the Simulation of Chinese Painting
Xiujin Wang, Jizhou Sun
School of Computer Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, 300072
{wxiujin@tju.edu.cn }
Abstract
The xuan-paper modeling, the most basic problem in
Chinese painting simulating, is explored in this paper.
An effective thickness xuan-paper model is presented.
The important influence of paper thickness to water
holding and water transmitting is considered; also the
complexity of mathematic solving caused by 3D paper
model is avoided. The experimental results demonstrate
that the model is simple and effective, and the model can
simulate the different quality xuan-papers by controlling
the corresponding parameters. The effective xuan-paper
model establishes the foundation for simulating of water
and ink moving in future.
Keywords: Chinese painting simulating, xuan-paper
model, paper cell; effective thickness

1. Introduction
NPR has become the important research branch of
graphics, and the simulation of Chinese painting is one
of the problems which are paid great attention.
Generally, Chinese painting simulating methods
include two kinds, which based on physics modeling and
simulating the special art effects. In the paper, physics
modeling is focused. And the important influence of
xuan-paper model to Chinese painting simulating is
explored.
Some works have been reported by building the
paper model. Kallmes[1] showed the microstructure of
paper. Lee[2-3] constructed the paper fibre as a sine
wave shape. Yu[4] simplified the fiber connecting model
and considered the paper included three layers: the
surface layer, the absorption layer and the deposition
layer. HUANG[5] divided the paper into 2D grids on the
plane, and each grid mapped a pixel on the screen.
Nelson S.-H[6] also constructed the paper as 2D grids
and thought the paper included surface layer, the flow
layer and solidify layer. YU[7]and Sun[8] took the paper
cell as the minimum unit of the paper, a pixel might map
several paper cells, and many adjacent paper cells
constituted fibre regiment, the fibre regiments were tied
by fasciculus.
Although the above researches imitated the paper
structure in a certain extent, and the simulations of water
and ink moving based on these paper models have got
results, there are still some problems. The paper structure
was so complicated that the huge calculation measures
were paid and very tiny results were gotten. Also, the

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

multilayer paper structure didn't consider the influence of
the paper thickness to painting result.
Aimed at the above problems, this text puts forward
a xuan-paper model which calculates thickness to the
painting result. The quality of paper can be controlled.
The paper model will build a reasonable, credible and
high effective foundation for the simulation of water and
ink motion.

2. Xuan-paper structure
2.1. The function of xuan-paper in Chinese
painting
When the four treasures of the study are mentioned,
we always say writing brush, ink stick, ink slab and
paper. The order shows that the xuan-paper, the carrier of
Chinese painting, was not paid enough attention just like
brush and ink. Many facts have indicated that the xuanpaper takes the most basic and important function in
Chinese painting effect forming. Figure 1(a) is a painting
draw with brush. Figure 1(b) is a finger painting on
xuan-paper. Although there is no brush to draw, the
Chinese painting effect and lingering charm is nowise
inferior to the painting draw with brush. That shows that
the special structure of xuan-paper is quite important to
painting.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1 Chinese painting work [9]
(a)A painting draw with brush (b) A finger painting

2.2 A few basic concepts about xuan-paper
structure
•

Paper fibre element
Enough small physical volume of the paper fibre
in 3D, whose water capacity is unit water, is called a
paper fibre element. The volume is ΔV= Δx × Δy ×
Δz, where Δx= Δy = Δz.
• Paper cell
Dividing the paper plane into enough small area
with the exact square gridding, there is Δx =Δy for
each area (the Δx and the Δy take the same value
with Δx and Δy in paper fiber element definition).
Each square which has the same area is called the
paper cell, and it is the minimum unit that constructs
the paper.
• The thickness of xuan-paper
Figure 2 and Figure 3 show the 3D paper
structure given by Holmstad[10]. When taking the
direction, which is perpendicular to the paper plane
and along the thickness direction of paper, as the z
direction, the thickness of paper in z direction
includes two parts: paper fibres and pores.
Paper thickness = NΔz + MΔz
NΔz is the length of paper fibre elements in the
z direction. The MΔz is the length of the pores. Just
because of the existence of the pores, the xuan-paper
has loose characteristic. The paper fibre element has
the adsorbing ability for the water, and the pores
allow the water to move along the paper fibre
elements.

allows water to seep to the paper fibre elements of
bottom layer from upper layer due to gravity. So the
ability of keeping and transmitting water can be
described by the length of fibre in z direction (called
the effective thickness of the paper).
Effective paper thickness = NΔz
The effective volume of the paper cell (x,y) is
V(x, y).
V(x, y) = Paper cell area × Effective thickness
=（Δx×Δy）×(N（x,y）×Δz)
= N(x, y) × ΔV
So the effective volume of the paper cell can be
expressed as the quantity of the paper fibre element
that paper cell contains, and the quantity also is the
biggest value of storing unit water. It is called the
water capability of paper cell.
The effective thickness of paper takes a value
which distributes random in the certain range.

2.3 The effective thickness and the motion of the
water and ink
A number of experiments prove that the effective
thickness of the xuan-paper directly influences the
motion of the water and ink and finally affects the
texture effect of the painting. Figure 4 is the handwriting
of the water and ink drawn on the xuan-paper whose
paper fibre elements distribute unsymmetrically. The
seeping range on the place where the effective thickness
is smaller (paper fibre is more sparse) is less than the one
on the place where the effective thickness is bigger.
Therefore, the effective thickness of the paper should be
considered in describing the properties of paper cell and
the xuan-paper.
The area where the effective
thickness is smaller

Figure 2 The 3D structure of the paper
Figure 4 The influence of the effective thickness
to seeping effect

3 The static attributes of the paper and the
paper cell
3.1 The static attributes of the paper cell
Figure 3 The distribution of fibre and pores in z
direction (black expresses fibre and white
expresses pore)
•

The effective thickness of xuan-paper
The paper fibre element is the carrier of water.
The pore in the z direction can’t keep water, but it

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

On the paper surface, the area of each paper cell is
equal, and it is decided only by the resolution property of
the paper. So there are two static attributes to describe
the paper cell.
• Position: The two dimensions coordinate of
paper cell;

•

Effective thickness: The water capacity of paper
cell.
When the two parameters are used to describe the
static attributes of paper cell, the effective thickness is
considered of playing important role in holding and
transporting water and ink. When taking the effective
thickness paper model, the complexity caused by 3D
paper model is avoided.

3.2 The static attributes of the paper
Many paper cells that have different static attributes
construct the paper. The area and effective thickness of
the paper cell is closely related with the attributes of the
paper. The static attributes of the paper include:
• Resolution: The paper cell doesn’t map to
screen pixel one by one. Maybe 2×2 cells or
even more cells map a pixel;
• Measure: The size of the paper;
• Average effective thickness: This attribute
follows the principle of "the overall situation is
consistent, the local is random".
• The maximal water capacity;
• The minimal water capacity.

4 The xuan-paper model and its building
4.1 The effective thickness xuan-paper model
The xuan-paper model given by the text is shown as
figure 5. Each square means a paper cell. The numeral
marked means the water capacity or the ability of
keeping water of the paper cell and is written as the N(x,
y). When N(x, y) =0 means that the paper cell is empty,
The empty paper cell doesn't contain the paper fibre
element, neither keep nor transmit water. When the N(x,
y) takes a bigger value, it indicates that the paper cell has
stronger ability of keeping water. The ability of seeping
and absorbing water changes with the water content
variety.

Figure 5 Xuan-paper model

4.2 The method of building effective thickness
model
The papers with different qualities and the different
painting effects can be imitated by adjusting the scale of
N and the distribution regulation of N(x,y).

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

The water capacity of the paper cell on the paper
plane distributes random but it satisfies to the Stat.
regulation. The problem of constructing xuan-paper used
to carry water and ink translates into the generating of
the random water capacity of the paper cell on the plane.
In the paper, a method, which is called transform
sampling method, in common used to generate random
number is adopted. The pseudocode are as follows:
Proc GenerateRandN (N,O)
//N is average effectivethickness
//O is maximum offset to the average
For each i,j
r1 ← Rand ()

r2 ← Rand ()
N (i, j ) ←

1 i, j
∑ N (m, n) + O × −2 ln r1 × cos 2π r2
3 m =i −1, n = j −1

EndFor
End Proc

5 The analysis about the simulating result
5.1 The water and ink motion model
•

The porous media and the mechanics of fluids
in porous media[11]
The fluid flowing through the porous media is
called seepage. The porous media means the object
which can be divided into a lot of tiny cubages.
Solid and fluid are included in each small cubage.
The solid is called "framework", and the part filled
with fluid is called "pores". The volumes of all
pores connected together are called "effective
pores". The fluid can flow continuously from one
point to anther in the effective pores.
The mechanics of fluids in porous media is a
branch of the fluid mechanics, and it studies the
regulation of fluid moving in the pores. Soil is one
kind of porous media.
• The effective xuan-paper model and the porous
media
The aqua of water and ink is adsorbed by the
paper fiber elements or moves along the paper
fibre elements. It is similar to the liquid moving in
porous media, especially in soil.
According to the structure of porous media,
the gridding used to comminute paper fibre
element is taken as the virtual framework of the
paper. They neither share the volume nor
metamorphose. The water and ink move along
these paper fibre elements. The quantity of water
contained by one paper fibre element is called unit
water. Map to 2D effective thickness xuan-paper
model, the water capacity of each paper cell is
corresponding to the size of the effective pores.
So the theory of the mechanics of fluids in
porous media can be used to build water and ink
motion model. Based on the thery, the equation of
water motion on horizontal plane is :

∂θ ∂ ⎡
∂θ ⎤ ∂ ⎡
∂θ ⎤
D(θ ) ⎥ + ⎢ D(θ ) ⎥
=
∂t ∂x ⎢⎣
∂x ⎦ ∂y ⎣
∂y ⎦

(1)

In which θ is moisture content, D(θ) is
seepage conductivity and is the function of θ. The
empirical equation is written as:
D (θ ) = D0 e − β (θ0 −θ )

(2)

The ink motion includes two parts: the
convection caused by the water moving and the
molecular diffusion caused by the Brownian
movement. The ink convection is the key factor to
form Chinese painting effect. The equation of ink
motion is:
∂(θ c) ∂ ⎛
∂c ⎞ ∂ ⎛
∂c ⎞ ∂ ( qx c ) ∂ ( q y c )
=
D (θ )
+
D (θ )
−
−
(3)
∂t

⎜
∂x ⎝

s

⎜
⎟
∂x ⎠ ∂y ⎝

s

⎟
∂y ⎠

∂x

∂y

c is The concentration of ink. Ds(θ) is
diffusion coefficient and its value is far smaller
β sθ

than D(θ). Ds (θ ) = D0 ae .
The equation of water motion and the equation
of ink motion can be solved independently.

5.2 The dynamic attributes of the paper cell
When the paper receives the water and ink, the static
attributes of the paper cell keep constant, but the
dynamic attributes should be described deeply. Before
reaching balance, these attributes change continuously.
• The actual quantity of water
• The quantity of appendiculate ink
• The quantity of active ink
• The position marking(inside the outline, on the
outline, others)

5.3 The simulating result
The effective xuan-paper model presented in this
paper and the water and ink motion model based on the
mechanics of fluids in porous media are used to imitate
the Chinese painting effect. Some results are obtained
and shown as figure 6 , Figure 7 and Figure 8.

shorter. As a result, the seeping area is symmetrical
and narrow. The result is shown as figure 6(b).
• The paper fibre distribute uniformly, average
effective thickness is lesser(N=400,O=10)
Because the average water capacity of the paper
cell is lesser, the moisture content of the paper cell
inside the original outline is easy to reach saturation
for the same quantity of water, even a water supply
source will form. The holding ability of the paper
cell for water is weaker. The difference of the
moisture content between the inside and the outside
of the outline is bigger. The water and ink will move
to the outside of the boundary through the paper
fibre elements easily. The existence of the water
supply source makes the travel path long. As a result,
the seeping area becomes symmetrical and wider.
The result is shown as figure 6(c).
• The paper fibre distribute non-uniformly
(N=400,O=100)
The effective thickness difference of the paper
cells is bigger at this time.
There are two kinds of paper cell at the place
where paper fibre is sparse: the paper cell whose
effective thickness is smaller and the empty paper
cell. The former’s water capacity is lesser and the
quantity of water and ink passed to the neighboring
paper cell by it is also lesser. It makes the ability of
passing water and ink to neighboring paper cell
weaker. The travel path of the water and ink is
shorter, and the seeping margin is narrow. The
empty paper cell does not have the ability of holding
and conducting for the water and ink, so the water
and ink can only round the empty paper cells to
move.
At the place where the paper fibre distribution is
dense, there is no empty paper cell and the value of
water capacity is bigger. The water and ink can
move through these paper cells more easily, the
seeping margin is wide.

5.4 The analysis about simulating result
When the water and ink act on the xuan-papers
which have different attributes simulated by controlling
the distributive regulation of effective thickness, the
different seeping effects can be got. The parameters are
D0 =0.8,β=0.02,α=1.
• The paper fibre distribute uniformly, average
effective thickness is bigger(N=800,O=10)
Because the average water capacity of the paper
cell is bigger, the possibility of the moisture content
of the paper cell inside the original outline tending
to saturation is smaller. The holding ability of the
paper cell for water is stronger. The difference of the
moisture content between inside and outside the
outline is smaller. Although a certain quantity of
water and ink will move to the outside of the
boundary through the paper fibre elements, the
motion is well-proportioned and the travel path is

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

(a)

(d)

(b)

(c)

(e)

Figure 6 Simulating results
(a) The original handwriting (b)The paper fibre elements
distribute symmetrically, moisture content is small and ink
concentration is high. (c)The paper fibre elements distribute
symmetrically, moisture content is bigger. (d)The paper fibre
elements distribute unsymmetrically, moisture content is bigger.
(e)Multi-handwriting stack

6 Conclusion
This text explores the characteristic of xuan-paper
by building physical model. The effective thickness
xuan-paper model given by the paper calculates the
important influence of paper thickness for the painting
effect and also avoids the mathematic complexity caused
by 3D paper model. The experiment proves that the
effective xuan-paper model is resultful and is simple. It
can imitate the xuan-paper which has different density
characteristic by controlling the related parameters. It
laid the solid foundation for further simulating the
moving regulation of water and ink.

References
Kallmes and H. Corte. The structure of paper in the
statistical geometry of an ideal two dimensional fiber
network[J]. The Tappi Journal, 1960,43(9):737 -752.
[2] J. Lee. Diffusion rendering of black ink paintings using
new paper and ink models[J]. Computers& Graphics,
2001,25:295-308.
[3] J. Lee. Simulating oriental black-ink painting[J]. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Application, 1999,19(3):74-81.
[4] Young Jung Yu , Do Hoon Lee. Interactive Rendering
Technique for Realistic Oriental Painting[J]. Journal of
WSCG, 2003, 11(1): 538-545.
[5] The Shengwen Huang, the Der Lor Way, Zen chuang
Shih. Physical-based model of ink diffusion in Chinese
ink paintings[J]. Journal of WSCG, 2003, 10(3):520–
527.
[6] Nelson S.-H. Chu Chiew-Lan Tai. Real-Time Ink
Dispersion
in
Absorbent
Paper[J],
ACM
TRANSACTIONS ON GRAPHICS, 2005, 24(3):504511.
[7] Yu Bin. Simulation of Diffusion Effect Based on
Physically Modeling of Paper in Chinese Ink Wash
Drawing [J]. JOURNAL OF SYSTEM SIMULATION,
2005, 17(9): 2305-2309.
[8] Mei-jun Sun, Ji-zhou Sun, Bin Yun. Physical modeling
of Xuan paper in simulation of chinese ink-wash
drawing[C]. CGIV 2005, 26-29 July 2005, Beijing,
China. IEEE Computer Society 2005. 317-322.
[9] PAN Tianshou. Paintings By PAN Tianshou. Beijing:
People’s Fine Arts Publishing House, 2004-7: 350-351.
[10] Holmstad, R., Antoine, C., Nygård, P., Helle, T..
Quantification of the three –dimensional paper structure
–methods and potential[J]. Pulp and Paper Canada, 2003,
104:(7):186-189.
[11] LEI Zhidong, YANG Shixiu, XIE Senchuan. soil-water
dynamics. Beijin: Tsinghua University Press,1988.10.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 7 Simulating calligraphy
(a) The original handwriting (b) The simulating result of (a)
when ink concentration is lesser. (c) The simulating result
when ink concentration is bigger.

[1]

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 8 A simulating work

