Conceptual Design: An Operational Prescription for a Computer Support System
Oren Shapir, Gabriela Goldschmidt and Abraham Yezioro
Faculty of Architecture and Town Planning. Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
{oshapir@inter.net.il, gabig@tx.technion.ac.il, ayez@tx.technion.ac.il}
Abstract
A prescription for a computer based support system for
conceptual design is presented. The necessary
components needed are listed, and their implementation
in a complete system is shown. Combining the
components with the right balance among them is the key
to a successful transition of today's conceptual design
phase, using pencil and paper, to a computer based
system. This work presents ConceptUdraft, a computer
system built using this prescription. It allows the creative
freedom of freehand 2D and 3D sketching the designer
habitually relies on, assists that creative process and
elevates it to a higher degree of visualization and
interaction. The system developed may contribute to the
quality of design and the speed with which conceptual
design matures into a feasible new object.

1. Introduction
Fast development of Computer Aided Design (CAD)
systems for the last 40 years and the huge demand for
better products with a shorter time to market, made the
design process almost totally computer dependent.
Bearing in mind that the first stages of the design
process, which incorporate a collection of background
material, analysis and production of preliminary sketches
of ideas - are most important and have the greatest
impact on the final product, we should have had many
computer systems by now that support the conceptual
stages of design - Computer Aided Conceptual Design
(CACD) systems. Surprisingly enough, we do not.
Today we still do not have a comprehensive system
that allows a designer to start using it as soon as a new
design task is launched. Major initial tasks include
incorporating data and information collected before and
during the conceptual design process and sketching ideas
in 2D and 3D, which are combined into one or more
spatial representations of the object being designed. The
object could be of any type and scale, be it a chair, a car
or even a house. A support system should assist the
designer throughout the conceptual design process using
existing databases of information relevant to the project
at hand.
Conventional CAD and 3D design systems are
widespread these days. Some of these systems are
marketed as supporting the conceptual design phase, but
in reality they are intended to assist the designer in the

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

detailed and accurate stages of the design process and in
the presentation and production of the final object. They
are not effective in supporting the first stages of analysis
and conceptual design [1, 2].
Although a lot of work has been done over the years
towards creating CACD systems, most of the research in
this area focused on one aspect of the problem (e.g., two
handed input, converting a 2D sketch to 3D, etc. [3, 4, 5]
or on one feature (shape recognition, gesture based
manipulation etc. [6] that should be incorporated into
such a system. The IDEATE research project described
in Stuyver and Hennessey [7], and Ullman [8] who
described how a modern design environment should
function in the year 2010, are welcome exceptions.
Analyzing conceptual design as an activity
performed using pencil and paper and translating this
manual operation into a sophisticated CACD system
without crippling the design process on the way, is the
path we took in order to create our prescription of a
CACD system. ConceptUdraft, a CACD system
developed using the complete prescription (see
acknowledgements), allows the designer to work freely
and uninterruptedly with the system. The designer can
start using the system from the moment the task is
initiated, during background material collection and
through the entire conceptual design phase. At present
the system mimics the look and feel of a physical work
environment of a designer and the manual tools used in
the design process, due to the lack of available
comprehensive alternative computer based tools in the
market. Future development will allow the system to
offer advice to the designer, create 2D and 3D
representations of the design collaboratively, and support
seamless integration into CAD/CAM systems for team
collaboration and manufacturing.

2. The search for prescription components
The search for the right prescription components
must start with an investigation of the way conceptual
design takes place today. Only by understanding why
conceptual design is being carried out the way it does,
can we make sure we will not miss vital components in
our prescription of a CACD system.

2.1. The conceptual design process – the primacy
of sketching
The conceptual design process starts as soon as the
designer receives the design task. At that time he or she
starts collecting information about the problem at hand relevant codes and regulations, ergonomics data, social
and economic information, technical data, precedents,
and so on. Soon thereafter or even in parallel to data
collection, most designers start sketching on paper, using
a pen or a pencil. Sketch creation is an integral part of
the conceptual design stage and most designers adopt
this method as their main mode of thinking [9, 10, 11].
The reasons for that rest with the nature of sketching
which allows for fast and rule-free scribbling as well as
manipulation of the sheet of paper on which one works
by rotating, folding, flipping or cutting it in the process
of designing. These possibilities are believed to support
creativity [12].
From the cognitive point of view, there are more
reasons for sketching during the conceptual design stage:
generating, clarifying and testing new ideas; enhancing
imagination and perception [13]; predicting the
consequences of manipulations done on a representation
and thus enhancing the abilities of the mind to imagine
and evaluate candidate designs [14]; capturing ideas and
clarifying the design problem [15]; allowing a free flow
of thoughts, and tolerating vagueness which prevents
fixation [16]. All this is achieved while only a low
cognitive load is imposed on the designer, while
expanding his or her capacity to use short-term memory
[17]. This means that the lower the amount of cognitive
resources (perceptual, memory and sensor-motor) that
must be invested, the better for the design process: the
designer will concentrate most of his efforts on the
design itself, rather than system requirements that must
be dealt with.
However, the single most important aspect of a
design process using sketching at the conceptual phase is
an uninterrupted dialog between the designer and him or
herself and between the designer and the object that is
being designed [18]. Such an ongoing dialog includes
checking and feedback - from an image in the mind to an
image on paper and vice versa, through an inspection of
the sketch and the reading of new information off it [19].
This method of dialog through sketching requires
minimal effort because of its speed and the lack of need
for accuracy or completion of sketches. This allows the
designer to focus on the design problem rather than on
technicalities of the representational system.
During the design process the designer is not limited
to the use of only one type of representation, namely
sketches. Other types of representation can serve as
concept triggers, references, or background for sketches.
The most common types of representation used beside
self-generated sketches are texts, photographs, drawings
(all types of maps, floor plans, perspective drawings etc.)
and 3D objects. Although these representations can be
found in many a place (books, journals, internet, picture
albums, etc.), most of the time the designer uses some

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

kind of photocopying device to transfer them to a sheet
of paper. The goal is to create handy 2D background
material that may be overlaid with a semi transparent
sheet of sketching paper. Using 'imported'
representations as background templates for sketches
accelerates the process and allows for an examination of
alternatives without the need for re-sketching from
scratch each time. Incorporating underlying images is
possible only by using semitransparent sheets of paper,
which creates a distinction between layers of paper (a
little washed out) containing different versions of a
sketch. Stacking several semi-transparent sheets of paper
is possible, thus allowing fast and effortless action.

2.2. Physical characteristics of the conceptual
design process
The design process, which is embedded in an
action/reaction type of work, includes the creation of
sketches; visual feedback from those sketches; and the
processing of this feedback in the mind, which in turn
generates new (reverse) feedback that is channeled back
into the process of designing. The use of paper and
pencil enables the fast creation of a sketch and instant
visual feedback from it; continuous cycles of this nature
enable smooth progress. There is a direct visual
connection between the movement of the drawing tool
on the sheet of paper and perceived feedback from the
same sheet of paper: the designer does not have to move
his or her head and hands to seek visual feedback
elsewhere.
The designer manages to achieve direct
manipulation and feedback by assigning the "work" to
two hands, allowing one (the dominant hand) to be in
charge of the actual design creation while the eyes are
focused on the drawing surface. The other hand (the nondominant) assists the creation without interrupting it.
Such division of the work load is based on three rules:
a. The scope of action is different – the dominant
hand operates relative to the space where the nondominant hand operates [20].
b. Both hands operate at different scales and at
different frequencies. (The non-dominant hand operates
at a larger scale and at a lower frequency than the
dominant hand) [21].
c. The non-dominant hand operates ahead of the
dominant hand [21].
For example, during sketching, the non-dominant
hand enables the designer to position and rotate the sheet
of paper in a way that helps the dominant hand operate
better and faster [22].

3. Specifying components for a wellbalanced prescription
Specifying each component in the prescription for
creating a computer system for conceptual design must
be dealt with using utmost caution, lest one of the most
negative aspects of such a prescription - cognitive load -

will dominate it and render the system unsuitable for its
purpose by crippling the design process.
When using a computer system attention must be
dedicated to system requirements: series of commands
that translate the user's intentions into a 'language'
comprehensible to the system [23]. This translation
which is in fact a secondary, unnatural task, takes too
long and results in less attention to the primary task:
designing. Therefore the first and most important
principle to be embedded in a CACD system prescription
should be:
(i) Do NOT disturb the design process by cutting
the line of thought via the imposition of performance of
system-oriented tasks. The design process should
progress at its own inherent pace, without disruptions,
delays or accelerations due to system operation
requirements [24].

3.1. Physical interface
Lack of adequate direct physical feedback from the
design tool to the designer is one of the characteristics of
today's computer based design systems. In manual work
with pen and paper, the mere contact of the nondominant hand with the sheet of paper allows for
movement and rotation with no obligation to shift the
center of attention from the design itself to peripheral
zones. Also, the direct creation of the manual sketch
allows for the essential dialog between the designer and
the evolving sketch.
Another characteristic is the lack of two-handed
interfaces for computer systems. Even where such an
interface exists, it is not congruent with the natural and
instinctive way of using both hands (see section 2.2).
There are three main reasons for using two hands while
designing with a computer system: (a) parallel work shortening the time each hand works to finish a task; (b)
distributed tasks enable each hand to travel less (moving
the cursor on the screen); and (c) dependent relationship
between the two hands - one hand helps the other, which
reduces the overall work load. Much research was
carried out on the subject of two-handed interface in 2D
and 3D design systems [20, 22, 25, 26]. All researchers
came to the conclusion that a computer system would
benefit from a two handed interface if it could be used
intuitively and in a manner similar to the way we use two
hands in other tasks in daily life. Clearly, achieving
fluency requires practice and cannot be expected to be
instantaneous. Following that, two new components to
the prescription were added:
(ii) A physical interface which allows for direct
manipulation and feedback from the virtual interface. A
CACD system based on such interface reduces the
amount of attention needed to perceive the current state
of the design and allows the uninterrupted and direct
generation and manipulation of sketches by the designer.
(iii) A two handed interface based on a hierarchy by
dominance of the hands, mutual dependability and
different scales and frequencies of operation, carried out
in an intuitive, natural manner.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

3.2 Virtual interface
Today's virtual user interface in computer systems
requires considerable distributed attention. Most work
screens in design software are divided into several areas:
(a) menus - at the top of the screen; (b) information lines
- at the bottom of the screen; (c) toolbars - at the left and
right sides of the screen; (d) work area - what is left in
the middle of the screen. In most 3D design tools, this
area is itself divided into a few subparts, dedicated to
different viewpoints of the object. According to
Kurtenbach et al [27], two main problems arise from the
screen division: (a) the actual work area left to the
designer is very small, especially when compared with
the area taken up by menus and toolbars. This forces the
user to pan and zoom at a very high frequency, which
disturbs the continuity and uninterrupted use of feedback
during the design process; (b) the cursor must be
repeatedly shifted from the work area to menus and
toolbars, thus distracting the designer and interrupting
the design process.
The problem of divided attention between the design
area and support areas (menus, toolbars etc.) has a
negative influence on the quality of interaction between
the designer and the computer system [28]. In most CAD
systems, the user interface stands between the user and
representations of the designed entity. The user must
conform to the requirements of the interface by using
those menus, toolbars, etc. in the correct sequence to
perform manipulations on models or images, as opposed
to manual sketching in which manipulations are done
directly on the representation of the designed entity, with
no filtering between the two.
The last two components must therefore:
(iv) CACD systems must support the direct
manipulation of models or images, be they sketches or
any other type of representation used in the process of
designing. They should work alongside the designer and
the sketch, and not stand between them.
(v) The user interface must have minimal to no
impact on the designer's working area, avoiding the use
of menus, toolbars etc. in the system, thus allowing the
designer to stay focused on the design itself.

4. The complete prescription
The complete prescription is embedded in the
ConceptUdraft system. ConceptUdraft integrates almost
all of the components mentioned above into one
complete operational solution for conceptual design
support using a computer system. ConceptUdraft allows
the free, direct and uninterrupted flow of design activity
by a combination of a physical and a virtual interface.
The combination allows the direct manipulations of
design representations with both fresh and re-visited
sketching sheets as well as different types of other
images (photos, texts, 3D objects etc.) imported into it.
ConceptUdraft is based on a vector system that allows
for further inclusion of virtual tools to enhance the
design process, such as information based support

systems and auto-generated 3D model representations
out of 2D sketches.
Figure 1 is a diagram of the complete prescription.
In the lower part, the bottom double-box of each vertical
string compares the features of ConceptUdraft with
currently available state of the art commercial or
prototype (research) systems intended for the conceptual
phase of the design process. The rest of section 4 is a
detailed presentation and explanation of the major
features of ConceptUdraft.
At this development stage, the prescription tries to
map the actual manual way of work at the conceptual
design stage onto a computerized environment, since this
is the desired way of keeping in track of the design ideas
development. Future development will allow for a more
comprehensive integration with different computerized
resources, so they can be embedded more effectively on
the design process (a few temporary alternative routes
had to be taken in order to overcome hardware, time and
resource shortcomes: some extended assistance modules
and complex 2D to 3D conversions will be executed in
the future).

4.1 Physical interface

Prescription

The designer who uses the system should have a two
handed direct manipulation hardware interface in order
to input the sketches, manipulate the data in the system

and get direct feedback from it. Such hardware interface
is not commercially available at present, but overlaying
two products can give the desired. The use of a Wacom
Cintiq 21.3" LCD digitizer overlaid by a touch screen
enables the designer to create and manipulate a sketch
using a digital pen with the dominant hand, while the
touch screen allows for the non dominant hand to
manipulate the working area, assisting the dominant
hand. Such a prototype device (using a tablet pc overlaid
by a touch screen) was shown to work satisfactorily [29].
Due to the lack of a commercially available device
ConceptUdraft was built around a digitizer tablet that
allows for simultaneous two-handed input: the dominant
hand uses a digital movement-pressure-angle-inclination
sensitive pen and the non-dominant hand uses a
movement-rotation sensitive mouse. Both work on the
same tablet surface - a Wacom Intuos II A3.
A partial solution to the lack of direct visual contact
with the design tool (the designer looks at the computer
screen where the sketch is displayed whereas the design
tool is on the tablet) is provided by a virtual 3D model of
the design tool (pen, pencil etc.). The tool is represented
on the virtual interface (screen), thus allowing the
designer to keep looking at the sketch and getting visual
feedback from the virtual design tool (Figure 2).

Figure 1: The complete prescription - diagram.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

4.2 Virtual interface
The virtual interface is divided into two main parts:
(a) Project management module (Figure 3) consists of a filing system and a list of projects, summary
information and a worktable pictogram for each project.
(b) Design module (see Figure 4) - the virtual
worktable on which the process of research and design
through sketching and other data integration takes place.
4.2.1. Project management. The project
management module allows the designer to manage
projects under folders. Each project is a new worktable
consisting of all sketch sheets and other data types. The
module is designed for simple and direct use - no menus
or sub-menus. Information input is done using a
keyboard, handwriting recognition or a virtual keyboard.
(handwriting recognition is yet to be implemented in
ConceptUdraft).
4.2.2. Design module. The design module consists
of one screen. The work area is shaped after a real
designer's work environment, as follows:
The semi-transparent sheet of paper (B in Figure 4)
is the main object in the work area. It contains sketches
as well as other optional representations such as pictures,
texts and 3D objects, if the designer brings them in. Any
number of sheets of paper may be placed on the work
surface at any given time, thus allowing for tracing over
other sketches or over pictures or 3D objects on other
sheets of paper whenever the need arises. Sheets of paper
are controlled by the non-dominant hand which moves,
rotates, flips and folds them (flipping and folding are yet
to be implemented in ConceptUdraft).
Each sheet has a title bar (Figure 5) that allows to:
remove it from the work area by pressing a button (A);
throw it into the garbage bin (B); change its title (C);
stamp it with the time of its creation (D) or its last
revision (E); change the opacity level (F) and the
background color (G); fixate the sheet to the work
surface to prevent its movement (H); and a 'link sheets'
facility used when sheets are to move/rotate together (I).
Sketching on sheets of paper is done using the
dominant hand, which holds the digital pen. Lines
created in freehand sketching have the properties and
looks typical of the tool used to create them. For
example, the marker generates soft lines that get thicker
and more opaque as the user presses harder on the
digitizer surface with the digital pen. A selection of
drawing tools (pen, pencil, markers etc.) permits a
faithful simulation of manual sketching on regular paper
using different tools (see Figure 6).
Similar to sketch lines, entities such as photos, text
and 3D objects can be placed freely on the sketch sheet,
allowing the designer to use them as background for
sketching, extra sources of additional information, or as
any other resource (see Figure 7).
Managing and editing objects (be they sketch lines
or other representations) involves two steps:
(a) Selecting an object - sketch lines, photos, texts
or 3D objects. There are two selection options: 1) when
one line is picked, a group of interlinked lines is

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

automatically selected. Interlinked lines are those lines
produced by the pen without lifting it off the digitizer; 2)
a group of lines may be encircled by drawing a line
around them while pressing a button on the digital pen:
this interlinks them for the purpose of editing. Selecting
photos, texts and 3D objects is done the same way.

Figure 2: A 3D virtual design tool (pen) - as
feedback indicating the physical tool's location
and inclination.

Figure 3: Project management module screen Available folders (A); project in a selected folder
(B); extended information on the selected
project (C); a pictogram representing the work
(D); folder manipulation (E); project
manipulation (F); entry into the design module
and exit from the system (G).

Figure 4: Design module screen - Background
(A); sheet(s) of paper (B); the last sheets of
paper, removed from the work area - pictograms
at the top (C); extra module tabs (D); undo and
exit buttons (F and E).

Figure 5: Sketch sheet title bar.

Figure 6: Different sketch lines.

Figure 7: (left to right) Photo editing; sketch
lines; text; 3D object.

Figure 8: Pie menu.

Figure 9: The tool chest: a) pen; b) pencil;
c) thin marker; d) wide transparent marker;
e) text tool; f) add a new sketch sheet; g) color
palette; h) palette of last colors used.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

(b) Editing - Using hot spots on the corners of
selected objects, the designer can arrange and edit the
selected objects by dragging hot spot corners and using
simple gestures (hot spots and gesture recognition are yet
to be implemented in the system). Another option is the
translucent pie menu that pops up on the selected object
(see Figure 8). Using pie menus instead of regular pulldown/pop-up menus shortens the distance the pen must
travel in order to select commands, thus allowing the
designer faster selection. An experienced user has to
remember only the pie-slot position of each commandicon. This is made easy by the circular arrangement of
the icons. Pie menu icon arrangement is identical for
each object type to allow for easy, almost automatic, use
of pie menus. Pie menus appear on request, and as such
they represent part of the design process. They are the
tool that permits manipulations of the sketch, as done in
a manual sketching process where the designer extends
his hand to pick the eraser, or another similar task. The
advantage of the pie menu over the “traditional” GUI
Windows based menus on the top, is that they appear on
request, semi-transparently over the sketch to allow for
direct manipulation and keeping the designer's focus on
the sketch itself and not on the tools.
Two-handed input in this system allows the
dominant hand to sketch without interruption while the
designer focuses on the design and not on moving,
rotating, flipping or folding the sheet of paper.
Furthermore, in this system the non-dominant hand
controls a toolchest that contains different drawing tools
and sheets of paper (Figure 9). When the designer wants
to change a drawing tool, the non-dominant hand moves
the toolchest to where it is wanted on the sheet of paper –
again, allowing for less interruption of the sketching
process and less movement of the eye away from the
sketch.
There are more tools controlled by the non-dominant
hand that assist the dominant hand: a) scale ruler with
different scales for the purpose of measuring and
drawing straight lines (see Figure 10); b) background
grids (see Figure 11); c) eraser that acts like a regular
eraser by turning the digital pen upside down and erasing
(see Figure 12).

Figure 10: Scale ruler.

Figure 11: Grids - options are selected from the
pie menu.

Figure 12: Stages of erasing sketch lines with
the eraser: a) flipping the digital pen to the
eraser end; b) erasing while pressing on the
digitizer button; c) lifting the digital pen from
the digitizer - sketch lines are erased.

Figure 13: Module tabs: a) information;
b) reference material; c) sketch notebook;
d) trash bin.
4.2.2.1. Extra Module Tabs. During the design
process hundreds and even thousands of sheets of paper
are created and archived. In order to manage this vast
amount of information and accommodate it as well as
information imported from other sources, a new visual
archiving metaphor which allows for a natural and fluent
use of the resources is required. Conforming to the
folder/files metaphor of the operating system UI would

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

not allow for a fast retrieval of the visual and non visual
information needed for the design and would shift the
designer's attention from the images he or she needs to a
list of folder/files to be memorized.
In order to allow the designer to use the desired
information as fast as possible the support information is
divided into six separate sections that reside on the
desktop as small tabs, accessed by tapping the
appropriate module tab on the left side of the work area.
This opens it over half of the current work area (see D in
Figure 4). The metaphor corresponding to manual
sketching is desk drawers, where normally the designer
archives the background material. So while in the
“actual” physical environment, the designer draws the
material from drawers, in the virtual environment this
material is drawn from the tabs.
In its present version, ConceptUdraft has four
implemented module tabs (see Figure 13):
a) Information - general information and
specifications regarding the object being designed. It is
normally created by the designer himself and allows him
to keep track of the design description, client related
information, etc;
b) Reference material - every piece of background
material (photos, maps, texts, 3D objects etc.) that the
designer has collected before and during the design
process;
c) Sketches - a sketch notebook that contains
pictograms of all sketch sheets ever created in the
project. The notebook facilitates finding older sketches
with the help of a search engine, yet to be implemented;
d) Trash bin - contains all the sketch sheets thrown
into the trash bin for possible retrieval later, or reference
material that at some point the designer may dispose of.
Two additional modules are to be implemented in
later versions of the system (not yet implemented and not
shown in Figure 13), namely:
e) Index - a general index of sketch sheets of all the
projects in the system which allows the designer to
access material from his other projects. The index also
allows for an accurate material search by keywords, type,
dates etc.
f) Interactive WWW search engine that
automatically fetches visual and non visual 2D and 3D
information relevant to the project at hand, by using
keywords taken from the project information tab and
keywords which were entered as noted on the sketch
sheets themselves. This tab also allows for manual and
semi-automatic information search using conventional
search engines.
To use the information and objects in the reference
support module, the designer has only to drag it to a
sheet of paper for further processing. Information (text,
pictures, 3D objects, etc.) is not erased by dragging it
from place to place; it remains stored for future use until
deliberately deleted by the designer. The retrieval of
deleted or archived sketch sheets is realized by a simple
point-and-click on the corresponding pictogram.

5. Using the completed prescription
The process of learning to use this new tool is
expected to be as simple as it is to draw with a pen on
paper, literally. No special skills are required from the
user other than using his two hands and a pen. The only
techniques he/she needs to learn are the following: a)
executing the interface; b) browsing the list of projects
and choosing which one to activate; c) creating sketches;
d) using the support material; and e) operating the tablet
pen.
At the present stage of development of
ConceptUdraft, the expectations from the systems are
largely fulfilled.

6. Summary
Only by investigating the actual conceptual design
process and its reliance on sketching, using paper and
pencil, and by understanding the fundamental advantages
of this manual design strategy, can we start thinking
about ways in which a computer system for conceptual
design should function. A good understanding of the
process is vital in order to focus on proper ways in which
a computer system might enhance the design process.
Uninterrupted freehand sketching is fundamental to
conceptual design processes. It enables direct
manipulation of design images and feedback from
external representations, thus supporting the dialog
between the designer and the designed entity.
Furthermore, using two hands during the conceptual
design phase helps maintain a continuous dialog by
allowing the dominant hand to focus on sketching while
the non-dominant hand assists in maneuvering the work
area and various design tools. Using semi-transparent
sheets of sketch paper allows for the incorporation of
other types of representation such as photos, maps, texts,
perspective views and other sketches - as background for
sketching or faster evaluation of alternatives.
A comprehensive computer system is proposed for
the conceptual design stage: ConceptUdraft. The
ConceptUdraft system, shaped according to the
prescription presented, avoids the traditional user
interface, found in practically every CAD system, which
consumes too much of the designer's precious cognitive
resources by forcing a rigid and linear workflow to suit
the system's 'understanding'. The proposed system has a
physical interface that supports direct manipulation and
two handed design, whereas most CAD systems conform
to the use of a single handed interface - a mouse - or at
most the use of the keyboard as a second hand support.
ConceptUdraft shows that the prescription for a
computerized conceptual design system, as presented in
this paper can be achieved. Also, instead of suffering
from the transition to a computerized system, the process
rewards its user in many ways. These include better
incorporation and management of sketches and other
representations; faster retrieval of alternatives and
inspection of past sketches; and an integrated platform
for design assistance modules that work in parallel to the

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

designer's progress rather than after the design has been
completed. The paper shows that the traditional
computer interface is not suitable for a conceptual design
support system. CACD systems must allow the designer
to focus on the design itself, on the sheet of paper, with
no distraction caused by the need to attend to system
requirements.
ConceptUdraft is a working prototype CACD
system that allows the designer to make the move from
traditional pen and paper to a computer system without
constraining the design process and with the added
benefits of design support modules. As a platform for
real time assistance components, the system can accept
new modules for real time retrieval of design information
from the internet or other information databases,
evaluation modules (ergonomics, structural analysis,
building codes, energy consumption, etc.) and 3D
extrapolation modules, to allow for automatic 3D sketch
creation from 2D elevations. User acceptance, usability
and satisfaction will be tested in further stages of the
system's development.

Acknowledgements
This paper is based on the first author's Master's
thesis at the Technion (including the development of
ConceptUdraft) under the supervision of the second and
third authors. The research involved and the writing of
the paper were partially supported by grants to the latter
authors from the fund for the promotion of research at
the Technion, hereby gratefully acknowledged.

References
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

S.N. Pollalis, Towards the Automation of Conceptual
Design, in A. Tzonis and I. White (Eds.) Automation
Based Creative Design – Research and Perspective,
Elsevier Science B.V. 1994.
H. Lipson, Man-Machine Interface for 3D CAD Based
on Freehand Sketching, Research Thesis, Israel Institute
of Technology, Haifa, 1998.
Takeo Igarashi, Satoshi Matsuoka, Hidehiko Tanaka,
"Teddy: A Sketching Interface for 3D Freeform Design"
ACM SIGGRAPH'99, Los Angeles, 1999, 409-416.
Shigeru Owada, Frank Nielsen, Kazuo Nakazawa, Takeo
Igarashi, "A Sketching Interface for Modeling the
Internal Structures of 3D Shapes", Proceedings of 3rd
International Symposium on Smart Graphics, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Springer, Heidelberg,
Germany, July 2-4, 2003, 49-57.
Takeo Igarashi, John F. Hughes, "A Suggestive Interface
for 3D Drawing ", 14th Annual Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology, ACM UIST'01,
Orlando, Florida, November 11-14, 2001, 173-181.
Takeo Igarashi, "Freeform User Interfaces for Graphical
Computing", Proceedings of 3rd International
Symposium on Smart Graphics, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, July
2-4, 2003, 39-48.
R. Stuyver and J.M. Hennessey, A Support Tool For The
Conceptual Phase Of Design, People and Computers X,
Edited by: Kirby, MAR, Dix, A.J. and Finlay,

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

Cambridge, J.E.,Cambridge University Press, 1995, pp.
235-245.
D. Ullman, The Foundations of the Modern Design
Environment:- An Imaginary Retrospective, in N. Cross,
K. Dorst and N. Roozenburg, (Eds): 1992, Research in
design thinking, Proceedings of a workshop meeting held
at the Faculty of Industrial Design Engineering, Delft
University of Technology, The Netherlands, 1992, pp.
61-73.
A. Pipes, Drawing for 3-Dimensional Design: Concepts,
Illustrations, Presentation, London, Thames and Hudson,
1990.
B. Lawson, Design in Mind, Oxford, UK, Butterworth
Architecture, 1994.
N. Cross, Natural intelligence in design, Design Studies,
20(1), 1999, 25-39.
G. Goldschmidt, Read-Write Acts of Drawing, or - The
Economy of Treasure Hunting, TRACY Contemporary
drawing
issues,
2002,
http://www.lboro.ac.uk/departments/ac/tracey/somag/gab
i.html.
N. Negroponte, On Being Creative with Computer Aided
Design, Information Processing, 77, 1977, 695-704.
J. Fish and S. Scrivener, Amplifying the Mind’s Eye:
Sketching and Visual Cognition, LEONARDO 23(1),
1990, 117-126.
P.A. Rodgers, G. Green and A. McGown, Using Concept
Sketches to Track Design Progress, Design Studies
21(5), 2000, 451-464.
M. Puttre, Gearing up for Conceptual Design,
Mechanical Engineering, March 93', 1993, 46-50.
D.L. Jenkins and R.R. Martin, Applying constraints to
enforce users' intentions in free-hand 2-D sketches,
Intelligent Systems Engineering autumn, 1992, 31-49.
D.A. Schön, The Reflective Practitioner, New York,
Basic Books, 1983.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

[19] G. Goldschmidt, The Dialectics of Sketching, Creativity
Research Journal 4(2), 1991, 123-143.
[20] K. Hinckley, R. Pausch, D. Proffitt, J. Patten and N.
Kassell, Cooperative Bimanual Action, ACM CHI'97
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
1997, 27-34.
[21] Y. Guiard, Asymmetric Division of Labor in Human
Skilled Bimanual Action: The Kinematic Chain as a
Model, Journal of Motor Behavior 19(4), 1987, 486-517.
[22] R.C. Zeleznik and A.S. Forsberg, Two Pointer Input For
3D Interaction, Brown University site of the NSF
Science and Technology Center for Computer Graphics
and Scientific Visualization, 1997.
[23] T. Igarashi, S. Kawachiya, S. Matsuoka and H. Tanaka,
In Search for an Ideal Computer-Assisted Drawing
System, INTERACT'97 (The Sixth IFIP Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction), Sydney, Australia, 14-18
July, 1997, 104-111
[24] M. McCullough, Abstracting Craft – The Practiced
Digital Hand, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1998.
[25] P. Kabbash, W. Buxton and A. Sellen, Two-Handed
Input in a Compound Task Proceedings of CHI ’94,
1994, 417-423.
[26] W. Buxton and B.A. Myers, A Study in Two-Handed
Input, CHI 86, 1996, 321-326.
[27] G. Kurtenbach, G. Fitzmaurice, T. Baudel and W.
Buxton, The design of a GUI paradigm based on tablets,
two-hands and transparency, Proceedings of CHI ’97,
New York, NY, 1997, 35-42.
[28] T. Baudel, A Mark-Based Interaction Paradigm for FreeHand Drawing, ACM-SIGGRAPH and SIGCHI, Proc.
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology (UIST), 1994.
[29] Y. Ka-Ping, Two-Handed Interaction on a Tablet
Display, Proceedings of CHI '04, 2004.

