How Psychophysical Perception of Motion and Image relates to Animation
Practice
Carol MacGillivray
Thames Valley University, UK

Keywords and phrases --- Psychophysical,
Animation Principles, Uncanny Valley.

animation it would be true to say that: ‘What you see is
not what you get’. Every animator knows that his or her
art lies in the lacuna between what an audience sees and
what it perceives.
It is generally accepted that there are three
fundamentals required for animation: images, motion and
time. As a teacher of animation, I have spent some time
analyzing animation and searching for a comprehensive
theory that includes all the work I regard intuitively as
animation. This paper works on a new, updated
definition of animation; a definition that allows for the
film artwork of Bill Viola and Sam Taylor-Wood, the
abstract films of Norman Mclaren and Oskar Fischinger,
the iconic cartoons of Disney, Warner Brothers and the
anime of Mamoru Oshii, the mixed media of Jan
Svankmajer and the Brothers Quay; it encompasses the
editing experiments of Eisenstein and the photo
montages created by Eadweard Muybridge and Jules
Marey and it also allows for modern computer SFX and
Motion Capture. This new definition for animation is:
‘Sequenced manipulated images of motion in time’.
Without manipulation; we have film-making in its purist
sense and without sequencing in time; we have fine art in
its purist sense.
Using this definition, the goal of this paper is to
analyse image and motion in popular animation using a
psychophysical paradigm to explore the gap between
what an audience sees and what it perceives.

1. Introduction - W.Y.S.I.N.W.Y.G.

2. Image

Animation is not a genre nor can it be defined by its
process such as Computer 3D, Cel or Claymation. It is a
medium that sits at the cusp of film-making and fine art.
Any search for a definition of ‘Animation’ throws up
definitions that are various and frequently cumbersome
yet still manage to be so narrow and process-specific that
they exclude areas of animation both new and old.
Typically it is defined as ‘The making of Animated
Cartoons’ [2] with an Animated Cartoon being defined
as ‘A film made by photographing a series of cartoon
drawings to give the illusion of movement when
projected in rapid sequence’. [3] Such a definition would
exclude not only Computer animation but also the
myriad of other ways animation artists have sought to
fool us into seeing something that isn’t there. For with all

Images in animation span three areas, the ‘real’, the
abstract and the iconic. [4]

Abstract
This paper investigates the difference between
seeing and perceiving in animation. It analyses
character design in the light of experiments in face
recognition, in particular how iconic a character can be
in design. It discusses whether a universal theory can be
applied and if caricatures are really ‘super-portraits’
that echo how brains recall faces.
The psychophysical perception of motion in
animation is analysed in the light of animation principles
such as ‘squash and stretch’ and ‘isolation’. Using made
and found examples, the paper looks at how signature
movement and animation principles are now being
supplemented or even supplanted by motion capture and
posits what this means for animation in the future.
The paper maps popular animation characters
within two specially designed triangular charts for image
and for motion. It analyses the resulting images in terms
of perceived and received information, looking
particularly at the region of empathic connection coined
by Dr Masahiro Mori as the ‘Uncanny Valley’. [1] By
examining the different empathic demands motion
capture makes on an audience it reaches the conclusion
that both image and motion must be treated
symbiotically for full analysis to be achieved.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 1. Image Chart

All animated subjects from Mclaren’s scratched
lines on film emulsion to Sam Taylor Wood’s time-lapse
film of fruit rotting in a bowl to the iconic Mickey
Mouse 1 could be slotted onto the triangular chart shown.
Reading up the line from Iconic to Abstract we
would find it inhabited by animated logo’s and symbols,
so beloved of advertising, Mrs Potts the dancing teapot
in Beauty and the Beast, the Magic Carpet in Aladdin,
the Disney Flour Sacks and the writhing mathematical
3D shapes of William Latham. Reading down from
Abstract to photorealism we would find it peopled by
characters from Monsters Inc, Chris Landreth’s Ryan,
Disney’s Seven Dwarfs, Star Wars’ derided Jar Jar Binks
would sit next to the much lauded Gollum from Weta’s
Lord of the Rings. In many cases characters from the
same film would be spread over the Image Chart;
consider how different the idealized but realistically
proportioned Snow White looks against the strongly
caricatured Dwarves.
Reading along the bottom line of the chart from left
to right and again using a non-exhaustive cast of famous
animated characters to illustrate, we can clearly define an
area on the chart that popularly corresponds with
Masahiro Mori’s ‘Uncanny Valley’.

Figure 2. Mapped Image Chart
Dr Mori is a roboticist who developed his theory in
the 1970’s. He coined the term ‘Uncanny Valley’ to
explain how although we increasingly empathise with a
robot the more it resembles a human being (as in C-3PO
from Star Wars) if the robot becomes too human our
compassion plummets and we feel uncomfortable. Mori
contended that we find the small differences eerie and
the robot’s unresponsive mimicry of humanity
unnerving. (This theory immediately preceded the
breakthroughs in 3D CG animation that allowed
prototype humans to be animated in a live action setting,
and was capitalised on in the Terminator films.)
1

So iconic that it has been claimed that Mickey Mouse may be
the most recognizable symbol of the US after the Stars and
Stripes flag. Here I have created an iconic version using US
dimes and 50 cent pieces. The circular underpinnings of many
early cartoon characters were often made by drawing around
coins. For copyright reasons, I have not redrawn Mickey
himself.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Mori developed his theory to posit a methodology in
designing robots that avoided the Frankenstein monsters
and zombies that dwell in the Uncanny Valley.

Figure 3. Mori’s Uncanny Valley Graph
The Uncanny Valley as a theory has been neither
proved nor disproved, but it certainly seems worth
considering in terms of how we perceive animated
images - in particular as any development in 3D
Computer graphics seems to be driven by the desire to
create characters so human they can supplant flesh and
blood actors. Of course CG has already been used to
replace some actors in parts of many films, (in the film
series of Pirates of the Caribbean and Harry Potter to
name but two) but the Holy Grail as envisaged by Final
Fantasy and Polar Express is to eliminate the actor’s
corporeal presence entirely. (The desirability of
achieving this utopia is beyond the remit of this paper,
but it is worth pointing out that actors would still be
needed for their star quality and voices, and animated
characters come carrying their own baggage as the legal
team for Walt Disney Productions put it:
“Mickey Mouse and his various friends are performers
and salesmen who serve without pay. They work at all
hours, whenever called upon. They are not
temperamental and they need no union card. They need
no food, no transportation, no lodging. But one thing is
certain – they need a lawyer!”) [5]
As the Uncanny Valley deals with a measure of
empathy, it would not be surprising if the edges of where
it sits were blurred, with discrepancies from individual to
individual. Much of the criticism of Polar Express and its
characters so called ‘uncanny coldness’ came from
currently practicing animators – the question is, does it
exist to a greater or lesser extent for everyone? If the
Uncanny Valley does exist as a universal theory, its
origins must lie in the psychophysical perception of the
viewer, and to examine this we must first examine all of
the images in the chart from a psychophysical
perspective.

2.1. Psychophysical perception of images
The developmental psychologist Robert Fantz
wanted to establish whether newborns had an innate
ability to perceive certain forms, such as faces. For his
published research on infant form perception in the early
1960’s, [6] Fantz compared a new-born baby’s response
to drawings of faces versus scrambled patterns of similar
shapes. He established that newborns could differentiate
and favor the forms patterned like faces. Remember that
these were not photo realistic images he showed the
infants but iconographic and simplistic drawings
approximating a face akin to the picture below.

The closest approximation we have to photo-realism
in animation is images created in 3D graphics. To use an
example from web graphics: Which button would you
want to push? [7]

Figure 6. 2D and 3D buttons

Figure 4. Iconic Face
Other experiments suggest that children can
recognize their mother’s face the same day they are born:
When shown slides of their mother and a stranger, and
allowed to keep one slide up by sucking faster on a
pacifier, new-born babies would favor the mother. This
seems to indicate that our ability to recognize faces, even
at their most iconic, is hard-wired from birth.
We also appear to be hard-wired to see faces in the
most abstract of images – this is called ‘Closure’ and
refers to our tendency to complete a figure or face so that
it has a consistent overall form. The human desire to
form recognizable shapes, even with minimal visual
cues, is powerful, and almost involuntary. Perhaps this is
an adaptation of a survival instinct to distinguish
predators hiding in bushes, but wherever it came from,
this type of passive closure is often seen as an animator’s
best friend, allowing suggestion to carry a viewer and let
them imbue character into more than is on the screen.

Figure 5. Faces in everyday objects
If appreciation of iconic and abstract images is hardwired into us from a young age, what of photo-realism?
Obviously we inhabit a ‘real’ world, and we are
surrounded by real images. We are naturally drawn to the
real as it is easier to receive its message; we can
understand it without the need of specialized knowledge
to decode its meaning. It is a universal received
language whose message is interpreted instantly.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Audiences and producers have certainly embraced
the world of 3D CG animation with open arms, and the
idea that this may also be a hard-wired part of our
perception is borne out by further research by Robert
Fantz who found that babies preferred to gaze at threedimensional rather than two-dimensional objects.
That all areas of our animation chart seem to be
covered by innate, hard-wired psychophysical perception
may well account for animations near universal appeal,
but we need to examine how that perception is handled
by our brain if we want to explore Mori’s Uncanny
Valley theory further.
We can recognize a myriad of objects, file them
away access them (fairly) instantly and interpret the
essence of them meaningfully. For instance we have no
trouble (if ‘T’ is in our alphabet) in recognizing the Tness of T in a whole variety of forms every day of our
lives. [8]

Figure 7. The T-ness of T
Here is something that we can do and computers
cannot (a crucial difference exploited by private sites for
use as encryption). We can pick the T out in all these
ways and any number of others – even if we have not
seen this version of T before. That we can do this is
because when we perceive an image, we separate it out
from any background noise, we look for similarities and
contrasts and create closure. But the fact that we can
access this perception from a ‘T’ file in our brains is the
avenue this paper will explore.

2.2. Caricature and Perception
In 1949, a psychologist Jerome Bruner [9] used a
tachistoscope to flash pictures of cards on a screen for
very short intervals, he discovered that subjects
misperceived cards that did not fit their knowledge and
expectations. For instance, a red six of spades would be
misperceived as a normal six of hearts. From this, Bruner
drew the conclusion that perceptual learning builds up

mental categories. Experiences are then sorted into these
categories. Since observers had no category for a red six
of spades; they saw it as a six of hearts.
If we keep our perceptions in files or categories,
what’s written on the file heading? Are we
subconsciously deciding that all the images above belong
in an ‘alphabet’ file, subcategory ‘T’? If so, how is it that
we can extrapolate a ‘T’ we have never seen before? And
why do we mistake a red six of spades for a six of
hearts?
It is easy to demonstrate that there is a difference
between perception and reality. If I present to you this
upside down image of the UK’s longest running prime
minister, what do you see?

Figure 8. Thatcherised Blair
Does Tony Blair look happy to you? Now look at
the image upside down. What you think you see is in fact
what you perceive. [10]
What’s going on here? A number of cognitive
psychologists have conjectured after experiments in object
and face recognition that when we lay down a memory of a
face so that we might recognize it again, we not only
eliminate background noise, but we also exaggerate

qualities in the face to help us to file it. The category in
which we file an image of Tony Blair would be accessed
along a contextual neural pathway – eg: Politician - UK Iraq war - smiles a lot - husband and father etc. It might
well be filed under a personal ‘approval’ or ‘dislike’ list,
but the actual image we store is a caricature. We don’t
remember every part of Tony Blair’s face and lay down a
photo-realistic image; we remember a cartoon of Tony
Blair, or as cognitive psychologist Gillian Rhodes has
coined it a ‘Superportrait’. [11]
From the idea of the Superportrait and the fact that
we remember people as caricatures it is easy to
extrapolate that we might create a psychophysical
paradigm for everything we perceive as an image –
hence the mistaking of a red six of spades for a six of
hearts and our understanding of the T-ness of T.
Perhaps one of the reasons that animated images and
drawn cartoons are so appealing is that they cut straight
to the chase neurologically speaking. The caricature is
already made for us and we delight at the way it chimes
with our filed image. That we can happily accept both
caricature and photo-realism is evident, so why would
images that approximate reality cause disturbance?

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

There is no doubt that some facial images are
disturbing – anyone who has ever taken a picture of half
a face and flipped it to create perfect symmetry would
recognize that queasy feeling, or when television and
magazines combine famous faces to create a
‘Frankenstein monster’ celebrity; again there is that
uncanny feeling of disturbance. Or, to take a real life
example, the uneasiness and disbelief we feel when we
meet a person for the first time who bears a great
resemblance to someone we already know. Is it that we
are experiencing a conflict between our laid down
caricature and the image before us?
Although this might offer up an argument for not
pursuing photo-realism in animation, there is another,
stronger reason: It has been argued that the more iconic a
character is, the more we empathize with it as we can
translate either ourselves or others onto the character.
The blanker the canvas, the easier it is for us to overlay a
character with our own Superportrait. Marshall McLuhan
talks of an audience’s non-visual awareness; of how we
don’t observe characters, we become them. [12]
This idea of empathy brings us back to Mori’s
Uncanny Valley. Mori’s graph (Figure 3) shows that he
places even more emphasis on movement than on image.
Again the world of film has exploited the disturbance we
feel when confronted by robots or beings that look
human, but behave wrongly. Think of how disturbing we
find the ‘boy’ David is in the first reel of Spielberg’s
A.I., Yul Brynner in Westworld or the blonde, implacable
children of Village of the Damned. This paper contends
that images alone are not the whole story: We clearly
also need to examine the movement of animated
characters to get the full perceptual picture, as our
perceptions of motion also carry a powerful
psychophysical subtext.

3. Psychophysical perception of Motion
One reason we find the illusion of reality created by
the static images of trompe l’oeil fascinating and the
children in Polar Express chilling is because animation is
not about image alone, it is also significantly about
movement. Norman McClaren famously said: [13]
‘It is not important what goes on each frame of film;
it’s the spaces between frames that are important.’
And it has been observed as an object of wonder that a
film audience doesn’t walk out in disgust given that most
of what they are paying to see is ‘a load of blanks’. For
the fact that an audience stays seated, we can thank
persistence of vision or the ‘Phi’ phenomenon.
The Phi phenomenon describes the brain’s ability to
provide ‘inbetweens’ allowing us to tolerate these gaps
and bring continuity to our perception by providing an
illusion of movement although there is none actually
there. A good animator relies on this phenomenon either
consciously or subconsciously to economize on work and
maximize impact.
Motion in animation cannot be discussed without
referring to the twelve animation principles first
espoused by the Disney studios in the 1930’s and still

going strong today. An updating of the principles by
translating their application to 3D computer animation
was explored by John Lassetter in his much cited 1987
Siggraph paper.
The first and generally acknowledged most
important principle is that of ‘Squash and Stretch’.
Lasseter discussed this principle not just as a desirable,
indeed essential principle for animating facial movement
but also for the way squash and stretch and overlap can
be used by an animator to relieve the disturbing effect of
strobing that happens sometimes in depicting very fast
motion. This occurs if the distance an object moves
between frames is so fast that there is no overlap and the
eye begins to perceive separate images. There are a
number of ways an animator would deal with this
problem – in computer animation we would add blur, in
model we would never move an object beyond its
previous silhouette and, as Lasseter indicates, in drawn
animation we would stretch the figure.
Incidentally this has led to one of the great
animation fallacies; the myth of how a bouncing ball
should be depicted in animation. Again and again
animation books show a side-view diagram of this
motion that approximates the figure here (this is taken
from Lasseter’s paper):

Figure 9. Lasseter’s bouncing ball
I think all animators would agree that a ball should
squash on impact and stretch as it springs back, but why
on earth should a ball be so suddenly affected by gravity
as it approaches the ground that it is stretched out of
shape? This runs contrary to common sense, physics and
observed motion. I can only assume that the idea arose
from drawn cel animation and the need to eliminate
strobing. However if a bouncing ball is animated with
the squash and stretch only motivated by contact with the
ground and subsequent follow through, the movement is
very much improved. That the squash and stretch and the
height of the bounce would decrease with each bounce as
the ball’s energy is absorbed by the surface is basic
physics. With a nervous nod to animator’s far more
skilled than I, I have illustrated the way I believe an
animated ball should bounce. (Figure 10) 2
2

It is also a good idea to make contact with the ground for
three frames as this gives the bounce extra snap to go with the
squash and stretch. (Chuck Jones uses this technique for
improving the animation when Wile E. Coyote nose-dives into
a cliff)

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 10. MacGillivray’s bouncing ball
Quibbles of bouncing ball fallacies aside, the fact
that the twelve animation principles have stood the test
of time and have been adapted successfully to new
methods of animating such as 3D CG means that they
underpin most animator’s work today every bit as much
as they did the animation on Disney’s first feature Snow
White and the Seven Dwarfs a lifetime ago. The twelve
are:
1. Squash and Stretch
2. Timing
3. Anticipation
4. Staging
5. Follow Through and Overlapping Action
6. Straight Ahead Action and Pose-To-Pose Action
7. Slow In and Out
8. Arcs
9. Exaggeration
10. Secondary Action
11. Appeal
12. Personality
Looked at from a psychophysical angle there are
good arguments for at least one other principle; that of
‘Isolation’. Isolation refers to centralizing a character and
their movement. If one character is gesticulating wildly
in a scene, you don’t want another to join in or the
viewer’s eyes will shift away from the main action. We
are hard-wired to detect movement as a survival instinct.
If something moves on the periphery of our vision; we
need to know, ‘Is it food, or does it think I am?’ The
edge of the human retina is only sensible to movement
and because detailed visual information can only be
obtained by the concentrated nerve endings in the centre
of the retina, an animator who works extra hard moving a
lot of characters around at the edge of the screen is
wasting his or her time, worse still, they may be
distracting from the main action. (Claymation or model
animation, where more than one animator works on a
scene at a time, is particularly susceptible to this cf.
Aardman’s Claymation film Chicken Run)
Viewers of animated films not only accept that still
images move, they also happily accept that elephants can
fly, giant apes scale the Empire State Building and
sponges have personality. They unconsciously aid

animators create the illusion of life by looking for
narrative and characters they can empathize with. As
with film, audiences can immerse themselves in a twodimensional experience enhanced only by sound. They
can, in short, suspend their disbelief. Is it not the very
essence of illusion that it should be incomplete? To quote
the film theorist and perceptual psychologist, Rudolf
Arnheim:
‘In order to gain a full impression it is not necessary
for a film to be complete in a naturalistic sense - all
kinds of things can be left out which would be present in
real life so long as what is shown contains the
essentials.’
The example Arnheim gives is of viewing a black
and white film; how if all the color were to be drained
from our world we would be shocked, yet audiences
have happily participated in and enjoyed the spectacle of
black and white films such as Citizen Kane and the 1933
film of King Kong. (They also managed to empathize
with heroes and heroines of the golden age of silent
movie such as Chaplin’s Tramp or The Perils of
Pauline.)
There is a strong overlap between a live action film
and an animated film, in fact it could be argued that
animation is a more tangibly creative and formative
medium than film, it is closer to fine art and it deserves
to be treated with the same respect as an art form. A
work of art is not simply an imitation or selective
duplication of reality, but a translation of observed
characteristics into the terms of the medium. Perhaps
those animation principles are there for a reason.

3.1. Defining movement in animation
The way an animated character moves is often
dictated by the way it is designed visually. So in
mapping motion onto a triangular chart as we did for
image, we would expect to find a parallel distribution.

Figure 11. Motion chart
The points of the triangular chart for movement are:
Signature Movement, (where a character’s movements
are as defining as its image – such as the South Park
characters, Road Runner and Samurai Jack) Abstract
Movement, (movement driven by an abstract source
such as music or data), and Life Quality (movement that

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

feels real). The Motion chart demands rather more
explanation in a paper as it is harder to illustrate.
Reading up the line from Signature Movement to
Abstract Movement there are some parallels to those on
the Image chart, the dancing hippos of Fantasia would
segue into the more abstract music-driven sequences
from the same film and certainly McClaren and Latham
are near the top, but Aladdin’s carpet, Mrs Potts and the
Disney Flour Sacks (who all sat on in the middle of the
Iconic/Abstract line on the Image Chart) contain so many
animation principles in their movement and have such a
strong ‘Life Quality’ that they move closer to the middle
of the bottom line.
Reading down from Abstract Movement to Life
Quality we would still find Ryan, and almost all quality
SFX such as Spiderman, and Jurassic Park alongside all
of the everyday uses of ‘forensic’ SFX on television.
However, Gollum, and Jar Jar Binks accompanied by a
large cast of characters from Lord of the Rings and Star
Wars would all be banished to the line that runs between
Signature movement and Life Quality. Instead, bearing
in mind the definition of animation as ‘Sequenced
manipulated images of motion in time’, we would find
visual filmic effects such as backwards motion and stopframe live action on the line.
So now let us examine the bottom line in more
detail. The first question to answer is why ‘Life Quality’
at the end of the triangle, and not motion capture. Motion
capture is where an actor’s movements have been
recorded on sensors then transferred to a 3D model - this
is how Polar Express and Final Fantasy were animated.
Enhanced Motion Capture follows the same process but
animators have animated on top of the captured motion.
This was how Gollum was animated for Lord of the
Rings; indeed practically all of Gollum’s facial animation
was done by animators using film of actor Anthony
Serkis’ performance as a guide. So good was the
animation that there was some debate as to whether
Anthony Serkis should be nominated for an Oscar for his
performance, so it is safe to say that this character was
extremely well animated. A similar technique was used
for King Kong, where again Anthony Serkis’
performance in creating the great ape’s actions was
recorded by motion capture, but Weta’s animators
enhanced the movements by applying animation
principles to exaggerate the sheer mass and weight of
Kong.
Figure 12 illustrates an example drawn from work
by TVU student, Grant Garvin. Here Garvin drew a stick
figure over some live footage of a man lifting and
throwing a heavy weight to simulate motion capture. He
then overworked the footage using animation principles
such as Squash and Stretch and Follow Through.
Garvin made a series of these simple, quicksketched animations of stickmen performing various
tasks and without exception the animated version looks
more ‘real’ than the motion capture: There is a better
sense of weight and movement, and both animators and
non-animators alike agree that the second version has a

better ‘Life Quality’ than the one merely drawn over live
footage.

Figure 12. Motion Capture versus animation
It is for these reasons that I have moved beyond motion
captured ‘reality’ to Life Quality or enhanced motion
capture on the far right of the chart.
Reading from left to right on the motion chart to
encompass all motion between Signature Movement and
Life Quality we find the cast runs almost parallel to that
of the Image chart:

Figure 13. Mapped Motion chart
There are new additions that have been bumped
from other areas (like the Flour Sacks in the middle) and
the left hand side would be considerably more crowded
with the work of Fleischer, Warner Brothers and Hanna
and Barbera crowded together with the early version of
Mickey Mouse. (The later Mickey, who is more iconic
visually but anodyne in terms of movement would shift
further towards Life Quality) We can see that Mori’s
Uncanny Valley still maps over a roughly similar area
that includes motion capture (but not enhanced motion
capture).
There is, however, another category of animation
that I contend deserves to be included. Animation that I
encounter all the time as a teacher and critic of
animation; and that is ‘bad’ animation. By bad animation
I mean animation where characters suffer from ‘3D
float’; whose buttocks hover weightlessly above a chair
and whose feet appear to trudge through molasses.
Characters that gesture symmetrically and jar to a halt
without warning, that emote with ‘Robotic’ movement
that fails to ease in and out and moves in lines not arcs.
Characters that lack consistency in movement; bad
animation also encompasses ‘good’ animation where the
‘wrong’ note is suddenly struck and the melody of
movement is broken by a screeching trumpet of
insincere, poorly-observed movement. In short, I am
suggesting that animation that ignores animation
principles is ‘bad’ animation. And where does this
beastly category sit? Bang in the middle of Mori’s
Uncanny Valley. Could it be that the ‘Uncanny Valley’
when applied to animation is just a synonym for ‘bad’?
With CG animation it is easy to become so obsessed
with technique and process that real issues get clouded
over. Animation is not a genre, it is a distinct medium: A
medium like photography, film, art and dance that may
or may not be used to produce artistic results.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

All animation is not good, nor does it even always
set out to be ‘good’, any more than every picture
postcard aspires to be a Bill Brandt photograph or a
military march suppresses lyricism. Some animation is
made for non-artistic reasons: whether cynically to sell
product (as anyone who has sat through Pokemon the
movie can vouch for), or illustrative for forensic or data
assimilation as used by so much factual television, or to
simulate visual effects where it is entirely appropriate to
pursue reality - we want fireballs and earthquakes to look
‘real’, but most animation sets out to achieve an artistic
result. What we don’t want is to sacrifice the greater
truth of animation as a medium for the uncanny
mechanical mimicry of reality that is pure motion
capture.

4. Conclusion
By mapping animation onto charts and examining
human psychophysical responses to both image and
motion, we have shown that it takes time and specialised
knowledge to decode abstract symbols, but perceived
images need no education or cultural induction for an
audience to get the message; they are understood
instantaneously. This paper contends that that both image
and motion must be treated symbiotically for animation
to be analysed and a gestalt theory to be developed. It
also posits that Mori’s Uncanny Valley idea might work
for robots, but cannot be translated directly to animation
as it is nothing more than a way of describing poor
animation.
Playing with perceptual illusions can be disturbing
or joyous and animators have always had the opportunity
to discard the natural rules of the world and create new
ones. In fact, for an animation artist to be able to create a
work of art, it is important that s/he consciously stresses
the peculiarities of the medium. In our relentless desire
to reproduce reality we are confusing Art with Craft, as
all formative potentialities of animation as Art are taken
away if we remove the restrictions that come with the
medium. Animation is not a feeble mechanistic
reproduction of real life – it has a language of its own – it
is art.
This paper urges animators to hold on to their
principles, for it is by doing so that we stake out a
rightful place for Animation as Art and show that it is a
medium where greater truths can be found than merely
reproducing the mechanical.

Acknowledgements
Figure 1: Image Chart created with acknowledged
thanks to Scott McCloud and his Picture Plane in
Understanding Comics: The Invisible Art HarperCollins;
1st HarperPerennial Ed edition (6 May 1994)
Figure 2: Author’s own
Figure 3: Mori M. Energy, 7(4), pp.33 -35 1970.
(Translated by MacDorfman K.F. and Minato T. 2005)

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 4: Author’s own mother as recalled from birth
Figure 5: Author’s own
Figure 6: 2D versus 3D Buttons Image supplied by
MacGillivray C. and Head A. 3D for the Web Interactive 3D Animation using 3DS Max, Flash and
Director’: Elsevier books, 2005
Figure 7: T-ness of T image in part owes debt to
Gregory R.L. Eye and Brain – The Psychology of Seeing
(Third Edition) Princeton University Press
Figure 8: ‘Thatcherised’ version of Tony Blair image
supplied by Harold Hill at the Vision Research Group,
University College, London and obtained through
Viperlib.com
Figure 9: Ball Bouncing image courtesy of Lasseter J.
(July 1987) Principles of Traditional Animation Applied
to 3D Computer Animation. Siggraph/ Computer
Graphics
Figure 10: Author’s own
Figure 11: Author’s own
Figure 12: Motion capture versus Animation series of
pictures supplied by Grant Garvin of Thames Valley
University, London
Figure 13: Author’s own

References
[1] Mori M. Energy, 7(4), pp.33 -35 1970. (Translated by
MacDorfman K.F. and Minato T. 2005)
[2] http://www.thefreedictionary.com/animation
[3] http://www.thefreedictionary.com/animated+cartoon
[4] McCloud S. (1994) Understanding Comics: The Invisible
Art HarperCollins; 1st HarperPerennial Ed edition May 1994
[5] http://www.computerarts.co.uk/in_depth/features/adding
_character
[6] Fantz R.L. Pattern Vision in Newborn Infants Science:
296-297 19 April 1963
[7] MacGillivray C and Head A. 3D for the Web Interactive 3D Animation using 3DS Max, Flash and Director’:
Elsevier books, 2005
[8] Gregory R.L. Eye and Brain – The Psychology of Seeing
(Fifth Edition) Princeton University Press 1997
[9] Bruner, J. S. & Postman, L. On the perception of
incongruity: A paradigm. Journal of Personality, 18, 206-223
1949
[10] http://viperlib.york.ac.uk/
[11] Rhodes G. Superportraits: Caricatures And Recognition
(Essays in Cognitive Psychology) Psychology Press 1997
[12] Mcluhan M. Understanding Media: The Extensions of
Man; 1st Ed. McGraw Hill, NY 1964 (reissued by Gingko
Press, 2003)
[13] Wells P. Understanding animation, Routledge, 1998
[14] Lasseter J. Principles of Traditional Animation Applied
to 3D Computer Animation. Siggraph/ Computer Graphics July
1987
[15] Arnheim R. 1954/1974: Art and Visual Perception: A
Psychology of the Creative Eye. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.

