A Case Study of Integrating Principles of Photography and
Photorealistic for 3D Rendering
Jong Sze Joon*, Yuen May Chan* and Khong Chee Weng*
*Faculty of Creative Multimedia, Multimedia University, 63100 Cyberjaya, Selangor, Malaysia
{sjjong@mmu.edu.my, mcyuen@mmu.edu.my, cwkhong@mmu.edu.my}

Abstract
This paper discusses the hybrid technique of merging
both principles of photography and photorealistic 3D
rendering approach to create a harmony between the
two elements. In order to optimize the performance of
3D rendering and provide a creative solution for
effective rendering method, an experiment was
conducted. Based on analysis of 3D rendering works,
qualitative approach is selected and case study was
conducted by comparing works through observation.
The findings indicate the obvious difference in the
understanding of basic design fundamentals
accustomed in photography. The second phase of the
research is targeted towards the students’ maturity in
understanding the content of photorealistic 3D in
terms of model properties, textures, lighting and
rendering. The outcome of the research serves as a
guideline to understand the basic flow of efficient
photorealistic 3D rendering process for beginners with
enhanced method.

1. Introduction
The convergence of technology particularly
visualization has opened the chances for professionals,
individuals and animation goers to go for wide
varieties of creative exploration. Computer Generated
Imagery (CGI) has become so refined; that, it is hard to
tell where reality leaves off and the digital
interpretation of reality (or more likely, fantasy)
begins.
The course MCC1013 Computer Modeling Class
covers the necessity to educate students in the subject
of photography and 3D photorealistic rendering. The

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

course covers many different aspects in terms of
concepts, terminologies and technical skills, but it is
essential that the students are prepared and equipped
with mental capability to digest these new media and
technology, to produce technical solutions to
comprehend the analytical process of developing and
manipulating the flow of information. The initial plan
did not benefit the students as the concentration was
directed more towards software and buttons. The lack
of the adaptation for basic design skills, which
comprises of principles and elements of design and
even visual communication understanding, affected the
structure of the course.

2. An Overview Of 3D Realism
Photorealistic 3D rendering cannot totally rely on
its technical aspect only. Understanding of design
principles and detail observation on the surface
attributes are two major aspects. One such principle to
consider is Cinematography. This is because the
purpose of the 3D elements created and embedded into
the scene is primarily to enhance the storytelling. Since
there are times when one requires working on a very
huge 3D models database, the better solution to
acquire a sufficient performance is to decide on certain
aspects that will define the importance of the
workflow. Knowing the strength and weaknesses of
the 3D application can benefit the user to anticipate
what to expect for the final output. Besides that, it is
also an advantage to bypass certain technical problem
that will most likely surface.
From our observation, we determined a few useful
principles of photography elements, which are suitable
to be applied in digital image creation. The principles
are stated below:
i- Depth of field
ii- Motion blur
iii- Basic design understanding

iv- Lighting arrangement
v- Shadows -artificial light and real light
vi- Composition: Rules of third

transparency objects, inter-reflections,
illumination models and realistic materials.

complex

3. Photorealistic 3D Rendering
Photorealistic rendering has played an important
role in creating compelling 3D renderings; this
includes still image renderings and animation. The
definition of photorealistic rendering refers to
construction of computer images that in addition to
geometry accurately simulate the physics of materials
and light [1].
We briefly define the rendering process as a
process that translate 3D geometry into final flat image
or animation file by considering data from surface
shading and lighting condition. This is done with a
mathematical formulation.

3.1 The qualities of rendering engines to
produce realistic results
Basically, a renderer serves as an engine to
convert the 3D dynamic graphics calculation to
produce bitmaps. Since all renderers for different 3D
application or even standalone renderers are different
one way or another, the rendering time and the quality
of the render differ. Some renderers may specialize in
a certain task but lose out on another aspect. It is still
subjective to say which renderer works best with all
the 3D applications.
Common features for these renderers that suffice
to produce photorealistic outputs have included ray
tracing, caustics, global illumination, radiosity and
HDRI. The paper will elaborate on some of these
features to a certain extent.

3.2 Raytracing
Raytracing is a global illumination based
rendering method. It traces rays of light from the eye
back through the image plane into the scene. Then the
rays are tested against all objects in the scene to
determine if they intersect any objects. If the ray
misses all objects, then that pixel is shaded with the
background color. Raytracing handles shadows,
multiple specular reflections, and texture mapping in a
very easy and straight-forward manner.
Raytracing is much related with the effects needed
to generate realistic images; this includes accurate
shadow casting, surface reflections such as mirror,

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure. 1: Render using mental ray
renderer with ray tracing and caustics

3.3 Radiosity
Radiosity is a subset of global illumination
approach, which is commonly used for realistic image
generation. Radiosity approach has a strong relation
with the theory of heat transfer. Birn [2] explains,
“Radiosity is an approach to rendering indirect light, in
which light is transmitted between surfaces by diffuse
reflection of their surface color.” In another words,
radiosity is the indirect light that is distributed between
objects. It is also viewed as an independent rendering
method as Cohen et. al [3] explains, “...the form factor
computation is approximately an order of magnitude
greater than both stages of solving the set of equations
and rendering a view. The more important loop is the
one that changes the viewpoint. Here there is no need
to recompute a solution and the same radiosity date is
used to calculate any new view.”

4.
Comparisons
of
principles
photography and photorealistic

of

Below are some comparative elements based on
the principles of photography and photorealistic.
i- Depth of field (DOF): DOF can be defined as the
range from object to the camera whereby the object
will appear to be in focus [4]. Other elements in the
foreground and the background of the object will be
out of focus. DOF is very important to visualize
objects, and its relation to the surrounding naturally.
Usually to make it look natural, a certain degree of
blurriness around the edges can convince a more
natural impact.

Figure. 2: Comparison of DOF in real
photography (left) and DOF in
photorealistic 3d rendering (right)
In the real world, all camera lens created have a
slight curvature to it, regardless whether it is manmade or machine-made. The only flat lens that exists is
the 3D camera lens. Due to the different architecture
for different 3D applications, there can be no direct
calculation to convert the information from live
footage to 3D. This will result in having difficulties
matching the constructed 3D model to the live footage
model.

Figure. 3: The effects of perspective
distortions for real camera lens in
comparison to 3D camera lens
One other main factor that makes this process
difficult is because the focal point for the camera is
never lock down on its position in space. The focal
point is the position on contact with the film whereby
light is focusing on. The distance between the focal
point and the lens is the focal length. Digital zoom in
most cameras will cause the focal point to adjust its
position along the floating path. There is no exact
calculation to know where this ‘virtual’ position of the
focal point is. Furthermore with the lens distortion, the
only way to judge for a perfect match for 3D is by eye.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure. 4: An overview of the camera
system
ii- Motion blur: In photography, motion blur can give
certain meaningful impact to the object in motion.
As described by Potmesil and Chakravarty [5],
“Motion blur in photography or cinematography is
caused by the motion of objects during the finite
exposure time the camera shutter remains open to
record the image on film. In computer graphics, the
simulation of motion blur is useful both in animated
sequences where the blurring tends to remove
temporal aliasing effects and in static images where
it portrays the illusion of speed or movement among
the objects in the scene.” To capture a motion blur
image with a camera, all that needs to be done is
simply by adjusting the shuttle speed to a lower
level. As a result, the illusion of movement will
appear on the captured image. In computer graphics,
this effect can be achieved with 3D software
algorithms, which can generate two types of motion
blur, 3D motion blur and 2D motion blur. 3D motion
blur is processed and rendered by the software
where as 2D motion blur is added in to the rendered
image by the software after render.
iii- Basic design understanding: This is applicable to
any form of art, either digital or traditional. In
general there are four basic design guidelines, which
are interconnected: contrast, repetition, alignment
and proximity [6]. Since the final output for this
project is in a form of an image, basic design
understanding plays an important role to ensure that
the image is well composed, with proper lighting set
up, contrast and proportion. In 3D, application of
those guidelines will help to produce a better output.

Figure. 5: Basic design understanding
comparison in photography (left) and
photorealistic 3D rendering (right)
iv- Lighting and Color Temperature: Perisic (1999)
[7] says, “If perspective is the mother, the lighting is
the father of a good visual effects composite.” The
two work hand in glove to create the illusion of
reality. It is often the lighting of a studio set
representing an exterior scene that gives it away as
unreal, particularly when it is composited with a real
exterior element.
Lighting is a dynamic and exciting synthesis
of art and science [8]. Working together with shape
and form, light brings life to the managed
environment. There are two types of lighting setup.
They can be categorized as lighting for film and
lighting for video. To set up a basic lighting for
photography, reference from lighting for video can
be applied. This is the three-point lighting set up
consists of key light, fill light and rim light. In
general, the key light is used to define the highlight
of the object, the fill light is to define the ambience
of the object and the rim light or back lighting is
used to separate the ambiguous feeling of the object
from the background. The application of three- point
lighting for photography and for 3D is constraint by
the same rules and principles. This also covers the
usage of reflectors and filters. For a 3D object, the
successful simulation of materials and textures are
essential to determine the level of realism. The
shading model has two main ingredients - properties
of the surface and properties of the illumination
falling on it [9].
When composting two or more elements
photographed at very different locations or studios,
it is often possible to overlook the obvious – the
shadows.
Yet, the shadows are of crucial
importance to the composite picture if it is to look
convincing. A mismatch in the direction and density
of the shadows destroys the illusion even if the
perspective is matched perfectly, making the
composite picture appear as a collage (Elkins, 1998).
[10]

Figure. 6: Basic 3-point lighting setup

Figure. 7: Additional deflectors are used to
bounce secondary lighting to achieve
softer shadows

Figure. 8: Basic 3-point lighting to light a
simple object Lighting arrangement
comparison
iv- Shadows: In practical photography, shadows can
be casted based on two types of light: real light (e.g.:
sun) and artificial light (e.g.: neon light). Based on
that, there are two types of shadows generated, cast
shadow and drop shadow. Shadows are advocated
for improved comprehension and enhanced realism
in computer-synthesized images [11]. The quality of
the shadow is not fixed and varies upon situation. In
3D, generally there are two different settings for
shadow, depth map shadow and raytrace shadow.
Those shadows are produced based on different
software algorithm and have their own adherent
attributes.
v- Compositing- Rule of third: This is also known as

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

staging or the way we frame our picture. This is a
very important element, which is related to basic
design understanding. A good composition will
navigate the viewer’s eyes to focus on your subject
matter in frame. There is no distinctive feature
between composition in actual photography and 3D
rendering. Both require a good framing for better
result.

reference picture are chosen for comparison. Below are
the comparisons of the works before and after the
implementation of the principles of photography and
photorealism.

5. Case Study
A case study is conducted on students undertaking
MCC1013 Computer Modeling class.
They are
assigned with a task to produce photorealistic
renderings by using AutoDesk 3D Studio Max®. As
warming up exercise, they are given a few sample
images as reference and required to recreate the 3D
geometries from the photographs provided. They are
required to model and render the subject matter as
accurate as possible. Following by that, a few themes
are given to them for the final project. They need to
choose a good reference picture of their subject matter,
do a thorough study of surface characteristics of the
models, lighting configuration and arrangement, the
mood of the ambience and the entire composition for
final submission. The models have to be originally
created, followed by texture mapping, placing and
adjusting parameters of 3D lighting, and selecting the
appropriate rendering algorithm for final rendering.
The duration for testing and completing this study is
within a period of 14-weeks.
The main objective of this course is to create 3D
photorealistic rendered images by implementing
principles of photography within a short production
timeline. Creativity is evaluated by composition and
overall mood that is portrayed from the rendered
images. One original angle without any manipulation
of camera angles and materials is required and students
can explore different angles and composition as part of
submission. Sense of design, accuracy or level of
details and proportion of the models are part of the
criteria for evaluating the quality of the works.
During the initial stage of experiment, the students
are taught with essential technical knowledge of
various modeling, texturing and rendering techniques.
After the first review of submission, they are exposed
to the principles of photography and photorealism in
3D rendering, as well as advanced rendering
techniques such as built-in features in radiosity,
lightracer and MentalRay® in AutoDesk 3D Studio
Max®, as well as stand-alone rendering engines such
as VRay®, RenderPal® and Maxwell®.
As for this paper, only original angle as in

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Before implementation (A) After implementation (B)
Figure. 9: Figure B uses MentalRay for
realistic rendering of the subject matter,
while figure A uses scanline rendering
method

Before implementation (A) After implementation (B)
Figure. 10: Both figures use scanline
rendering method. Figure B gives a better
rendering quality with correct lighting
arrangement and cast shadow

Before implementation (A) After implementation (B)
Figure. 11: Figure B uses VRay for soft
shadow of the subject matter, while figure
A uses directional light with harsh shadow

Before implementation (A) After implementation (B)

Figure. 12: Figure A does not cast any
shadow; hence the light direction is
uncertain. Figure B has good composition
and light arrangement which brings a good
result.

is very promising. Previous method cannot achieve a
very outstanding result comparing to this method.
Since the light and photorealism are stored in each
texture map, it can be used for other applications such
as game and real time model on web. Below are the
comparative elements of this method.

5.1 Previous Works (before implementation)
During the early stages of the production, students
lacked the understanding and knowledge in properties
of 3D models as well as how materials and textures
react to surface normals under a certain angle of
lighting. Besides that, students were also not wellversed in applying the principles of photography to
their creation and they did not research and use visual
reference to relate to the production. Their designs
were purely from the mind. Using reference is very
crucial in any photorealistic 3D rendering.

5.2 Present Works (after implementation)
As claimed by Warniers [12], “Photographs are
achieving similar importance in the field of computer
graphics.” This is proven by students’ work, which
fully utilized principles of photography in their project.
Understanding of the elements has brought a new
dimension to this photorealistic 3D rendering project.
Most of the works reflect good application of basic
design principles. Furthermore, the works are created
with highly detailed observation on aspects of surface
characteristics and its reaction towards light. As
Flemming described [13], “Creating photorealistic
worlds requires a keen eye for detail. Nothing is more
important than detail when you are attempting to recreate realities in 3D. The trademark of flaw of most
3D images is lack of detail.” From the accomplished
works, we conclude that students have good
understanding of solving technical problems especially
during the rendering process. We highlight rendering
because most of the visual characteristics of a
simulated
three-dimensional
environment
are
determined during the rendering process. Kerlow [14]
explained, “The world of rendering by computer is
populated by most of the attributes of our visual realm
where the shapes of objects are revealed by light and
obscured by shadow, where color creates mood of
subtle tranquility or explosive happiness…”

Table1: Comparisons between standard
real time rendering and photorealistic
rendering method
Standard real time
rendering method
Produces a very flat
shading and texture
map

Photorealistic
rendering method
Produces a very
realistic shading and
texture map

Radiosity
solution
cannot be stored in the
texture
Texture map cannot be
brought to other 3D
platforms

Radiosity
solution
can be stored and
baked in the texture
The baked texture
map can be exported
and used in other 3D
platforms with same
quality
The baked texture
map does not require
UV projection if
brought to other 3D
platforms
because
UV coordination is
already fixed and
correct

Requires UV texture
projection if brought
to other 3D platforms
and sometimes the UV
coordination is not
correct

5.4. Final rendering
Below are some examples created and rendered by
students in the following project with understanding of
both principles of photography and photorealistic. All
works emphasized the technical and fundamental
solutions.

5.3 Comparison of these methods
This method can be considered as quite a detailed
process; however, the result in simulation application

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure. 15: This experiment is directed
towards the study on composition, taking
into consideration the overall design in

terms of color and lighting to define a
harmonious mood

[5]. M. Potmesil and I. Chakravarty. Modeling Motion
Blur In Computer-Generated Images. in Proceeding of
International Conference on Computer Graphics and
Interactive Techniques, Michigan, 389-399. 1983.
[6] R. Williams. The Non-Designer's Design Book.
Peachpit Press, CA. 1994.
[7] Z. Perisic. Visual Effects Cinematography. Oxford:
Focal Press, 62. 1999.
[8] Thorn: Lighting People and Places, http://www.
thornlighting.com/light/

Figure. 16: Radiosity will give the scene a
soft 360 shadow at the base of objects.
The higher values set for the photo will
calculate a cleaner image with fewer
artifacts

6. Conclusion
From the completed study, we conclude that the
design fundamental elements are very important to
create a successful and outstanding photorealistic 3D
rendering. Additionally, technical understanding of
surfaces and lighting will help create a more effective
rendering. We also found that technical knowledge
without a good understanding of design fundamental
will not help students/artists to produce remarkable
rendering. It will only produce operators who know
how to use the tools but unable to develop good ideas
or thoughts through art. Finally, we hope that this
study will help students to develop a better career with
strong understanding of the concept and fundamentals
as well as good technical skills in this field. We also
hope that this paper will trigger better ideas and
knowledge to improve digital and traditional skills
towards the growth and development in the local
community.

References
[1] D. Finn. How to Look at Photographs: Reflections
On The Art Of Seeing, Harry N Abrams, NY. 1994.
[2] J. Birns. Digital: Lighting And Rendering. New
Riders Publishing, NY. 2000.
[3] M.F. Cohen and D.P. Greenberg. A Radiosity Solution
For Complex Environment. In Proceedings of Computer
Graphics. Siggraph 85, 19(3), 31-40. 1985.
[4]. D. Thomas. A Primer On Depth Of Field.
http://www.keiko-ni.com/keiko/ArtoMonth/article.html.
2001.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

[9] Tomoyuki Nishita, Isao Okamura and Eihachiro
Nakamae, Shading models for point and linear sources. In
Proceeding
Of ACM Transactions on Graphics, New York, 124 – 146.
1985.
[10]D.W. Elkins. Motion Picture Camera and Lighting
Equipment. Oxford: Focal Press. 36. 1994.
[11] F. Crow. Shadow Algorithms For Computer
Graphics. In Proceeding of the 4th Annual Conference On
Computer
Graphics And Interactive Techniques. New York. 242 –
248. 1977.
[12] R. Warniers. Every Picture Tells a Story. Computer
Graphics World. 1998.
[13] B. Flemming. Advanced 3D Photorealism
Techniques. John Wiley & Sons, NY. 1999.
[14] I. Kerlow. The Art Of 3D Computer Animation And
Imaging. John Wiley & Sons, NY. 2000.

