Visualizing author attribution using Blobby objects
T.Mala, T.V.Geetha
Department of Computer Science & Engineering, College of Engineering, Anna University
{mala@cs.annauniv.edu, rctamil@annauniv.edu}
Abstract

In this paper, we propose a set of distinct features
that endeavors to recognize the author of the text
documents, independent of the theme of the document.
The features are used to distinguish the unique style of
every author. The features proposed are independent of
the theme, so the features are suitable for any type of text
document. Thus, it will be useful for systems that train
themselves to particular users in order to identify the
author automatically. Blobby objects are modeled based
on the author attribution information and the objects
depict authors features, author feature weightages and
the author identification for each and every document.
The visual display of author attribution is useful in
depicting the differences or similarities in the style of
author, based on the features as a measure. The blobby
objects are implicitly modelled and they move and join
together showing the author of the document with the
authors feature set values. Gestalt laws were applied to
the perceived visual output to visualize
author
attribution.

1. Introduction
There are many different types of crime and civil action
involving documents whose authorship has to be
authenticated [10]. The statistical analysis of the style of
a particular author using variety of quantitative features
is known as Stylometry. The art of Stylometry depends
on the feature set used for finding the author style of
writing. The style of the document depends on various
factors like theme, content, author and the time period in
which it was written. Various techniques have been used
to find the authors of documents. Decision trees and
neural networks have been trained to “learn” the writing
style of five Victorian authors [6]. To achieve robust
authorship identification, sequential word patterns have
been used as feature for classification purposes using
support vector machines[10]. A method for computer
assisted authorship attribution based on character-level
n-gram language models was formulated by Fuchun
Peng and Dale Schuurmans[3]. Author identification via
text classification algorithms were also proposed and
implemented[1]. In this paper a novel approach using
reading difficulty test parameters as feature set for

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

representing the document is proposed. Later Min-Max
algorithm was used to find the author of the document
based on the range of feature vector values. The current
relationship between visual languages and natural
language processing (NLP) is restricted to translating
graphical languages into natural language[4] or visual
representations of text processing languages[5].
Visualization of topical and temporal information from
text[8] and category strength information visualization[7]
are all steps taken towards visualization of natural
languages. Author attribute visualization also helps in
viewing the author information by modeling blobby
objects using the feature set. Each document is then
represented by feature blobby objects. Gestalt theory
based parameters like Similarity, Continuity, Symmetry,
Closure and Proximity are applied to perceive the blobby
objects.

2. Author Identification
In this paper a novel set of features were used for author
identification. The set of features used are listed as
follows: Average Sentence Length which tells how
lengthy an author writes a sentence, Gunning Fog Index
which gives a view of complex words in the passage,
Simple Measure Of Gobbledygook (SMOG) Index
which is also dependent on the number of complex
words, Automated Readability Index (ARI) which is
dependent on the number of characters in words and
number of words in a sentence, Flesch Reading Ease
(FRE)and Flesch Kincaid Grade Level(FGL) which are
both dependent on the number of syllables in the text.
The above set of features were
selected based on the readability of the document. Any
document will have its own readability complexity
associated with it. The readability complexity depends
on the number of complex words used in the text.
Complex words are words with three or more syllables
not including proper nouns, compound words, or
common suffixes such as -es, -ed, or -ing as a syllable, or
familiar jargon. The first measure considered is the
Average sentence length calculated as total number of
words divided by the total number of sentences in the
document. Gunning Fog Index (GFI) can be calculated
using the formula given below:

GFI is dependent on the number of complex words
present in a document and it also takes into account the
number of complex words present in the total number of
words. The SMOG index is calculated using the formula
given below:

blendings helps in smooth transitions of feature values
merging together. The key to using metaballs is the
definition of the equation for specifying the influence on
an arbitrary point from an arbitrary particle. The metaball
model describes the object as combinations of quadratic
density function of the form
F® =b (1-3r2/d2),

if 0<r<=d/3

=3/2 b (1-r/d)2, if d/3<r<=d
GFI and SMOG index are both calculated based on
number of complex words in the document. Automated
readability index is given by

=0,

if r>d

where r=radius of the metaball
d=distance of the particle to the point and

This is based on number of characters per word. Flesch
reading ease (FRE) is calculated using the formula given
below:

where total syllables/total words = Average number of
syllables per word(ASW) and total words/total sentences
=Average sentence length(ASL). Flesch Kincaid Grade
level (FGL) formula is given as follows

Flesch reading ease and Flesch kincaid grade level are
both based on syllables present in a document. The
above parameters are calculated as features to identify
the author of a particular document. The features used
were based on word complexities. These features were
mapped onto Blobby objects for Visualization.

3. Blobby object modelling
Metaballs, also known as blobby objects, are a type of
implicit modeling technique. These metaballs are used
for visualizing the author attribute information. A
metaball is a particle surrounded by a density field,
where the density attributed to the particle (its influence)
decreases with distance from the particle location. A
surface is implied by taking an isosurface through this
density field - the higher the isosurface value, the nearer
it will be to the particle. This isosurface generated helps
in modeling the metaball as a soft object which can be
used to represent the author feature value. The powerful
aspect of metaballs is the way they can be combined.
Combining the metaballs models the document feature
parameter values to get combined and represent one
author. By simply summing the influences of each
metaball on a given point, we can get very smooth
blendings of the spherical influence fields. These smooth

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

b=Threshold value.
Given the test document the feature values are found
out using the formulae given in section 2 and a feature
vector is constructed. Each value in the feature vector is
considered as radius for the metaballs generated. In our
paper we consider six features and therefore six
metaballs are generated with the feature values. The six
balls generated represents the features of one particular
document. Each author is represented by different
colours. Each author will have his range of feature values
obtained from training documents. Using Min-Max
technique the minimum and maximum values are
assigned for each feature. These values are compared
with the feature vector of a document and if the
document feature value lies within the range then that
particular author identity is given to the metaball as
colour information. Sometimes a feature value may lie in
more than one authors range. Here we consider three
authors and so metaballs possess the colour information
of the matching authors. Looking at the feature metaballs
one can analyse the feature values of the document and
the amount of overlap in author style. All the feature
value metaballs move in a random fashion and they
unite to produce one author document metaball The
colour of the blobby changes to the colour of the author
to whom the document belongs to. The author of the
document is one whose values matches the most and can
be clearly understood by just looking at the final blobby
object colour. The visual objects generated when
perceived
exhibit the Gestalt perception model
characteristics and these laws were used to analyse the
visual model generated.

4. Gestalt visual perception
Gestalt theory is a psychology related theory whose
principle is where the behavior of the whole is not
determined by that of their individual elements, but
where the part-processes are themselves determined by
the intrinsic nature of the whole [9]. The Gestalt laws are

based on human perception. This model helps in
grouping the objects based on gestalt laws. Here Gestalt
laws are used for grouping the blobby objects together.
Similarity, Continuity, Symmetry, Closure and Proximity
principles are used for identifying the author
perceptually. Similar colour blobbies mean that those
feature value ranges belong to same author. Each
blobby represent a feature and they combine to form one
blobby object which represents all the features of the
author of the document. While the blobbies join they
follow the continuity law which by perception seem as
though it is a continuous object. Symmetrical nature of
blobbies are seen when any one feature value of the
document lies within the range of more than one author.
In that case the matched authors colour are applied on
the blobby and by symmetry the blobby seem to match
more than one author. Closure by perception states that
all closed objects are grouped together. Here all the
feature blobbies finally join together to form a single
blobby object which by perception forms a closed figure.
By proximity nearer objects form a group and here the
nearer blobbies join together to form a group. The
Gestalt laws are thereby applied on the author feature
information to find the exact author of the document.

Fig 1:Feature values represented as
blobbies
Then the blobbies merge together following
continuity principle by random motion and the final
metaball gets the identified author’s colour. The random
motion and the merging of all the meatballs is shown in
fig2 and fig 3.

5. Gestalt based Blobby visualization
The visual blobby output is shown in the figure.
Training set of documents were taken and the feature
values were calculated. A range of values were identified
for each feature of individual authors based on the
trained values. Later test documents were taken and their
feature values were calculated and stored in a file. The
system reads the file input models the blobbies based on
the feature values and colours were given based on the
authors information. As shown in fig1 the six feature
values are modeled as individual metaballs. Feature
value of Average sentence length lies in the range of all
the three author value range and therefore the metaball
gets the colour of all the three authors. Here in the figure
below author 1 is represented by grey colour, author 2 by
green colour and author 3 by red colour. Feature value of
GFI lies in author 2 and author 3 range values , SMOG
index lies in author 3 range, ARI index value lies in
author 2 and 3 values, FRE in author 2 and 3 range and
FGL in all the three author ranges. Therefore author 3
values are more prominent in the test document feature
vector and thereby the final metaball of the test
document gets author 3 colour information and hence the
blobby possess red colour. By Gestalt Similarity
principle similar blobbies have same colour values so
that GFI, ARI and FRE blobbies have all three author
colour values. Symmetrical values in the blobby for more
than one author possess all the matching author colour
combinations which can be clearly seen in the case of
average sentence length blobby which has all the three
author colour information.

Fig 2:Random motion of metaballs

Fig 3: Merging of all metaballs

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Evaluation Metrics
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
No.of
identifiable
points

Occlusion

Data
density

Percentage

Fig 5:Evaluation metrics

Fig 4:Final author information visualization
Final author information is available as visual output
in fig 4 by Closure principle. The results generated were
given to twenty five different people and the visuals were
analyzed. Twenty people were able to identify the feature
blobby vectors author information correctly and all
twenty five of them were able to correctly identify the
final author. Later the gestalt based visual models
generated above are all mathematically evaluated.

6. Performance Evaluation
The performance evaluation of the proposed author
identification method was evaluated based on ten test
documents. The result analysis clearly states that the
system has 70% accuracy. The result in the case of
heterogeneous documents can go up to 80% accuracy.
The visual outputs obtained are evaluated based on four
factors namely Data density, Number of simultaneous
dimensions displayed, Occlusion percentage and Number
of identifiable points[2]. Data density is given as the
ratio of the number of data points to the number of
pixels. This gives how clearly the data can be displayed.
Number of simultaneous dimensions displayed gives the
number of maximum dimensions that can be displayed in
a visual. Occlusion percentage gives the number of
broken elements in the visual output and Number of
identifiable points tells the clarity in the image. The
parameter percentages are plotted below in fig5.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

The above figure clearly shows that the clarity of the
image is good and the image is clearly visible without
any breakages (The occlusion percentage is 0). The
number of simultaneous data dimension displayed is 18
which shows that 18 dimensions can be seen clearly from
the image at a time.

7. Conclusion and Future work
Author attribution information which was identified
using reading complexity features was modeled. Three
dimensional metaballs called blobby objects were used
for modeling the author feature set information. Author
feature values were also seen as visual output. The
document closeness with authors style was visualized.
Movements of the metaballs helps us in predicting the
author information. Identified author information was
also clearly shown using the colour values. Gestalt laws
also helps in perceiving the nearness of the feature values
of authors considered. More author identification
features can be added to increase the accuracy of the
system. New author identification features based on
syntax and semantic of the document can be considered.
The visual output generated can be modeled using other
three dimensional object representations.

References
[1] David Madigan (PI), Paul Kantor, Fred Roberts, and David
D. Lewis (New KDD proposal stemming from discussion with
Beth Walton), Author identification: Identifying real life
authors in massive document collections.
[2] Enrico bertini, Giuseppe Santucci ,Quality metrics for 2D
scatterplot graphics:automatically reducing visual clutter,
Smart Graphics , 2004, 77-89.
[3] Fuchun Peng_ Dale Schuurmans_ Vlado Keselj_
ShaojunWang. Language Independent Authorship Attribution
using Character Level Language Models In 10th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics,
Budapest,267--274.
[4] G. Bono and P. Ficorilli. Natural Language Restatement of
Queries Expressed in a Graphical Language. In ER’92 - 11th
International Conference on the Entity-Relational Approach.
LNCS 645, pages 357-274. Springer-Verlag, 1992.

[5] J. Landauer and M. Hirakawa. Visual AWK: k Model for
Text Processing by Demonstration. In Proceedings VL’95 11th
International IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages,
Darmstadt. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1995.
[6] Ramyaa , Congzhou He, Khaled Rasheed,. Using Machine
Learning Techniques for Stylometry In International
Conference on Machine Learning; Models, Technologies and
Applications (MLMTA'2004)
[7] T.Mala, Dr.T.V.Geetha, Visualization of Biological
Patterns in Event Detection and Tracking Based on SRP
algorithm , In Proceedings 9 th International IEEE conference
on Information Visualization IV05.
[8] T. Mala, T.V. Geetha, and Sathish Kumar, Topical and
Temporal Visualization Using Wavelets, In proceedings of
ninth Pacific Rim International conference on Artificial
intelligence, PRICAI, LNAI 4099, pp. 839 – 843,2006.
[9] Willis.D.Ellis "Source Book of Gestalt Psychology,"
New
York:
Harcourt,
Brace
and
Co,
1938.
Reprinted by the Gestalt Journal Press, New York 1997.
[10] Yuta Tsuboi and yuji matsumoto. Author identification for
heterogeneous Documents, Master's thesis, Nara Institute of
Science and Technology, 2002 .

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

