Simulation Techniques for Generating Behavior for Unitable Artificial Life
Shunsuke Ohono, Shinichiro Yagi, Yoichiro Kawaguchi
The University of Tokyo, Japan
n0ppe@hotmail.com, {qq66319, yoichiro}@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract

2. Behavior modeling

In this research, we aimed to generate behavior for
artificial life made by combining segments with the same
form while keeping a simple architecture by using
genetic algorithm.
And as a result, in symmetric-linear forms, looped
forms and forms asymmetrical on a two-dimensional
plane, we were able to study various behaviors used to
extend the distance traveled. Furthermore, with some
forms, we were able to obtain the interesting solution in
the task of crossing a mountain and a valley.

2.1. Expression of joints

Keywords--- genetic algorithm, unitable creature,
embodiment

We used a form in which two rectangular artificial
life segments are connected by a joint (Figure 2) in order
to keep the structure as simple as possible for generating
behavior. Other possibilities, such as a single rectangle
moving by shifting its center of gravity, or by amoebalike vermiculation, could also be considered to keep the
form as simple as possible, but in order to keep the
description simple when combining forms together, we
decided that a method that allowed description of
behavior in terms of the joints would be better.

1. Introduction
The goal of this research is to generate behavior for
artificial life made by combining segments with the same
form while keeping a simple architecture.
By combining segments, tasks that were impossible
for individual segments can be accomplished (Figure 1),
and new methods of locomotion for a wide variety of
forms can be generated.
To study and generate behavior, genetic algorithms
inspired by the evolutionary processes of living things
are used with the goal of obtaining behavior patterns that
do not seem artificial.
Figure 2: Example of segmented-body artificial
life
The joints have two degrees of freedom, with
sinusoidal torque applied according to the equations
below, with variable amplitude and frequency.

Figure 1: Clearing obstacles using two or more
segments

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

torque1 = amp1 sin f1x　

(1)

torque1 = amp1 sin( f 2 + α ) x　

( 2)

where amp1 and amp2 indicate amplitudes, f1 and
f 2 indicate frequencies, and α indicate phase
difference between axis 1 and 2.
Below, we discuss modeling the behavior of a threesegment form using these expressions.

2.2. Linear-combined forms

3. Morphological design of butterflies

Linear-combined forms are a model in which
segments have joints as described in the previous section,
and the joints are expressed as a linear combination of
torques applied at the connections between individual
segments (Figure 3).

Computation for rigid bodies with joints typically
uses either an analytical method or a penalty method.
Here, we discuss an analytical method. Baraff et al. have
proposed a method for solving contact forces using
motion equations and constraint conditions. This method
from Baraff et al. requires computation time on the
number of contacts, n. A characteristic of this method is
that it does not allow penetration between objects.
Physics engines using this analysis method include the
Open Dynamics Engine from Havok.

Figure 3: Expression of joints for linearcombinable forms

2.3. Master-Slave forms
A Master-Slave form is one in which, one of the
segments in a combined form is the Master, and the
remaining segments are Slaves.
The amplitude,
frequency and phase differences are expressed with
coefficients based on the Master joint (Figure 4).

Figure 5: Expression of the Master-Slave type

4. Experiments
Using the Open Dynamics Engine as a physics
simulator, we expressed the torque coefficients as 8-bit
genes and used genetic algorithms to evolve and study
them. We used the behavior variables at each joint for
genes, including amplitude, frequency and phase in two
directions, as well as variables representing the
relationships between joints.
These variables were combined into a single gene, and
various operations such as crossings and spontaneous
mutations were applied to them (Figure 6).

Figure 4: Expression of the Master-Slave type

2.4. Master-Slave synchronized-frequency forms
Considering inch-worm or snake-like motion, it can
be conjectured that useful motion is more likely to be
generated if, as a starting point, the oscillations of each
joint are synchronized. With this in mind, we define
Master-Slave synchronized-frequency forms as forms
with the Master-Slave form described in the previous
section, and with fixed-frequency joint oscillations. The
amplitude and phase of Slave torques are defined with
coefficients in terms of the Master joint values.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 6: Example of a single gene
The distance by which the artificial life-form was
able to progress toward the goal point during a single
prescribed loop was used as the evaluation function. For
distance measurements, the distance from the center of

gravity of the whole life-form to the goal point was used,
to account for differences arising from how segments are
connected in each form (Figure 7). Experiments were
done over 40 generations with 40 individuals, and
looping over 3000 attempts.

Figure 7: Distance from goal point

5. Results
Experiments were done applying three behavior
models to both symmetric-linear and looped forms
(Figure 8). For the linear forms, we were able to study
various behaviors used to extend the distance traveled,
including twisting, wave motions and rising up,
depending on the shape and behavior model used. With
loop forms, master-slave synchronized-frequency forms
that could attain a wave motion were particularly
effective.

Figure 8: Linear and loop forms
We also obtained results of how asymmetriccombined forms with three behavior models were able to
extend their travel distance. Master-slave synchronizedfrequency forms that extended over two dimensions were
particularly capable of acquiring rising-up behaviors in
three dimensions (Figure 9). Forms that extended into
three dimensions were only able to achieve flat, writhing
and creeping motions, however.

Figure 9: Erect, asymmetric form

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 11: Success and failure navigating a
valley

Figure 10: Jumping over a hill
We were also able to achieve solutions that
successfully overcame the hill and valley tasks using
combined forms (three segments), depending on the
behavior model. In particular, one three-segment linear
Master-Slave frequency-synchronized form yielded a
very interesting result, by curling up and jumping
dynamically over the hill as shown in Figure 10.

However, due to amplification of error caused by the
obstacles, the same results were not consistently obtained,
even using the same genes, and tests that completed
successfully once were observed to fail other times, even
with the same initial conditions (Figure 11).
For large-scale forms on the order of ten segments,
neither the linear nor asymmetric forms were able to
make significant progress, regardless of the model used,
and got tangled or could not otherwise control their body
length (Figure 12).

Figure 12: Large-scale segmented forms (ten segments)

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

6. Discussion

Also, in this research we started our study from
completely random initial gene values and evolved from
there, but in this manner, the computation cost expands
directly with the number of segments. By storing the
results of studies using two or three segments in a
database, forms with larger number of segments would
not have to be calculated from scratch. Genes could be
extracted as a unit from the database and combined to
create the initial conditions, allowing an increase in the
number of segments while reducing the overall
computational cost required.
As yet another application, we also tried applying
the behavior results derived in this research to hypercubes for a new type of artistic expression (Figure 13).
Dynamic processes in four dimensions are another topic
for exploration in the future.

Acknowledgements
This research is supported by JST, CREST.

References
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

Figure 13: Hyper-cube expression of a life-form
Further problems to be studied with the behavior
model include building-in feedback of contact
information, regarding what parts of the life-form are in
contact with the ground or an obstacle. This information
should help increase the success rate for overcoming hill
and valley obstacles.
Another task is to build combined shape information,
or joint information, into the behavior model. If this can
be incorporated effectively, it should become easier to
achieve rolling or turning-over behaviors extending into
three dimensions, instead of only planar, wriggling and
writhing behaviors.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

[9]

A. Kamimura, H. Kurokawa, E. Yoshida, S. Murata, K.
Tomita and S. Kokaji, Automatic locomotion design and
experiments for a modular robotic system, IEEE/ASME
Transactions on Mechatronics , 10(3): 314-325, 2005.
Sims, K., Evolving virtual creatures, Computer Graphics
(Siggraph '94 Proceedings), 15-22., 1994
Lipson, H., and Pollack, J. B., Automatic design and
manufacture of robotic lifeforms. Nature, 406:974-978,
2000.
Yaeger, L., Computational genetics, physiology,
metabolism, neural Systems, learning, vision, and
behavior or polyWorld: Life in a new context. Proc. of
the 3rd Int. Conf. on Artificial Life, 1993
Klein, J., breve: a 3D simulation environment for the
simulation of decentralized systems and artificial life.
Proc. of Artificial Life VIII, the 8th Int. Conf. on the
Simulation and Synthesis of Living Systems, 142-145,
2002
Smith, R., The Open dynamics engine, open source
library for simulating rigid body dynamics,
http://ode.org/
Sims, K., Evolving 3D morphology and behavior by
competition. Proc. of Artificial Life IV, 1994.
M.Komosinski,, The world of framsticks: simulation,
evolution, interaction. Proc. of 2nd Int. Conf. on Virtual
Worlds (VW2000), 214-224, 2000.
D. Baraff, Analytical methods for dynamic simulation of
non-penetrating rigid bodies, Computer Graphics
Proceedings (SIGGRAPH 89) 23: 223-232, 1989.

