2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Visualizing Clinical Trial Data Using Pluggable Components
Jonas Sj¨obergh, Micke Kuwahara, and Yuzuru Tanaka
Meme Media Lab
Hokkaido University
Sapporo, Japan
{js, mkuwahara, tanaka}@meme.hokudai.ac.jp
Abstract—We describe our system for visualizing data from
clinical trials. The system is intended for clinicians with little
or no knowledge of statistics, data mining, etc. The system is
built using pluggable components, and it is easy to add more
types of visualization. Currently the system supports interactive
data exploration using for instance parallel coordinates, image
maps, charts, and life tables. Grouping and ﬁltering patients
or subsets of data is easy and any changes are immediately
reﬂected in all visualization tools currently used.

so they can easily explore the data on their own. Clinicians
may have intuitions or knowledge on what is likely to
matter when it comes to cancer, so we would like to make
it possible for them to explore the data and see if their
intuitions are right or if they can get ideas for new things
to examine.
The visualization has different types of components for
visualizing the results of a trial, for example charts, parallel
coordinates, life tables. It also has different components for
selecting and ﬁltering groups of patients or subsets of data
to visualize.

Keywords-visual analytics, information visualization, clinical
trials

I. I NTRODUCTION

II. S YSTEM

Clinical trials are important for ﬁnding out what treatments work well against what medical problems. During
clinical trials, huge amounts of data are collected. Computer
support for clinical trials is of course very useful, and we
have developed a system to support clinical trials, especially
trials on cancer. In such trials, data is collected on many
things, and a lot of it is not relevant to what results
the treatment will have. What exactly has effects on the
treatment is not known, of course.
The data quality is not always great. Many values in the
data are “unknown”, we might for instance not know if
anyone else in the patient’s family had a similar cancer for
all patients. There are also many null values in the data
base, and the meaning of these is sometimes different from
the value “unknown” (though sometimes it just means that
no such data was collected for this patient). For “Date of
death”, patients who did not die could have null values
while patients that did die but where we do not know the
actual date may have “unknown”, for example. A lot of the
data is not numerical or even ordered, so smoothing data or
compensating for null values or other problems is not trivial.
Since the problem is not well formed, i.e. we do not
have a good model of what data will have an effect on the
cancer treatments, and since the data quality is not always
great, automatic data mining or data analysis methods do
not always give us all the insights we want.
We have created a system for clinical trials [1]. It supports
all phases of a trial, designing the trial, running the trial,
and analyzing the results of a ﬁnished trial. In this paper we
describe the data visualization parts of our system. The data
visualization in the system is aimed at supporting clinicians
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.56

We use a system called the Trial Outline Builder [1], or
TOB for short. It was developed to support clinicians when
running clinical trials, and especially clinical trials on cancer.
It supports designing the trial, data collection when running
the trial, and data visualization of the data collected in a
trial.
The system was developed in the EU FP 6 project
“ACGT” (Advancing Clinico-Genomic Trials on Cancer:
Open Grid Services for improving Medical Knowledge
Discovery), and development is continuing in the FP 7 large
integration project called “P-Medicine”, started in 2011.
The TOB runs as a plug-in inside another system, ObTiMA (Ontology based Trial Management Application) [2],
that handles among other things data access restrictions (who
is allowed to see what data). ObTiMA was also developed
in the ACGT project.
The system is intended for users who are not very
proﬁcient with computers. It is a very visual system with
direct feedback. The design of the trial layout is done by
dragging and dropping medical events (such as radio therapy,
randomization, surgery, etc.) from an event repository onto a
work board. They can then be dragged around, copied, have
their properties edited, etc. by simple interaction. Currently,
we are told that most trials are designed using pen and paper,
so even a simple work ﬂow editor like this seemed helpful
to the clinicians we showed it to.
When designing a trial you also attach data input forms
to the events in the trial, and when running a trial it is
easy to open the appropriate input forms just by clicking
on the events in the patients treatment plan. The interface is
291

Figure 1. Left: The TOB when designing a trial. Medical events are dragged from the repository window on the left, and dropped into the treatment
plan on the right. Right: TOB showing the overall treatment plan (top) together with the personal treatment plan of a speciﬁc patient (bottom). Paths in
the treatment plan that the patient cannot reach are shaded out in black. Parts that are still in the future are shaded with white. Clicking on future events
activates them and puts them in the patient’s own treatment plan. Clicking on events in the patient’s plan bring up input forms related to that event.

consistent throughout all phases of a trial, so the events and
trial outline look the same when running the trial as they
did during the design phase.
After the trial is ﬁnished, the system also supports visualization of the collected data. More on this in the next
section.
The system is built using “meme media” [3], [4] pluggable
components, a kind of intelligent software objects. Meme
media is intended to make sharing and reuse of services and
functionality as easy as sharing and reuse of data resources
such as text and images is with standard technology now.
This makes it easy to add new functionality to our system,
by simply adding new pluggable components.
We developed several different components for selecting
and grouping data, and these can be used separately, used
together, or one type easily replaced by another, thanks
to the pluggable component architecture. The same is true
for the different visualization components that can display
data in different ways. They can be used together, or easily
interchanged, and they of course work together with the
selection and grouping components.
Our system was developed with repeated feedback from
clinicians. Adding new functionality when the clinicians
came up with new things they would like to have in a
clinical trial support system, such as adding Life Tables
for visualization when showing a simple visualization tool,
turned out to be easy. Very little extra work was needed to
add new functionality to the running system, or to prototype
new ideas, so the meme media concept worked well.

the part of the trial that you click, i.e. clicking a surgery
event brings up all the data ﬁelds that were collected for the
surgery. Selecting data ﬁelds from the trial outline brings
components representing these data onto a work board.
On the work board, you can group the data, and ﬁlter out
data that you are not interested in. You could for instance
group patients into groups based on which treatment they
received or what treatment group they were randomized into.
You could then ﬁlter out patients with metastatic cancer, or
look at only patients that share some genetic trait.
Finally, you can choose how to visualize the data. There
are scatter plots, bar charts, etc. available. Clinicians usually
prefer to see the data as Life Tables, plotting the number of
patients still alive in each group as a function of the time
from diagnosis.
IV. G ROUPING /F ILTERING : PARALLEL C OORDINATES
AND I MAGE M APS
We use parallel coordinates [5], [6] both for visualizing
data and for grouping and ﬁltering. Parallel coordinates
have been used to visualize medical data by others [7].
The parallel coordinate system has one dimension for each
data ﬁeld selected to be displayed on the work board. A
patient is shown in the system as one line from each parallel
coordinate to the next. Figures 2, 3, and 4 show parallel
coordinates, and patients as lines between them.
Patients can be ﬁltered out by sliding the triangular objects
on the parallel coordinate line. Patients between the triangles
are kept, and patients with values outside the triangles on
any parallel coordinate are hidden. It is possible to have
multiple sets of ﬁlter triangles, to keep and remove patients
in non-continuous groups.
Patients can also be grouped and the groups displayed in
different ways in for instance graphs. All patients passing

III. DATA V ISUALIZATION , OVERVIEW
Data visualization is divided largely into three steps in
our system. First you select what data to use from the huge
amounts of data collected in the trial. This is done by simply
clicking on an overview of the trial to bring up the data from

292

Figure 2. Two Image Map components together with Parallel Coordinate components. Each patient is represented by a line, so a female patient from
Berlin and irradiated in the chest would be represented by a line consisting of line segments from the “Female” part of the ﬁrst coordinate to Berlin on
the map, and then a line segment from Berlin to the chest of the human ﬁgure, and so on.

through the same sets of triangles on all parallel coordinates
are considered to be in the same group.
The order between the parallel coordinates is important
when trying to see connections between different dimensions. In our system any parallel coordinate can easily be
moved by just dragging it to a new position, thus enabling
reordering of the coordinates.
New parallel coordinates can also be created by composition of other coordinates. For numerical data and dates,
simple mathematical composition is possible. For instance
creating an “Age when entering trial” coordinate by taking
the difference between “Date of birth” and “Date of entering
trial”. For textual data the values are just concatenated,
though we plan to add things such as testing equality
between values in the future.
Parallel coordinates work very well for numerical data or
dates. For for example textual data, the parallel coordinates
can still be used but the order on the parallel coordinate is
arbitrary, and other visualization methods might be more
appropriate. Another visualization component that works
very much like the parallel coordinates is also available.
It is an image map, where different data values correspond
to different parts of an image. This can be used with for
instance geographical data (data points correspond to points
on a map). In Figure 2 data on where a patient was irradiated
(abdomen, lungs, not irradiated, or unknown) is shown using
an image of the human body, and there is also another image
map that is showing where patients live on a map.
Patients can be ﬁltered by clicking on areas of the image
to add or remove patients whose values correspond to that
area, and patients can be grouped by selecting sets of areas
together.

These image maps can also be used together with the
parallel coordinates, and the image maps behave like any
parallel coordinate. This means for instance that lines in the
coordinate system pass through the images too. The images
can be dragged around to change the order between the
coordinates, and they can be scaled.
V. V ISUALIZATION : G RAPHS AND L IFE TABLES
Data can be visualized using many types of graphs and
charts. All “standard” types of graphs have been wrapped
into a graphical component, and it is easy to show for instance a bar chart showing how many patients had metastatic
cancer and how many did not, or how many patients in each
randomization group had metastatic cancer etc. Since these
are standard visualization components, we will not dwell on
them in this paper, though an example is shown in Figure
4.
Clinicians prefer to show the trial results using Life
Tables. This means showing the number (or percentage) of
patients still alive as a function of time into the trial (e.g.
after a certain number of days from the date of diagnosing
the cancer).
An example with a life table is shown in Figure 3, showing
that patients in one group die to a much larger extent than
in the other two groups, but if the patient is alive after about
two years from the time of diagnosis, the likelihood of dying
in the next ten years is very low for all groups.
The upper lines (that plane out to horizontal lines) show
the optimistic estimate of the percentage of patients alive.
Every time a patient dies and the data is entered in the
database, these curves go down. If nothing else is known,
patients are assumed to be alive.

293

Figure 3. Parallel Coordinates and a Life Table. The top shows the treatment plan of the whole trial. The parallel coordinates have been used to group
patients based on what treatment arm they belonged to, and a life table has been used to show the difference in successful treatment between these groups.
The upper lines that ﬂatten out towards the right show the percentage of patients in each group that are still alive as a function of the time from entering
the trial (i.e. from the time the treatment started or the cancer was diagnosed). Two groups have very little difference, but one group has signiﬁcantly lower
survival rate. This was because all patients with metastatic cancer were placed in that group.

The lower three curves that go steadily down show a
pessimistic estimate of the percentage of patients still alive.
Every time we have no more data on a patient, the patient is
assumed to be dead (there are many reasons for not having
data, including the patient leaving the trial, the patient not
having reached this stage in the trial (i.e. a patient 7 years
into the trial has no data for being dead or alive after 10
years), the patient not being heard back from for whatever
reason, etc.). The true percentage of patients still alive is
thus somewhere between the upper and lower line for each
group. In general, if a patient dies, the trial people will hear
of it, and thus the upper (optimistic) estimate tends to be
close to the true value.
In the example in Figure 3, the reason one group did so
much worse was that all patients with metastatic cancer (thus
more likely to die) had to be allocated to this group.
Life tables can also show the number of patients who are
relapse free or some other important factor other than just
being dead or alive. Our system supports displaying the data
in various types of life tables too.
When visualizing data using charts or life tables, groups
of patients to visualize are selected using the parallel coordinates and image maps. Changing the ﬁlters on the parallel
coordinates or regrouping the patients is reﬂected in the
charts and life tables. These are updated in real time. An

example screen shot using all components together is shown
in Figure 4.
VI. E VALUATION
Our system has not been formally evaluated yet. We have
had about six clinicians play with the system, and we have
shown it at the big ﬁnal review of the EU FP 6 project
“ACGT” (the reviewing committee included clinicians). All
clinicians who have seen the system so far were very
impressed and expressed interest in using the system if it
was made available. We would like (and plan) to do proper
evaluation of the system, but the preliminary feedback so
far at least seems very promising.
The uniform look and feel throughout all modes of the
system seems to be popular, and it is similar to the paper
based handling that the intended users seem to use currently.
Most of the positive comments we have received have been
with regards to the data visualization parts, though. The fact
that a clinician can explore the data by himself, without
contacting statisticians to do the work for him, is very much
appreciated. That all the visualizations can be set up ﬁrst and
are then updated in real time when subsets of patients are
added or removed so that changes can be seen immediately
seems to give the strongest impression. While a statistician
could probably explore similar data with his usual tools, the

294

Figure 4. Combining an image map, parallel coordinates, a life table, and a bar chart. The parallel coordinates have been used to group the patients into
patients with and without metastatic cancer. Patients where it is “unknown” if they had metastatic cancer or not have been removed. The life table shows
that patients with metastatic cancer have lower survivability (as expected), and the bar charts show that such patients were never randomized, while two
small groups of patients were randomized to tracks A and B.

clinicians are not statistically trained and they appreciate
a tool with a simple interface that allows them to do the
things they commonly want to do. Currently they have to
ask a statistician to do it for them, even for fairly simple
analyses.

considering how to implement it. After building a system
based on these design ideas, more iterations ironing out
misunderstandings and presenting ideas that are possible that
the clinicians had not even imagined, were also performed.
After a number of such iterations, a system that seems to
please clinicians very much was created.
The resulting direct manipulation interface for creating a
master plan is very visual and intuitive. The same interface
is then used for data input and data exploration too.
From an implementation point of view, the use of pluggable components has been very convenient. When adding
new visualization tools etc. it has been easy to just plug in
new functionality.
In the future, we would like to add analysis of genomic
data too. This will have to bee based on yet another
component, that allows selection and visualization of the
very large data sets even the genomic markers for a single
patient produce. Even simple sets of genomic markers that
seem to predict various cancer types consist of for instance
95 different markers. Adding a new component will be
necessary to deal with this, but plugging in a new component
once you know what component you want is straightforward.
The use of parallel coordinates and other tools for direct
manipulation of the data to select subsets of patients based
on combinations of data features allows for easy exploration
of the data. Setting up life tables or charts to show some
performance measure and then immediately see the changes
when changing the selected set of patients is an intuitive way
to look at different aspects of the data. A visual analytics
approach like this to visually an exploratively search the
very high dimensional space of data is useful since what
parameters affect cancer in what ways is very difﬁcult to
model formally.

VII. R ELATED T ECHNOLOGIES
There are other systems for clinical trial support. Examples include AI based systems that check constraints
on trials and warns the chairman if the knowledge base
indicates the current trial has problems, such as using a
not recommended medicine for the control group [8]. The
TOB does not currently support any automatic validation of
the created trials, though it does indicate possible mistakes
such as medical events with no assigned input forms to the
chairman. Adding validation to the TOB has been planned,
but is not done yet.
There are also systems for visualizing the trial ﬂow during
design [9], [10], similarly to TOB. We have not seen any
system that supports all phases of the work ﬂow, though,
only the design phase.
There are also many systems for exploratory data mining
of medical data. One example very similar to the analysis
part of TOB is described in [7]. It uses several visualization
methods, for example 3D parallel coordinates, and allows
real time ﬁltering of the data etc. This system is not for
use speciﬁcally with clinical trials, it has a broader usage.
Unlike TOB it does not allow for direct access to the data
through the graphical trial plan etc.
VIII. D ISCUSSION
TOB was designed in close cooperation with an expert
on cancer clinical trials. The idea was to ﬁrst design a
system based on what clinicians would like to have, without

295

IX. C ONCLUSIONS

[7] G. Falkman, “Information visualisation in clinical odontology: Multidimensional analysis and interactive data exploration,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 22, no. 2, pp.
133–158, 2001.

We described a system for visualizing data collected
during clinical trials. The system is built using pluggable
software objects, so it is possible to add, combine, or replace
visualization components with other types of visualization.
Currently the system supports parallel coordinates, clickable
image maps, many types of charts, and life tables.
The interface is built on direct manipulation, and aimed at
non-experts in statistics or data mining (the intended users
are clinicians). It is easy to select data to visualize and to
set up a visualization scenario such as showing the survival
rate of two groups of patients receiving different treatments.
Once it has been set up, selecting subsets of patients, e.g.
only patients of a certain age or only patients who had a certain genetic predisposition, shows how these changes reﬂects
the original visualization immediately, i.e. the same charts
or life tables set up using different selection criteria are
updated in real time to reﬂect the new selection restrictions.
It is thus easy to interactively explore the multi dimensional
data to see if for example a clinician’s intuition about some
parameter being important under certain circumstances is
supported by the data.
Clinicians that have tried the system have been very
positive, and they especially like that they can explore the
data themselves, and that they can see the changes their
choices make in real time.

[8] S. Modgil and P. Hammond, “Decision support tools for clinical trial design,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 27,
no. 2, pp. 181–200, 2003.
[9] R. D. Shankar, S. B. Martins, M. J. O’Connor, D. B. Parrish,
and A. K. Das, “Epoch: an ontological framework to support
clinical trials management,” in HIKM’06: Proceedings of
the international workshop on Healthcare information and
knowledge management. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006,
pp. 25–32.
[10] P. Y. Wong and J. Gibbons, “On specifying and visualising
long-running empirical studies,” in ICMT’08: Proceedings of
the 1st international conference on Theory and Practice of
Model Transformations. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag,
2008, pp. 76–90.

R EFERENCES
[1] J. Sj¨obergh, M. Kuwahara, and Y. Tanaka, “Using Webbased Meme media technologies to create an integrated visual
environment for clinical trials,” in The IET International
Conference on Frontier Computing 2010, Taichung, Taiwan,
2010, pp. 366–371.
[2] G. Weiler, M. Brochhausen, N. Graf, A. Hoppe, F. Schera,
and S. Kiefer, “Ontology based data management systems
for post-genomic clinical trials within an European grid
infrastructure for cancer research,” in Proceedings of the 29th
Annual International Conference of the IEEE EMBS, Cit´e
Internationale, Lyon, France, 2007.
[3] Y. Tanaka, Meme Media and Meme Market Architecture.
Piscataway; NJ; USA: IEEE Press, 2003.
[4] M. Kuwahara and Y. Tanaka, “Webble world – a Webbased knowledge federation framework for programmable and
customizable Meme Media objects,” in The IET International
Conference on Frontier Computing 2010, Taichung, Taiwan,
2010, pp. 372–377.
[5] A. Inselberg and B. Dimsdale, “Parallel coordinates: a tool for
visualizing multi-dimensional geometry,” in VIS’90: Proceedings of the 1st conference on Visualization ’90, Los Alamitos,
CA, USA, 1990, pp. 361–378.
[6] E. Wegman, “Hyperdimensional data analysis using parallel
coordinates,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
vol. 85, no. 411, pp. 664–675, 1990.

296

