2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

A Model to Store Coordination Mappings
Maria Cristina Ferreira de Oliveira, Rosane Minghim
ICMC, USP – University of S˜ao Paulo
S˜ao Carlos/SP, Brazil
{cristina, rminghim}@icmc.usp.br

Danilo Medeiros Eler, Rog´erio Eduardo Garcia
FCT, UNESP – S˜ao Paulo State University
Presidente Prudente/SP, Brazil
{daniloeler, rogerio}@fct.unesp.br

coordinations employed in visualization tasks can aid researchers to keep track of their investigation steps and also
improve teamwork, as such descriptions can be shared with
and disseminated to collaborators.
In this work we propose a model to enhance data
analysis supported by Coordinated Multiple Views (CMV).
The proposed model stores the mappings generated with
distinct coordination techniques, providing a mechanism to
register and disseminate the coordination mappings (i.e.,
user analysis operations). Storing the history of mappings
is interesting not only for reﬁnement, but also to recover
and to reproduce the sequence of ﬁndings resulting from
the exploration. Furthermore, the mappings can be recovered
and reproduced whenever desired.
The main contribution of this paper is the coordination
history model, which is applicable to multiple visualizations and coordination techniques. The proposed model is
illustrated with application to similarity maps generated
from multidimensional projection and point placement techniques [7].
The following section presents previous works on recording the history of visualization processes. Section III introduces the proposed coordination history model, and Section IV exempliﬁes how this model can assist users in data
exploration processes. Finally, conclusions and further work
are addressed.

Abstract—Exploratory tasks supported by visualization are
usually improved by Coordinated and Multiple Views (CMV)
of the data under study. Several coordination techniques have
been proposed in the literature, resulting in a diversity of
tools to generate mappings among the multiple views. These
mappings can be highly dynamic, and their history reveals the
settings employed in the multiple exploratory tasks conducted
in a discovery process. Several solutions have been proposed
to help users to recover the steps performed in exploratory
tasks, but little support is found for registering the multiple
coordination mappings employed. This paper provides a contribution in this direction, proposing a model for storing and
recovering such mappings. We believe such a facility is an
important feature of CMV systems, so that users can recover
and rerun the coordinations performed when exploring their
data. We present details of the proposed model and show some
potential applications.
Keywords-Coordinated and Multiple Views; Coordination
History Model; Coordination Mapping Recovering;

I. I NTRODUCTION
Visual approaches are well established as a valuable aid
in data analysis. Exploratory data analysis tasks may be
performed both by individuals and by research teams. In
both cases, situations will arise when it is necessary to
reproduce tasks previously executed, either to verify or to
share results, or just to replicate previous steps that led to
some interesting discovery. Whenever this happens, someone
needs to replicate all the steps conducted, executing the same
tasks with the original data and parameters, and replaying the
same interactions. However, unless it is properly recorded,
analysts are likely to lose track of this information over time.
Recently, several efforts attempted to provide mechanisms to
reproduce the tasks executed during exploration processes
[1], [2], [3], [4], [5], by storing pipelines, parameters and
interactions.
Multiple views constitute an important facility in exploratory data visualization. However, interacting simultaneously with multiple visualizations may increase task complexity, due to the need of switching contexts continually [6].
Coordination mechanisms are widely employed to reduce
user cognitive overload. Still, we have not identiﬁed in the
literature a model to record coordination procedures, that
is, to register the mappings created among multiple views
along the data exploration process. We believe recording
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.106

II. R ELATED W ORK
In 1996, Shneiderman [8] stated that information visualization systems should include functionalities to preserve the
sequence of steps conducted, thus avoiding trial and error
approaches and allowing for a gradual reﬁnement of the
exploratory process. Concerned with this issue, Kreuseler
et al. [1] proposed a model that keeps a history of this
process. They create a history tree from the user interaction
and parameterizations, so that users can undo and redo
operations based on this recording. Furthermore, successful
branches can be labeled and stored for later recovery, for
further exploration and presentation purposes.
Similarly, Heer et al. [5] proposed a history model in
which a node depicts a visualization state and an edge represents an action. States are managed by a history viewer that
shows thumbnails of visualization states to aid recognition,
630

with the actions displayed under the thumbnail. Users can
undo and redo states, and go to a speciﬁc state in the history
viewer. Furthermore, the system provides a set of rules to
group some actions into a unique state, for instance, when
a group of related actions are performed in sequence.
Jankun-Kelly et al. [3] argue that a visualization technique
whose results cannot be stored is useless. Their proposed Pset model provides a conceptual framework to describe the
relationships between results of an exploratory visualization
session. P-Set is a robust model capable of capturing the
visualization techniques applied and the process employed
to obtain the results, i.e., interactions and parameterizations.
This information is recorded in a XML ﬁle that can be easily
shared and loaded.
A distinct mechanism has been implemented by Callahan
et al. [2] in the VisTrails system, to capture the evolution
history of a workﬂow’s speciﬁcation. VisTrails captures
changes in parameter values, as well as in the workﬂow
deﬁnition. Upon each change introduced, a new node is
created that represents a new state of the previous workﬂow,
and the edge between nodes represents changes applied. This
change-based provenance mechanism [9] is an interesting
way of storing the visualization process and also disseminate
the sequence of visual information seeking.
Similarly to Jankun-Kelly et al. [3], we keep the history
of coordination mappings in a XML ﬁle so that they can
be reused. The proposed coordination history model is
presented in the following section.

Figure 1.

Simpliﬁed Architecture for Coordinating Multiple Views

Topic Coordination, and Distance Coordination, deﬁned
elsewhere [7]. Those data relations are deﬁned in terms
of the attributes describing each data instance, which are
provided by Data Manager, and the parameters to establish
the relations, used by coordination techniques.
All the interaction captured by History Manager must be
preserved into the proposed model. Such architecture allows
us to focus on recording information about each coordination
mapping. Therefore, the model must keep record of the data
sets being explored and the relations among data items that
the user has interacted with.
The proposed coordination model is depicted in Figure 2.
The ﬁrst element on the structure is Tool: such data element
is a signature aimed at validating the XML ﬁle to further
instantiation, used as header ﬁle (only ﬁles that had been
created by the tool can be reloaded, recreating the visual
exploration).
The second element is a description of the visual exploration in progress. It is aimed not only at documenting
the exploration, but also at keeping record of the data sets
used. To document an exploration, we propose a description
identifying the Author of exploration, its Objective and a
Commentary about what s/he is looking for. The Datasets
are recorded into strings that may identify either data ﬁles
names (full path names) or SQL statements used to select
data from a database. The stored string is obtained from the
Data Manager component and used to recover data items
during further instantiation.
The third element – Selection – includes attributes that
describe the coordination mapping, which is the result of a
user interaction by selecting visual elements on a speciﬁc

III. T HE C OORDINATION H ISTORY M ODEL
In this work we propose a model for registering the
coordination process. Our model has elements from previous
models, in that it assists analysis by means of recovering
previous steps conducted by analysts. Figure 1 presents
a simpliﬁed architecture for coordinating multiple views
– we packed the components that are responsible for the
interaction manager, actions and presentation (visual attribute mappings) into View, since they are not handled
by the coordination model, which deals speciﬁcally with
Data Management, Coordination Management and History
Management.
The employed coordination model is based on that proposed by Boukhelifa and Rodgers [10], which has been incorporated into the Projection Explorer tool (PEx) [11]. Such
model deals with coordination techniques (i.e., techniques
that generate and apply coordination mappings), rather than
with coordination types, that are techniques employed to
highlight coordination mappings (e.g., brushing and linking,
and zoom in).
Views may be coordinated during the exploration process,
using a single coordination technique or multiple ones, according to the Coordination Manager, which establishes relationships among data instances. Some of the coordination
techniques employed in this work are Identity Coordination,

631

Figure 2.

XML structure for recording coordination mappings

view. Considering that the Coordination Manager performs
the coordination in pairs, it is necessary to register the
source and target data sets – DataSetOrig and DataSetDest, respectively. Also, the coordination technique that
generates the relationship (i.e., the coordination mapping)
among data items and its parameters (CoordTechnique and
CoordParam, respectively) are stored to allow reinstantiating
each exploration step. We also add a commentary to each
interaction (Comment) to inform other users how to interpret
the content. Finally, it also stores the data items selected in a
source view and their corresponding data items highlighted
in a target view (ItemsOrig from DataSetOrig and ItemsDest
from DataSetDest).
The model implementation also includes another component management in the architecture: the Storing Manager.
Such a component is coupled with the History Manager and
is aimed at capturing the interactions considered successful,
i.e., those for which the visual result has led to discovery of
a relevant fact. Transient classes were implemented to keep
the model, one for each element described. Another class
was implemented as an interface with History Manager.
Additionally, two classes were implemented as a persistent
layer. The ﬁrst one creates the XML ﬁle, as depicted in
Figure 3. And the second one loads a XML ﬁle and creates
the transient classes.

Figure 3.

XML ﬁle of coordination mappings

exploratory task is to seek for related papers in three distinct
information visualization datasets, namely:
• CMV: 66 papers from Coordinated & Multiple Views
(CMV), published between 2003 to 2008;
• IV: 1,263 papers from Information Visualization Conference (IV), published between 1997 to 2008;
• InfoVis: 315 papers from IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (IEEE InfoVis), published between
1995 to 2008.
We are only using title, abstract, keywords and publication
year from each document. The similarity maps employed in
the examples are generated by the Least Squares Projection
(LSP) [12] and the Neighbor-Joining(NJ) [13] tree.

IV. A PPLICATIONS
In this section we show the proposed model being applied
to the simultaneous exploration of document collections. The

632

We employ the brushing and linking coordination type
to highlight instances in a target view from that have
been selected in a source view. The coordination mapping
generated between the selected instances (source view) and
the highlighted instances (target view) can be performed in
distinct ways. We use three ways to generate the coordination mappings: based on IDs, instances with same ID are
highlighted; based on topics, instances are highlighted in
target view if they are covered by the detected topic from
the selected instances in source view; based on distance,
instances are highlighted in the target view if they are the
k-nearest neighbors instances from that selected in source
view, with k user deﬁned. For the ID based, we employ
the Identity Coordination; for the topic based, we employ
the Topic Coordination [7]; and for the distance based, we
employ the Distance Coordination [7].

the same documents are highlighted), by employing the
Identity Coordination. Once a selection is performed and a
mapping is generated, it is stored in the history model. The
stored mappings are shown in Figure 4(b), which presents a
Header with some information about the exploratory process
and a list with information about the stored mappings. The
highlighted rows in the table correspond to the mappings
generated in Figure 4(a). When the user ﬁnishes the exploration, s/he can save the stored mappings for future analysis.
For instance, Figure 3 presents a XML ﬁle with four stored
mappings.
Figure 5 shows the coordination mappings recovered
from the previous example. Note that the user ﬁlls the
commentaries for some mappings. We select the last one,
which is a Distance Coordination mapping between V iew1
and V iew2 . The coordination technique employed 3-nearest
neighbors to generate this mapping. Once a mapping is
chosen the selected and the highlighted instances are shown
in the respective views. We can see the selection of a document in V iew1 , intitled “A collaborative multi-view virtual
environment for molecular visualization and modeling”, and
three highlighted documents in V iew2 . One of them (i.e.,
the paper “Collaborative geographic visualization: enabling
shared understanding of environmental processes”) is related
with the selected paper.

(a) Selection in V iew1 and highlighting in V iew2 (Distance Coordination) and in V iew3 (Identity Coordination).

(b) Recorded mapprings from the exploratory process. The highlighted rows
are the coordination mappings generated from the selection in (a)
Figure 4.

Exploratory process and coordinations recorded.

The ﬁrst example illustrates how the model works (Figure 4). Three views are presented in Figure 4(a): (1)
is a LSP layout computed from CMV dataset; (2) is a
LSP layout computed from InfoVis dataset; and (3) is
a NJ-Tree layout computed from CMV dataset. When a
selection is performed in V iew1 , the instances in V iew2 are
highlighted based on distance mapping, which is computed
from Distance Coordination; simultaneously, the instances
in V iew3 are highlighted based on the document IDs (i.e.,

Figure 5.
Recovering stored mappings. The selected mapping was
generated by Distance Coordination set to map 3 nearest neighbors, as
recovered in V iew1 and V iew2 .

Usually, a user performs many selections along an exploratory process, trying to identify relevant data relationships, even among multiple datasets. In this process, one can
lose track of previous attempts. For instance, Figure 6(a)
shows several attempts in V iew1 , of the user trying to ﬁnd

633

In this case, the selection in V iew1 detected a topic with the
words “information, systems”. The coordination technique
generates a mapping in V iew2 , highlighting that documents
covered by the detected topic.
The last example, presented in Figure 7, shows the
recovering of an exploration from InfoVis and IV documents. Figure 7(a) presents the stored mappings, which were
generated by employing Distance Coordination and Topic
Coordination. One interesting feature of storing mappings
is the possibility of combining them. For instance, we
select two mappings from Topic Coordination: the ﬁrst was
generated with the topic “data, ﬁnancial” and the second was
generated with the topic “animation, data”. The mappings
show two distinct selections on V iew1 and the combined
highlightings in V iew2 . We note that there is an intersection
between them, that is, the paper titled “Research report:
information animation application in the capital markets”
is related to animation of ﬁnancial data.

(a) Exploratory process.

(b) Stored mappings.

(a) Stored mappings.

(c) Mapping recovered from that selected in (b).
Figure 6. Trials in the exploration process (a) can be stored (b) and
recovered latter (c).

related topics between InfoVis (V iew1 ) and IV (V iew2 )
papers. This process can be laborious and previous attempts
can be lost. The proposed history model may be employed
to overcome this problem, by storing the coordination mappings. Thus, one can redo each selection that generated a
coordination mapping, that is, redo each attempt. Figure 6(b)
shows recorded mappings from selections presented in
Figure 6(a). The selected row is the mapping generated
with the Topic Coordination and the selected (V iew1 ) and
highlighted (V iew2 ) documents are presented in Figure 6(c).

(b) Combination of two stored mappings selected in (a).
Figure 7.

Recovering and combining recorded mappings

These applications illustrate how the history model can be
employed to aid in exploratory visualization supported by
CMV approaches. For instance, we can redo these previous
examples anytime. Therefore, this model is an interesting
way of registering coordination explorations. Additionally,
it is also valuable to share discoveries and analysis with

634

collaborators. Regardless of the visualization system used,
collaborators can share the mappings: any system can redo
the examples by loading the XML ﬁle and showing the
selected instances in the source view and the highlighted
instances in the target view.

[5] J. Heer, J. Mackinlay, C. Stolte, and M. Agrawala, “Graphical
histories for visualization: Supporting analysis, communication, and evaluation,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, vol. 14, pp. 1189–1196, November 2008.
[6] M. Q. Wang Baldonado, A. Woodruff, and A. Kuchinsky,
“Guidelines for using multiple views in information
visualization,” in Proceedings of the working conference
on Advanced visual interfaces, ser. AVI ’00. New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2000, pp. 110–119. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/345513.345271

V. F INAL R EMARKS AND F URTHER W ORK
Coordinated Multiple Views has widely been employed
in dataset exploration. In an exploratory process a user
performs several interactions, from which coordination mappings are generated. These mappings hold the ﬁndings and
the results from exploratory process. The mappings can
be investigated by partners immediately to review steps
previously performed; or revisited later to report, to generate
presentations; or to use to recreate similar scenario in
different context. Therefore, users need a mechanism to
review, store and communicate their mappings. In this paper,
we proposed a coordination history model that overcomes
this lack.
Our model records the coordination mappings generated
during an exploration process. In our opinion, this is a valuable feature for researchers and their collaborators. Thus,
the former can store its researches and load anytime, and
the later can receive analysis from other researchers.
In 2007, Chris Weaver stated a question “Is coordination
a means to collaboration?” [14]. We believe that this model
is a starting point for using coordination explorations in a
collaborative way. In this case, it would be an asynchronous
collaboration. Hence, as future work we would like to
investigate approaches to support synchronous collaboration
from coordination mappings.

[7] D. M. Eler, F. V. Paulovich, M. C. F. d. Oliveira, and
R. Minghim, “Coordinated and multiple views for visualizing
text collections,” in Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference Information Visualisation (IV ’08). Washington,
DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2008, pp. 246–251.
[8] B. Shneiderman, “The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for information visualizations,” in Proceedings of the
1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages. Washington,
DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 1996, pp. 336–.
[9] C. T. Silva, E. W. Anderson, E. Santos, and J. Freire, “Using
vistrails and provenance for teaching scientiﬁc visualization.”
Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 75–84, 2011.
[10] N. Boukhelifa and P. J. Rodgers, “A model and software
system for coordinated and multiple views in exploratory
visualization,” Information Visualization, vol. 2, pp. 258–269,
December 2003.
[11] F. V. Paulovich, M. C. F. Oliveira, and R. Minghim, “The
projection explorer: A ﬂexible tool for projection-based multidimensional visualization,” in XX Brazilian Symposium on
Computer Graphics and Image Processing. Washington, DC,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2007, pp. 27–36.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of the
Brazilian ﬁnancial agencies FAPESP and CNPq.

[12] F. V. Paulovich, L. G. Nonato, R. Minghim, and H. Levkowitz, “Least Square Projection: a fast high precision multidimensional projection technique and its application to
document mapping,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 564–575, 2008.

R EFERENCES
[1] M. Kreuseler, T. Nocke, and H. Schumann, “A history mechanism for visual data mining,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization. Washington, DC,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2004, pp. 49–56.

[13] A. M. Cuadros, F. V. Paulovich, R. Minghim, and G. P. Telles,
“Point placement by phylogenetic trees and its application
for visual analysis of document collections,” in IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007,
Sacramento, CA, USA, 2007, pp. 99–106.

[2] S. P. Callahan, J. Freire, E. Santos, C. E. Scheidegger, C. T.
Silva, and H. T. Vo, “Managing the evolution of dataﬂows
with VisTrails,” in 22nd International Conference on Data
Engineering Workshops (ICDEW’06). Los Alamitos, CA,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 71–75.

[14] C. Weaver, “Is coordination a means to collaboration?” in
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2007, pp.
80–84.

[3] T. J. Jankun-Kelly, K.-L. Ma, and M. Gertz, “A model and
framework for visualization exploration,” IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 13, pp. 357–
369, March 2007.
[4] J. C. Roberts, “State of the art: Coordinated & multiple views
in exploratory visualization,” in Proceedings of the Fifth
International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views
in Exploratory Visualization, ser. CMV ’07. Washington,
DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2007, pp. 61–71.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CMV.2007.20

635

