2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

A Video Game Level Analysis Model Proposal
Samuel Almeida1,2, Ana Veloso, Óscar Mealha

Licínio Roque, Arnaldo Moura

1

2

CETAC.MEDIA, Dept. of Communication and Art
University of Aveiro
Aveiro, Portugal
sja@ua.pt, aiv@ua.pt, oem@ua.pt

CISUC, Dept. of Informatics Engineering
University of Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal
lir@dei.uc.pt, arnaldo@student.dei.uc.pt

each of these elements defines a specific analysis context
from which data can be extracted regarding player behavior
within game levels. The variety of combinations of gameplay
and psychophysiological metrics can result in information
that may posteriorly help designers, developers and
researchers reflect on level design issues; e.g. areas of a level
that are explored the most/least, movement patterns for a
single player or a team, the actions and events players
execute in various game situations, among others.

Abstract — This paper presents a preliminary model proposal
for the analysis of video game level scenarios consisting of four
elements: video game, players, metrics, and gaming experience.
The selection of parameters from each of these elements
defines a specific video game level analysis context. Initial
validation of the model is being carried out with a First-person
shooter video game and selected metrics (including eye
movement behavior) to understand player behavior (both
interactive and visual) within a game level. An additional
analysis technique based on visual representation techniques
applied in this validation context is also described. After
validated, this model may be applied in the analysis of player
behavior in game levels, in several different situations
predicted in the model itself. Information acquired from the
application of this model may posteriorly be used in the design
(or redesign) of game levels and scenarios driven for optimal
use which should generate a greater gaming experience.

II.

Keywords – Video Game Level, Analysis Mode, Gameplay
Metrics, Eye Tracking, Level Design, Gaming Experience, Player

I.

INTRODUCTION

Level design – “the act of creating a piece of a greater
whole” [1] – is a crucial part of the game development
process as it results in the creation of a stage where the
action takes place. When a game development team creates a
game (and game levels), the end goal is for players to
explore it to its full extent. However, studies [2, 3] have
shown that in particular 3D video game levels, this does not
always happen. In some cases, up to 25% of a game level
may be overlooked by players. While different playing styles
may impact how much of a game a player takes advantage
of, and, depending on the game genre and objectives; it is
conceivable for players to complete or go through games
without having interacted with part of the game elements
(scenery, objects or even characters), some of which are
crucial to the actual flow of gameplay. Therefore, if game
development teams understood player behavior – namely
movement patterns, interactions with other non-playable
characters and level entities, as well as eye movement
behavior – level designers and artists could conceive levels
that appeal more to the player and be more exhaustively and
adequately explored.
This paper proposes a solution for this gameplay and
level exploration and interaction issue, by presenting a
preliminary model proposal for video game level analysis
consisting of four elements: video game; players, metrics;
and gaming experience. The selection of parameters from
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.82

RELATED WORK

The development and application of models in game
studies has covered multiple areas. Sweetser & Wyeth [4]
proposed a model – ‘GameFlow’ – for evaluating player
enjoyment in games based on eight elements; Fabricatore et
al. [5] presented a model for the understanding of playability
of video games; Nacke [6] proposed a hierarchical game
usability model based on research regarding usability
approaches in video games. Despite these examples, research
has not focused on models that solve game level questions
based on player behavior that can be recorded and analyzed
using metrics.
The use of metrics in game analysis is a recent approach.
The term ‘metric’ originates from computer science and
refers to a standard unit of measure. Metrics are used in the
evaluation and measurement of processes, events and
interactions [7]. The use of (gameplay) metrics works by
recording User Initiated Events (UIEs) or player behavior,
resulting in log files with player related data [8] regarding
interaction within or with a virtual environment (VE).
Additionally, these events and behaviors may be initiated by
agents or other systems present in the VE, not under the
influence of the player [7]. Further player behaviors that may
be considered as metrics are those of psychophysiological
nature. Game metrics may be categorized according to
several scopes: (1) temporal resolution [9], (2) spatial
resolution [10], and (3) level of abstraction.
Regarding temporal resolution (1), the recording of
metrics can be of three types: (i) continuous; (ii) based on a
defined frequency (e.g. measurement of a player event every
2 seconds) or (iii) triggered (e.g. record a specific event
every time it occurs) [9]. Concerning spatial resolution (2),
metrics can be (i) spatial (if they operate in the spatial
environment of a game world and have an x,y,z coordinate
association) or (ii) non-spatial (if no x,y,z coordinate is
associated) [10]. Non-spatial metrics do not contain any
spatial information. Lastly, concerning their level of

474

of a game level attracted players’ visual attention and can
posteriorly help designers understand if gameplay elements
were visualized.
The relevance of this study is connected to some
evidence presented in the introductory section. Studies [2, 3]
have demonstrated that in some contexts, significant areas of
a 3D game level can go unnoticed or without exploration by
players, independently of their experience with videogames.
Fig. 1 represents a heat map illustrating hardcore player’s
visual and interaction behavior [2], also related to level
exploration.

abstraction (3), metrics can be (i) low-level (e.g. logging
keystrokes) or ‘high-level’ (player movement throughout a
game) [9].
The use of gameplay metrics is a novel approach but is
also rapidly growing. Kim et al. [8] used metrics along with
survey and video data to understand player behavior and
improve game design, describing their use in two case
studies; Drachen & Canossa [11] applied metrics to analyze
gameplay during game production, presenting a series of
case studies; Tychsen & Canossa [9] explored the use of
gameplay metrics to describe personas of players (patterns of
play).
As occurs with gameplay metrics, the use of eye tracking
in a video game context for analysis purposes is still in an
embryonic stage, with only a handful of occurrences to
account for [2, 3, 12-16]. Eye tracking and visual attention
patterns in game contexts can help improve the design of
game levels, decreasing frustration [12] and increasing the
gaming experience. Eye tracking can inform on where
players are looking while playing a game and for what
period of time. These two elements can be later used by
developers and designers so they know “where to place
items in a level or how to choose colors and use other visual
tools to stimulate attention and eliminate (…) problems”
[12].
ElǦNasr & Yan [12] applied eye tracking to explore
whether players’ visual attention patterns follow the ‘bottomup’ or ‘top-down’ visual attention theories; Johansen et al.
[14] explored how eye tracking could address several
challenges faced by a computer game developer in their
pursuit to develop better, more usable, fun and challenging
games. Almeida [2] used eye tracking to analyze how
players visually interacted with video game scenarios. He
developed a method that helped identify game level areas
that were and were not visualized by players. In another
study, Almeida [3] explored the differences in visual and
interaction behavior between hard core and inexperienced
players. Regarding gaming experience, Jennet and
colleagues [13] were able to use eye tracking to determine
that the intensity of eye movements varies according to level
of immersion in which a player is in.
III.

Figure 1. Heat map representation of hardcore players’ visual and
interaction behavior

This heat map representation indicates that for a specific
level, a significant percentage of the map was poorly
explored (areas represented in ‘colder’ colors). Areas with
‘warm’ colors are the most explored. Because players are a
game’s end target, understanding player input – in the form
of gameplay data as well as eye movement – is essential.
Consequently, video game levels can be improved, even if
slightly, if player tendencies, opinions and direct input are
taken into consideration.
The multiplicity of defined metrics may offer resourceful
information regarding player behavior; scenic and level
elements that might have played part in a determined
behavior, event or action; it can inform on what areas of the
map are explored the most/least and how players populate
the map; how and with what map/level entities and nonplayable characters players interact with; if essential game
elements or artifacts are being used by players, some of
which are essential to the flow of gameplay. If the model is
applied during game development, game designers can
rectify design issues before the game is finished and
released. If applied in a later stage of the development
process, the data can be used as a reference in the
development of future games of the genre.

STUDY AIMS & RELEVANCE

The study described in this paper has the following main
goal which is twofold: (i) present a preliminary video game
level analysis model consisting in four elements: video
game, players, metrics, and gaming experience; and (ii)
present the setup of a first validation of the proposed model.
A first validation of this model is being carried out
according to a defined analysis context in which parameters
from several of the model elements have been identified.
Specifically, for the metrics element, data such as player
events, position and eye movement behavior is considered.
These metrics were selected because they can help represent
player interaction within a game level. The way in which
players move within a game level; the way players interact
with other players and non-playable characters and entities,
may provide information about the level design. Eye
movement behavior provides insight regarding what aspects

IV.

VIDEO GAME LEVEL ANALYSIS MODEL

The Video Game Level Analysis Model (VGLAM)
described in this paper consists in four elements; these are:
(1) Video Game; (2) Players; (3) Metrics; and (4) Gaming

475

be analyzed independently or in relation to others. The
complexity of each game genre will define the number and
type of metrics that can be analyzed. For example, a FPS
game may offer gameplay metrics that cannot be found in a
Sports Simulation game and vice-versa. Despite these
possible variances, there are metrics that exist independently
of the game genre in analysis and span across all defined
game genres, for example: time, player-character
actions/events, x,y,z coordinates for a player-character, nonplayable characters and level entities. Table 1 presents a list
of some game metrics that may be used in game level
analysis for two game genres: FPS and Sports (Racing)
Simulation. Table 1 also specifies how several game metrics
may have different applications and meaning in two different
game genres.

Experience. The definition and selection of parameters
within each of the elements defines a specific analysis
context that can help in the analysis of desired aspects of
video game levels. Fig. 2 represents the specified VGLAM.

TABLE 1. Examples of game metrics for two types of games
Figure 2. Representation of the Video Game Level Analysis Model

Metric
The first of the elements, (1) ‘Video Game’, describes the
genre of games that this model can analyze. There are many
types of game genres, divided according to several
taxonomies [17, 18]. However, this model may primarily
support a spectrum of genres such as: First-Person Shooters
(FPS), Third-Person Shooters (TPS), Role-playing games
(RPG), Real-time Strategy (RTS) and some simulation
games. In common, these genres share the fact that their
gameplay includes at least one playable character, takes
place in one or more game levels (larger or smaller in size)
and promotes interaction with one or more Non-playable
characters (NPC) and other entities. Ideally, for each genre,
respective 3D game levels can be projected as 2D maps
where the gameplay takes place. This ‘map’ will later serve
as a georeference layer on which data will be analyzed.
The second element, (2) Players, describes an element
that is crucial to all video games – their end target. Video
games are designed and developed for players, and to
entertain players. Players and the act of play and player
behavior (interaction and visual) in games are dependent of
many variables: motivations, skills, past experience and
expected experiences, for example. Crawford [17] speaks
extensively on the motivation to play games. This author
highlights the motivation to learn as a main factor for
playing, even if a player is not conscious of that motive. For
other players, motivation might reside in other factors such
as the need to explore, to prove oneself or the need for
acknowledgement. Furthermore, player gender and age may
also play a role in motivation. Skills are also a relevant factor
in the player element, and are closely related to another of
the model elements (Gaming Experience) [19]. A player’s
skills in a specific game can influence the outcome and the
success in a game. Skills can also influence a player’s
motivation to continue playing a game. Lastly, players’ past
and expected experiences also play a role in a player’s
performance in a game, and can also influence motivation.
The third element, (3) ‘Metrics’, describes gameplay and
other behavior metrics that are used in a defined analysis
context. As explored in the ‘Related Work’ section, metrics
can be categorized in multiple ways. Furthermore, these may

Time
Energy
Health
Player
Action
Team
x,y,z
coordinates

FPS
Time to
complete a
mission
Remaining
running boost
Overall health
E.g. jumping,
running
Blue Team/Red
Team
Current position
of playercharacter in
level

Sports (Racing)
Simulation
Time spent on a
lap
Remaining fuel
Car damage
Accelerate/Break
Ferrari/Renault
Current position
of car on track

Other data considered in this model is that directly
related to the player and of psychophysiological nature: eye
tracking (eye movement and behavior); electromyography
(EMG); cardiovascular measures and others. In the case of
eye tracking, quantitative data regarding where and how a
player was looking at a certain object can provide insight
about, for example, what level entities are visualized with
greater or less intensity. Lastly, a sub-element of the
‘Metrics’ element is the ‘In-Game Environmental’ metrics.
These metrics deal with specific level parameters that can be
altered and that can produce an effect on other gameplay
metrics. Examples of these ‘in-game environment’ metrics
are the size of the level (map), quantity of resources/entities
and
climate
conditions.
Furthermore,
‘In-Game
Environmental’ metrics can have an effect on another of the
elements described in the model: gaming experience.
The fourth element of the model, (4) ‘Gaming
Experience’, deals with a selection of traits that may
potentially be analyzed with the model; e.g.: immersion and
flow. Immersion and flow are two of the most common
gaming experiences and have been studied extensively [13,
16, 19-22]. The quality of the gaming experience can be a
direct result of the quality of a level and is therefore a
relevant element of the model. Game experiences as a whole

476

context from which information can be extracted. This
information can be later analyzed and interpreted with the
help of one or more analysis techniques. In terms of
applicability during the game development process, it is
expected that the model can be applied during game
development or used in post-launch analysis, with different
impacts. Globally, the model can help understand and
analyze how players interact within their game level; it can
help understand if player interaction patterns are those that
are expected; if players are moving through the game and
interacting with crucial gameplay elements, which can
ultimately define the quality of their gaming experience.

may not fully be understood using the model, but several
gameplay (e.g. number of deaths, player movements) and
psychophysiological metrics (e.g. eye tracking) may provide
an understanding of the quality of a level. For example, in a
shooting game, a low number of deaths may indicate that the
game is too easy, suggesting a more boring game and
therefore, hindering a positive flow state. Additionally, as
referred, the variation of in-game environmental metrics can
also influence the quality of the gaming experience. To
exemplify, in a racing game, an insufficient time to complete
a race may cause a player to become anxious, also hindering
a positive flow experience.
The four elements of the proposed model are all
connected and interdependent. A video game is a central
element of the model and can only exist if there are players
to play the game. Different player profiles, based on
motivations, skills and experiences, will influence players’
behavior within the game. The game and game genre can
also influence player behavior. The qualities of a game and a
player profile can define the quality of the gaming
experience. Metrics can be associated to games and players:
gameplay metrics in the case of games and
psychophysiological metrics in the case of players. Lastly,
metrics can provide valuable information regarding player
behavior with and within a game. These diverse relations
among elements establish the interdependency of the model.
The selection of parameters from these elements defines a
selected ‘analysis context’ from which information can be
collected, correlated and analyzed. This correlation and
analysis can help establish connections between each of the
parameters defined in the model.
In some contexts, the analysis of quantifiable data is not
linear. Therefore, further techniques and/or methods can be
applied that assist in establishing a connection between
parameters (e.g. gameplay metrics). For example, a linear
correlation of eye tracking data and player movement is not
direct. As a result, additional techniques may be used to
combine these two metrics and assist in understanding the
acquired information; e.g. the relation between where a
player was moving and where he was looking. Visual-based
techniques are one option to assist in the analysis of data
from the metrics defined in the analysis context. Depending
on the specificities of each context, multiple visual analysis
techniques may be used. For example, heat maps – which
use color to represent levels of intensity – can be used to
analyze multiple metrics (e.g.: areas where player movement
was most/least intense; areas where player interactions were
most frequent). Clustering can also visually assist in the
analysis of metrics within defined areas (clusters) of a game
level (e.g. providing information regarding number of deaths
in various areas of a map, in a FPS). Furthermore, common
visual representations such as bar graphs and pie charts can
assist in visually interpreting two or more metrics (e.g. time
and number of interactions with other non-playable
characters).
In a game/level design process, this model can be used in
the analysis of player behavior in game levels. The definition
of parameters from each of these elements – a game and
genre, a player(s) profile and metrics – provides an analysis

V.

MODEL VALIDATION

A first validation of the Video Game Level Analysis
Model is being carried out in order to confirm the relevance
of each of the constituent elements.
An analysis context has been defined based on the
selection of parameters from several of the elements that
make up the model: a video game was developed (described
in section 5A) for the purpose of this validation and game
metrics were defined according to possibilities of the game.
However, gaming experiences have not been initially
considered. Additionally, in this first validation, one of the
metrics selected was of psychophysiological nature: eye
movement (visual behavior). The selection of the eye
movement metric resulted in the need to apply an additional
technique that was used to collect, extract and subsequently,
interpret data. The analysis of eye movement in dynamic
media (i.e. video games) cannot be carried out using
visualization techniques (e.g. gaze plots, bee swarms,
clusters) frequently used with static media (e.g. pictures)
[23]. As a result, a specific technique was projected in order
to carry out the intended collection of data for posterior
analysis. Fig. 3 is a schematization of the technique used
during the validation process, consisting in 4 phases: Data
Tracking; Log Files; Computing; Data Visualization System.

Figure 3. Representation of the technique used in the validation process

The first phase (1), ‘Data Tracking’, is related to the
capturing of player eye movements using an eye tracker
while playing the video game. The second phase (2), ‘Log

477

been developed for a particular analysis context, it intends to
have sufficient versatility to be applied in other analysis
contexts with different parameters in each of the elements of
the model.
The tool initially requires an upload of a 2D map of the
game level being analyzed. This map serves as a
georeference layer on which additional layers of player
activity is represented.
Once the game map is imported, the tool is launched and
an initial layer of information is presented. This layer of
information consists in the representation of movements by
players used in the study. In addition, the analysis tool
consists of other functions: (i) Timeline control: controls the
evolution of a player’s movements and events within the
course of a player’s gameplay time; (ii) Player selection
filters: filters allow the selection of what player’s movements
and actions to visualize and control; (iii) Player events
representation: a user may control what player-triggered
events (jumping, shooting, harvesting water, running or
alliance proposals) to see independently or simultaneously;
(iv) Player health evolution: the evolution of one or more
player’s health may be visualized and analyzed according to
their movements and other player events that influence the
increase/decrease of health; (v) Information representation:
the combination of log file data regarding gameplay metrics
and eye movement data can be represented and analyzed
through a combination of different information visualization
paradigms. For example, heat maps may be used to represent
areas of the map that were explored and populated the most,
thereby also revealing eventual problematic areas of the
game level. This last function is also connected to the last
element of the model, regarding visual-based analysis.

Files’, refers to the extraction of log file data from the eye
tracker and video game. Phase three (3) and four (4),
‘Computing’ and ‘Data Visualization System’, deal with the
integration and correlation of the selected metrics: eye
tracking and gameplay metrics. These are then processed
with an analysis tool (described in 5B) developed
specifically to interpret these combined data. The resulting
data may later be analyzed through the use of several
information visualization paradigms, such as a heat map (as
seen in Fig. 1).
A. Video Game study object
Regarding the video game developed and used in this
first validation; the platform selected for development was
‘Unity’ (http://unity3d.com/). The game, titled ‘ReCycle’,
has an intentionally simple and flexible design which allows
for a multiple number of combinations of game parameters,
ultimately leading to various types of gameplay dynamics.
Fig. 4 represents a screenshot from ‘ReCycle’.

VI.

Figure 4. Screenshot from the game 'ReCycle'

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

The objective of this paper is to present a preliminary
video game level analysis model currently in validation. The
model consists of a four elements: Video Game; Players;
Metrics; and Gaming Experience. The selection of
parameters from each of these connected and interdependent
elements defines a specific analysis context.
Currently, a first validation is being carried out using a
First-Person shooter game. Several gameplay metrics as well
as eye tracking behavior were defined in order to understand
player interaction and visual behavior. The definition of
these parameters demanded the development of additional
techniques that are used in the correlation of these sets of
metrics. Nonetheless, further validation of the model is
necessary and is being carried out for this analysis context.
Initial results have been applied in the rectification of the
model itself. The current model proposal based on four
elements has been iteratively refined to its current state,
based on the removal of elements and addition of others,
namely gaming experience. Further work will result in a
more concise Video Game Level Analysis Model.
The validation of the model may ultimately help
understand player behavior – interactive and visual – in
game levels based on defined gameplay and other metrics.
This and other information can help developers make more
conscious choices during the game development process or

The objective of the game is for players to survive in a
desert where water is the only source of energy. The game
also consists of a day and night cycle that results in energy
loss after each cycle. As a result of this, players must look
for water (found in the blue spheres in Fig. 4), scattered
around the desert, to stay alive. Each player, carrying a
weapon, must survive in the desert, fighting off opponents
and, in some game variants, may form alliances. These
alliances bring both benefits as well as responsibilities. Each
gameplay session lasts until there is a single survivor in the
desert.
The game logs two types of data: continuous and eventtriggered. Continuous data – written by the server – is logged
into a file and contains player positions and status. Every 0.2
seconds the server writes for each player their ID, username,
current position, rotation, alliance, energy and the time stamp
of this information. A second log file is created with playertriggered events: jumping; shooting, harvesting water,
running or alliance proposal.
B. Analysis Tool Development
An analysis tool was developed and applied in this first
validation process which responds to the needs of the predefined analysis context. Although this analysis tool has

478

in future versions of a game. Additionally, with this
knowledge, levels can be conceived and designed for optimal
usage, therefore creating a more intense and gratifying
gaming experience – the ultimate goal of any video game.

MindTrek Conference: Everyday Life in the Ubiquitous Era,
Tampere, Finland, 2009.
[11] A. Drachen and A. Canossa, "Towards gameplay analysis via
gameplay metrics," presented at the Proceedings of the 13th
International MindTrek Conference: Everyday Life in the
Ubiquitous Era, Tampere, Finland, 2009.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[12] M. S. El-Nasr and S. Yan, "Visual attention in 3D video
games," presented at the Proceedings of the 2006 ACM
SIGCHI international conference on Advances in computer
entertainment technology, Hollywood, California, 2006.

Special thanks to Labs.SAPO of the University of Aveiro
for providing the eye tracker used in our studies; and to our
colleague Celso Soares. Finally, our acknowledgments to the
Portuguese institution ‘Fundação para a Ciência e
Tecnologia’ (FCT) for funding this project with the PhD
grant no. SFRH/BD/66527/2009.

[13] C. Jennett, A. L. Cox, P. Cairns, S. Dhoparee, A. Epps, T.
Tijs, and A. Walton, "Measuring and defining the experience
of immersion in games," Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., vol. 66,
pp. 641-661, 2008.

REFERENCES

[14] S. A. Johansen, M. Noergaard, and J. Rau, "Can Eye Tracking
Boost Usability Evaluation of Computer Games?," presented
at the CHI 2008: Evaluating User Experiences in Games,
2008.

[1] B. Bates, Game Design, Second ed.: Thomson Course
Technology, 2004.
[2] S. Almeida, "Augmenting Video Game Development with
Eye Movement Analysis," M.Sc Thesis, Departamento de
Comunicação e Arte, Universidade de Aveiro, Aveiro, 2009.

[15] T. Lin and A. Imamiya, "Evaluating usability based on
multimodal information: an empirical study," presented at the
Proceedings of the 8th international conference on
Multimodal interfaces, Banff, Alberta, Canada, 2006.

[3] S. Almeida, Ó. Mealha, and A. Veloso, "Interaction Behavior
of Hardcore and Inexperienced Players: "Call of Duty:
Modern Warfare" Context " in Proceedings of SBGames 2010
- IX Brazilian Symposium on Computer Games and Digital
Entertainment, Florianopolis, SC, Brazil, 2010.

[16] L. Nacke and C. A. Lindley, "Flow and immersion in firstperson shooters: measuring the player's gameplay
experience," presented at the Proceedings of the 2008
Conference on Future Play: Research, Play, Share, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada, 2008.

[4] P. Sweetser and P. Wyeth, "GameFlow: a model for
evaluating player enjoyment in games," Comput. Entertain.,
vol. 3, pp. 1-24, 2005.

[17] C. Crawford. (1984). The Art of Computer Game Design.
Available:
Digital
Copy
available
at:
http://library.vancouver.wsu.edu/sites/library.vancouver.wsu.e
du/files/ACGD.pdf

[5] C. Fabricatore, M. Nussbaum, and R. Rosas, "Playability in
action videogames: a qualitative design model," Hum.Comput. Interact., vol. 17, pp. 311-368, 2002.
[6] L. Nacke, "From playability to a hierarchical game usability
model," presented at the Proceedings of the 2009 Conference
on Future Play on @ GDC Canada, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada, 2009.

[18] A. Rollings and E. Adams, Andrew Rollings and Ernest
Adams on Game Design: New Riders Games, 2003.
[19] M. Csíkszentmihályi. (1990). Flow: The Psychology of
Optimal Experience.

[7] A. Drachen and A. Canossa, "Analyzing user behavior via
gameplay metrics," presented at the Proceedings of the 2009
Conference on Future Play on @ GDC Canada, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada, 2009.

[20] J. Chen, "Flow in games (and everything else)," Commun.
ACM, vol. 50, pp. 31-34, 2007.
[21] J. Takatalo, J. Häkkinen, J. Kaistinen, and G. Nyman,
"Presence, Involvement, and Flow in Digital Games," in
Evaluating User Experience in Games: Concepts and
Methods (Human-Computer Interaction Series), R.
Bernhaupt, Ed., First ed: Springer, 2010, p. 288.

[8] J. H. Kim, D. V. Gunn, E. Schuh, B. Phillips, R. J. Pagulayan,
and D. Wixon, "Tracking real-time user experience (TRUE): a
comprehensive instrumentation solution for complex
systems," presented at the Proceeding of the twenty-sixth
annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems, Florence, Italy, 2008.

[22] E. Brown and P. Cairns, "A grounded investigation of game
immersion," presented at the CHI '04 extended abstracts on
Human factors in computing systems, Vienna, Austria, 2004.

[9] A. Tychsen and A. Canossa, "Defining personas in games
using metrics," presented at the Proceedings of the 2008
Conference on Future Play: Research, Play, Share, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada, 2008.

[23] Ó. Mealha, A. Veloso, S. Almeida, R. Rodrigues, L. Roque,
R. Marques, and C. Manteigueiro, "Eye Tracking Data
Representation and Visualization: on Information and
Communication studies at CETAC.MEDIA," Journal of Eye
Tracking, Visual Congnition And Emotion, 2012.

[10] A. Drachen and A. Canossa, "Analyzing spatial user behavior
in computer games using geographic information systems,"
presented at the Proceedings of the 13th International

479

