2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Augmented Reality Technology and Art:
The Analysis and Visualization of Evolving Conceptual Models
Vladimir Geroimenko
School of Art and Media
Plymouth University
Plymouth, UK
vladimir.geroimenko@plymouth.ac.uk

Abstract

activity in the field of Augmented Reality has increased
significantly. Our simple analysis based on the Google
Scholar Search [1] has showed that while the number of
academic works on Augmented Reality published in
2008 was 2100, in the following year 2009 there were
3700, 5600 in 2010, and 5100 in 2011.
Why has Augmented Reality become so popular?
There are several reasons, some from the past and some
recent. First, it’s because Augmented Reality is a natural
way of exploring 3D objects and data, as it brings virtual
objects into the real world where we live [2]. Second, it’s
because the possibilities of AR are endless, such as
information visualization, navigation in real-world
environments, advertising, military, emergency services,
art, games, architecture, sightseeing, education,
entertainment, commerce, performance, translation and
so on [3]. All the afore-mentioned features of AR have
already been known for some time. What has really
brought Augmented Reality to life in the recent years is
that AR applications are now available on any
smartphone or similar portable device (such as iPad) and,
in other words, AR has moved from scientific labs to the
pocket of the man in the street.
In principle, AR can be implemented on any
computer and handheld device that use video-seethrough technology that allows to “see through” the
display to view both the real world and superimposed
computer-generated objects. However, only the recent
Mobile AR applications for iPhone, iPad and Android,
such as Junaio, Layar and Wikitude [4] have brought this
technology to the masses.
Information Visualisation and Augmented Reality
Art seem definitely to be among the numerous areas
where Augmented Reality is going to thrive in the near
future. In terms of a commercial interest and success, the
most promising AR applications could be in the field of
AR games [5]. This new type of video games allows
gamers to run around a level of their favourite game, and
to battle life-size “bad guys” and monsters. AR games
immerse the gamer not in an artificial world of Virtual
Reality, but in the physical world, and therefore need to
be played in a more active and healthy way, rather than
sitting statically and staring at a screen. “Using AR, it is

This paper provides a logical and methodological
reconstruction of the evolving concept of Augmented
Reality (AR) and also of the paradigmatic shift in art,
caused by this emerging technology. It starts with an
analysis of the notion of Augmented Reality, that leads to
the construction of a conceptual model and a definition
which together capture the nature of present AR
applications. This is followed by a detailed conceptual
analysis of major types of Augmented Reality that
contribute to an understanding of current concepts.
Finally, the resulting conceptual models are applied to
the newly emerging field of Augmented Reality Art in
order to assess the paradigmatic potential of AR as a
new artistic medium.
The paper puts a strong emphasis on the effective
and adequate visualisation of the analysed conceptual
frameworks, in order to promote a better comprehension
of the logical structures underlying the notions of
Augmented Reality and AR Art. This paper was intended
to be presented at the opening of the First International
Symposium on Augmented Reality Visualisation and Art,
proposed and chaired by the author as part of the 16th
International Conference on Information Visualization,
IV2012.

Keywords--- Augmented reality, augmented
reality art, logical and methodological analysis,
conceptual model, visualization, concept visualization.

1. Introduction
The idea of Augmented Reality (AR) has been
around for two decades, being from time to time
successfully implemented in some, mostly scientific or
military, projects. However, the arrival of smartphones
and the advances in Mobile Augmented Reality in recent
years have aroused a real interest in this technology
among an extremely wide audience and many dedicated
commercial companies. At the same time, research
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.77

445

possible to achieve a level of immersion that is beyond
what most people associate with video games” [2, p.7].
Some current games provided, for example, by Nintendo
Wii are far from being passive, but they need to be
played indoors. AR games take the gamers outdoors and
immerse them in the vast physical world.
All the recent advantages in the field of Augmented
Reality have led to the necessity of rethinking the
evolving concept of AR and reconstructing underlying
logical structures and conceptual models. The
visualization of these abstract models could contribute
significantly to their more adequate perception and a
deeper understanding.

Figure 1 A comparison of the proposed
definition with the “ideal” definition of AR
According to Wikipedia, Augmented Reality is a
live view of physical, real-world environments whose
elements are augmented by computer-generated sensory
input such as sound, video, graphics or GPS data [3]. In
general, this is a good definition, though, for example, in
the case of Audio AR no view or any visual display can
be provided. In addition, in many AR applications, we
are dealing with AR objects that are embedded in the
whole physical environment rather than augmenting any
particular elements of it.
We will try to construct a definition of Augmented
Reality using the “analysis – synthesis” approach. This
approach is the most effective one, traditionally used in
philosophy and methodology of science. It consists of
two stages: analysis (when we analyse and “disassemble”
the concept in question in order to reveal its bare logical
structure) and synthesis (when we try to “assemble” the
logical structural elements and to express their
organisation in one of the most appropriate verbal
forms).

2. Augmented Reality: The Concept and
Relationships with Physical and Virtual
Worlds
The definition of Augmented Reality has had a
rather long history, because most publications on AR
include a defining statement that starts with “Augmented
Reality is ...” On the one hand, the limited length of this
paper does not allow us to research this history. On the
other hand, such research would not have had a
considerable impact on an up-to-date understanding of
the Augmented Reality concept, since it has been
evolving considerably all the time, following the
advances in the AR technology. This is why our focus
will be on just a few recent high-impact works that deal
with the concept and definition of Augmented Reality.
In his book “Augmented Reality Browsers for
Smartphones” [4, p. 4], published by Wiley/Wrox in
2011, Lester Madden attempts to provide a broader and
all-encompassing view of AR, and defines Augmented
Reality as a technology that has the following five
features:
• It combines the real world with computer
graphics
• It provides interaction with objects in real-time
• It tracks objects in real-time
• It provides recognition of images or objects
• It provides real-time context or data
This example makes it obvious that the job of
defining Augmented Reality is far from being easy. The
provided definition has captured some essential features
of AR, but not all of them. As illustrated in Figure 1, it is
overlapping with an “ideal” definition of AR
(intersection 1), but is not identical to it for two reasons.
Firstly, some features have not been included into the
proposed definition (shown as area 2). For example,
location-based AR is one of the main types of
Augmented Reality, but it does not comply with all of
the 5 features, since it doesn’t track objects and isn’t
based on recognition. The second reason is that the
proposed definition allows the inclusion of things that
can hardly be named as AR, such as fiduciary markers
that by no means “are the truest form of AR” [4, p. 5],
barcodes and QR codes [4, p. 6-7]. On the Euler diagram
in Figure 1, it’s shown as area 3.

Figure 2 A logical structure of the concept
“Augmented Reality”
Figure 2 shows the results of our conceptual
analysis. The logical structure of the concept

446

“Augmented Reality” consists of the following “building
blocks”: (1) the presence of the real world; (2) real time;
(3) the presence of computer-generated sensory objects
(sensory means related to or using human’s senses of
sight, hearing, smell, taste, or touch); (4) close or
seamless integration between the real environment and
the computer-generated content; (5) the use of an ARenabled device.
The analytical stage of the approach provides a
logical framework for a definition that can be
synthesised from the conceptual building blocks. At this
stage, some suitable verbal expressions have to be found,
to present the definition in a clear and comprehensible
form. As the result of the synthesis, our definition can be
verbalised as follows:
Augmented Reality (AR) is a real-time devicemediated perception of a real-world environment that is
closely or seamlessly integrated with computergenerated sensory objects.
The description and especially visualization of the
relationships between Augmented Reality, on the one
hand, and the Real World and Virtual Reality, on the
other hand, is highly important for an in-depth
understanding of the nature of Augmented Reality.

Figure 4 An interpenetrating conceptual model
of the relationships between the Real (Physical)
Reality and Virtual Reality
Figure 5 represents another conceptual model that
can be titled “The Yin and Yang of the Two Realities”.
In our opinion, it’s a rather obvious interpretation of the
concept of Yin Yang that is used in Asian philosophy to
describe how polar opposites or seemingly contrary
forces are interconnected and interdependent in the world
[7]. “AV” stands for “Augmented Virtuality”.

Figure 3 The Reality-Virtuality (RV) Continuum,
according to [6]
The widely cited “Reality-Virtuality Continuum” is
a concept, introduced by Paul Milgram et al [6], that
describes and visualises a continuous scale between
completely Real and completely Virtual Environments
(see Figure 3). It also uses the concept of Mixed Reality
(MR) in order to describe two possible combinations of
Real and Virtual Reality, namely Augmented Reality
(the virtual augments the real) and Augmented Virtuality
(the real augments the virtual).
Despite the fact that Milgram’s Reality-Virtuality
Continuum was intended to show continuity between the
virtual and the real, it actually presents four different
states as all the possible combinations of the virtual and
the real: “Real Reality”, “Augmented Reality”, “Virtual
Reality” and “Augmented Virtuality”. These four states
can be visualised in the context of a different (noncontinuous) conceptual model that provides a slightly
dissimilar view of the construct “Real/Virtual/Mixed
Reality”. For example, Figure 4 visualises the four
possible combinations of the two realities using an
“interpenetrating” conceptual model.

Figure 5 The Yin and Yang of the real and the
virtual
Work on the construction of a variety of conceptual
models and visualisations is important because it can
significantly contribute to the understanding of the
notion of Augmented Reality, providing either diverse or
just slightly different views.

447

computer monitor, a television or a smartphone. Audio
AR embeds not digital graphics, but digital sound into
physical world [9]. Haptic AR is a type of AR that
allows the user to touch and feel augmented reality
objects placed into a real-world environment (see, for
example, [10]). To achieve this effect, the user needs, for
instance, to wear a special Virtual Reality (VR) gloves,
well researched and developed in the field of Haptic VR
(see, for example, [11]). The remaining two type of
sensory-based AR that could augment the real world
with smell and taste are possible in principle, but they
can hardly be implemented successfully in the near
future. They can be called Olfactory AR and Gustatory
AR respectively.
We can imagine an example that presents an
application of Olfactory AR (Figure 7). It shows a future
generation of smartphones that allows you to smell a rose
or other flowers just by pointing the smartphone’s
camera at an image of the flower. Although, this looks
like a distant future, some research into “Smell Enhanced
Augmented Reality” is being conducted at present [12].

3. Types and Conceptual Models of
Augmented Reality
The definition of Augmented Reality is the most
important step in the understanding of its concept, but it
is only the first one. The next step that can contribute
significantly to our understanding is the analysis of
different types of AR and their possible classifications.
This step is not as strictly logical as the definition of AR.
Classifications can be based on a variety of principles
and therefore can be rather dissimilar. There is no lack
of taxonomies in the literature on Augmented Reality.
Many authors and publications name and analyse the
existing and future types of AR [2; 3; 4; 8; 24]. In this
paper, we will try to consider only those types of AR that
seem to be the most important and central for the further
understanding of the conceptual models on which the
notion of AR is based.
Let’s start with a simple question and a simple
answer. “... What exactly is AR? In its simplest form, AR
is the art of super-imposing computer graphics over a
live view of the real world” [4, p.xxi]. Definitely, this is
an answer, but does it refer to Augmented Reality as a
whole, or merely to a particular type of AR that exists
alongside with several others? Augmented Reality based
on computer graphics is not the only type of AR related
to human senses, i.e. the five natural powers of sight,
hearing, feeling, taste and smell. Figure 6 shows a
sensory-based classification of AR.

Figure 7 An imaginary example of an Olfactory
AR application
The classifications of AR are not cast in stone; they
are evolving, following the progress of AR technology.
Let’s analyse the main types of AR in the context of their
conceptual evolution. To start with, AR applications can
be divided into two classes depending on whether or not
they are using a marker. Sometimes these two types of
Augmented Reality are called “Marker and Markerless
AR” [2; 4]. It’s important to note that this classification
implies that “Marker AR” is the main type of AR,
because it can be used for defining the other type of AR
as “Markerless AR”.
What is a marker? In the broadest sense, an AR
marker is an image or a view of real-world objects that
provides a unique pattern that can be captured by an AR
camera and recognized by AR software. The pattern may
range from an obvious one (such as a barcode) to a
concealed one (such as a landscape painting or even a

Figure 6 A classification of Augmented Reality
based on human senses
Visual Augmented Reality is the most common type
of AR and is often described as simply “Augmented
Reality”. In the case of Visual AR, computer graphics,
embedded in the real world, is not visible to the naked
eye and hence requires the use of a display, such as a

448

effectively used in a particular type of AR. We would
suggest that this line of argument can help to distinguish
between two major types of Augmented Reality, namely
Recognition-based AR and Location-based AR.
For a deeper understanding of the nature of
“Markerless AR”, we will consider the following
statement: “Markerless tracking is where AR is used to
track objects in the real world without using special
markers. Face recognition is an excellent example” [4, p.
9]. Strictly speaking, face recognition is not an example
of Markerless AR. Despite the fact that human face is
something rather different from a printed AR marker,
functionally it works in the same way as any other
marker and is, actually, a very specific and highly
complicated type of marker. We can talk of a human face
as of a “natural marker”, for example, but functionally it
still is a marker.
The following simple experiment could clarify the
concept further. Imagine a person that is holding a livesize photograph of their face. You are using a
smartphone to explore AR objects “connected” to the
person’s face as well as to the photograph. If face
recognition software works well enough, we can
experience absolutely the same results. It means that in
this experiment we are dealing with two examples of
Marker-based AR. For AR software, a human face is the
same marker as its photograph and the software is able to
recognize it only because a digital image of the face has
been stored in its database alongside with other type of
markers, such as printed ones.

human face). After a marker has been recognized by AR
software, the software calculates the correct position and
orientation of a relevant virtual object and embeds it in
real time into the real environment on the top of or near
the marker.

Figure 8 An example of fiduciary markers: a
FLARToolKit AR marker (on the left) and a
Quick Response (QR) code (for the VG Art
Gallery www.geroimenko.com)
Historically, the notion of the marker was a starting
point in the definition of AR. It was used to define the
opposite type of AR as “markerless”, i.e. not based on a
marker. The term “Marker AR” seemed to be adequate
for a long time during which different types of fiduciary
markers were used (see Figure 8). However, the latest
development in the field of AR has led to the use of
human faces as a marker and, as a result, made the term
“Marker AR” less suitable for describing this particular
type of AR. Therefore, it is a good idea to try to replace
it with another term that could sensibly be applied to the
entire range of “markers” – from printed QR codes and
AR markers to human faces. What is common between
them is not the concept of a marker (it’s rather inhumane
to classify a human as a marker), but the notion of
pattern or image recognition. From this point of view, the
term “Recognition-based AR” seems to be the most
appropriate one. Since it can be a contentions question,
we will consider it in more detail.
“Marker AR” technology uses fiduciary markers as
a point of reference that defines the position, orientation
and scale of an AR object in the physical world. If the
object is a 3D one, then by rotating the marker the user
can view it from 360 degrees. We can argue with the
assertion that “fiduciary markers are the truest form of
AR because they are used to track objects in the real
world” [4, p. 5]. Firstly, a marker is not a form of AR,
but merely an important part of a particular AR
technology. Secondly, what makes the specifics of AR is
not tracking, but embedding digital objects into a real
environment.
Can standard barcodes and QR codes be considered
as forms of AR because they include the process of
recognizing a marker [4, p. 6-7]? We think not. Image
recognition is an important part of Marker-based AR, but
this is not the essence of Augmented Reality. Image and
object recognition is a broad and relatively independent
field, and we cannot label its numerous applications as
“Augmented Reality”, because it is simply a technology,

Figure 9 The evolution of markers in
pattern/image recognition technology related to
AR applications
In other words, we can distinguish between the
following three types of AR markers: digital markers (for
example, an image on a computer screen), printed
markers (for example, a photograph in a magazine), and
natural markers (for example, a human face). In addition,
AR markers can be classified as technical (for example, a
QR code) and natural (for example, a photograph, a
human face or a view of a real-world environment).

449

Technical markers are nothing else but clearly visible
geometrical patterns and therefore they do not look userfriendly (see Figure 9). Natural markers, such as the
cover of a magazine or an advertising poster, can be used
in the same way, but they are much more attractive and
common for the user.
Though the difference between a printed AR marker
or QR code and a human face might look massive, in
terms of recognition technology, both of them contain
some visual patterns (the pattern of a printed AR marker
or QR code is quite obvious and the “pattern” of a human
face is deeply concealed) that have to be identified,
extracted and compared with a reference pattern on the
server. Hence, we are dealing with different levels of the
pattern recognition technology, rather than with different
types of AR. All of the above examples are examples of
Recognition-based AR applications.

will have a different effect. In the case of Recognitionbased AR (aka Marker AR), the AR objects will have
disappeared, in the case of Location-based AR (aka
Markerless AR) they will not have disappeared, but it’s
easy to program their disappearance when no structured
input from the camera is available. Figure 10 summarises
and visualises the evolution of the conceptual model of
Augmented Reality from “Marker/Markerless AR” to
“Recognition/Location-based AR”.

4. AR Art and its Paradigmatic Conceptual
Model
It stands to reason that Augmented Reality Art is a
recent phenomenon in the field of art, because it is based
on AR technology and therefore could not come into
existence before a certain point in time. However,
despite this obvious logic, some implicit conceptual
prototypes of this radically new type of art can be found
in the cultural history. We will consider just two of them
to serve as examples.
In the famous children’s novel “The Wonderful
Wizard of Oz” [14] written by L. Frank Baum and
published in 1900, there is something that could be
clearly interpreted as an early conceptual prototype of
architectural AR art. The story describes the adventures
of Dorothy and her friends in the Land of Oz, where they
follow the road of yellow bricks to go to the “Emerald
City” or “City of Emeralds” (see Figure 11).

Figure 10 The evolution of the conceptual model
of Augmented Reality
An interesting comparison between Location-based
AR and Recognition-based AR can be achieved by
conducting another simple “experiment”. Imagine that
you have an example of each of them and then you
simply cover the camera lens of the smartphone. In the
case of Recognition-based AR, AR objects will have
disappeared and there will be nothing on your display. In
the case of Location-based AR, all AR objects will be
still shown, even when the view of the physical world
will have disappeared. Lester Madden [4, p. 5] rightly
points out that because the use of the camera in this case
is largely superficial (the application neither knows nor
cares about what camera sees), some people can argue
that this is not a true example of AR.
Location-based AR is one of the two main types of
Augmented Reality. It places computer-generated objects
into a real-world environment based not on its visual
features than can be used as a marker, but on the position
(the latitude, longitude and altitude) of the AR object in
the physical environment. The AR objects can be closely
or seamlessly integrated with physical objects in both
cases, but because of the different nature of the two types
of Augmented Reality, obstructing the camera’s view

Figure 11 The cover of the book “The Wizard of
Oz” depicting the green-coloured Emerald City
(image from [15])
In our opinion, the Emerald City can be understood
as a piece of augmented reality art created by the Wizard
of Oz. A “translation” of this part of the well-known
story into today’s language of AR technology could go
as follows. Because all citizens and visitors of the

450

Emerald City had to wear green AR spectacles, they
were seeing not ordinary grey architecture, but an AR
masterpiece where “the streets were lined with beautiful
houses all built of green marble and studded everywhere
with sparkling emeralds” [14]. Quite obviously, the City
of Emeralds was not only an ideological and
architectural creation of the Wizard, but also a brilliant
AR artwork.
Furthermore, the Wizard used other features of the
AR spectacles. He himself appeared as something
different to each of the visitors: Dorothy saw a giant
head, the Tin Woodman saw a ravenous beast, the
Scarecrow saw a beautiful woman, the Cowardly Lion
saw a ball of fire. It was like a miracle, but nowadays it
would be easy to implement such “transformations”
using AR technology, its marker or face recognition
features and a pair of specialist AR glasses, or just any
smartphone.

based on the utilisation of the creative potential provided
by AR technology [21; 22; 23]. In order to understand
“how big” this phenomenon could be, we will consider
its underlying conceptual model and a possible
paradigmatic shift in art caused by the arrival of
Augmented Reality technology.
Augmented Reality Art, as a mode of creative
expression, could exist in numerous forms, many or even
most of them impossible to imagine at the current initial
stage of its development. For this reason, only a general
definition of AR art is possible at the moment, and it can
be articulated as follows:
Augmented Reality Art is artwork exhibited in a
real-world environment using AR technology.
The underlying conceptual model of AR Art is so
different from all previous forms of art (we will call
them collectively “Pre-AR Art”) that AR Art can be
named as “the next big thing” or “a new paradigm” in
art, because it can lead to revolutionary changes in the
distinct concepts and thought patterns about how artwork
can be produced and presented to the audience in realworld locations and environments.
Figure 13 compares some of the main features of
Pre-AR Art and AR Art. It shows that AR Art has
several big advantages over its “predecessor”. AR Art is
not limited spatially, it’s not expensive to produce and
exhibit, and it can be easily made interactive, animated
and multimedia.

Figure 12 Marcel Duchamp’s artwork (on the
left, image from [16]) and our AR-based
implementation of the same idea using the
Junaio AR browser
Another example that could be interpreted as a pretechnological conceptual prototype can be found in the
Dada movement. In 1919, one of the leading Dadaists
Marcel Duchamp pencilled a moustache and goatee on a
reproduction of Leonardo da Vinci’s Mona Lisa. The
idea of the augmentation of real-world objects by using
them as AR markers and putting some AR objects on top
of them is one of the major techniques in the current
Augmented Reality Art. This is why the Marcel
Duchamp’s idea is “native” to AR Art and can be easily
implemented at the present time. Figure 12 compares the
Marcel Duchamp’s implementation of the idea with our
AR prototype. It is interesting to note that our AR
“artwork” can be viewed not only on any reproduction of
Leonardo da Vinci’s Mona Lisa, but also on the original
in the Louvre Museum.
Despite the fact that some early implicit ideas can be
found in the cultural history (and not everyone would
have agreed with such interpretation of them),
Augmented Reality Art is a novel phenomenon that is

Figure 13 A comparison between Pre-AR Art
and AR Art
In order to construct an initial conceptual model of
Augmented Reality Art, we need to consider these and
other defining characteristics of this novel form of art in
more detail.

451

The first major feature of AR Art is that this is art
without spatial limits. Artwork can be exhibited in any
location at any time. For example, artists can display
their paintings on trees in a park, on the Empire State
Building, on the seabed or in any other real-world places
they can only imagine. From technological point of view,
it does not matter at all, though from creative, artistic and
cultural points of view, it does.
The “chosen” and most attractive locations for
exhibiting AR Art are those where artwork is supposed
to be exhibited, namely famous art galleries and
museums. In an era of AR Art, artists do not need to wait
until their masterpieces are selected for displaying in the
Louvre or other world famous art museums and galleries.
They can put their artwork in there right away and
without asking for permission.
For example, a New York-based artist Amir
Baradaran infiltrated the Louvre Museum on 27 January
2011 to permanently install his artwork titled
“Frenchising Mona Liza”. It is a 52-second video,
streaming live over Leonardo da Vinci’s painting [17].
Another example could be the “Art Invasion” AR
exhibition in the MoMA (The Museum of Modern Art in
New York), which was opened on 9 October 2010 to
show the radical new possibilities and implications that
Augmented Reality is bringing to the cultural and
creative field [18].
In AR Art, the expense of producing and displaying
artwork is minimal and does not depend on the size and
the number of copies. For example, we can imagine a
project in which an AR artist could easily create a 50metre tall statue and then put a copy of it on each square
kilometre of the land surface of our planet (i.e. about 150
million statues in total).

real world in such a way that it appears to belong to the
physical environment. For example, Proto is a green
three-eyed creature created by the Boffswana Company
[19] from Australia using the String™ technology. Proto
is animated and interactive: from time to time, he
scratches himself, and tapping on the screen makes Proto
move around to any place you command him to go (see
Figure 14).
In terms of time, AR Art has big advantages over
physical Pre-AR art. AR artwork can be exhibited
forever (or, at least, for as long as an AR server is alive
and available). AR artwork cannot be stolen, vandalized
or damaged by the elements, even if it is being displayed
outdoors in a public place, such as in the middle of a city
square.
AR Art has several other features that make it quite
different from Pre-AR art. One of them is the possibility
of exhibiting numerous artworks in exactly the same
location at exactly the same time. For example, ten AR
artworks by ten different artists may be displayed at the
same time in the middle of a city square, such as Red
Square in Moscow. Each of them can be viewed using
different AR channels or applications.
Another remarkable feature of AR Art is the
possibility of not only adding AR objects to a real-world
environment, but also of hiding and replacing physical
objects. It should be noted that a similar artistic
technique has sometimes been used in “traditional
physical art” as well. A good example is the wrapping of
the Reichstag in Berlin and Pont-Neuf Bridge in Paris by
Christo and Jeanne-Claude [20].

Figure 14 An iPhone screenshot showing
Boffswana’s Proto in a real-world environment
(in the university’s office of the author of this
paper)

Figure 15 A basic conceptual model of
Augmented Reality Art
The above description of the conceptual model on
which the notion of Augmented Reality Art is based has
hopefully been able to capture some of its main
components, but it is far from being finished, because
currently AR Art is an area of extremely quick and deep
transformations. More work is required in order to

Since AR Art is, basically, digital art embedded into
a real-world environment, it can easily be made animated
and interactive. Also, any multimedia elements can be
added to AR artwork. Animation and interactivity may
play a crucial role in adding a 3D digital object to the

452

comprehend the nature of these changes and the rapidly
evolving conceptual models of this emerging novel form
of art.
Figure 15 summarises our reasoning and findings.
As a whole, it shows the paradigmatic importance of
emerging Augmented Reality Art and its great potential
for the further development, which could lead to the
replacement of many current real-world art forms by
their AR Art alternatives.

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

Conclusions and Future Work
The recent advantages in AR applications have led
to a significant shift in the understanding of the nature
and types of Augmented Reality. This has generated a
need for a logical and methodological analysis of this
evolving field, and the construction of conceptual models
that can facilitate a better and deeper understanding of
Augmented Reality and its novel areas of applications,
such as AR Art. A combination of a traditional
analytical/synthetic method with effective visualisation
and the use of simple examples and imaginary
experiments have allowed us to research and clarify the
definition of Augmented Reality, its most significant
types, and the underlying logical structures and
conceptual models, including in the emerging area of AR
Art.
However, the current progress in the field of
Augmented Reality and AR Art requires constant logical
and methodological attention. This work is just a step
toward further understanding the evolving concept of
Augmented Reality. Future work is needed to improve
several aspects of the proposed conceptual models and
we are open to discussion.

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]

References

[18]

[1]

[19]
[20]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

“Augmented reality”, search results. Available at:
http://scholar.google.co.uk (Accessed 9 March 2012).
Stephen Cawood and Mark Fiala. Augmented Reality: A
Practical Guide. The Pragmatic Programmers, 2008.
Wikipedia.
Augmented
Reality.
Available
at:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Augmented_reality
(Accessed 20 February 2012).
Lester Madden. Augmented Reality Browsers for
Smartphones: Programming for Junaio, Layar and
Wikitude. Wiley Publishing, Inc., 2011.
Elizabeth M. Bonsignore, Derek L. Hansen, Zachary O.
Toups, Lennart E. Nacke, Anastasia Salter, Wayne
Lutters. Mixed reality games. CSCW '12 Proceedings of
the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work Companion. Seattle, WA, USA, 2012,
pp. 7-8.
Paul Milgram, Haruo Takemura, Akira Utsumi, Fumio
Kishini. Augmented Reality: A class of displays on the
reality-virtuality
continuum.
Proceedings
of
Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies. Vol
2351, 1994, pp. 282-292.

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

453

Wikipedia.
Yin
and
yang.
Available
at:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yin_and_yang (Accessed 14
March 2012).
Borko Furht (Ed). Handbook of Augmented Reality.
Springer Verlag, 2011.
Marco de Sa, Elizabeth F. Churchill, Katherine Isbister.
Mobile augmented reality: design issues and
opportunities. Proceeding of MobileHCI '11 – 13th
International Conference on Human Computer
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services. ACM,
New York, USA, 2011, pp. 749-752
Seokhee Jeon and Seungmoon Choi. Haptic augmented
reality: Taxonomy and an example of stiffness
modulation. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, Volume 18, Issue 5, October 2009, pp.
387-408.
J Blake, H B Gurocak. Haptic Glove with MR Brakes for
Virtual
Reality.
IEEEASME
Transactions
on
Mechatronics (2009), Volume 14, Issue 5, pp. 606-615.
Werner Lonsing. Architectural models in urban
landscapes: Synthesis of markers and virtual structures.
Proceedings of 10th IEEE International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality - Arts, Media, and
Humanities, ISMAR-AMH 2011, Basel, Switzerland,
October 26-29, 2011. IEEE, 2011, pp. 109-110.
Julian Horsey. Smell Enhanced Augmented Reality
Creates
Any
Food
You
Desire.
Available:
http://www.geeky-gadgets.com/smell-enhancedaugmented-reality-creates-any-food-you-desire-10-082010/ (Accessed 16 March 2012).
L. Frank Baum. The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. George M.
Hill, Chicago, New York, 1900. Available at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/55
(Accessed
13
February 2012).
http://oz.wikia.com/wiki/File:The_Wizard_of_Oz_book_
cover_.jpg (Accessed 17 February 2012).
http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Marcel_Duchamp_M
ona_Lisa_LHOOQ.jpg (Accessed 19 February 2012).
http://www.amirbaradaran.com/ab_monalisa.php
(Accessed 15 February 2012).
http://www.sndrv.nl/moma/ (Accessed 15 February
2012).
www.boffswana.com (Accessed: 18 February 2012).
http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christo_and_JeanneClaude#section_1 (Accessed 15 February 2012).
Jurjen Caarls, Pieter Jonker, Yolande Kolstee et all.
Augmented Reality for Art, Design and Cultural Heritage
– System Design and Evaluation. EURASIP Journal on
Image and Video Processing. Vol. 2009, Article ID
716160, Hindawi Publishing Corporation, 2009.
Geoffrey A. Rhodes. Augmented Reality in Art:
Aesthetics and Material for Expression. Proceeding of
the International Society for Electronic Arts, 2008, pp.
76-89.
Stephen W. Gilroy,Marc Cavazza, Remi Chaignon et all.
An Affective Model of User Experience for Interactive
Art. Proceeding of the Conference “Advances in
Computer Entertainment Technology 2008, Yokohama,
Japan. ACM Publishing, 2008, pp. 107-110.
Wendy E. Mackey. Augmented Reality: Linking real and
virtual worlds – A new paradigm for interacting with
computers. Proceedings of AVI’98, ACM Conference on
Advanced Visual Interfaces. New York: ACM Press,
1998, pp. 13-21.

