2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Value Lab: Innovation in Teaching Visual Design: There is Nothing to Wait for
Kateřina Nováková, Lukas Treyer, Gerhard Schmitt, Henri Achten
Czech Technical University in Prague (CVUT), Czech Republic
Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zurich (ETH), Switzerland, ETH, CVUT
{novakova@arch.ethz.ch, treyer@arch.ethz.ch
gerhard.schmitt@sl.ethz.ch, achten@fa.cvut.cz}

Abstract

cepts to other people). In our research we aim to increase
the potential of sketching by incorporating it in a technological infrastructure that supports collaborative design
and, furthermore, help incorporating this into the teaching
process by facilitating a case study. This research is tightly
connected with Value Lab (VL) [9], where our teaching
course is situated.
We structured our paper in these main sections: preliminary studies show the importance of sketch based communication in the domain of architectural design as well
as it reports on the use of electronic devices for drawing.
Afterwards we introduce the technology and software: a
close description of the Prague and Zurich team-rooms
[1] and the application developed. The case study section
reveals that the part of application development can only
hardly be separated from the experimental studio description, caused by the manner of its evolution. Finally, our
paper is concluded with a summary of major achievements
and future outlook into planned research continuity and the
remaining challenges.

In this paper we comment on design teaching and
communication in the domain of architectural education,
particularly in the initial parts of the design process, where
hand sketching is applied. We are aware of advantages that
electronic sketch devices incorporate, therefore we investigate their implementation in diverse phases of architectural studio education. We are testing our presumptions on
site, running an experimental design studio with students
at two universities: ETH Zurich and CVUT Prague. The
focus lies in configuration and further use of Value Lab in
teaching and in an adequate sketch application development. The tool is called ColLab sketch and its multi-interfacial manner fits large touch-tables as well as small
tablets.
Keywords: Collaborative design, sketching, multi
touch table, Value Lab, Prague Lab

1 Introduction

2 Preliminary studies

Literally, there is nothing to wait for. In the past, development of a project took an unimaginable long time.
Now, in the information age, we can almost instantly send
and receive data, documents of spatially unlimited size.
There is nothing to wait for. We can collaborate on projects
instantly together with the team of multiple co-workers no
matter where they are.
This paper is a report on an on-going research in the
domain of teaching architecture with the use of electronic
devices in the initial phases of architectural design and
in communication. These two activities have the word
“sketch” in common. Sketching is very helpful both for the
designer (to develop the design ideas) and for communication between designer and other parties (to explain con1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.117

The preliminary study was crucial to the introduced
contribution and stands on three pilasters. Firstly, the research on the function of hand sketching in the cognitive
processes was studied, secondly Computer Supported Collaborative Work (CSCW) related papers, which describe
the use of multi touch devices in collaborative design and
activities related to architectural practice were overviewed
and finally related Human-computer Interaction (HCI)
research articles within the domain of architecture were
taken into account.

426

2.1 Research on sketch efficiency

Traditional design interface constraints natural visual
thinking and most computer user interface tools require the
designer to specify more of the design than a rough sketch
allows, which causes the loss of ideas [7].
Pinto Albuquerque, Fonesca and Jorge implemented
digital stroke recognition and sketch enhancement [8].
This does not fit for design in initial phases being based
on stroke recognizer and visual syntax analyser, where the
intention is to turn the sketch into regular shapes.
Studies that compare the influence of both digital and
traditional media on sketching were published, which we
found most relevant to our topic and on which we based
our further research. With the use of function-behaviourstructure (FBS) [10] approach and reflection-in-action
method the authors were able to conclude when a traditional pen-and-paper environment is simulated, there is
no significant difference in the design process between
traditional and digital media. To explain the fact that their
studies contradict the preliminary research [11] the authors
speculate on the relevancy of the type of the media.
Finally, the study that compared three electronic devices in the task of sketching and image sorting was introduced by Elliot and Hearst [12]: traditional mouse-based
PC arrangement, PC with an LCD tablet + stylus and largescale digital desk with a stylus. In the sketching task the
user preference split regularly between the table and tablet,
where the obstructions were user-commented: the table as
being too slow, too big and too imprecise. One of the comments from the survey authors was, that a loss of scale appeared when sketching on an unusually big device. As for
the study being 10 years old, we anticipated an improvement in speed, but reacted on the size problems by splitting
workspace in smaller areas.

Several articles related to sketching were reviewed
to anchor the presumption that it is not possible to bypass
it in the architectural praxis and thus education. Authors,
whose thoughts we describe distinguish between creative
sketching and sketching in communication. For the first
mentioned they use the term “visual thinking”.
When solving a complex problem, notes are made due
to the fact that STM (Short Term Memory) has limited capacity of 7+– 2 chunks. (pieces of information). According
to Cheng, Sketches help designer generate other designs
without forgetting the previous ideas [2]. Designers usually make visual notes: sketch, draft, text, dimension and
calculate. On one hand they increase the capacity of their
memory with external medium, which on the other hand
creates a restriction to the transformation of the vision in
mind to the representation in reality. Therefore the more
facile the medium works, the more data would be recorded
[3].
But sketching is not only a one way visualization of
inner view, it is an interactive process of seeing – drawing
– seeing. It is rather a brain activity towards creativity than
towards perception. We learned from Goldschmitt s’ broad
research [4], that own sketch works like an inspiration for
further creativity. In addition, one can read more information off the sketch than was invested in its making.
An informal way of making notes, which evolved
through the years of sketching is incorporated in designers’
own shortcuts and level of abstraction. Using this method,
architects can be very fast in visualizing complex ideas.
Described by Tovey, the advantage of sketching in architectural design process is the speed and easiness of the activity, which is very important in facilitating the transformations [5].
Incompletion and mistakes offer also a big potential.
They leave space for imagery, provoke the designer to
more variants of finishing. CAD systems support neither
mistakes nor incompletion, on the contrary, they are programmed to repair incorrect drawings and to finish started
actions.
Architects, trained in sketching, are able to think more
deeply about the given task than the students. Suwa and
Tawersky [6] brought objectives to this fact by the protocol
analysis of recording and interviewing students and architects while developing a design task and further analysis of
the filmed data. Therefore we suggest it is worth training
students in sketching.
We presume that the cognitive process of visual thinking is influenced by the medium used for sketching. We
will discuss this topic later in the HCI section.

2.3 CSCW related research
Although there are many types of different tablets,
which support the transmission of sketches into program
files, most of the architects and the majority of architectural students stick to the traditional paper and pen or pencil [13]. Systems based on recording-and-projecting paper
were developed by Takao, Shi and Baker [30], but they
only support bilateral remote collaboration.
We know now, that the size of the medium for sketching influences its usability together with other factors like
speed and impreciseness.
Morris, Fischer and Wigdor investigated systems for
collocated collaborative work such as image sorting or text
editing [14]. For our research the comments on the use of
hardware together with the layouts of the presented applications are relevant. The face-to-face working style tends
to encourage more equitable work and supports coopera-

2.2 HCI preliminary studies

427

we acquired insights into diverse teaching conditions. We
made video recordings from the sessions in order to detect
the events that encourage or discourage students from using the tool, facilitating a recording of both camera and
touchscreen simultaneously. Furthermore, we assembled
a questionnaire for the participants. Finally we constantly
counted the number of participants in both Teamrooms
during each course.

tion. It is focused on co-located collaboration, but can also
support remote or mixed-presence co-working, when multiple table-tops are distributed at different locations. This
model we would like to follow having different content of
activity.
Pen based sketch tools were investigated as well. UPen [15], a laser based pointer, was introduced in collaborative large scale screen environment in order to make it
interactive together with the Smart Platform [16]. Now the
interactivity is incorporated in the VL touchscreens, which
makes our students independent of additional tool.
Next, Smart Pen [17], which has the advantage of preserving the convenient paper media and thus likely to be
used by architects was tested. Research on the use of this
tool was made in teaching sketch methods with record-andreplay [18] feature of the pen, but the tool was not found
suitable for remote multiple users simultaneously interacting with each other in real time. [13]

4 Technological background
4.1 ValueLab
The VL is 80 meters square and 6 meters high white
room, where multiple touch screens and projectors are
placed. It is equipped with two 65” LCD screens installed
in a horizontal position as tables and three 82” LCD screens
mounted vertically on the wall. The devices lie close to
each other, so that it allows quick change of function of either the screens or tables [20]. Both the table and the screen
are equipped with PQ Labs multi touch overlays to allow
direct collaboration and interactivity among the screens,
with 32 touch inputs. Besides the touches, users can act
with regular keyboards and mice on all screens. The
configuration is originally meant for real-time landscape
visualization, nevertheless, most common use of the VL is
videoconferencing. The huge computing resources together with the variety of display possibilities and interactive
touch overlays offer an unimaginable amount of uses and
types of configuration. Thus, the biggest challenge for such
a system is being operated easily by just one person during
the teaching. The user can choose more or less complicated
modes of the system and can assign selected screens to external inputs. From the user point of view, the system is
complicated and requires training in order to operate.
The VL is being used by chair of iA [21] for teaching
in the domain of urban planning. Rather than by studios,
the room is occupied by sessions with collaborative character and urban design courses, where multi touch tables
are used to sort (drag and drop) images, view and manipulate big scale maps etc. [22] It occasionally serves to an
architectural studio for teleconference ,critique or presentation thank to its large screens and high quality teleconferencing system [23].

3 Research strategy and method
Sketching is still an important mean of communication among architects, which can, however, be considerably improved by means of Information & Communication Technology. We are interested in the communicative
sketching between students, which ideally brings the
initial phases of design studio into the collaborative process of “sketch-storming”. Sketch communication can be
performed face to face (collocated) but it can also be distributed among different locations. In the latter case, audio
and video should be of a high quality. The graphic outputs depend on verbal and visual information exchange
while physical communication (through body language,
facial expressions, and gestures) is less dominant. [19] In
this research we propose that the positive role of sketches
can become even greater in remote communication with
the use of appropriate application and suitable team room
constellation and could be used in architectural education.
As a Case study we have initiated a collaborative design
studio between ETH Zurich and CVUT Prague. It is called
“experimental studio FOR GARBAGE”, detailed description will follow.
In the domain of architecture the method of “research
by doing” exist and is understood as e.g. building a house,
on which a revolutionary layout is shown. In our research
we applied this method on studying student-computerteacher and student-computer-student interaction in the
initial parts of design development and in communication.
A ColLab sketch application [3.3], which will be described
in section 4.3, has been developed on the same basis. We
tested the application on innovative Teamroom settings
such as in the Value Lab (VL) [3.1] as well as on lowtech school equipment as in Prague Lab (PL) [3.2]. Thus

4.2 Prague Lab
The lab in Prague [24] was assembled uniquely for
the purpose of this seminar and used for the first time.
The PL is a dedicated room for collaborative design
sessions. The means for establishing the collaboration are
rather limited, so we work with standard technology as

428

2.Phase

6 weeks

Interface layout + Function specification

3.Phase

6 weeks

Implementation of a framework with IT supp.

→

The use of any sketch application on the VL touch
tables is limited by the approximate impreciseness of 1cm
and the stylus used (if any). The stylus can be an ordinary
stick of certain thickness and color except white, as it reflects infra-red light. The stylus does not belong to permanent equipment of the VL, the applications like Visual
manager [25] or City Engine[26] is operated by fingers or/
and mouse.
The educational character of the application development together with the unique equipment of the VL led
us to a development of a new application, peculiar programmed and layouted for VL tables and its ability of remote collaboration. The character of the PL contributed on
the application being multi-interface and thus also independent of the appropriate size and type of the hardware.
We started a new application development project
from scratch (Figure1). The plan was to design a program,
that enables not only collocated sketch collaboration, but
remote sketch storming simultaneously and would be easy
enough to support creativity. The development process

Education of lecturer -architect in IT basics

→

4.3 ColLab sketch

1.Phase

→

much as possible and with free versions of software. The
technology consists of regular PC’s with Internet connection, equipped with high-quality web-cam, microphone,
tablet and sound system. A monitor and two LCD-projectors provide three different screens: one running the collaborative system from ETH, one showing the people from
Zurich, and one for local management of files, browsing,
and controlling software. Additionally, two iPads function
as additional camera/video transmitters. Their advantage is
that they are mobile and can be held and placed at any location thus making the visual communication much more
dynamic and attractive. The challenge between ETH and
CVUT was to see whether we could link the different platforms and technologies.
We have seen that the equipment of both institutions
differ. On the Zurich side, the facility can serve the collocated co-workers interactively, it is a team equipment.
On the Prague side the facilities are rather focused on individual use and are put together in order to perform the team
cooperative studio room. In the future, the device setting
can be split into single distant units, still cooperating in
real time, where ColLab sketch applications’ single user
interface will find employment.

6 weeks

4.Phase
Further development within the Case study
12 weeks
Figure 2: application development framework
shown in Figure 2 preceded the phase of development
based on user experience in experimental studio.
The server based application (Figure 4) is programmed
in MT4j (java for multi touch surface) and is running on
windows in the stage of version 0.6.2. A development web
site [27] was established for the possibility to follow the
process and download the current version. The program is
meant to be freeware when in a finalized version. This arrangement fulfils the scenario of developing the application on basis of observation of HCI of the students on site.
ColLab sketch has 3 basic interfaces: single user, multiple user and administrator (Figure 3). This constellation
enables operating the application by big multiuser multi
touch devices as well as by single user mouse-and-keyboard settings, simultaneously and independently of the
number of users. The administrator interface allows editing
the library of the sketches in terms of a web page.
The application layout for touch tables (Figure 3)

Figure 1: Application development from scratch: from the left: sketch idea, layout specifikation (2.phase),
Silverlight blend working prototype (3.phase), MT4java
429 test version 0.3.0, MT4java version 0.6.1 (4.phase)

without an additional human assistance in the room, a precedence for studio teaching in VL.
The experimental collaborative studio FOR GARBAGE [28] consists of 4 students at ETH side and 6 stu-

and data structure
2

5

4

7

Figure 3: from the left: Single user, multiple user,
adminisrtator interface
divides the screen into 4 separate “private” workspaces,
where users can sketch simultaneously with 1 touch each.
The “public” stripe in the middle, achievable by every collaborator. Once a participant starts sketching, constant preview appears in “public”. From this location sketches can
be downloaded by a gesture of two fingers any time. With
the same gesture of 2 touches they can drag the ready image to the “public” area to terminate the process of editing.
Single user mode consists of 1 “private” and 1 “public” area and can be operated by mouse as well as by touches.
Participants can only choose from 3 thicknesses of
the line and tones of grey-scale. They can change the tone
with another touch while sketching, which creates a fluent
overcome e.g. from black to white. They can “delete” with
white line.
System6 and data structure
8

client

1

2

5

3

4

7

Value Lab client

r client
t, smart-board...)

9
Single-user client
(PC, tablet, smart-board...)

r client
t, smart-board...)

10
Single-user client
(PC, tablet, smart-board...)
...

r client
t, smart-board...)

N

CLIENTS
classroom participating in the course,
omputer, touchscreen device

nt does two things
user(s) the drawing interface (white area)
awing data to CORE
ates from CORE about other client’s state
t data as actual thumbnails of all sketches
being drawn by other users (grey area)

Single-user client
(PC, tablet, smart-board...)

Database CORE
Public server or
cloud app

Stores information
about
- SESSIONs
- USERs
6 - PICTUREs
Drawing data are
8 distributed in
form of STROKEs

Every client does two things
- provides user(s) the drawing interface (white area)
+ sends drawing data to CORE
- gets updates from CORE about other client’s state
+ interpret data as actual thumbnails of all sketches
drawn or being drawn by other users (grey area)

5 Case study

Layouts of clients above are just schematic

PCVL

Screen1

PC2 + Adobe
Connect

Laptop

Screen2

iPad 1+ Face
Time

iPad

Screen3

ValueLab
PCVL+Adobe
Connect+Skype
Laptop

iPad + Face
Time

Data:
PICTURE
- link to predecessor if started as a copy (when the picture is opened while being
Is one drawing that also carries the information about the progress of it’s creaedited by other user, the copy is created)
tion and about it’s creators. Every re-opening creates a new copy with link to
- time periods of being edited and by whom
original, this way variants can be stored.
- background image if there is any ... for critique purposes
Data:
- set of strokes, that the picture consists of
- link to predecessor if started as a copy (when the picture is opened while being
edited by other user, the copy is created)
STROKE
- time periods of being edited and by whom
Is sent to CORE whenever a user finishes line or curve (releases mouse or lifts
- background image if there is any ... for critique purposes
a finger from touchscreen) and it is a set of simple line-segments of the curve
- set of strokes, that the picture consists of
defined parametrically:
- coordinates of segments
STROKE
- color of curve
Is sent to CORE whenever a user finishes line or curve (releases mouse or lifts
- authoring user
a finger from touchscreen) and it is a set of simple line-segments of the curve
- timestamp or order of the stroke in the picture
defined parametrically:
CORE then sents update to all CLIENTS to redraw the thumbnail of the picture
- coordinates of segments
- color of curve
- authoring user
- timestamp or order of the stroke in the picture
CORE then sents update to all CLIENTS to redraw the thumbnail of the picture

PragueLab
PC1

Beamer1

PC2

Beamer2

iPad 2

Screen

Figure 5: PL-VL communication scheme

dents at CVUT side. The unusual topic for the seminar is
promoting sketch exchange by its originality and contributes to collaborative character of the seminar by unique
information from different locations.
Experimental design studio takes place every week
and consists of all phases of a regular design studio enriched by a phase of fabrication of a prototype. Regular design studio is usually divided into three parts: introduction
and analysis, design and finally presentation of the design
together with a critique. These phases may intersect in the
sense of the “communication” and “presentation”, which
takes place every three or four weeks. Communication by
sketch is needed nearly every time during the semester
loop.
Due to the limited resources of CVUT we focused
on using mainly free teleconferencing software. Skype,
FaceTime, Adobe connect (not free) and ColLab sketch.
We have constituted multiple addresses in the teleconferencing applications to be able to switch between devices

CONSOLE
Provides administrative and advanced viewing
functions available to privileged users.
Sketching CLIENTS
Value Lab, classroom participating in the course,
personal computer, touchscreen device

ValueLab

PC1 + Skype

SESSION
Represents set of users and drawings. Practically one session is one lesson of the
studio or one designing phase (first sketches, critique)
Includes information about:
- what users participate on session
Database CORE
SESSION
- dates and times when session was open (can be reopened next week)
Public server or
Represents set of users and drawings. Practically one session is one lesson of the
- what pictures belong to session
cloud app
studio or one designing phase (first sketches, critique)
- name, description
Includes information about:
Stores information
- what users participate on session
USER
about
- dates and times when session was open (can be reopened next week)
Can have different privileges only for drawing ... student, or also edit and analyse
- SESSIONs
- what pictures belong to session
session’s pictures using CONSOLE ... teacher
- USERs
- name, description
Data:
- PICTUREs
- name
USER
- user type
Drawing data are
Can have different privileges only for drawing ... student, or also edit and analyse
- text note (if some other data are needed)
distributed in
session’s pictures using CONSOLE ... teacher
form of STROKEs
Data:
PICTURE
- name
Is one drawing that also carries the information about the progress of it’s crea- user type
tion and about it’s creators. Every re-opening creates a new copy with link to
- text note (if some other data are needed)
original, this way variants can be stored.

Figure 4: System and data structure

clients above are just schematic

PragueLab

Main functions:
- editing, correcting, deleting database entries
- analysis of drawings to use all the advantages of
the database ... tree-view of specific drawing development showing variants, additions of users participating on a drawing shown in different colors etc
(will be closer specified on the fly)

CONSOLE
Provides administrative and advanced viewing
functions available to privileged users.

Main functions:
- editing, correcting, deleting database entries
- analysis of drawings to use all the advantages of
the database ... tree-view of specific drawing development showing variants, additions of users participating on a drawing shown in different colors etc
(will be closer specified on the fly)

Not only does our case study go hand in hand with
the ColLab sketch application development, it also reports on the user experience of the VL. Halatsch, Kunze
and Schmitt describe it as a facile system to operate [20].
There is no precedence to prove the easiness of running the
collaboration in teaching over distance together with the
use of touch-tables for architectural collocated and remote
sketch cooperation. The aim is to facilitate a quality lecture

430

Figure 6: Experimental studio FOR GARBAGE, from the left: reality according to the Figure 2, student
presenter with iPad sitting among other students, guest critique presenting
(Figure 5). In the case study we observe how students behave when forced to using all collaborative technology and
applications introduced above. We optimize the use of the
ValueLab in terms of spatial placement of the audience,
presenter and displays that show the remote collaborators.
We specify two types of collaboration:
1. Shared presentation “all-to-all” with critique (figure 7).
2. Creative collocated and/or dislocated “sketchstorming” with the implementation of the application ColLab sketch (figure 8).

A setting without external assistance and without need
of technology adjustment and manipulation was found as
shown in the schema (Fig. 7).

5.2 “Sketch-storming”
Four participants in VL and always one in PL took
part on sketch storming session. A debate about construction technology of a tower arose, therefore we started using ColLab sketch application. While the collocated participants were able to take (in either active or observing

5.1 Presentation

Figure 8: Arrangement of the “sketch-storming”
role) part on the sketch exchange, the remote collaborators
were contributing sketches to the library without commenting them. The interview after the lecture showed, that
using external tablet caused an obstruction and the users,
who were not used to this device, had to concentrate on
the drawing process and could not provide their contributions with comment. On the other hand, the Questionnaire
showed, that the students from Zurich have not even noticed using any special sketch tool, which declares they
could fully focus on the architectural problem without
having any obstructions with the program. In the survey
all 4 students replied they use electronic devices, but none
used it for sketching. They appreciated the speed of sharing
ideas within the team, the negative critique was directed

Figure 7: Arrangement of the “presentation”
Spatially: giving a lecture to both sides from the VL
was performable by standing inbetween the camera and
audience, turning the face in 120° to the home public and
the camera. In this constellation the speaker could see both
audiences and react to them and could be as well seen by
both sides. There is a triangle between remote audience
(A), audience (B) and speaker. If one of the students wishes to speak, he can either go to the presenters desk, or use
the iPad, which cleraly transmits audio and video of the
speaker to the large scale view on the other side. In Figure
6 photos from a real lecture are shown.

431

6 Conclusions
The slideshow share in the presentation phase was
done with either Skype share screen or Adobe Connect software, where we used only the presentation mode. Sketching into presentations (enabled by Adobe connect) was not
of satisfactory speed and preciseness. Together with the
fact that the use of this tool is financially demanding, we
could not incorporate it into the recommended independent setting, although it was successfully used for shared
presentation of images. In Sound and video transmission
Skype and Facetime was successfully implemented. Using
an iPad for the speakers had two advantages: firstly, when
presenting the slideshow, the students appreciated sitting at
their place and talking to the iPad. They felt more relaxed
than when standing in front of an audience with a microphone. Secondly, the distant collaborators could see a large
image of the speaker, which helped understanding, without
manipulating the extern camera.
From the dimensions of the table we derived that for
sketch collaboration 4 users per table is an ideal number of
participants. Thus one designer has enough space to draw,
while he/she does not need to make an effort in order to
operate on the far end of the table.
While collocated “sketch-storming” worked well, the
remote sketch collaboration was not successful due to the
hardware that single users were not familiar with. There
was also not adequate number of single user tablets. The
impossibility of sketch contribution might have led to the
decrease of number of students in PL. There are indications that the sketch communication in the case study has
speeded up the project development.
Finally, we observed, that students preferred to draw
by fingers on the horizontal touch-table without using stylus.

Figure 9: “sketch-storming” live

Figure 10: recording from the session
to the hardware (impreciseness). Like we do, they see the
potential in further development of single user interface.
“Sketch-storming” (Figure 8) was documented by
recording the session (Figure 9 and 10) [29]. The film
showed, that students were discussing more lively when
they could exchange sketches and they were going back in
the library to adjust previous variants. We could see, that
ideas were evolving rapidly, as everybody enjoyed the activity and therefore took part on it.
The experiment also confirmed, that the suggested
layout of ColLab sketch for the purpose of “sketch-storming” on the 1080x1920 resolution multi touch table with
960x500 res. per person is applicable. There was no interference among designers and they were not drawing on
others planes, because it was physically inconvenient.
The number of students in PL decreased from 5 to 2
after introducing the new ColLab sketch tool, while it remained at 4 in VL. Also the work quality arose in VL ,
whereas no contributions were submitted in PL.
Video recordings confirmed that most discouragement is caused by the hardware imprecision and instable
sensitivity of the tables. In the ColLab sketch application,
the students lacked “back and forward” function. On the
other hand they liked the simplicity of the tool and the way
we gathered functions: e. g. there is no “erase” button, deleting can be done by simple choosing white colour of bigger diameter.

6.1 Summary and future outlook
The use case of the experimental studio proved the
usability of VL for teaching collaborative design studio by
bringing the exact scheme of the used equipment: screens,
computers and other mobile devices. Furthermore the teleconferencing technology together with the ColLab sketch
application, allowed the design course to be not only collaborative locally, but also international without added expense.
The ColLab sketch application is situated on web sites
[27] prepared for free download. We showed how case
study of using the tool together with the tool development
can be dependent and can help specifying the exact needs
of the users even in the fragile phases of the architecture
teaching domain like sketch designing. The results of the
study describe some of the advantages and disadvantage of

432

adopting digital tools in architecture studio teaching.
More Case studies are recommended by the authors
to prove VL suitability in regular design studios, using the
above described device-software-spatial configuration. As
stated above, the ColLab sketch application is under construction. Further development will go in the direction of
making the program public and putting the downloaders in
the role of users as well as programmers. Focusing on the
collaborative parts of the application, which need specific
hardware, we expect the use of the layout and constituents
of the code in other applications which are being developed at iA. In terms of an operating system, we can see the
challenge in making ColLab sketch independent.
Not all the potential of this system has been utilized,
the application will bring more insight into collaborative
architectural student work when further developed into an
analytical tool.

and traditional sketching environments:A protocol study using
the function-behaviour-structure coding scheme Elsevier Ltd.
[11] Zafer Bilda, Halime Demirkan (2003) An insight on
designers’ sketching activities in traditional versus digital media
Elsevier, Volume 24, Issue 1, Pages 27–50
[12] Ame Helliott, Marti A. Hearst (2002) A comparison of
the afordances of a digital desk and tablet for architectural image
tasks, Int. J. Human-Computer Studies, 56, 173–197
[13] Kateřina Nováková, Henri Achten, Dana Matějovská
(2011) Towards improved architectural education, a research
framework, Proceedings of the 29th eCAADe 2011 Conference,
Ljubljana, Slovenia
[14] Meredith Ringel Morris, Danyel Fisher, Daniel Wigdor, (2009) Search on surfaces: Exploring the potential of interactive tabletops for collaborative search tasks, Information Processing & ManagementVolume 46, Issue 6, Pages 703–717
[15] Xiaojun Bi, Yuanchun Shi, Xiaojie Chen, PeiFeng Xiang (2006) uPen: Laser-based, Personalized, Multi-User Interaction on Large Displays
[16] W.K. Xie (2002) Smart Platform: A Software Infrastructure for Smart Space (SISS)” ICMI2002 , pp. 429-434,
[17] http://www.livescribe.com/en-us/smartpen/index.html
[18] Nancy Yen-wen Cheng (2004) Stroke sequence in digital sketching, eCAADe 04 Proceedings Copenhagen, Denmark
[19] Abigail.J.Sellen (1995) Remote Conversations: The
Effects of Mediating Talk With Technology Journal HumanComputer Interaction archiveVolume 10 Issue 4, December
[20] Halatsch, J., Kuntze, A. Schmitt, G. (2009). Value Lab:
A Collaborative Environment for the Planning of Future Cities,
Proceedings of eCAADe 2009
[21]http://www.ia.arch.ethz.ch/category/teaching/fs2012newsim/
[22] Jan Halatsch, Antje Kunze, Remo Burkhard, Gerhard
Schmitt, (2008) ETH Value Lab: A framework for managing
large-scale urban projects, The Seventh China Urban Housing
Conference, Chongqing, China, September
[23] http://www.tandberg.com/
[24] Czech technical university in prague, faculty of architecture, Thákurova 9, 166 34 Praha 6 - Dejvice, floor -1, DeskCave room
[25] Burkhard R., Schneider C., Meier M. (2009) The ETH
Value Lab and Two Software Tools for Knowledge Creation in
Teams, Information Visualisation, 13th International Conference,
pp 469 - 473
[26] Jan Halatsch, Antje Kunze and Gerhard Schmitt (2008)
Using shape grammars for master planning, Design Computing
and cognition ‘08, Part 8, 655-673
[27]http://gjk.cz/~hugo/collab/
[28]http://www.ia.arch.ethz.ch/category/teaching/fs2012-thesis-for-garbage/
[29] http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uA9mtbmYZfw
[30] Naoya Takao, Jianbo Shi, Simon Baker, (2003) TeleGraffiti: A Pen and Paper Based Remote Sketching System, International journal of Computer vision,Volume 53, Number 2

Acknowledgements
We thank Christine Meixner, the chair of iA and
Vladimír Jakubal for the IT support, Stanislav Moravec for
ideological improvements. We appreciate the contribution
of students from spring semester 2012 Thesis Elective: For
Garbage: Korbinian Kainz, Maxmillian Kamlah, Ondřej
Soukup Michael Meier, Marilia and Toni.

references
[1] Mark Roseman, Saul Greenberg, TeamRooms: Network
places for collaboration
Dep. of Comp. Science, University of Calgary, Canada 1996
[2] Nancy Yen-wen Cheng (2007) Mining a collection of
animated sketches eCAADe 25 nywc@uoregon.edu
[3] Ullman D G, Wood S, Craig D (1990) The Importance
of drawing in the mechanical design process Oregon State University Corvallis USA
[4] Goldschmidt G, 1994, On visual design thinking: the vis
kids of architecture, Israel Institute of Technology, Israel
[5] Tovey M, Porter S, 2002 Sketching, concept development and automotive design, School of Mathematical and Information Sciences, Coventry University, Coventry, UK
[6] Masaki Suwa, Barbara Taverski (1997) What do architects and students perceive in their design sketches? A protocol
analysis Elsevier Science Ltd. USA
[7] James A. Landay, Bred A. Myers (1995) Interactive
sketching for the early stages of user interface design, CHI ‘95
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems, ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.
New York, NY, USA
[8] Pinto-Albuquerque M., Fonseca, M.J., Jorge, J.A. Visual
languages for sketching documents, (2000) Proceedings IEEE
International Symposium Visual Languages pp 225 - 232
[9]ValueLab: HIT building, F22, Wolfgang Pauli strasse 27,
Zurich 8039, Switzerland
[10] H.H.Tang, Y.Y. Lee, J. S. Gero (2010) Comparing collaborative co-located and distributed design processes in digital

433

