2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Three-level Visualization of Internet Discussion with Extruded Word Clouds
Pavol Fabo
Faculty of Mathematics, Physics, and Informatics
Comenius University
Bratislava, Slovakia
pavol.fabo@fmph.uniba.sk

Abstract—Visualization of discussions is an intensively explored information visualization area. Many existing approaches explore the discussions from the point of view of
individual participants, often omitting interesting information
about the discussion itself.
We present a visualization technique that centers around the
discussion, its dynamics, intensity and topic changes. The ﬂow
of the text is divided into uniform time spans that aggregate
the data and where the text analyzer runs. Then, the discussion
is visualized using three different levels of details. The topmost
shows the global view of the discussion development over time,
the middle shows an inside view on discussions’ main topics,
and the bottom level displays individual word clouds.
The technique is demonstrated on data from an Internet
Relay Chat (IRC) but it can be used for visual analysis of any
time-dependent text data such as email communication, search
terms, keywords and similar.

Matej Novotn´y
VIS GRAVIS, s.r.o.
Bratislava, Slovakia
novotny@visgravis.sk

Figure 1. An example of the introduced technique visualizing the most
frequent words in an Internet discussion.

Keywords-Visualization; Text analysis; Tag clouds;

I. I NTRODUCTION
II. R ELATED WORK

Text visualization has become an interesting and vidid
area of information visualization, mostly due to the development and popularity of the Internet. Electronic media,
blogs, emails, instant messaging, social networks and other
services generate an enormous volume of text-based data.
This data is a valuable source of information about the world
it describes or about the various sides participating in the
communication.
The analysis of text goes beyond simple text reading. The
underlying trends, patterns or features have abstract nature
and their discovery and comprehension require approaches
on a higher level than words or sentences. Moreover, the text
might involve a temporal aspect, such as in a sequence of
emails or instant messaging. This allows us to also observe
the dynamics within the data. The proposed technique allows
for visual analysis of online discussions in three levels of
detail, each addressing a different aspect of the data within
the temporal context: the development of overall volume of
the discussion, the emergence, evolution and possible decline
of individual keywords, and relative occurrence of keywords.
While our technique is primarily oriented on discussions, it
can be used on any time-referenced text data. This extends
the area of our interest from online discussions to email
communication, news reports, blogs or popular search terms.
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.13

Text visualization has been a part of information visualization for quite some time, starting with the early works such
as Perspective Wall [8] or Seesoft [2]. The origins of the
now popular word clouds (or tag clouds) can be traced back
to Milgram’s Psychological maps of Paris [5] which used
geographic position as the reference grid for word placing
in 1976.
However, the word clouds were not very popular until
the development of the Internet and online societies. Web
2.0 sites such as Flickr or del.icio.us required a way to
form structure out of user-contributed content and the word
clouds became a regular asset among online visualizations.
Following this success, various modiﬁcations and inspired
visualizations started to emerge, often incorporating some
temporal aspect.
Dubinko et al. [1] created an animated and interactive
visualization of tags with associated images. Nguyen et
al. [7] and Lee et al. [4] add temporal information to
the word clouds by changing the visual appearance of the
words or by embedding new artifacts into the display of an
individual word.
Visualization of discussions, on the other hand, has been
evolving in a different fashion. Centered around the people
13

important advantage of this approach is that we get simultaneous visual access to both the temporal and the textual
information.

partaking in the communication, the observed relations are
often social patterns [11], individual habits [6] or a combination of both [10].
We approach the Internet discussions from the textual
point of view rather than the social point of view. The word
clouds are extruded into the 3rd dimension to record their
temporal evolution in a manner inspired by ThemeRiver [3].
Thus, we create a three-level visualization that captures over
time the discussion dynamics, changes in discussion topics
and relative word frequency.

A. Single time spans
The ﬁrst level includes the individual words organized
into word clouds. We compute the word frequencies for
each individual time span and select only the most frequent
words. In order to preserve the information value of the
text analysis, the words are ﬁrst ﬁltered either by a blacklist
(to ﬁlter out meaningless words) or by a whitelist (to only
include a selected set of words). Word clouds for consecutive
time spans are then placed equidistant on the z axis (which
represents time). The height placement of the word cloud
is derived from the number of the users contributing to the
discusion in the respective time span.

III. BASIC IDEA
The presented visualization technique is based on the
extrusion of two-dimensional word clouds into the third
dimension and creating a tubular surface. Thus, the shape
of the surface represents the temporal characteristics of the
discussion – the changes in the popularity of a certain term,
in the volume of the discussion or in the number of users
participating in the discussion.
We start by dividing the time-referenced text (e.g. an
online discussion) into successive time intervals. For each
interval, a word cloud is generated based on the most
frequent words and their relative population. These word
clouds are then placed perpendicular on the z-axis of the
three-dimensional space. We create a bounding rectangle
for every word in every cloud and use the vertices of
the rectangles to create a Bezier surface that connects the
instance of a certain word with its instances in the neighbor
word clouds.
The same principle is then repeated to create bounding
rectangles for each word cloud as a whole. This creates
a discussion surface, wrapping around the word surfaces
and creating a visual representation of the overall discussion
volume. We encode additional information – the number of
discussion participants within a certain time interval – as
the y-coordinate of the word cloud representing the time
interval.
The result is a three-level visualization with different
levels of abstraction and different analysis goals related
to each level. These levels are further explained in the
Section IV. Section V explains in detail the generation of
the surfaces and Section VI demonstrates our technique on
a discussion in the Internet Relay Chat (IRC) environment
and on popular search terms gathered by Google Trends.

B. Discussion topics
The second level of the visualization connects the words
in adjacent word clouds. The connection is done using
Bezier surfaces deﬁned by the word’s bounding box within
each word cloud. These surfaces form a three-dimensional
representation of the evolution of a word’s relative frequency
over the time.
It happens that a word disappears from the selection of the
most frequent words and does not appear in the subsequent
word cloud. Such “death” of a word is represented by a
round “cap” on the end of the surface. Alternatively, a word
can become popular at a later stage and does not appear in a
word cloud before a certain time. This event is not depicted
by a “cap”. Instead, the surface starts in its full elliptic extent
in order to make place for the type should the user decide
to combine word cloud with a surface display (Figure 5.)
C. Discussion volume
At the third level of visualization, we create a bounding
box around each word cloud and build a single bounding
surface over the whole discussion. The Bezier surface control points are derived from the word cloud bounding boxes,
thus the width of the surface depends on the size of the word
cloud. Varying surface extent depicts the overall discussion
activity in a particular time span. Since the word clouds are
offset on the y-axis based on the number of participants,
the discussion volume surface displaced is vertically shaped
according to the number of participants.
This helps to identify large-scale relations and patterns
such as “hot hours” where large number of people create a
vivid discussion, “cold hours” where large number of people
is present but the discussion is sparser or temporal patterns
such as periodicity or abrupt changes.

IV. T HREE - LEVELS OF DISCUSSION DATA
A discussion visualization is considered a special subset
of text visualization where the data is augmented with time
stamps. Because of such data augmentation, a text visualization strategy needs to be revised in order to include the new
information as well. We divide the temporal characteristics
of the discussion into three levels of information.
This allows us to provide overview ﬁrst, zoom and ﬁlter
second, and details on demand as suggested by Ben Shneiderman’s visual information seeking mantra [9]. Another

V. E XTRUDED WORD CLOUDS
We developed our own word placing algorithm to generate
word clouds in the 2d plane: The most frequent word is

14

placed in the center of the word cloud plane. The bounding
box of the word divides the rest of the plane into eight
neighbor areas where the next 8 frequent words are placed in
a counter-clockwise order, starting from the upper left area.
After ﬁlling the 8 neighbor cells, each of the neighbor cells
creates their own neighbor cells and new words are placed
in the same way unless the area is already occupied. This
process is iterated until the word list is depleted or there is
no more room. However, our extrusion technique will work
with word clouds generated by any other algorithm.
The word surface is generated as a sequence of Bezier
surfaces between instances of the same word in adjacent
word clouds. We use two cubic Bezier surfaces for each
time span. One for the top and one for the bottom part of the
surface. Cubic Bezier surfaces allow us to blend smoothly
between the top and bottom surfaces as well as between
surfaces in adjacent time spans.
The generation of a word surface is illustrated in Figure 2.
We start with two instances of the same word in adjacent
parallel word planes. Their mutual distance is marked as Δz.
First, we divide the word bounding boxes to top halves (solid
red/blue lines) and bottom halves (dotted lines) which will
be processed separately. The corner points of the top parts
of the red box and the blue box form the ﬁrst and the fourth
set of control vertices of the Bezier surface. The second and
third set of control vertices are generated by perpendicular
offsetting the ﬁrst and the fourth set off their word planes
by Δz/3 in positive or negative z-direction respectively.
The Bezier surface computed on these 16 control vertices
(Fig. 2, bottom) has its tangent vector on the borders
perpendicular to either the word planes or the horizontal
plane. This ensures C 1 continuity between the top/bottom
surfaces as well as between subsequent surfaces.
A special case happens when a word does not appear
in the subsequent word plane. In that case, we create a
Bezier surface “cap” that gradually shrinks towards a single
point generated by offseting the center point of the word’s
bounding box by Δz/4 in the direction of the subsequent
word plane.

y
Δz
x

Figure 2. Generating the upper half of the word surface for a single time
span. The two adjacent instances of the same word (top). The generated
control vertices and resulting surface (bottom).

creation. But we keep in mind the contrast against the
background and only generate saturated colors.
While the implementation itself is interactive in terms of
camera position or data ﬁltering, we also provide the user
with the option to run an animation that shows how the
surface evolves from the earliest towards the latest time span.
This is done by translating a perpendicular clipping plane
along the z-axis.
VI. D EMONSTRATION AND RESULTS
We demonstrate our technique on a three days long Internet relay chat (IRC) discussion. The input data was divided
into time spans of 6 hours each. The text analysis used
a blacklist disregarding meaningless words such as “and”,
“the” etc. Figure 3 shows the overall discussion volume,
i.e. the third level of the visualization – the overview.
The shadow beneath the surface supports the perception of
the volume and makes it easy to detect the peaks of the
discussion activity: ﬁrst day’s noon and third day’s 6 a.m.
Judging by the relative height of these two segments, we
can also say, that there were less people contributing to the
third day’s discussion than the ﬁrst day.
The second level of visualization is shown in Figure 4.
The individual words in time span’s word clouds connect
to the corresponding words in the subsequent word cloud.
From this point of view, we are able to see the development
of the words in time, emergence of new words, extinction of

A. Visual enhancements
We employ several visual effects to enhance the comprehensibility of our visualization. A shadow is created by
projecting the whole discussion volume surface onto the
ground plane. This way, the overall discussion volume is
always visible. It provides context when the focus is on
individual word surfaces or word clouds. Furthermore, the
shadow serves as a time axis reference where the individual
time spans are marked and it improves the spatial perception
of the 3d surface too. We also added specular light component to surface shading in order to improve the perception
of the surface shape.
We use color coding for individual word surfaces. The
colors are currently chosen randomly upon the word clouds

15

Figure 5. A section through the surface shows the word cloud for the
particular time span. Notice new words emerging in the background.

Figure 3.
Overall view of the discussion development in time. The
time axis augmented with surface shadow shows the discussion volume
development.

Figure 6. Words ﬁltered by the number of consecutive occurences. Also,
the varying height depends on the number of users in the particular time
span.

sequence. This way we can focus on short-, medium- or
long-living words. Figure 6 shows a word life ﬁlter set to 4
to 6 consequent occurences.
Figure 6 also shows how the number of users contributing
to the discussion affects the height displacement of the word
clouds and the generated surfaces. From this point of view,
the most people were contributing to the discussion around
the midnight of the second day. The presented visualization
technique can also be used on any other time-referenced
text data. In Figure 7, we tested our technique on Google
Trends data. The visualization presents the top Googlesearched terms from France between the years 2004 and
2012. The turquoise snake-like surface represents the term
“jeux” (games) and it dies between 2008 and 2009 which
is (probably not by coincidence) the period when the large
red surface appears, representing the term “facebook”.

Figure 4. More detailed view showing individual words connected between
the adjacent word clouds.

weak words (the visual mapping of the end words in form
of a cap) or the existence of words that survive even during
weak night times. The shadow in the ground plane serves in
this level as a context to the discussion topics. The base level
– word cloud for a single time span – is shown in Figure 5.
The words are enclosed within an approximation of an
ellipse created with Bezier surfaces. If a word repeats itself
in a subsequent time span, the word’s elliptical enclosing
extrudes and connects these corresponding word instances.
An interesting analysis option is the “word life” ﬁlter.
We can specify the minimum and maximum limit for the
number of subsequent occurences of words in the word cloud

VII. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We present a novel approach to visualization of Internet
discussions based on word clouds and inspired by The-

16

[2] Stephen G. Eick, Joseph L. Steffen, and Eric E. Sumner, Jr.
Seesoft-a tool for visualizing line oriented software statistics.
IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., 18(11):957–968, November 1992.
[3] Susan Havre, Paul Whitney, and Lucy Nowell. Themeriver:
Visualizing thematic changes in large document collections.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
8:9–20, 2002.
[4] Bongshin Lee, Nathalie Henry Riche, Amy K. Karlson, and
Sheelash Carpendale. Sparkclouds: Visualizing trends in tag
clouds. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 16(6):1182–1189, November 2010.
[5] Stanley Milgram. Psychological maps of paris. In Harold M.
Proshansky, William H. Ittelson, and Leanne G. Rivlin, editors, Environmental Psychology: People and Their Physical
Settings, 2nd ed., pages 104–124. Holt, Rinehart and Winston,
1976.
[6] Petra Neumann, Annie Tat, Torre Zuk, and M. Sheelagh T.
Carpendale. Keystrokes: Personalizing typed text with visualization. In EuroVis, pages 43–50, 2007.
[7] Dinh Quyen Nguyen, Christian Tominski, Heidrun Schumann, and Tuan Anh Ta. Visualizing tags with spatiotemporal
references. In Proceedings of the 2011 15th International
Conference on Information Visualisation, IV ’11, pages 32–
39, Washington, DC, USA, 2011. IEEE Computer Society.

Figure 7. Visualization of Google Trends from 2004 to 2012. Notice the
red word starting in 2009, which corresponds to ”facebook”.

[8] George Robertson, Jock D. Mackinlay, and Stuart Card. The
perspective wall: Detail and context smoothly integrated. In
Proceedings of CHI ’91 Conference, pages 137–139, 1991.

meRiver. We combine three levels of visualization, each
corresponding to a different layer of information about the
discussion. The proposed technique is further improved by
focus+context combination of individual words and overall
discussion. We also combine the discussion density and
discussion population into a single 3d shape giving the user
the option to switch between these two variables by simply
looking at the shape from a different angle.
The presented concepts are not limited to Internet discussions but can as well be used on any other text data as long as
it refers to a temporal domain. An even more abstract extrapolation of the technique could involve any time-dependant
data with weighted elements such as clusters.
Our next research will include investigation of color
semantics that can be used to give an even better overview
of the content and the reduction of surface overlapping by
employing a word cloud algorithm that involves temporal
coherence of word placement.

[9] Ben Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type
taxonomy for information visualizations. In Proceedings of
the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, VL ’96,
pages 336–, Washington, DC, USA, 1996. IEEE Computer
Society.
[10] Dana Sean Spiegel. Coterie : a visualization of the conversational dynamics within irc. Master’s thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, 2001.
[11] Annie Tat and Sheelagh Carpendale. Crystalchat: Visualizing personal chat history. In Proceedings of the 39th
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS’06), IEEE Computer Society, pages 58–67, 2006.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was partially supported by VEGA grant No.
1/1106/11.
R EFERENCES
[1] Micah Dubinko, Ravi Kumar, Joseph Magnani, Jasmine Novak, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Andrew Tomkins. Visualizing
tags over time. In Proceedings of the 15th international
conference on World Wide Web, WWW ’06, pages 193–202,
New York, NY, USA, 2006. ACM.

17

