2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

ArchiBrain: A Conceptual Platform for the Visualization of Collaborative Design
Thomas Van Bouwel, Andrew Vande Moere, Stefan Boeykens
Design Lab – Department of Architecture, Urbanism and Planning
KU Leuven - Belgium
van.bouwel.thomas@gmail.com, {andrew.vandemoere, stefan.boeykens}@asro.kuleuven.be

Abstract— The network effects of the digital age have made it
easier for individuals to collaborate with others to produce
meaningful content from the bottom up. Architectural and
urban design could benefit from these new forms of distributed
collaboration, since they have the potential to introduce a
wealth of knowledge and creativity in the design process. In
this paper, we present a prototype online platform called
‘ArchiBrain’ that is built around a ‘project-tree’ visualization
of individual design contributions, which provides participants
with a structured overview of the design process they are
collaborating in. Our evaluation study provides the first
indications that this visualization platform is able to increase
the intrinsic motivation for designers to contribute in a
collaborative manner, provides a clear overview over the
design process, and can help directing collaborative efforts by
highlighting the most popular design proposals.

(CAAD) files and project images through various filesharing services and social networks. However, to organize a
creative collaboration between geographically distributed
designers over the web, one needs to take into account
specific issues inherent to the process of designing:
•

•

Keywordssocial
production;
collaborative
design;
visualization; co-design; participative design; feedback

I.

INTRODUCTION

The network effects of the digital age have made the
sharing and producing of information, knowledge and
culture more efficient and effective. Recent phenomena such
as social media, blogging, crowdsourcing and the open
source movement have shown that it is now easier than ever
for individuals to connect and collaborate with others to
produce meaningful content from the bottom up. These new
modes of ‘social production’ typically occur between loosely
connected and geographically distributed individuals, who
tend to cooperate with each other without relying on either
market signals or managerial commands [1].
Contemporary architectural and urban design problems
are often confronted with complex, cross-disciplinary
challenges that can only be tackled by a creative team
possessing a variety of backgrounds and experiences.
Therefore, design problems could benefit enormously from
these new open forms of distributed collaboration and
participation, since they have the potential to introduce a
cross-disciplinary wealth of knowledge and creativity to the
design process. For instance, Maher et al. state that
“collective design is possible because we can easily
communicate and share ideas, digital models and files on the
Internet” [2]. Indeed, during the last two decades, the
architectural design and planning process have become
radically digitalized, making it easier for architects and
designers to share Computer Aided Architectural Design
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.72

Chunking design problems in separately problems is
not always possible. The solvable aspects of a design
problem are often ill-defined and tend to co-depend
on each other. Though designers may focus on
individual or detailed aspects of a larger design
problem, the according decisions should always be
consistent with the overarching concept of the design
solution. Therefore, contributors require some sort of
overview of the design process to become aware of
where their contributions fit in with the ‘big picture’.
Most design problems are wicked and ill-behaved
[3]: they tend to generate more than one solution, as
designing the ‘right’ answer is influenced by the
individual experiences and subjective opinions of the
designer(s). Therefore, collaborative design should
leverage these inherent differences by encouraging a
constructive discussion between participants.

We hypothesize that some of the issues of web-based,
participative design can be overcome by visualizing the
collaborative design process in real-time. We thus present
ArchiBrain: a prototype online platform built around a
‘project-tree’, a time-based visualization of the design
contributions that offers a structured overview of the actual
state of the collaborative process. We evaluated its efficacy
by studying its impact on three distinct levels:
•
•
•

Impact on motivation. To what extent does online
the platform provide incentives for designers to
contribute to an overall design solution?
Impact on awareness. How effective is the platform
at providing participating designers with a clear
overview over the design process?
Impact on social dynamics. To what extent do social
media features like voting and ranking enhance the
creative interaction between designers?

The results of this study could be particularly useful for
current and future web platforms that aim to facilitate
creative and open design collaborations between
geographically distributed individuals – ranging from
396

designers to any stakeholder such as actual inhabitants or
policy makers – by providing insights into the efficacy of
visualizing a collaborative design process to all participants
during the design itself.
II.

III.

DEVELOPMENT OF ARCHIBRAIN

ArchiBrain was implemented as a prototype, yet fully
working, website. Through the knowledge gathered via
several pilot tests, this platform was refined in an iterative
way.

BACKGROUND

A. Concept Definition
ArchiBrain aims to enable anyone to propose a design
project, and to allow others to collaborate on finding
appropriate design solutions in a distributed and
asynchronous manner. The main elements of the platform
are:
• The project-tree provides users with an organized
overview of all preliminary proposals (represented in
the tree as circular thumbnails) that have been
submitted, and acts as the main navigational
interface of the design project. The tree also
visualizes the feedback from the community on each
proposal, such as the number of comments and an
average approval rating. A project-tree is created by
defining an assignment description (the left-most
sphere in the project-tree). Participating designers
can then submit a number of design proposals on
which the design community can then build
alternative proposals. (Figure 1)
• A proposal is a short blog post written by a
participant to describe a submitted design proposal.
Such a post can contain images of a design proposal,
some explanatory text, and the digital design file(s).
These files provide other participants with the
opportunity to create successive proposals by
building upon the design files of previous ones. Each
proposal can be rated by other participants, who can
also leave comments to discuss what they like or
dislike about the proposal.

The original definition of social visualization describes the
enriching of social, electronic communication by making its
rich and salient qualities visible in easily accessible and
understandable ways [4]. Current development in social
visualization aims to democratize the representation of
information by: 1) opening up advanced data acquisition and
visualization methods to lay audiences, and 2) integrating
powerful social communication features within or alongside
the visualizations. Accordingly, social visualization offers
non-expert people the chance to increase their understanding
of complex information by the power of collective and
collaborative efforts [5]. Several projects from different
disciplines have demonstrated how social visualization can
positively impact collaboration and participation. In the field
of open source software development, CodeSaw [6] showed
how the visualization of code repositories and project
communication can influence contributor motivation by
providing insight into the patterns of collaboration within an
open software community. DiMicco et al. [7] studied the
effect of a shared display showing user contributions on
group participation during collaborative tasks. The Netscan
visualization [8] indicates how visualization can be used to
provide a clear overview of the structure of online threaded
conversations and patterns of participation within these
conversations to reveal hidden structures and emergent social
dynamics.
Several online platforms that focus on facilitating
collaborative design have been developed in recent years,
such
as
OpenArchitectureNetwork.org
[9]
and
OpenIdeo.com [10]. Both aim to create web-based
collaborative design communities, but have not yet explored
the potential of visualization as the means of organizing and
encouraging design collaboration. Research in CAAD has
also focused on how computer applications and tools can
positively stimulate, cause or assist collaborative design [11].
For instance, Phase[X] [12] was an online collaborative
design studio which encouraged students to collaborate by
elaborating on each other’s designs in a series of sequential,
evolutionary design phases. The use of visualization in this
field has often focused on analyzing the data related to the
design process after its completion [13, 14], rather than to
actually support or organize it. At least one exception is the
Studio-WikiTecture [15] project, which used a tree-shaped
diagram of submitted design proposals to represent a
collaborative, architectural design process within the virtual
world platform ‘Second Life’. While this project became an
important inspiration for our own platform, it does however
contain some restrictions that are inherent to operating within
the medium of a proprietary 3D virtual world, such as the
difficulty of integrating commonly used design file formats,
and a significant learning curve towards participation.

Figure 1. Every project-tree starts with an assignment. Contributors make a
first set of design proposals on which the design community can give
feedback via comments and ratings. (top) Contributors can edit each other’s
proposals (tree grows from left to right). The resulting project-tree is a
diagram that shows how the collective design evolves over time. (bottom)

397

We propose that the ArchiBrain concept provides a
collaborative platform for exploring multiple alternative
design ideas to a given problem. The project-tree
visualization is meant to help designers keep an overview
over the proposals that have been made so far, the structural
relations between them, and the feedback that they received
so far. This overview could be used to better evaluate which
proposals are relevant to work on or not, which is
particularly useful when a multitude of alternative proposals
compete against each other simultaneously.
B. Prototype Development
Our prototype platform was implemented and offered
under the domain www.archibrain.org. The platform was
built with the Drupal 6 Content Management System [16]
following current best practices as elaborated in ‘Using
Drupal’ [17]. Each proposal is formatted on a separate
bookmarkable webpage, here called the proposal page. The
project-tree visualization was developed with Processing
[18], and was embedded at the top of each proposal page as
an interactive Java-applet. This applet parses the necessary
data needed to draw the tree from a set of XML-lists, which
summarize all submitted proposals and comments, votes, and
thumbnail-images related to these proposals. Figure 2 shows
the final version of the proposal page as it was used during
the evaluation study. It contains the following elements:
•

•

•

Project-tree visualization (top). The visualization
acts as the main navigation tool to browse through
the different proposals (represented as circles) and
their comments (smaller bubbles located around the
circles). Hovering over a specific circle displays
additional information on the according proposal.
Selecting it enlarges the thumbnail, while doubleclicking take the user to the specific proposal page.
Users can select certain ‘parameters’ to reveal extra
layers of information: one can highlight the most
recent comments, filter the proposals and comments
by author, or correlate the surface area of the spheres
with the average rating of that proposal.
Proposal (middle). This area consists of a title, a set
of images and the textual description. The sidebar
contains the like/dislike rating system, project metadata (e.g. author, postdate) and the attached design
files. At the top right, there is a ‘create child
proposal’ button, which invites the reader to create a
new proposal that builds upon the ideas of the shown
proposal.
Comments section (bottom). This section shows the
feedback by the design community on the proposal.
Comments can include images and files to support a
more visual style of feedback other than just text.

Figure 2. An example proposal page with the project-tree
visualization at the top, the proposal information in the middle and the
comment section at the bottom. The arrow indicates the proposal that
is currently being viewed.

pilot evaluation tests. Figure 3 shows the state of the projecttree as used during the first pilot-test, Figure 4 during the
second pilot test. The following list reveals the most
important design decisions made during development.
•

•

C. Design Rationale
The prototype website underwent several iterations
during development based on the results from two separate

398

Drawing the tree. We noticed that the relations
between proposals and the order by which proposals
are submitted influence the overall readability of the
tree. Therefore, our drawing algorithm draws
proposals in chronological order from left to right.
Referencing other proposals. We introduced the
concept of ‘references’, which are represented in the
project-tree as grey arrows. References allow
designers to relate to up to three additional
proposals, to indicate that the according ideas have
been incorporated into their new proposal.
References are visible when hovering over a
proposal, as shown in Figure 4.

Figure 3. The first version of the project-tree used during the first pilot-test. Proposal are represented by interconnected spherical thumbnails with
comment ‘bubbles’ around them.’

Figure 4. The version of the project-tree as used during the second pilot test. Several new elements were introduced since the first version, such as
the ability to reference more than one proposal, an updated drawing algorithm that places proposals in chronological order, and an arrow that
indicates which proposal is being viewed.

•

•

Proposal ‘family history’ clarity. When hovering
over a proposal, all the references and proposals that
came before it are revealed, highlighting all
historical steps that influenced that proposal.
Rating and visualizing popularity. The initial fivestar rating system proved inefficient at identifying
popular proposals, since most proposals received an
unrepresentative amount of votes and the average
value tended to hover in the middle (i.e. 2.5). Our
second pilot test indicated that popularity was best
indicated by the number of comments a proposal
received as well as the number of ‘child proposals’
that came from it. The final version of our platform
swapped the five-star rating for a binary like/dislike
rating system in order to encourage more decisive
voting. To factor in how the number of comments
and children could be better highlighted, a ranking
algorithm was added which placed branches with
many offspring, recent comments and references at
the top of the screen.

IV.

EVALUATION STUDY

A. Pilot Studies
As mentioned before, the development phase was
influenced by two pilot studies that were conducted prior to
the main evaluation study. The pilot tests served as a means
to root out possible technical problems as well as to identify
unknown issues with our evaluation study methodology. For
instance, the second pilot test was conducted with a group of
architecture students who were asked to use the platform to
collaborate on a design assignment over the course of three
consecutive design sessions. Due to some technical
difficulties during the last design session and various issues
with controlling the laboratory environment, the results of
this experiment were not fully representative and a separate
study was required.
B. Main Evaluation Study Methodology
We conducted the main evaluation study with seven
students and young professionals in the field of architecture
and urbanism. Five were recent graduates and two were still
students of a master-level architectural degree. Although this
cohort was relatively small, the participants constituted a

399

their comments and their design proposals (Likert).
Participants consistently responded positively (sesion 1:
av=4.0, sd=0.0; session 2: av=4.0, sd=0.0; session 3: av=4.5,
sd=0.5). We also asked whether they appreciated the
adaptations made out of their proposals. Only after the
second design session did a majority of participants respond
positively (av=3.75, sd=0.43). We can assume that this
occured because no adaptations of previously submitted
proposals were made during the first session and only a few
were made during the last.
Duty. In an open question we asked participants for their
personal motivation to contribute to the evaluation study:
“[Archibrain] offered a useful tool for us to collaborate,
something you wouldn’t have at your disposal otherwise. It
also formed a good way of tracking the different design
proposals that were made” - Participant 3
“I liked [designing on Archibrain] because of the
challenge of the design, and because [we didn’t need to be in
the same place] to meet with everybody.” - Participant 2

realistic user group, as everyone took part on a voluntary
basis and took the initiative to use the platform for a real-life
design competition scenario.
All participants had already used our website during the
second pilot study and were therefore already familiar with
all its functionalities. All participants were asked to fill in a
background survey, to provide us with an idea of their
familiarity with social media and their experience on sharing
information or collaborating via the web. During a period of
two and a half weeks, participants were asked to try to
exchange design files and design ideas via the ArchiBrain
platform. Five participants used the platform during this
period to brainstorm design ideas for a real design
competition during which they had to design an exhibition
pavilion in New York [19]. All participants used the platform
from their own homes and during their own spare time.
Participants did not receive any reward for their
participation. The evaluation period was divided into three
consecutive design sessions, at the end of which the
participants were asked to fill in an intermediate survey,
which was used to track any changes in the motivation and
perception of the design process. During the last session, two
additional participants were invited to provide additional
commentary and feedback on the design proposals that were
being made. After the evaluation period, all participants were
asked to fill in a final survey, which focused on the user
experience of collaborating using the platform. In addition to
the survey data, all interactions on the website were logged.
V.

The following categories of user motivation appeared to
be negatively influenced by our platform.
Fun. In the final survey we inquired if participants
enjoyed working on the platform. Although most enjoyed the
overview the project-tree provided to them, some
participants pointed out that the asynchronous collaboration
hindered an enjoyable workflow.
“It is nice to have the process in a visual synthesis, but
the fact you had no real time discussion and had to wait long
for new proposals made it frustrating and slow.” Participant 2
Social. All participants reported in the final survey that
they enjoyed receiving feedback from other designers
(Likert, av=4.4, sd=4.9). However, when asked in the
intermediate surveys if they felt like being part of a team, the
response was neutral (sesion 1: av=3, sd=1; session 2: av=3,
sd=1; session 3: av=3.5, sd=1.12). A possible explanation for
this result could be found in the asynchronous nature of the
collaboration, which sometimes meant participants had to
wait for creative feedback for longer periods of time.
The survey questions that polled user motivation based
on the categories ‘Career’ (participation that may lead to an
advance in the individuals career) and ‘Challenge’
(participation that provides a sense of personal achievement
through acquiring additional knowledge or skill) did not
gather notable or relevant results, mainly due to neutral
responses to our survey questions.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Over the course of the study, 10 design proposals were
submitted and 87 comments were exchanged, which were all
represented in real-time in the project-tree, as shown in
Figure 2.
A. Impact on User Motivation
We set out to understand how the visualization could
help motivate participants to collaborate in the context of a
joint design. The analysis was based on 8 categories of user
motivation, as defined by Maher et al. [2]. The following
categories of user motivation appeared to be positively
influenced by our platform.
Ideology. When asked on a five point Likert scale
whether they felt like their design contributions helped
improve the overall design, a vast majority of participants
responded positively (average = 4.6, standard deviation =
0.49). When asked if their comments helped improve the
design, respondents also reacted positively (av=4.14, sd =
0.64). In both cases, a statistical T-test shows that the average
differs significantly from the mean of 3 (with 90% certainty).
Reward. When asked if seeing their proposals visualized
in the project-tree felt rewarding (Likert), all participants
responded positively (av=4.4, sd=0.49). A vast majority felt
the same about their comments being visualized in the tree
(av=4.2, sd=0.75). A statistical T-test shows that both
averages differ significantly from 3 (with 90% certainty).
Recognition. In each intermediate survey, we asked the
participants if they appreciated the feedback they received on

B. Impact on Overview
We set out to understand to what extent our platform, and
in particular the project-tree visualization, provided a useful
representation of the collaborative design process. When
asked in the final survey if they felt like they had a good
overview of the different proposals that were made during
the design process (Likert), a vast majority of participants
responded positively (av=4, sd=1.07). A statistical T-test
showed that this average differs significantly from 3 with
90% certainty). To check whether the project-tree helped
them with this, participants were asked in an open question

400

shared design process in several different ways. The
visualization provides a useful overview over the
collaborative design process, which allows the identification
of promising design proposals. While certainly not replacing
face-to-face contact, our results indicate that a common,
shared visualization can support asynchronous distributed
collaboration between designers. By facilitating these new
forms of social visualization, a more widespread creative
collaboration between designers can be encouraged.
Further work in this area will explore how different
design phases could be better organized and represented
within the project-tree to allow for a more structured design
process, and how a better notification system for new content
could streamline the collaboration experience and help
designers keep track of the comments and adaptations made
on their proposals. Furthermore, we want to look into how
different project-trees can relate to one another to create a
wider network of creative exchange within the ArchiBrain
platform.

whether they felt the project tree was a correct representation
of the design process. Most responded positively:
“Yes: you can see what projects are being worked on,
you can see the timeline in it. Everything was clear.” –
Participant 3
“Yes, you can see which concepts were abandoned, and
which ideas [were elaborated]” - Participant 1
One participant mentioned that the references to other
proposals were sometimes unclear, since you could only
view them for one proposal at a time once you scroll over it.
“…it is only a pity you only see the connection with one
project unless you click on a proposal.” – Participant 2
C. Impact on Social Dynamics
We aimed to understand how our platform and projecttree visualization helped designers give and interpret creative
feedback. Participants mostly ignored the like/dislike system,
as most felt this rating system was far too simplified to
effectively evaluate a design project. Instead, most
participants praised the use of comments for giving
feedback:
“The effect of the votes hardly made a difference, but the
comments were essential - even more important than the
proposals. The proposals trigger the discussion, but the
comments are needed to explore the concept and because
there were many collaborators you always had different
angles on one proposal.” - Participant 2
One participant noted that he mainly looked at a
proposal’s offspring as an indication of its success:
“...didn't think about rating: if a proposal didn't have
children it wasn't good, that's rating enough for me” Participant 1
These comments tend to support one of our preliminary
conclusions from our second pilot study that the popularity
and relevance of a design proposal is primarily influenced by
the number of comments and offspring it has received. We
had taken this issue into account by implementing a ranking
algorithm, which placed proposals with a high number of
offspring, references and recent comments, higher up on the
page (the upper branches of the tree). This effect was noted
by most participants:
“I noticed that the most important discussions came on
top of the tree. [By doing this], the tree filtered the important
[designs] for me, so I could focus my attention only on the
important designs.” – Participant 3
VI.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the participating
designers who contributed their time in our pilot tests and
evaluation study. After the study was over, they continued
work on the competition submission (in collaboration with
the author), and actually won an honorable mention in the
design competition as a result.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

CONCLUSION
[6]

In this paper, we aimed to understand how the
visualization of a distributed, asynchronous, and participative
design process helps to organize collaboration in the context
of design. We therefore presented ArchiBrain: an online
prototype platform with a ‘project-tree’ visualization that
provides designers with an overview over the design process
and helps them evaluate feedback from other designers.
We conducted an evaluation study with a voluntary
group of recent architecture graduates, who used the
platform to collaborate on a joint submission for a design
competition. The study indicated that our platform tends to
increase the motivation for designers to contribute to a

[7]

[8]

[9]

401

Y. Benkler, “The Wealth of Networks: How Social
Production Transforms Markets and Freedom”, Yale
University Press, 2006, pp. 60.
M. L. Maher, M. Paulini, P. Murty, “Scaling Up: From
Individual Design to Collaborative Design to Collective
Design”, Proc. Design Computing and Cognition DCC’10,
2010, pp. 581-600.
H. Rittel, “Some Principles for the Design of an Educational
System for Design”, DMG-DRS Journal, Vol. 7, April - June
1973, pp. 151-152.
J. Donath, K. Karahalios, F. Viegas, “Visualizing
Conversation”, Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, 1999.
M. Wattenberg, K. Jesse, M. Matt, “ManyEyes: a Site for
Visualization at Internet Scale”, IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 2007, pp. 11211128.
E. Gilbert, K. Karrie; “Using Social Visualisation to
Motivate Social Production”, Transactions on Multimedia,
Vol. 11, IEEE, April 2009, pp. 413-421.
J. M. Dimicco, A. Pandfolio, W. Bender, “Influencing group
participation with a Shared Display”, Proc. CSCW ’04 ACM
conference on Computer supported cooperative work, ACM,
2004, pp. 614-623.
M. A. Smith, A. Fiore, “Visualization Components for
Persistent Conversations”, Proc. SIGCHI conference on
Human factors in computing systems, ACM, 2001, pp. 136143.
Open Ideo , Viewed May 01, 2012

url: http://www.openideo.com/
[10] Open Architecture Network, Viewed May 01, 2012
url: http://openarchitecturenetwork.org/
[11] H. Achten, J. Beetz, “What Happened to Collaborative
Design?”, Proc. 27th eCAADe conference, Istanbul, Turkey,
2009, pp. 357-366.
[12] U. Hirschberg, M. Engeli (editor), “Phase (X)”, In: “Bits and
Spaces: architecture and computing for physical, virtual,
hybrid realms, 33 projects by architecture and CAAD, ETH
Zurich”, Bïrkhäuser Publishers for Architecture, Basel,
Switzerland, 2001.
[13] T. Dorta, A. Lesage, E. Perez, J.M. Christian Bastien, “Signs
of Collaborative Ideation and the Hybrid Ideation Space”,
Proc. Design Creativity 2010, Springer, 2010, pp. 199-206.
[14] S. Abdelhosen, T. El-Khouly, “Representing Reflective
Practice in a Remote Design Collaboration Process”, Proc.

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]
[19]

402

3rd Conference of International Association of Societies of
Design Research, IASDR, 2009, pp. 1317-1326.
S. Chase, R. Schultz, J. Brouchould, “Gather around the
Wiki-Tree”, Proc. 26th eCAADe Conference Proceedings,
ISBN, 2008, pp. 809-816.
Drupal 6 Content Management System, Posted September
28 2003, Viewed March 13, 2012,
url: http://drupal.org/project/drupal
A. Byron, A. Berry, N. Haug, J. Eaton, J. Walker, J.
Robbins, “Using Drupal - Choosing and Configuring
Modules to build Dynamic Websites”, O’Reilly, Sebastopol,
2009 (12008).
Processing, Viewed March 13, 2012,
url: http://processing.org/download/
Under the Railroad, design competition hosted by
anonymous.d, New York, competition ended Jan 9th, 2012,
url: http://www.anonymousd.com

