2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

The ARC project
Reasoning about Representations of Gothic Cathedrals with Artificial Intelligence

Stefaan Van Liefferinge, Rebecca A. Smith

Tyler Carlson, Elijah Holt, Michael A. Covington,
Walter D. Potter

Lamar Dodd School of Art
The University of Georgia
Athens, USA
svlieffe@uga.edu

Institute for Artificial Intelligence
The University of Georgia
Athens, USA
carlsont@uga.edu
repertory of architectural vocabulary is vast, but a limited
subset will usually be sufficient to visually describe a
specific type of building in a specific style, such as Gothic.
Second, they know how to render the organization of the
building. Gothic cathedrals, for example, generally follow
the same model in terms of organization. Moreover, physical
requirements exclude absurd relationships – a roof cannot be
below its own supports. Equipped with these relatively easy
skills, the architectural historian produces a precise
description of a cathedral.

Abstract— The Architecture Represented Computationally
(ARC) project analyzes documents that describe Gothic
cathedrals. It researches how these descriptions can be
translated from a natural language into a formal logical model
– a representation that a computer can handle. Handling
representations of architecture is not straightforward and
requires expertise involving logical reasoning. ARC
implements this expertise in Prolog. The project aims to create
a system that can understand descriptions composed in a
natural language and eventually in a later phase reproduce
them in 3D.

A. Decoding a Description
If the production of a visual description is rather easy,
one could expect that decoding it would also be relatively
straightforward. However, descriptions are concise.
Architectural historians focus on the essential elements. They
describe what deviates from the standard, leaving out what
should be known about the building. Architectural
descriptions are efficient ways of communicating visual
knowledge, but this comes at a cost. It expects expertise from
the person who analyzes the description.

Keywords- Gothic Architecture; Knowledge Representation;
Defeasible Logic; Visualization

I.

INTRODUCTION

Descriptions of Gothic cathedrals are usually relatively
brief considering the complexity of the architecture they
render. However, with a basic description, the architectural
historian can visualize the sophisticated architecture of the
cathedral. This project investigates how a computer can
achieve this. ARC studies the processes which lead to the
mental image that architectural historians picture. It aims to
replicate these processes in order to design a computational
system that can understand descriptions of Gothic cathedrals
like an architectural historian. The focus of this paper is the
processes that take place when an expert on Gothic
architecture describes a building, and when he understands
the Gothic building that a description represent. More details
on the actual implementation of the system can be found
elsewhere [1]. ARC builds on the work of William J.
Mitchell, and benefitted from research on ontologies and on
procedural modeling based on shape grammars [2][3][4].
However, our project focuses on a specific domain of
architecture, Gothic cathedrals, and offers a different
approach and implementation.
II.

B. The Default Model
The first step in decoding a description is picturing a
standard representation of a Gothic cathedral. The expert has
memorized this default representation by studying the
features shared by many buildings, and will use it as a
default model to complete the description that he is
analyzing.
The default model includes the different components that
are generally found in cathedrals. It also represents the
organization of these components. It includes the vocabulary
denoting objects and also the relationships between these
objects. It provides must-be-present elements (completeness)
as well as the specific logical organization (consistency) of
the different elements.
C. Completeness
For the architectural historian, the inclusion of must-bepresent elements is based on two aspects of the buildings.
First, cathedrals contain a number of elements that are
consistently found in all buildings. The architecture that is
described cannot exclude these components. They must be
present in whatever building is described because otherwise

VISUAL NARRATIVES AND DECODING PROCESSES

Visual narratives of buildings are widely used in
architectural history. Composing one is relatively
straightforward. Principally, the expert in architectural
history manipulates two skills. First, experts are familiar with
specialized architectural vocabulary. This is fairly easy. The

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.100

599

the building would not be a Gothic cathedral, would be
unfinished, or could not stand. For example, there are no
Gothic cathedrals without a number of freestanding supports,
whether columns or piers.

default organization of a standard prototype cathedral. This
will principally add positional information to the objects.
Furthermore, some objects are always in a specific
sequence with regard to one another. For example, the main
arcade is below the triforium, which is below the clerestory
(Figure 1). This is the case in any cathedral that has these
three elements in its elevation. In a mental model, they will
always be seen in this sequence. Finally, the expert can also
position elements that do not follow the same organizational
pattern. For example, shafts start at the arcade level, continue
at the triforium level and at the clerestory level (Figure 1).
They do not participate in the same sequential organization
as the elements to which they are attached. The architectural
historian will nonetheless picture them in their correct
location.
E. Instantiating the Default Model
With the description, the expert modifies the default
model to picture a specific cathedral. The pictured cathedral
changes due to the addition of information. This process can
be subdivided into two sub processes. The first can modify
components; the second can change how they are organized.
Modifying components principally consists of, first,
removing elements from the model, and, second, detailing
their aspect. Furthermore, if the description modifies a
specific component, either by removing it or by offering
details on how it looks, this change will be propagated to all
similar objects in the pictured cathedral. For example, if the
description specifies that a support of the main arcade is a
pier, the architectural historian will picture all supports as
piers (Figure 1).
A description can also modify the organization of the
components. However, consistency rules apply here. If the
description violates a consistency rule, the expert in
architectural history will become suspicious of the quality of
the description.
The processes that lead to the construction of a mental
model do not strictly follow the sequence presented here;
rather they overlap. But this is roughly how an architectural
historian translates a description into a visual model in his
mind.

Figure 1. Cross section, Amiens Cathedral, France (E.-E. Viollet-le-Duc.
Dictionnaire raisonné de l’architecture française. Vol. I.).

Second, the presence of some elements in the description
implies the presence of other elements. It is, thus, a
relationship that produces the must-be-present element.
There are three types of such relationships. First, some
elements must themselves contain default elements. This can
be either for elements that are always present, or for
elements sometimes present in cathedrals. For example, if
the description specifies that the supports (always present) of
the cathedral are columns, these columns must have shafts; if
the description specifies the presence of a triforium (not
always present) this triforium contains an arcade (Figure 1).
Second, some elements always have a relationship with
another element, which must be present. If a description
mentions an arch, then some sort of support must bear this
arch. Third, some elements pertain to more than one element.
For example, the supports of the main arcade are also
supports of the side aisles. The presence of these supports in
the main arcade implies that there must be a side aisle.

III.

ARC IMPLEMENTATION

The subject of the ARC project defines its research
domains in computer science. The project principally
involves analysis of textual descriptions of architecture and
development of a logical computational model. Two fields in
Artificial Intelligence concern such activities: Natural
Language Processing and Knowledge Representation.
Currently, ARC focuses on Knowledge Representation. The
Prolog computer language was selected for its
implementation. This language is well suited to handle logic
and to reason on data. The system also implements
defeasibility [5].

D. Consistency
Knowing that these elements must be present in the
described building, the expert will use consistency rules
derived from the default model to organize these elements.
They must be arranged in a way that corresponds to the

A. Knowledge Representation
The goal is to create a system capable of understanding a
narrative describing a building in the same way an
architectural historian would. In order to develop such a

600

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

system, the Knowledge Representation must be more than a
repository of building components. It should mimic the
logical processes that the historian follows when he mentally
pictures the described building.
The Knowledge Representation developed for the ARC
project presents three implementation features. First, it is a
hierarchical representation of the objects present in a default
prototype cathedral. This information is needed to complete
a description. Second, it contains the logical relationships
between components as well as properties of relationships.
This serves to make a description consistent, or to reject it.
Third, it embeds mechanisms to make rules defeasible. This
provides the mechanism to create an instantiation of the
default model, corresponding to an actual cathedral. This
rule-based system can handle the default cathedral as well as
specific features of an actual building.

ARC benefited from the generous support of a Digital
Humanities Start-Up Level I Grant from the NEH (Grant
Number HD5110110), a University of Georgia Research
Foundation Grant, and The University of Georgia President's
Venture Fund.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

B. Instantiation
Once the Knowledge Representation of the default model
is produced, the system can deal with architectural
descriptions of a specific building. This process of
instantiating the model into a specific cathedral is enabled,
principally, by the defeasibility of the relationships. If the
description contradicts a defeasible relationship of the
default model by offering a new relationship, the system will
modify the model. However, if the relationship in the default
model is indefeasible, the system will either trigger an error
or reject the change. This last choice can be determined at
runtime by, for example, requesting input from a user.
Finally, to track the objects internally, the system uses
discourse referents [6]. These are arbitrary numbers that the
system maintains to know the identity of an individual
component. However, this is transparent to the external user.
This way of operation is consistent with how architectural
historians work when describing a cathedral. Individual
elements are only considered and identified if they are
“abnormal” compared to other objects, but, generally,
architectural historians do not deal with individuals in
descriptions.
IV.

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

CONCLUSIONS

Currently, ARC provides a basic working framework to
deal with the processes involved in understanding
descriptions of a Gothic cathedral. In the future, work will
focus on Natural Language Processing, 3D visualization, and
on refining the algorithms used in the Knowledge
Representation. The goal is to design a system that
understands a description of Gothic cathedrals without
human intervention. This system is developed to work with
descriptions of Gothic cathedrals. They form a good subject.
They are organized structures yet at the same time human
artifacts. However, nothing prevents this type of research
from exploring other knowledge domains that involve
rendering structured visual artifacts in a natural language, or,
for example, becoming a tool in research on lost or never
built buildings that are only known through descriptions.

601

Tyler Carlson, Stefaan Van Liefferinge, Elijah Holt, Rebecca
A. Smith, Michael A. Covington, Walter D. Potter,
“Application of defeasible domain-specific knowledge to the
description of Gothic cathedrals in the ARC project,” Proc. of
the 2012 Int. Conf. on Artificial Intelligence (ICAI 12), in
press.
William J. Mitchell, The Logic of Architecture: Design,
Computation, and Cognition. MIT, 1990.
Simon Haegler, Pascal Müller, and Luc Van Gool,
“Procedural modeling for digital cultural heritage,” EURASIP
Journal on Image & Video Processing, Special Issue 3, Vol.
2009, pp. 1-11, 2009, doi: 10.1155/2009/852392
Yong Liu, Yunliang Jiang, and Lican Huang, “Modeling
complex architectures based on granular computing on
ontology,” IEEE Trans. on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 18, no. 3, pp.
585-598, June 2010.
Donald Nute, “Defeasible logic,” Proc. of the Applications of
Prolog 14th International Conference on Web Knowledge
Management And Decision Support (INAP 01), SpringerVerlag, 2003, pp. 151-169.
Thoralf Skolem, “Über die mathematische Logik (Nach einem
Vortrag gehalten im Norwegischen Mathematischen Verein
am 22. Oktober 1928),” in Selected Works in Logic, Jens Erik
Fenstad, Ed., Oslo - Bergen – Tromsö: Universitetsforlaget,
1970, pp. 189-206.

