2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Framing Interaction through Engagement in Interactive Open Ended
Environments.

Kristine Deray

Simeon Simoff

Faculty Arts and Social Sciences
University of Technology, Sydney
Sydney, Australia
kristine.deray@uts.edu.au

School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematics
University of Western Sydney
Sydney, Australia
S.Simoff@uws.edu.au

learning and interacting styles. The centrality of how
museums, can support engagement and foster critical
cultural dialogue, on such issues as climate change, is a
developing area of research. Put simply, it is useful to such
organisations to gauge how, and to what extent, visitors are
engaged with exhibition content that rely upon interaction.
This work recognizes these developments and argues
that there is benefit in an interaction model that can provide
real time information on how interactions unfold in openended environments, to better interpret the value of such
approach to interactive content delivery in museums. As
interactions are fundamental to human communication and
social interaction, the way people interact with artifacts and
with one another can be utilized to assess behavior when
considered as a complex feature and movement chain.
Visual analysis of such kinetic signatures would assist in
identifying difference in people’s interaction style and, it is
proposed, an indication of engagement with the content
provided by the interactive installations. The potential is for
interactions to construct experience, and thus semantics, for
people, generating provision for a history of interaction
behavior.
The design of interactive content in spatial
environments, in terms of spatial structure, content, and
perceptual layering of modalities, will benefit from
knowledge of how people behave and learn through
interaction.
This work focuses only on human movement actions
and interpretation of such.

Abstract— In this paper we present preliminary pilot study
of how people’s interactions can be characterized in openended environments through the concept of engagement. By
open – ended environments we refer to physical spaces that
construct content and associated semantics through nondidactic methods supportive of non - linear navigation. This
work presents an overview of an approach to interactions as
mapping human actions and their characteristics, through
which behavior features can be identified. The interpretation
is based on the extension of previous work, the Kinetic InterActing System, that interprets, visualises and offers means for
analysis of the interaction process between parties enabling
visual reasoning about the quality of interactions. The
approach is examined in the context of new developments in
museums that perceives them as becoming creative and
reflective agents in digital humanities. Examples are taken
from a large public immersive exhibition that relies upon
interaction delivered through various modalities for content
assimilation and participant experience.
Keywords- Interaction, engagement, behavior modeling,
information
visualization,
movement
characterization.,
morphodynamics.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Over the past few years there has been a significant shift
in the perception of knowledge dissemination of
contemporary museums. The traditional role of museums as
silos of archival content is no longer wholly sustainable in
an environment where the self - evidence of the ‘truth’ of
what museums exhibit is under question [1]. There is a call
for museums to re-define themselves as places for debate,
experimentation and confrontation [2]. Recently museums
have been characterized as reflective spaces that can
provide agency for change [3] as part of their obligation to
foster critical cultural debate [4]. One way museums have
been accommodating such shifts is to move to open - ended
interactive environments where dialogue is primarily
generated through interactions with artifacts and
technology. The prospect of museums to become reflective
and creative agents engender opportunities for access to
visitor’s interaction pathways and a method to identify

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 Crown Copyright
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.91

II.

INTERACTION MODEL AND ENGAGEMENT

This work looks to interaction as a central construct.
The work builds on prior research that explores the
potential of the Kinetic Inter-Acting (KIA) visual language
and visual analysis system. So far the approach has been
applied to dialogical frameworks between pairs of human
participants, in particular, between patients and healthcare
practitioners. However, as noted in [5] the technology has
broader application. Constructed on a high level conceptual
framework that supports in its design principles,
expandability and scalability, the KIA system can be
applied to such interaction contexts as mobile systems,
534

SMS communications, interactions in virtual worlds, video
conferencing, and other systems where interactions can be
discretized. Since interactions are complex and happen in
dynamic operational environments, it is impossible to predefine everything at design time. Consequently, the design
and evaluation of a language describing interactions need
to have the capability for dynamic reconfiguration and
extendibility, which sustains backward compatibility for
consistency of the results of the analysis of interactions.
The capacity of KIA for scalability addresses not only the
size of the data displayed, but the diversity of screens on
which visualisation can appear, ensuring the displayed
components remain recognisable under projective
transformations, such as scaling, rotation, translation, or if
presented in perspective. The capacity for expandability
aims at visualisation that can support change in the
representation of interaction information [5]. These design
principles, along with the principle of expressive power [6]
of the discrete elements that constitute the visualisation and
their combinations that constitute the visual language,
provide KIA with adaptable dimensions applicable to
varying interaction contexts.
The visual language KIA provides high - level view of
interactions partially because the modelling of the
behaviour of the visual elements provides an
approximation of their complexity and partially because
interpretation of the behavior of the visual primitives is
supported by the familiarity of the embodied constructs.
The method applied for the design of KIA language, is
based on analogical reasoning, following the “SourceTarget” model of linking conceptual space in metaphor
analysis in cognitive linguistics [7]. The argument for the
choice of human movement as a source domain is twofold:
(i) there is a need for a visual language that is
understandable by people with different backgrounds, that
can enhance communication, and; (ii) cognitive
psychology [8] and artificial intelligence [9] emphasise the
phenomenon that the knowledge about human body is well
embedded in us, hence satisfies (i). The visual knowledge
representation is designed based on aspects of human
movement. Such design is justified from the fact that
human possess implicit knowledge about human
movement.
We briefly cover respective aspects of KIA sufficient
for presenting the study in this paper. We refer to [10]
readers, who are interested in further details about the
design principles, basic concepts, constructs, expressions
and implementation overview of the KIA visual language.
The essentials of the framework are modeled on two
groups of constructs that provide the forms and behaviour
rules of the ‘shaping affinities’ for expression of
information about interactions. In particular, mapped into
the target domain are the Rising-Sinking (R-S) elasticity
and the Contracting-Extending (C-E) elasticity. Elasticities
are constructs that refer to anatomical actions alongside the
dimensions in the movement of human body. Qualities are

dimensions associated with each elasticity. They are the
expressive features of the interaction. Elasticities represent
the reciprocal effects as integral dimensions of the domain
of interactions. Qualities represent cooperative processes,
cooperation, interpreted as ‘common ground’ between
parties in the interaction domain.
Elasticities are descried through the computational
models of their qualities. In the present version of KIA
there are five qualities to express the interaction process. In
its current development the R-S elasticity includes four
qualities, presented here in terms of their interpretation in
the interaction domain. Flow (q1R-S) indicates the
contribution of each participant to an interaction; transition
(q2R-S) characterises interaction in time; exertion (q3R-S)
correlates to the amount of effort required for an
interaction to achieve some perceived position; and control
(q4R-S) indicates the amount of control applied in the
interaction. The C-E elasticity currently includes a single
quality - intensity (q1C-E), which indicates the strength of
the interaction. Intensity can also be interpreted as
capturing the strength of attraction between parties similar,
as an analogy, to the strength of a movement. – that is, its
material expression through elasticity.
The target domain, interactions, is expressed in terms of
the behaviour of the ‘shaping affinities’ that follows the
computational models of the elasticities and qualities.
Figure 1 describes the combination of these constructs.
The approach is based on dimensional differentiation and,
presently, organises interaction into states in two dimensional space as shown. The Kinetic Inter-Acting
model provides consistent semantics through establishment
of the relation between sets of variables.
Since the model presupposes to reflect the
characteristics of interaction, as a physical system, the
importance of the establishment of such relation in
differing contexts is central to the ability of the model to
capture interaction information through expression of the
interaction process and how it unfolds in time.

Figure 1. Combination of the shaping affinities in KIA as an expressive
unit. [11].

535

It is proposed that KIA has the capacity to interpret
engagement through the behavior of its visual elements as
they respond to changes in the characteristics of the actions
contributed to an interaction session. Yet, issues present in
mapping KIA to open ended environments where the
interaction is between a person’s actions, facilitated through
a tool, to a (reactive) system. Such an interpretation of
interaction challenges the KIA system, which is based on
perceivable reciprocal effects that are the output of dialogue
between interacting parties. KIA, as noted, provides an
overreaching framework for interaction, with capacity for
extendibility and modification. It can be used to capture
interaction paths in different modes dependent upon
whether the interaction is reciprocal, or not,
regular/irregular, symmetrical or asymmetrical.

Using KIA as the base framework to think about
engagement as a component of interaction is logical. KIA
is based on the importance of physical action and how it
can create, manipulate, and share meaning specifically
through a focus on the embodied characteristics of action
that provide information re the interaction session. The
proposition is that a person’s interaction with the
physicality of the world expresses how s/he feels. The
unfolding of morphodynamics of KIA’s visual elements
interpreted as held, or not held, positions, that is, variant or
invariant, provides information relevant to the interaction
context under discussion pertaining to the person’s
engagement with that context. Interaction analytics of such
patterns can be utilised to create, manipulate and share
information. The question of how can engagement be
recognized and expressed pre-supposes that engagement
can be characterized through the dimensions within the
KIA framework. As such, KIA is placed as a cognitive
technology.
III.

A. Design Aspects of KIA Expression
Design aspects of KIA’s visual constructs provide
flexibility for change and are capable of application to
varying interaction contexts. Figure 2 illustrates current
visualisation of the body element. We refer further to its
two parts as Figure 2a and 2b, respectively. The subparts in
each part are referred in brackets. Figure 2a and Figure 2b
show the configuration and the operation of the current
body element with a single quality. In particular, the
visualisation in Figure 2a(b) indicates relatively low
intensity of the interaction between the parties. Assuming
that it follows a previous ‘measurement’ of the interaction
between same parties, shown in Figure 2a(a), the
visualization in Figure 2a(b) indicates also contraction of
the interaction. The body element in Figure 2a(c) is
composed of three qualities of ‘Contracting and Extending’
elasticity. In Figure 2a(d) the interaction data does not
carry information about the second quality; the third
quality is present and visualised at the position assigned by
the visualization system for the third quality of
‘Contracting and Extending’ elasticity for the considered
set of interactions. Note that the anchor points can be in
any combination, i.e. we can have an active and a passive
participant, two passive participants, or two active ones,
distinguished by the different coloring of the anchor points .

EXPRESSING ENGAGEMENT

An interactive exhibition was selected, High Arctic.
The study, a pilot, consisted of fifty exit surveys and three
days of continuous videography. The focus of the survey
was to elicit from participants what they were ‘thinking’ in
relation to the interactions they participated within while in
the exhibition space. Of interest, is that most people found
the exhibition did not assist with or generate collaboration
between people as an underlying consequence of their
interaction. The exit surveys will not be discussed further
in this paper.
High Arctic is a multi layered immersive exhibition that
deals through an abstracted arctic landscape with climate
change. The installation consists of five interactive ‘pools’
of various dimensions each with a different climatic theme.
The visualisation of these themes is activated through a
series of projections from cameras, suspended from the
ceiling, that respond to the movements of ultra violet
torches each person is issued with when entering the
exhibition space. Other components of the exhibition
included a large number of columns (3000) that represent
glaciers of varying dimensions. In addition, a soundscape
of poems tell the story of human’s relationship to the
Arctic since the first explorers went there.
Importantly, in High Arctic, interaction relies upon a
person’s ‘doing’ to create interactive content. Interaction is
communicated through a ‘tool,’ namely, gestures with an
ultra violet torch. Through ‘doing’ the system responds
and the projections change in behavior. Thus the ‘drive’ of
the interaction lies in embodiment. Dourish [11] explores
the notion of embodiment and concludes by saying,
”embodied interaction is the creation, manipulation, and
sharing of meaning through engaged interaction with
artifacts.” Engagement, then, can be perceived is an aspect
of interaction. It is of value to interpret an interaction
session, and by inference a person’s learning experience.

a

b
Figure 2. (a) Body element arms (fields): (b.) aspects of the design of the
Effort Shape Element

536

Figure 2b illustrates the construction of the Effort-Shape
elements. Figure 2b(a) shows a single cell element with a
neutral value of the corresponding quality. Figure 2b(b)
shows an Effort-Shape element with four cells. The figure
also shows the rule for extending the number of qualities in
the Effort-Shape element – any new quality (in this case
q(5)) is introduced as an addition to the right of the last
existing quality, preserving the backward compatibility of
the Effort-Shape element. The element in Figure 5.8(c)
operates with only two cells (qualities q(2) and q(4),
indicating that the maximum number of qualities in the
Effort-Shape element is four.

level.

Figure 4. High Arctic scene is inspired by climate change and Lego
bricks. Photo courtesy National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, London,
UK.

These parameters describe interactions as a physical
system and allow us to specify a guiding process for how
to interpret engagement in open-ended environments like
High Arctic, shown in Figure 4
In High Arctic the richness of the interaction session,
can be interpreted as reflecting engagement. By ‘richness’
reference is made to the diversity and length of the
person’s ‘doing’ with the ultra violet torch. Diversity
requires greater duration, as the interface in High Arctic is
intuitive / explorative defying quick interpretation. Yet,
conversely, longer duration may also not result in increased
richness of interaction facilitated through the torch. Instead
it may reflect stagnation or ineptitude. One issue is the
reactive nature of the system. The digital state of the
system is embodied in the projections that respond in
various ways to the movement of the ultra violet torch
directed by each person. Additionally, the glacier columns
are embedded with names made visible through the shining
of the ultra violet torch upon them. Yet the quality of the
interaction is part of the design strategy of the design of
High Arctic. Thus, the interaction process is central to the
success for engagement with the content of the installation.

Figure 3. Morphodynamics:depeicting difference in the behaviour of
interacting parties .

The design aspects of KIA to support expandability of
interaction qualities and associated expressive power
ensure the language can be applied to the visualisation of
interactions in the context of the High Arctic immersive
installation. With respect to KIA, originally developed for
analysis of human-to-human interaction, we have humantechnology interactions, which, may require from a visual
language for analysis of interactions the ability to cater for
asymmetry in the nature of responses. Figure 3 suggests
one way of presenting such asymmetry between the
interacting
parties,
by
generating
asymmetrical
visualizations of the qualities in the Effort - Shape element.
Figure 3 shows a version of KIA, where respective
deviation of the curve from the vertical axis is indicative of
variation in that quality, caused by the difference in the
nature of the interacting parties. These design aspects of
KIA are revealing of the capacity of the language to
represent information derived from the interaction process
in varying contexts.

IV.

EXAMPLES

In this paper only interactions in High Arctic with the
ultra violet torch are discussed. Figure 5 provides four
instances of interaction in High Arctic. In Figure 3(a), (b)
and (d), interaction is enhanced through collaboration with
one or more people in the space.
The layered construction of High Arctic presents issues
for clear demarcation and data segmentation of people’s
actions. Still through observational data and qualitative
analysis of video footage we can surmise that engagement
can be interpreted through the qualities of KIA.

B. Application of KIA Dimensions
As noted, KIA explores the interaction process through the
behavior of the constructs, elasticities and qualities.
Interactions can be described through the various time –
based statistics of actions. These include the length of each
action, the average length and variance of actions of each
party in an interaction, the frequency of turn taking and
other similar parameters. Similarly, the interaction space
can be described in similar parameters at the interaction

537

Figure 5. Various interactions across the ‘pools’ in High Arctic

Preliminary pilot investigation is surmised as follows.
Transition q2R − S has effect upon engagement. Generally
the longer people spent investigating content and the
manipulation of such through various movements of the
ultra violet torch, the more productive, and, thus, engaged
became the interaction session. Physical variations
embedded in the interaction sessions included, wave,
circle, pointed, and oscillating movements all of which
contribute differing lengths and frequency of actions. The
physical way people interact with the animated
projections is a major part of the installation, as
interaction can influence internal states. [11]. People who
chose to wander through with little, or no, exploration of
the projections in the ‘digital pools’ raises the question of
whether, or not, they were engaged in any sustained
manner with those components of the installation. Yet
quite frequently visitors immersed in some aspect of the
installation would sit or stand still. This is a form of
implicit interaction and thus engagement. Exertion q3R − S ,
which correlates to the amount of effort required for an
interaction to achieve some perceived position, is closely
linked, in this context, to the number of different
movements people make to facilitate the interaction
between the ultra violet torch and the projections. From
preliminary analysis this quality benefited from

collaboration. People who interacted with others
(generally it appears they were friends or relatives) learnt
from one another ways of manipulating the projections
and such collaboration appeared to relate to extended
duration. Control q4R − S , which indicates the number of
decision points can be interpreted as motion paths in this
context. This refers to navigation as people move into,
through, and away from each ‘digital pool.’ Flow q1R − S
that is a measure of the contribution of each participant to
an interaction cannot, in its present form, be applied
readily into a reactive interaction framework. Lastly
intensity q1C − E , which indicates the strength of the
interaction, can be interpreted as strength of attraction in
the interaction between people and content of the
exhibition, or at least the parts of the exhibition discussed.
V.

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we discussed an approach to preliminary
analysis of engagement with the content of an immersive
installation as an outcome of the interaction with this
installation. This proof-of-concept study showed that the
Kinetic Inter-Acting language and analysis system can be
a working tool in digital humanities for modeling
engagement with content as a component of the interaction

538

[3]

with the installation, through the behavior of KIA visual
constructs (elasticities and their qualities). This is based on
the premise that interaction(s) can influence internal states
and that such states will be manifested in the interaction
context through people’s behavior patterns. The potential
for interpreting engagement has significance for the design
of interactive environments in museums. This is timely
given contemporary trends of museums to re-define
themselves as places for debate, experimentation and
confrontation.

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[9]

We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of the staff
of Greenwich Maritime Museum, Greenwich, London.UK.
Special thanks to the Director Kevin Sumption (untill
February 2012) for his support.

[10]

[11]
[12]

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

F. Cameron, ‘Criticality and Contention- museums, contemporary
societies, civic roles and responsibilities in the 21st century’,
openmuseumjournal,
8,
1-5,
2006,
[http://hosting.collectionaustralia.net/omj/vol8/editorial.html
D. Cameron, ‘The Museum, A Temple Or the Forum’, Curator,
Xiv, 1, 11-24, 1971

[13]

539

E Hirzy,. Mastering Civic Engagement: A Challenge for
Museums, Washington, D.C. American Association of Museums,
2002.
D. Casey, ‘Museums as Agents for Social and Political Change’,
first anniversary address from the Director of the National
Museum of Australia to the National Press Club’, Wednesday 13
March 2002, unpub mans.
K Deray, and S. Simoff, Designing technology for visualisation
of interactions on mobile devices, Journal of Computing Science
and Engineering, 3 (4), 2009, pp. 218-237.
D. Chandler,. Semiotics: The Basics. Routlege, 2004
G. Lakoff and M. Johnson, Metaphors We Live By. Chicago,
University of Chicago Press, 1980.
M. Wilson, Six views of embodied cognition, Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 9 (4), 2002, pp. 625-636.
M. L. Anderson, Embodied Cognition: A field guide, Artificial
Intelligence, 149, 2003, pp. 91–130
K. Deray and S. Simoff, Kinetic Inter-acting: A System for
Visual Analysis of Interaction Dynamics’, in Proceedings of The
14th International Conference Information Visualisation (IV’10),
pp. 73-78, London, United Kingdom, 2010.
Ibid, p79
P. Dourish, Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied
Interaction, MIT press, Cambridge, 2001.
E Edmonds, Art Interaction and Engagement, in Proceedings of
The 15th International Conference Information Visualisation
(IV’10), pp. 451-456, London, United Kingdom, 2011.

