2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Beyond Level 2 BIM, Web Portals and Collaboration Tools
John Counsell
Cardiff School of Art and Design, Cardiff Metropolitan University
{ JCounsell@cardiffmet.ac.uk }
Abstract

truism that communication and collaboration are about
people. So also construction contracts are fundamentally
about people, relationships and trust. Traditional
construction contracts are often criticised for promoting
adversarial conflict, for focusing on what happens after
things have gone wrong, rather than on the quality of
communication and trust that prevents things going awry,
which includes regular consensus focused interaction and
meetings. [3] Special features are identified for construction
procurement and contracts: long periods from concept to
completion and thus long ‘transaction’ and file checkout
times; during the long process it is possible that client user
needs will change, requiring mechanisms that enable this
change of scope, and collaboration to ensure the outcome
remains optimal; incomplete or fuzzy data since each
building and thus each project is to some extent a prototype,
if only below ground, in local context, and for specific
users. This paper suggests that these features may be used
as criteria for examining proposed collaborative tools,
‘apps’, processes and portals. In the experience of the
author of systems analysis prior to and over the several
projects described later, it is necessary to distinguish
between pragmatic software applications and those
‘political’ decisions that determine their specific application
and use at a particular time. If the software applications are
designed to engineer a ‘political’ outcome, they may often
be so narrowly defined and so limited in practice that a
change in the dynamics of that practice renders them
swiftly functionally obsolete. For example at the moment a
number of proprietary web portals are described as BIMServers. However this paper goes on to examine the
emerging need to federate BIM with GIS and urban models,
with Building Performance Software (BPS) and wider
ecological
software
applications,
with
mark-up,
commentary and broader semantic information, in what
may be termed overarching construction information
management (CIM). BIM-Servers may not be adequate.
It is suggested that: while it may be sensible within an
organisation to limit the use of CIM to BIM alone during a
learning period; for longevity of skills and training that
should be a ‘political’ decision, not a restrictive built in
limitation of the software itself; proprietary web-portals
may be as or more expensive than proprietary BIM or GIS
software solutions, and yet may possess such built-in

The UK government defines Level 2 Building
Information Modelling (BIM) as collaborative use of a BIM
process, not software per se, within the full design and
construction team. They perceive the resulting ‘federated
single point of truth’ as central in improving shared
communication and consensus. The government will
require all engaged in the design construction and
management of publicly funded buildings and
infrastructure to share that process by 2016. It is argued
that it is not enough for all users to deploy focused BIM
software, however adroitly. Broader construction
information management visualisation and collaboration
tools are needed, including web tools, applications, apps,
and portals, benefiting from the extension of contemporary
ICT through ‘Web 2.0’ and beyond. Projects are described
that used database-driven collaborative web modelling of
the built and natural environment with non-proprietary and
software-independent forms of ‘mark-up’ for collaboration
and consensus building and architectural visualisation.

1. Introduction
The UK government is mandating the collaborative use
of BIM (termed level 2 BIM) for all publicly funded
substantial construction projects from 2016.[1] Pathfinder
schemes start this year. Their aspiration is that this will
swiftly follow the US path towards what is termed i-BIM. It
is suggested that at best there is a ‘federated single point of
truth’ [9] rather than a single unified model or repository.
Thus this process of fully collaborative BIM at level 2, and
beyond towards full ‘i-BIM’, will depend on diverse and (at
best) federated ranges of tools from database driven web
portals to new uses of social media, Web 2.0 tools and
beyond [2]. These portals may be ‘software as a service’
proprietary cloud based products, (often expensive).
However it is suggested that there is little in these services
that cannot be established using open source and low cost
web tools.
This paper discusses the plethora of software packages
and file formats that are chosen by users to meet their
perceived needs. Hence it may be suggested that attempts at
standardisation become over complex or flounder. It is a
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.88

510

limitations. Larger organisations may be able to afford the
added subscription and running costs of such portals.
However the UK government has expressly stated it wishes
to enable small and micro enterprises to be involved in this
transformational process. [1] Such organisations in general
struggle to afford annual updates of BIM software alone,
even when not in present financial crisis. The author’s IV10
paper [4] described several sequential projects designed to
enable and support database driven web-based collaborative
modelling of the built and natural environment. Throughout
these projects a need was defined for non-proprietary and
software-independent forms of ‘mark-up’ for: commenting
on the evolving state of and versions of modelling; linking
to many different media, documentary sources and base
data that served to evidence these interpretations; and
achieving consensus in opposing or supporting planned
proposals. The tools needed for management of this process
of collaborative development, handling multiple versions of
model with tagged objects, linked source media, and
comments, were found to be more prevalent in GIS than in
either CAD or current approaches to BIM.
Most BIM practice is currently focused on new-build
construction projects. However it is argued that there is a
shift of emphasis occurring towards prioritising the
sustainable refurbishment of existing building stock. The
author’s IV09 paper [5] focused on the divergent issues that
relate to the CIM of existing buildings. Practice that is
limited to new-build CIM will struggle to adapt to the
diverse needs and issues arising in heritage or
refurbishment CIM practice. These include: partial or
sequential or additive BIM models; precise data in close
proximity to fuzzy or uncertain data; and a bandwidth of
alternate interpretations and proposed solutions. It is
suggested that the needs of this form of CIM are far broader
than contemporary practice would suggest. Lastly, design
and construction information is closely related to real-world
objects and activities, experienced visually. Hence current
and future CIM tools require a strong visual focus.

packages and computerised maintenance management
systems (CMMS). [7] Leading BIM packages use Industry
Foundation Classes (IFC) as the primary open source
exchange format. The Building Smart consortium has been
developing this exchange format since the early 1990’s.
Despite the increasing take-up of IFC for BIM, the
GBXML exchange format is still also widely used between
a number of BIM software packages and some leading
building performance simulation software packages. [8]
“The UK BIM Strategy addresses the needs of the UK
Infrastructure – and because it is addressing infrastructure,
sound information management and GIS is critical to its
delivery.”[9] There has been an attempt to extend the IFC
format towards geographic information as the proposed
IFC2x3g standard.[10] However this is a very limited
interchange of some key BIM and Geographic Modelling
Language (GML) data such as topography and georeferencing. GML is probably the most commonly used
open source GIS vector data exchange format. (There is
also a diversity of different GIS raster file formats, used
more for digital imagery and grid based spatial analytical
tools.) The GML schema is identified as having some
limitations that make translation to complementary
software packages more difficult. So it is held GML could
usefully be extended to include: ‘CSG (Constructive solid
geometry) - to ease interoperability with IFC; Sweep
geometries – to ease interoperability and the 3D
representation of for example pipes for Utility infrastructure
modelling; and scene graphs – to increase interoperability
with X3D and COLLADA.’[11] CityGML is an emerging
standard for 3D urban modelling, based upon extensions
within the GML schema. With the exception of those cities
implementing CityGML (mainly German) there are few
approaches to standardisation in such urban models, despite
years of discussion. This continues to limit the automated
upload of architectural design proposals into such models
for critical planning evaluation, and limits the later update
of the urban model with the as-built result. While work is
underway on effective translators between BIM/IFC and
CityGML, these are complicated by the differences
between, on the one hand, focus on an IFC element based
volume model (‘confusingly’ “IFC files support several
different ways of describing geometry” [12]) and, on the
other, a GML based topographic surface model. [13] Even
if a data standard like GML is applied there remain a
number of different national standards within the EU alone
that make automated synchronisation of data a challenge,
such as the wide range of different geographic and mapping
national height standards. The US administration views the
collaborative and integrated use of BIM as critical.
The National Institution of Building Sciences (NIST)
has set up a website to promote 'Whole Building'
Design’[14]. NIST also supports open source approaches,
IFC and the SPie Project. The objective of the Specifiers'
Properties Information Exchange (SPie) project is to “create

2. Multiple file formats
Many BIM software programs rely on proprietary tools
or two way exchange processes to exchange data with
selected complementary packages. However both the GSA
{the US Federal body leading the move to establish the US
National BIM standard} and the UK coalition government
advisors appear to advocate open source software and
exchange standards. Both bodies have settled on
“Computerised
Operations
Building
Information
Exchange” (COBie) as the common data standard in which
they wish to receive data from BIM for longer term
management of their asset base of buildings and facilities.
[6] They both face the current challenge that differing
departments and sections reporting to each national body
still use a range of different facilities management software

511

Automation Systems (BAS), Facilities Management
Systems (FMS), and Geographic Information Systems
(GIS). By integrating these previously separate datasets
EcoDomus FM is claimed to allow the Facility Manager an
increased ability to analyze operational data, thus enabling
a holistic approach to capital asset management.”[ 21] This
demonstrates the complexity of whole life CIM. Some will
be tempted to use the much cheaper or free Cloud tools
such as Dropbox (www.dropbox.com). However these in
turn have limitations that render them less reliable for
design and construction related audit and control. For
Dropbox these shortcomings include: the current very high
costs for significant volumes of data; the need to pay for
‘version management’ beyond 30 days; and the lack of file
checkout, so that the first upload ‘wins’. Although it keeps
the conflicted later copy it may prove very difficult to
reconcile the ‘conflicted’ copies in an orderly manner. As a
result perhaps, major consultancies such as Atkins still find
the need to establish their own in house approach to overarching information management (construction CIM) using
the Web. “Much of the received data does not conform to
project standards e.g. spatial reference system, file format,
accuracy, and is processed to ensure adherence e.g.by reprojecting data from a local grid system to UTM zone
40N… Using tools including AutoCAD Civil 3D and FME,
data received in e.g.ESRI geodatabase/shape file,
Intergraph GeoMedia, are provided in DGN or DWG
format, as required…. a web GIS portal for use across the
project/stakeholder team, has been established, so that
spatial data (both CAD and GIS) can be viewed and
interrogated in context with other key information, within
one system.”[9].

set of product templates that can be used by manufacturers
to export product data into an open-standard format
consumed by designers, specifiers, builders, owners, and
operators.” This appears to have some similarities to a
separate ‘Data Template’ under development by CIBSE in
the UK. [15] Major property and facilities managers already
confront these integration problems. The Australian
Government funded the prototypical historic BIM
modelling of the Sydney Opera House for its long term
management. [5] Nuclear plants like Sellafield have been
the focus of the integration of CAD and GIS into a “lifetime
plan” to support “a programme spanning the next 110
years”. [16] Kemp claims that “BIM data is just like any
other - it can be effectively handled in a larger database
management system (DBMS), e.g. Oracle, Microsoft, IBM,
Open Source - that cares little for what the data actually is,
but is powerful enough to handle large quantities of it and
receive, link, store, and output any subset of that data, on
demand, in the way an end user needs it. Huge strides will
be made once BIM tools can be routinely integrated with
GIS systems in this way.”[9] Turk vividly illustrates the
complexity of that data to be managed, in his paper on
‘Construction informatics: Definition and ontology’. [17]

3. ‘Federated Single Point of Truth’
“Some kind of portal is commonly being adopted as a
single source of truth which allows access to, processing of,
and integration of, information which remain at their
original – or most appropriate- location. This approach
allows for flexibility and scalability of solutions – use of a
single model is not sustainable for the majority of projects.
Bentley refer to the principle of a Common Data
Environment as a ‘Federated Single Point of Truth’”[9].
There are a range of proprietary websites used for
construction project data exchange, collaboration and
teamwork. Autodesk have a cloud based version of their
Buzzsaw collaboration portal. This is claimed to enable
users to “know who accessed, edited, uploaded and
downloaded any document and when they did it... Control
access to documents and enable only one person to edit a
document at any given time... Track and manage multiple
document versions, add comments and send notifications
when you create new versions.” [18] However with a
“Recommended Retail Price of £3350” it is expensive for
small practices, private or some public clients.[19]
Onuma’s software has been used for a sequence of BIMStorm events where widely varying software packages and
teams with members distributed across the world have
collaborated in 48 hour design “brain-storm” charrettes.
[20] Proprietary facilities management focused portals and
collaboration sites include Ecodomus. It is claimed that
“EcoDomus helps mitigate this problem by integrating
various systems used for building lifecycle management,
such as Building Information Models (BIM), Building

Information Management
CAD / BIM
GIS / Data
Document
Management Management Control
Management
Figure 1 Overarching CIM at WS Atkins [9]

5. Partial BIM, sequential BIM, or LOD’s
Communication requirements also relate to commonly
defined levels of detail (LOD). LOD relate to the
appropriate refinement of the model at each key stage from
concept through design to construction detail. The wider the
collaborative sharing of the same model, the more
important that confusion does not occur when e.g. an early
design stage structural model is viewed in the context of a
more detailed architectural model. Discussion of possible
UK L2BIM contract formats has started, since the UK
Government announced its strategy. There are already
several US contract templates focused on BIM and its wider
collaborative process, variously termed ‘Integrated Project

512

Delivery’ or ‘Virtual Design and Construction’. It is
currently recommended in these that LOD are defined
beyond possible confusion. It is suggested that these LOD
issues are compounded when there is partial or sequential
BIM. BIM for FM in the US National BIM specification
has many similarities to the historic BIM process. “A small
project may be affecting just a portion of a facility or a
single building system. By creating a BIM for that project
and registering that BIM to the 2D floor plan, you can
begin to create a 3D model of the facility…. If the scope of
a Major Renovation is limited, then the implementation will
follow the Small Project model.”[7]
BIM and thus wider CIM also need to afford means of
clearly stating where a description is a performance
specification or an exemplar (often specified as ‘or
similar’), or a specific required specification, or whether
certain, uncertain, or positioned on a fuzzy spectrum in
between. This was discussed in the author’s IV10 paper
relating to the at times conflicting evidence based
interpretations of heritage [4], “different interpretations and
expert views” and thus a need to make uncertainty visible.
It went on to suggest “It is important to be able to establish
whether the model is a credible facsimile of the original.
This depends upon a sufficiently coherent audit trail back to
the base measurements. These may be controversial, fuzzy
or incomplete.” Even within the design team it is held that
clarity is often lacking. “Architects often associate material
types with building objects in order to make the building
look right for a client presentation, and not necessarily
because that is the material to be used in construction.
When the model is then given to the engineer or quantity
surveyor, it might be unclear whether the material has been
selected intentionally, or simply for visual effect. Which
parts of the model are definitive, and which are illustrative?
This is important from a legal liability perspective.”[22]
The BIM or CAD urban model may thus be regarded as
analogous to the slowly eroding physical relief map, and
the overlaying GIS links (to other information) as
analogous to swiftly shifting political, social and economic
borders. Within such models individual features may
change regularly while the whole appears largely static.
Multiple alternatives may co-exist, so that a “single point of
truth” is more an interpretative focus than a rigid route.

on how to manage these. For example, there is no toolindependent way of grouping or labelling different
representations into, for example, levels of detail or visualversus-symbolic viewpoints.” In most instances geometry
but not parametric rules and relations is transferred.[22]
These concerns were endorsed by Dr. Andrew Marsh,
the developer of the highly successful Ecotect Building
Performance package. “The main problem is that the IFC
classes must be all things to all people... With flexibility
comes some level of ambiguity... the upshot is that there is
no single absolute solution for the straight conversion of
CAD geometry to a format suitable for all forms of
performance analysis or simulation. This means that you
will need to make a judgement on the best method to use
for different situations, based on both the type of analysis
you intend performing and the export capabilities of the
CAD tool you use.”[12] Casey and Vankadara [23] endorse
Peachavanish et al “that support for semantics ... is possible
within the IFC framework, but that it has been intentionally
omitted for one main reason: agreement about the semantic
nature of all objects is not possible across all applications.”
These issues are magnified greatly when the wider
integration of varying GIS, CityGML, BIM, BPS, FMS,
BAS, CMMS, and other software data types is considered.
“Not every commercial package provides all the features
and capabilities needed by all users, so users choose the
products that best meet their needs. Interoperability with
CAD and GIS tends to be even more remote. Herein lies the
opportunity for semantic interoperability”. “Semantic-level
interoperability relates to the ability of two tools to come to
a common understanding of the meaning of a model being
exchanged.” [23] However until that day, it can be argued
that there will be a prevailing need for additional
collaborative communication and or ‘markup’ to ensure
collective understanding, due to such diverse data in that
broader CIM realm and so much ambiguity and room for
misinterpretation. Particularly if file exchange itself
continues to be limited, and to strip out higher order
semantic information or parametric rules and relations.
Kemp quotes Jernigan the 2008 author of ‘Big BIM, Little
bim’, ”BIM, coupled with GIS, relational databases, and the
Internet all help us”. [9]

7. Open source web tools and portals
6. Semantic confusion
For smaller practices, small private clients, and cash
strapped local government bodies the cost of this help via
proprietary solutions may be prohibitive. The UK Coalition
Government through its construction strategy aspires to
achieve transformation of the industry by 2016. [1] This is
not likely to transform the many small organisations that
make up the bulk of that industry if it costs thousands for
the proprietary BIM software, and thousands more for an
auditable construction focused web portal service. This
paper suggests that honed collaborative web skills are

In the design team use of IFC alone it is argued that “a
more subtle but more problematic example might be the
alternative modelling of a low wall as either a wall object, a
thick slab object, an upstand beam, or even a kerb. Each of
these objects have different semantic meaning, so although
the objects might look no different on a 3D rendering, they
will be treated differently by analysis tools.” “IFC includes
language support for the definition of different
representations for objects, but to date there is no consensus

513

was achieved that it should cater for: tagging objects
(CAD-like), so that selecting one or more objects invoked
the comments or vice versa; comments associated with
viewpoints making possible narrative sequences; but also
comments in the form of additions to or suppressions of
parts of the model itself, enabling interventions and
alternative proposals to be ‘comments’. Version
management became critical when dealing with varying
modifications of urban models as alternative proposals. We
devised a tool to enable alternative versions to be selected
and ‘played’ like a film from any selected viewpoint.
Similar tools would it is suggested become necessary
in fully collaborative BIM. The author first compared BIM
and GIS functionality and complementarity in 1995.[28] In
1995 the conclusions included the views that
“improvements in building project information systems,
based upon 3D CAD models, would be made by tools
which enabled users” to: “enter building descriptions into
accessible databased inventories with 3D graphical display
and manipulation of the spatial component of the data”, (i.e.
use the database itself as a spatial data management tool,
not just a storage and retrieval mechanism); incorporate
change control, “version management and time-stamping of
data as an integral part of, and to manage the database”;
provide tools to “record and interrogate the quality and
accuracy of data”; calculate contiguity and adjacency from
locational spatial data, and so assist the allocation of
resources to entities”; “explore the sequence of assembly
within user-defined constraints” (parametric rules); “set
minimum and maximum constraints deduced from historic
data within the database, to identify and report quantities
and items which fall outside these bounds”; “Generalise
models within pre-defined parameters”, (i.e. control the
levels of detail – LOD - from the database); “model
performance specification buildings to which the specific
allocation of materials, components and resources may be
added later, both as attributes and graphical expression, for
'what-if' exploration, and site-specific application”, (i.e.
performance specification models vs prescriptive, relating
to the issue posed earlier of materials assigned by architects
for visual effect not for construction). It was argued then
that ‘Single Point of Truth’ models might begin to be
applied in practice by users, if they had more effective and
flexible control over the systems they use. [28]

required so that such organisations can adequately engage
with open source low cost alternatives.
Approaches to open-source ‘markup’ were discussed
more broadly in the author’s IV10 paper. [4] In traditional
CAD systems, from which such 3D models stem, there is
an expectation that it suffices that attributes are coded to the
objects which compile the built form. This is still largely
the case with those 3D CAD systems that claim to enable
Building Information Modelling. There is in an implicit
classification hierarchy from site, building, level, via
assembly to component. A member of one class cannot
usually be included in another class. This leads to issues
when for example a roof supported on four columns may
for one purpose be called a shelter, and for another termed a
building. These terms are subjective, and often difficult to
make exclusive. Research at UWE also showed that
assemblies of building components are grouped together
differently in differing European cultures, so direct
translation of building terms is difficult. A similar approach
to classification and description in a GIS would imply
(inadequately) that the map data alone suffices to code all
relevant data, without the usual overlaying of other themes
of interest, recorded via overlaid points, lines, or bounding
polygons or polyhedra. An argument was made for enabling
objects to be members simultaneously of a number of
different semantic groups, and for tools to retrospectively
group/tag elements together in this way, following work in
the Hortonet e-Ten [24] and subsequent Valhalla projects
[25] [4],. In the Valhalla project we developed tools for
retrospectively tagging objects, images and video clips, to
associate linked information. This highlighted a need to
record more metadata with raw data and images than is still
the norm. Exploration continued, in that and the subsequent
VEPs project, into combining event driven behaviours and
Structured Query Language. This enabled the results of the
spatial database search and analysis tools within the GIS
database to be displayed interactively within the 3D
representation. Queries such as 'where is…?', 'where is the
nearest…?', 'what is near to this point…?', 'what has
changed?' or 'what are the consequences of a proposed
change?' could be demonstrated visually or by associated
‘pop up’ pages or labels. Perhaps one of the most
significant developments was the association of information
with viewpoints, so that moving to the viewpoint invoked
the information or selecting the information also triggered a
move to the viewpoint, starting to support a narrative
sequence in the interactive VR environment.
This approach became fully developed during the
course of the subsequent VEPs project. The database driven
3D models and collaboration tools developed by the VEPs
project were presented at IVO5, IV06, and IV10. [4]. The
international partners in the project extensively debated
how best to support tagging and commentary, leading to
formulation of a standardised approach implemented across
a range of prototypes termed COML. [26] [27] Consensus

Conclusions
The multiplicity of file formats is a major challenge for
CIM. Commonly used formats adopt such different means
of describing built environment objects that interoperability
is difficult. Web Portals will be increasingly necessary to
enable full collaborative use of this information and to
support ‘single point of truth’ linked repositories. The
particular features of construction information require
special features in the underlying management systems for:

514

spatial data management; relational and semantic
information; identification of levels of, or the ‘fuzziness’ of
detail; version management and the comparison of
alternative possibilities; partial and incomplete BIM
models, or full models built sequentially from part models
over time. The current lack of rigour identified in IFC in
particular appears to require a means of associating
explanation with IFC objects. The diversity of file types,
information sources and software also indicates a
requirement for an over-arching mark-up commentary and
communication toolset, on the lines of COML. Open source
tools seem inevitably necessary if all engaged in the design
construction and use of buildings are to engage, but these
will require new skills to manage. In almost two decades
since the 1995 comparison of GIS and BIM, little seems to
have yet changed. Now (at last) rapid movement to
mainstream of the need to meld BIM and GIS, the
increasing 3D capacity of GIS, and the vision of Levels 2
and 3 BIM offer the first signs of major progress.

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[20]

Cabinet Office 2011: “Government Construction Strategy”.
Anderson P, 2012 Beyond Web 2.0” accessed 20/04/2012
http://techlun.ch/2011/11/07/beyond-web-2-0/
Bell Gully “relationship first contracting” accessed 16 Oct
11 www.bellgully.com/resources/resource.00037.asp
Counsell, J 2010 "“Models, mark-up, commentary and
attention”
BuiltViz10:
International
Conference
Visualisation in Built and Rural Environments. published by
the IEEE Computer Society, California, July 2010, London
Gillard, A. Counsell, J, Littlewood, J. 2008 “The Atlantic
College case study - exploring the use of BIM for the
sustainable design and maintenance of property” in the proc.
of the 2008 RICS Research Cobra Conference, DIT, Dublin
COBie
UK
2012.
Accessed
18/5/12
www.bimtaskgroup.org/cobie-uk-2012/
GSA 2011:”Building Information Modeling Guide Series:
08 – GSA BIM Guide for Facility Management “ version 1,
Dec
2011.
Accessed
11/04/2012
www.gsa.gov/graphics/pbs/BIM_Guide_Series_Facility_M
anagement.pdf
GBXML
2012:”Schema”
Accessed
11/04/2012
www.gbxml.org/schema/0-34/GreenBuildingXML.xsd
Kemp A, 2011: ‘“BIM isn’t Geospatial” …. Or is it?’ AGICommunity’11
accessed
11/04/2012
https://communities.rics.org/gf2.ti/f/200194/6768101/pdf//RICS12Pres_ACK_Speech.pdf
IFC 2007. Accessed 11/04/2012 www.towntology.net/
Kolbe TH, Nagel C, 2011: “CityGML and GML” 78th
OGC Technical Committee, Boulder, Colorado (USA),
19/9/2011
accessed
11/04/2012.
http://external.opengis.org/twiki_public/pub/GML/Gml4Wo
rkshopAgenda/07_CityGML_and_GML.pdf
Marsh A, 2006: “CAD Geometry vs Performance Analysis”
Natural Frequency Journal :: Issue No. 003 accessed
11/04/2012 http://naturalfrequency.com/articles/cadanalysis
El-Mekawy M, Ostman A, 2012: “Ontology Engineering
Method for Integrating Building Models:The Case of IFC

[21]
[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

515

and CityGML” University of Gävle, Sweden. Universal
Ontology of Geographic Space: Semantic Enrichment for
Spatial Data (pp. 151-185). Accessed 11/04/2012
www.irma-international.org/viewtitle/63999/
NIST 2012: “Whole building design guide” Accessed
11/04/2012 http://www.wbdg.org/
Conaghan P, 2012. “What is BIM” CIBSE BIM update
conference,
London
15/5/12
www.cibse.org/content/BIM2012/Paddy%20Conaghan.pdf
Cottrill M, 2010:” The choreography of a 100 year
restoration programme” AGI-geocommunity’10 11/04/2012
http://www.agi.org.uk/storage/geocommunity/papers/Mike
Cottrill.pdf
Turk Z, 2006:“Construction informatics: Definition and
ontology” in Advanced Engineering Informatics 20 (2006)
187–199,
accessed
11/04/2012
www.civ.utoronto.ca/sect/coneng/i2c/Civ1283/Civ1283Ref-Final/Civ1283-Basic%20Ref/Philosophy/ziga.pdf
Buzzsaw
2012
accessed
11/04/2012
www.cadline.co.uk/Solutions/DataManagement/AutodeskB
uzzsaw.aspx
Excitech
2012
accessed
11/04/2012
www.excitech.co.uk/products/Buzzsaw-2012.asp
Onuma 2011: Bim Storm. Accessed 11/04/2012
http://bimstorm.com/i/BimStorm.php
EcoDomus
2012.
Accessed
11/04/2012
www.ecodomus.com/index.html
Steel J, Drogemuller R, Toth B, 2010 “Model
Interoperability in Building Information Modelling”
Software and Systems Modeling. Accessed 11/04/2012
https://sites.google.com/site/jimsteel/bim-interop.pdf
Casey MJ, and Vankadara S, 2010:” Semantics in CAD/GIS
Integration” p143-170 in ‘CAD and GIS Integration’
Karimi HA, Akinci B, (Ed). CRC Press / Taylor and Francis
ISBN
978-1-4200-6805-4
http://faculty.unlv.edu/jensen/CEE_common/textbooks/pdf/
CADandGISIntegration.pdf
Counsell J 2000 “The management and visualisation of 3dimensional models using a spatial database”, CIDAC – the
International Journal of Computer-Integrated Design &
construction, Volume 2 Issue 4, pp. 225-235 Nov 2000
http://cumincad.scix.net/cgi-bin/works/Show?de43
Counsell J 2005 '‘An approach to adding value while
recording historic gardens and landscapes’ Chapter 19 (pp
175 – 185) in book ‘Digital Applications for Cultural and
Heritage Institutions’ ed Hemsley JR, Cappelini V, Stanke
G Ashgate ISBN: 0-7546-3359 4.
C. Schill, B. Koch, J. Bogdahn, V. Coors 2007 “Public
Participation Comment Markup Language and WFS 1.1” in
proceedings of the UDMS Annual Conference 2007, Taylor
and Francis, p. 85 – 9
Limbrick P 2006 ‘Comment Markup Language’ technical
report on line at http://www.veps3d.org/site/files/28-feb2007/16-3237/13%20CoML%20Presentation_PL_200607.pdf
Counsell, JAM, 1995:”GIS Software and Coordinated
Project Information Systems - A Mechanism for Increasing
the Effectiveness of 3D CAAD Models” in Sixth
International Conference on Computer-Aided Architectural
Design Futures [ISBN 9971-62-423-0] Singapore, 24-26
September 1995, pp. 389-397. Accessed 11/04/2012
http://itc.fgg.uni-lj.si/data/cumincad/robots/1586.htm

