2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Visualization of Power System Data on Situation Overview Displays
Christine Mikkelsen
Industrial Software Systems
ABB Corporate Research
V¨aster˚as, Sweden
christine.mikkelsen@se.abb.com

Jimmy Johansson, Matthew Cooper
C-Research
Link¨oping University
Norrk¨oping, Sweden
jimmy.johansson@liu.se, matthew.cooper@liu.se

presented and the objective is to develop a ﬁrst attempt at a
”best practice” for designing overview displays.
One part of this work was to determine what is actually
needed in an overview display and the second part was to
develop a set of mappings that do not conﬂict with each
other from an information visualization perspective. As part
of this work, the following information has been identiﬁed
as important to present in an overview display and to each
of them we present a proposed visual mapping:
1) Nominal voltage
2) Actual voltage, per-unit (pu)
3) Power ﬂow, including direction
4) Generation reserve capacity
5) Breaker/switches status (open/closed)
6) Transmission line status (energized/de-energized)
7) Abnormal equipment status
8) Data/information uncertainty
The proposed solutions should, so far, be seen as inspiration for future research. They have not yet been validated,
which must be done before implementing in a real system.

Abstract—Findings from ﬁeld studies in power system control rooms show that overview displays are needed to aid
operators to achieve shared situation awareness. The existing
overview displays are often cluttered, with a lot of detailed
information and with overuse of colors. There is no “best
practice” in the ﬁeld and it is up to power system utilities
to design their own displays. This work presents a survey of
previously proposed mappings of power system data to visual
representations and based on this analysis a set of alternative
mappings are demonstrated.
Keywords-power systems; situation awareness; information
visualization; power grid visualization; overview displays

I. I NTRODUCTION
The focus system in this paper is a human supervisory
control system for power grids. The system gathers measurements from the grid and, with advanced applications,
a complete system status is calculated and presented to
human operators through a number of different displays. The
operators use this information to operate and maintain a safe,
reliable and robust grid. Understanding the current system
status is crucial and visualization plays an important role
[1].
The type of data operators have to deal with is multivariate, temporal (both continuous and discrete), spatial and
uncertain. In addition, the size of the systems continues
to grow with more nodes, more interconnections and more
sensor data to be accommodated.
In the last 10-20 years, the need to improve how information from power grid control systems is displayed has
resulted in a few proposed solutions. Around 1993 Mahadev
et al. were among the ﬁrst to present ideas of how to map
data from power systems to visual representations [2][3].
A few years later Weber and Overbye et al. presented
a collection of alternative solutions [4][5][6]. Since then
surprisingly few new ideas on how to make use of the
human vision system’s capability to detect patterns have
been presented.
This paper is a survey of the previously proposed techniques and the idea is to shed new light onto this interesting
application area and demonstrate the need for future research
by information visualization experts. A number of new
proposed mappings of data to visual representations are
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.41

II. BACKGROUND
Control systems for supervision of power grids are complex and consist of many different applications used for
different tasks. Operators use different views in the system
to perform their tasks and it is important to understand the
objective of the tasks in order to develop efﬁcient displays.
This work focuses on overview displays supporting the task
to provide operators and other users with shared situation
awareness.
A. Status overview displays
A power system control room usually has a number
of work stations divided into areas of responsibility. One
operator is thus normally responsible for monitoring and
controlling a part of the power grid. To understand the
system status in their area of responsibility they monitor a
number of different displays showing information from the
control system. To reduce the amount of information they
have to deal with, the information is often ﬁltered to their
speciﬁc area of responsibility. Since the responsibility areas
are interconnected, the operators must also have an overview
188

additional tabular lists ﬁltered on speciﬁc violations. There
is, for example, a list with current voltage violations in the
system.
The SE is normally running with a predeﬁned interval.
The results from the SE can be used both for detecting
violations in the network but also for detecting bad data.
Bad data can be caused by measurement errors and device/communication failures but it can also be caused by
manual operation mistakes or intentional so called cyber
attacks” [7].
Depending on the available input to the SE the results
are more or less reliable. In some cases the SE results are
uncertain and it is important for an operator to know when it
is the case. A loss of a measurement sensor can for example
result in a more uncertain SE result in the area around it.

of the overall situation in the power grid. A problem in one
area can very quickly propagate into other areas and a single
operation can have an effect across the whole power grid.
To overcome this problem it is common that control rooms
also have a large wall display unit, called the power wall
or the video wall, with an overview display of the current
status in the power grid. What the overview shows varies
but typically it is either a large single line diagram (SLD)
of the part of the power grid supervised by the control room
or a geographical map of the same.
When the power wall was introduced it replaced the
formerly used large static board, displaying a static map
of the power grid. The only dynamic information reﬂecting
the system status was small light bulbs indicating alarm
conditions. The introduction of digital displays enabled more
dynamic information to be included and, in many cases, as
much information as possible is added to the display. Colors
are used for both differentiating static information like, for
example, nominal voltage levels, areas of responsibility,
equipment types etc. At the same time color may be used
to highlight alarm conditions in the power grid.
In control rooms for supervising industrial processes the
problem with overuse of colors has been brought up and
the ever more established solution is to only use colors
for information that needs the operators’ attention [?]. This
rather obvious solution has not yet been recognized in the
power system industry and there is a need to evaluate how
it would affect the ability to achieve situation awareness.
The need to provide the operators with shared situation
awareness is not fulﬁlled in many control rooms today. The
utility companies often create their own overview displays
and due to the urge to show everything, the result is often
a cluttered display with a lot of detailed information. From
the resulting displays it is difﬁcult for the operators to detect
patterns of important information about the overall status in
the grid.

C. Visualization to achieve Situation Awareness
Situation Awareness is an accepted term within the ﬁeld
of human supervisory control systems and a common used
deﬁnition is Endsley’s “Situation Awareness is the perception of the elements in the environment within a volume of
time and space, the comprehension of their meaning, and
the projection of their status into the near future” [8].
The applications in the system generate huge number
of alarms and warnings and it is possible to set up an
alarm system for all kind of situations. A fully automatic
system is not currently possible and it is necessary to have
a human in the loop acting in critical situations and tuning
the system to prevent failures. The problem is that operators
can not deal with the amount of information generated by
the system. Visualization is a powerful tool to aid operators
digest the information and in particular overview displays of
the current situation are important. The problem is to identify
natural visual codings for the quantitative information that
do not conﬂict with the human vision system’s pre-attentive
process.
III. M ETHOD

B. Energy Management System and the State Estimator

To understand operators’ need and to identify problems
with currently used visualization techniques for power system data, a number of ﬁeld studies were conducted during
2008 and 2010. In total 16 different power utility control
rooms in the USA, India, Sweden, the United Arab Emirates
and Oman were visited. Qualitative data was gathered using
cognitive task analysis methods and bootstrapping protocols
[9].
Previously published visualization methods for power system data have been analyzed and the beneﬁts and drawbacks
with each of them have been identiﬁed.
To demonstrate problems with previously proposed solutions and to present the new suggested visual mappings of
data we have used the IEEE 118-bus test system. A replica
of the 118-bus test system single-line diagram was created in
Processing. The ﬁrst ”raw” version of the single-line diagram

The energy management system (EMS) is the part of
a power network control system that supervises the transmission network which typically means voltage levels of
110 kV and above. The EMS consists of a number of
applications, where some are more fundamental and some
are optional. One of the most fundamental applications is
the State Estimator (SE).
The State Estimator (SE) calculates a more comprehensive
system state based on information from several sources in
the system, such as measurements and load curves etc.
The result is presented in tabular displays and on electrical
schematics, called Single Line Diagrams (SLDs).
The calculated values coming out of the SE are compared
with predeﬁned limits and if a value exceeds a limit, a
violation is reported. A violation is presented to the operator
in the form of an alarm in the power system alarm list and in

189

is shown in Figure 1. The black lines represent the 118 buses
and the gray lines are the 186 branches (transmission lines).
This single-line diagram was then used as a test bed and
data from the IEEE 118-bus system was mapped to visual
representations.
The results have been demonstrated to domain experts
who provided valuable qualitative feedback.

transmission lines. The disadvantages with this technique
are many. First, color has no natural mapping for different
voltage levels. The operator has to learn what the colors
mean. Second, the choices of colors are typically arbitrary
and there is no inherited order relating to the order of the
voltage levels 110 kV, 230 kV, 400 kV etc. The biggest
disadvantage is probably that colors should be used for
attracting the operators’ attention to critical areas in the one
line diagram and using colors for other information results in
conﬂicts. If, for example, a transmission line is overloaded
it might turn red to get the operators’ attention and then it
is not possible to see what nominal voltage level it has.
One possible solution is to use only gray scale levels to
differentiate the voltage levels. Normally there are only a
few different voltage levels displayed in the same singleline diagram and it should be possible for the human eye to
separate them. Even with a small variation as in Figure 2
(right) it is possible to identify the transmission lines with
the higher voltage level. This alternative color coding solves
the problem with visual clutter but it does not solve the
problem with conﬂicting coding.

Figure 1.

IEEE 118-bus test system

IV. V ISUAL MAPPING OF POWER SYSTEM DATA
Some of the techniques summarized below, such as color
contours, animated arrows, 3D bar graphs and pie charts,
have been implemented in power grid control systems as
solutions to ﬁll the need for more intuitive displays. This
survey summarizes the previously proposed techniques and
highlights the beneﬁts and drawbacks with each one from
a visualization perspective. Each subsection ends with our
proposed mapping of data to a visual representation together
with an argumentation for the proposed solution. The next
step is to benchmark the previously proposed techniques
with our new set of mappings.

Figure 2. (left) Nominal voltage level mapped to colors (right) Nominal
voltage level mapped to gray scale colors

2) Proposed new mapping - Line width: A more natural
coding of nominal voltage level would instead be to map it
to the width of the lines. Mahadev et al. proposed to use
the line width to represent the actual power ﬂow [2]. Their
proposal was to map the magnitude to a continuous width
but this resulted in quite wide lines cluttering the single-line
diagram. Mapping the nominal voltage level to the width of
the lines would only require a few different discrete widths
and it should be possible to compare them to understand
whether one transmission line has a higher nominal voltage
value than another. The result using two widths with only
2 pixel difference is shown in Figure 3. In this example
the same color is used for the two types of transmission
lines so there is no double coding of information. One big
advantage of this method is that color can, instead, be used
for representing more important information and it does not
clutter the view. A possible disadvantage is that it could be
difﬁcult to differentiate the lines if they do not have the same
color.

A. Bus voltage nominal value
The nominal voltage of a bus or a transmission line is
information that experienced operators normally know. It is
thus not the most critical information operators need on an
overview display. But an overview display might also be
used by other roles without the same natural feeling about
the voltage levels in the power grid and the information
should be mapped to the single-line diagram without distracting from more important information.
1) Color coding: To separate transmission lines and
buses with different nominal voltage levels it is common
to use color coding. One voltage level is represented with
one color and another voltage level with another. Figure 2
(left) shows an example when two nominal voltage levels
are coded with green and magenta. The beneﬁt of using
this type of mapping is the clear separation of the different

190

Figure 3.

bars representing violating voltage levels but it will still not
result in an easily detected pattern.
2) Color contour: Color contours were considered by
Mahadev et al. as a potential technique for visualizing
voltage levels in a power system [2]. They did not believe in
this technique, however, since they did not consider it to be
a natural coding of the information. Weber et al. [4][5][6]
had opposite view and presented their solution a few years
later. The algorithm used for the contouring is described in
[4] and later a technique taking advantage of the GPU was
presented [10].
The idea of color contours is to use the same principle as
temperature maps for weather forecasts. The voltage levels at
the available discrete spatial locations of the buses are used
for calculating values in between to create a continuous map.
To highlight the most important information they suggest
only contouring voltage levels above or below the limits.
One problem with this mapping is to decide what colors to
use. The authors uses a color scale ranging from blue to red
and demonstrate examples when low voltages are mapped
to blue and high voltages to red and vice versa. The ﬁrst
mapping seems to be the most natural coding since we tend
to relate cold colors to low values and vice versa. For a
domain expert this can be conﬂicting since low voltages are
more critical and should, perhaps, be represented with red.
The authors realized this conﬂict and left the decision to
the ones implementing and conﬁguring the system. It is not
clear which alternative is best and whether there is a better
color map to use. Another problem, which is not as obvious,
is that it is impossible to see which nominal value the buses
and transmission lines have. It is useful for an operator to
know if a potential voltage collapse is in a 110 kV part of
the grid or in a 400 kV region, for example.
The color contour technique was validated in a followup study on the human factors aspects [11][12]. The study
showed that the color contouring display attracts the users’
attention to the worst voltage violations quicker than the
numerical display, but at the cost of worse performance
when used for solving or removing the voltage violations.
Overbye et al. also found that combining the numerical
display with color contouring resulted in worse performance,
in some situations, than just color contours or numerical
display alone. Their proposed explanation is that users are
not able to ignore one dimension (numbers) while using
another (color contours). The result of this study underpins
the importance of conducting more studies and developing
alternative solutions.
3) 3D Bars: A third proposed mapping presented by
Meliopoulos et al. in [13] is the use of a third dimension by
mapping the voltage level to the height of 3D shapes placed
on a tilted 2D SLD. Figure 4 demonstrates some drawbacks
with this choice of mapping. In this example the pu voltage
level in the IEEE 118-bus test data set is mapped to the
height of the 3D bars. In this case the differences between

Nominal voltage level mapped to line thickness.

B. Actual voltage magnitude and limits
The current voltage level at buses and transmission lines
is normally measured as the fraction of the nominal base
value for the unit and the expression is called per-unit
(pu). The per-unit expression makes it possible to compare
units regardless of the voltage level. Information about low
voltage levels (values below, for example, 0.96 pu) and
high voltage levels (values above, for example, 1.04 pu) are
very important for an operator and the result from the state
estimator lists all current voltage violations in the grid.
1) Bars (thermometers): Mahadev et al. [2] presented
a solution to map current bus voltage levels to what they
called “thermometers”. First they had tried to map it to
a color contour (see Section IV-B2) but they were not
satisﬁed with the result. The second attempt was to use
a continuous color scale where the hue represented bus
voltage. Since it required a separate key they found it less
effective and instead proposed to map the current voltage to
a bar placed next to the bus. The bar was proposed to be
colored according to the voltage level and the top of the bar
represented the high voltage limit and the bottom the low
voltage limit. Since a low voltage typically is more important
they used two contrasting colors to also draw attention to
bars closer to the lower limit. In addition they also proposed
to change the color and outline the bar if a value exceeds a
limit.
The disadvantages with this mapping are numerous. The
voltage magnitude is important both for the buses and the
transmission lines. Adding an extra geometry for every
single bus and branch will clutter the display. Another
drawback is that it does not use the human vision system’s
capability of pre-attentive processing of information and to
get a feeling of the voltage levels in the system, the operator
has to scan the whole display and read the bars. One possible
solution to the clutter problem would be to show only the

191

the per-unit voltages are small and it is not possible to detect
any interesting pattern from this view. Instead the bars just
add visual clutter. One solution to this is to only display
bars representing violating values. Figure 5 demonstrate this
solution but then another problem is apparent. The low
voltage violations represented with the smaller bars are the
most important but the eyes are drawn to the highest bars
representing the less critical high voltage violations.
Another problem with 3D displays is the risk of occluding
important information. It must be possible to rotate a 3D
display to see information from different angles. Overview
displays shared by many operators usually do not permit that
type of interaction.

Figure 4.

colors for high voltages and three cold discrete colors for
low voltages. An example of the result is demonstrated in
Figure 6. The ﬁgure clearly shows a pattern with a few areas
with high voltage problems and some more areas with low
voltage problems. Since thickness instead of color is used to
code voltage capacity it is also possible to see the nominal
voltage levels in the problem areas. The thick blue line in the
middle should get the operator’s attention since it represents
a low voltage problem at a line with high nominal voltage.

Figure 6. Per-unit voltage mapped to discrete colors of bars. Blue ≤ 0.96
pu and Red ≥ 1.04 pu

Per-unit voltage mapped to height of 3D bars.

C. Power ﬂow (capacity, actual, limits and direction)

Figure 5.

Overload of transmission lines and how the power ﬂows
in the grid are other important information needed on an
overview display. The direction can be deduced from the
signs of the numerical values of the incoming and outgoing
side on a transmission line. To understand the overall ﬂow
from reading numerical values is cognitively demanding and
visual representations are preferred according to ﬁndings
from the conducted ﬁeld studies.
1) Thickness: Mahadev et al. proposed to map the active
power ﬂow limits and the current amount of active power
ﬂow (MVA) to the thickness of the transmission lines
[2]. The idea was to use the absolute MVA and not the
percentage of loading since it would give a better idea of
the magnitude of a problem. They also suggested using
color to highlight when a line is overloaded. The scale they
used in the example resulted in very wide lines and visual
clutter. One reason for using this scale could be to be able
to have a wider range since the mapping is continuous. On
an overview display there is no need to have that level of
detail. It is enough to know if a line is overloaded or close
to overload.
2) Arrows (static and animated): In addition to the loading of a transmission line an operator needs to understand the
direction of the ﬂow in the power grid. Mahadev [2] realized

Violating per-unit voltage values mapped to height of 3D bars.

4) Proposed new mapping - Discrete color coding:
Mahadev et al. tried to use a continuous color scheme to
map the actual voltage level to the buses but disregarded
this technique since it required a separate color key. Our
suggestion is, instead of a continuous color scheme, to
use a discrete scheme to only color the buses that need
the operators’ attention. The alarm management system is
normally conﬁgured to trigger warnings when a voltage level
exceeds the ﬁrst limit. A new warning is sent when the
voltage level exceeds the second limit and ﬁnally an alarm
is triggered if the value exceeds the third and critical limit.
These three limits could be color coded with three warm

192

the obvious mapping to represent the ﬂow direction with an
arrow on the transmission line and Overbye et al. [5][6]
extended this mapping to distribute ﬂow arrows along the
transmission lines. They also suggest mapping the amount
of ﬂow to the size of the arrows and, as an additional feature,
they present animation as a way to further enhance the ﬂow.
The problem with the animated arrows is the animation itself
and a common comment from the users is that they turn of
the animation since it is distracting. The remaining static
arrows are often enough to display the ﬂow, see Figure 7.

Figure 7.

The drawback with resizing the pie chart in relation to
magnitude of the problem is that the pie charts could hide
important information. In some of the ﬁgures presented
in [5][6] it is impossible to see to which line some of
the pie charts actually belong. This problem is mentioned
by the authors and there are also other problems. The
proposed technique has a lot of redundant coding cluttering
the display. Both the numerical values and the ﬁll of the
pie chart represent the same data. The size and the color
also represent similar information. A pie chart is colored
red if the percentage exceeds 75% and the size increases if
the percentage is above the same threshold. The need for
using resizing for attracting the operators attention to the
most severe violations is probably due to the overuse of
colors. If colors were only used for highlighting important
information it should be enough to color the pie chart red to
draw the operator’s attention to the transmission lines with
highest percent overload.
A problem that is not as apparent is what happens if the
SLD shows both 220 kV lines and 400 kV lines. A 400 kV
line loaded to 74% is probably more important than a 220
kV line loaded to 76% and the proposed pie charts do not
support this scenario.

Power ﬂow direction indicated with static arrows.

A study comparing a numeric value display with static
arrows and an animated arrows display is presented in [14].
The general conclusion was that the animated arrows could
be helpful for some tasks but great care must be taken since
the moving arrows attract the user’s attention and it must be
relevant to the task. If the only task was to understand the
ﬂow in the system it could be a good alternative but since
the task is usually more complicated the moving arrows are
likely to distract the user.
One complication with the ﬂow is that both the active
power ﬂow in MW and the reactive power ﬂow in MVAR are
important, and these can sometimes be in opposite direction,
and usually with different magnitudes. No known solution
to this problem has been presented other than through user
interaction switching between the two types of ﬂow and
using the same visual representation.
3) Pie charts: An alternative solution to display the
magnitude of line loading was presented by Overbye et al.
in [5][6]. Their suggestion is to map the magnitude to a
pie chart and the technique is demonstrated in Figure 8.
The idea is that a pie chart will appear on the single-line
diagram on the transmission line if it is overloaded or is
close to overload. This will draw the operator’s attention
to the problem and this is probably the biggest advantage.
They also suggest that the pie charts should be resized
dynamically when the problem is above a certain threshold.

Figure 8.

Power ﬂow magnitude mapped to pie charts.

4) Proposed new mapping - Bars: The idea with pie
charts appearing when a line is close to overload is probably
a good way to attract the operator’s attention but a pie chart
is not a natural mapping of ﬂow. A similar but more natural
mapping would be to represent the ﬂow with a ﬁlled bar.
If the bar is ﬁlled in the direction of the ﬂow it will both
map the percentage of ﬂow and the direction in the same
representation. Figure 9 displays an example with data from
the IEEE 118-bus test system mapped to voltage levels and
ﬂow magnitude. The idea is to only display the bars for
lines with ﬂow exceeding the limits. For other lines it is
enough to know the direction and for now we have no better
alternative than using arrows since it is a natural coding of

193

ﬂow. Care must be taken to reduce potential visual clutter
and the arrows should therefore have the same color as the
transmission lines. We also propose to use only two discrete
sizes on the arrows on the overview display. A larger one for
lines close to reaching the ﬁrst limit and a smaller one for the
others. In the detailed displays operators use for operation it
is possible to use a more continuous scale of the arrow sizes
but on an overview display the focus should be to have as
clean a display as possible.

conducted evaluations is discussed in [16] and Smallman et
al. present their own comparison study where they found that
information about a third dimension can be better conveyed
by a well-designed 2D display.

Figure 10.

Figure 9.

Generation reserve capacity mapped to height of 3D bars.

2) Proposed new mapping - Pie charts: The study in [15]
compares 3D cylinders with what the authors call a graphical
”thermometer” which is basically a 2D bar. This could be
an option but since we suggest mapping the power ﬂow to a
bar this representation is already ‘taken’. Instead we propose
to use pie charts as shown in Figure 11. The ﬁlled part of
the pie chart represents the current power generation and
the remaining piece is the reserve. Neutral colors should be
used as long as the generators are not in an alarm mode.
One issue to solve is how to map the maximum generation
capacity of one generator. One suggestion is to map the
nominal magnitude of the generation to the radius of the
pie chart.

Power ﬂow magnitude mapped to bars.

D. Generation reserve capacity
To know the current generated power and the available
generation reserves is also important information. In today’s
power grids a large variety of generators are available. Some
are relatively small and produces only a few MW but some
are very large and can produce hundreds of MW.
1) 3D Bars: Overbye et al. [6] suggest utilizing a third
dimension by mapping shapes onto a tilted 2D plane with
the SLD. The maximum capacity generation is mapped to
the cylinder’s height and the different colors represent the
current reactive power output and the available reserve. A
human factors study of this approach is presented in [15].
The result indicated a faster solution time compared to a 2D
representation and numerical values but the study could not
verify increased accuracy compared to the other two display
types. In this study the problem of overlapping cylinders
does not seem to have been included in the 3D view but,
in a real system, this problem cannot be neglected. Figure
10 demonstrates this problem. Another issue is the wide
range of generation capacity. Our example only maps the
current power generated but it is possible to understand that
it will be difﬁcult to see the available reserves for the smaller
generation units.
Evaluations of 3D displays in comparison to 2D displays
have been done for various other domains with mixed
results. The reason for the variety of conclusions in previous

Figure 11.

194

Generation capacity and reserve mapped to pie charts.

E. Equipment status (open/closed)

good since it is a discrete color and does not draw too much
attention.

Other important information in an overview display is
to see the current status of breakers and switches. This
binary open/closed information is, in some cases, mapped
to colors. Colors are not a natural way to encode this type
of information since operators without any training cannot
understand what a speciﬁc color means. Instead we argue
for using two variations of the symbols. This is already done
in many systems today and the symbols can vary. In many
cases a closed breaker is represented by a ﬁlled square and
an open breaker by an unﬁlled square. The color of the
symbol should be the same as the transmission line unless
there is an alarm. In that case the symbol should be red to
attract the operator’s attention.

H. Data uncertainty
Finally it is important to know how reliable all previous
information is. The information comes from the State Estimator and the quality of the data depends on the available
input data. If the system is undetermined the result is just
a best guess and it is important to know when this happens
and where in the system. In current systems this is typically
done with an index after the numerical displayed values.
This solution makes it difﬁcult to see a pattern of areas
with uncertainty. Our proposed solution is to use a gray
scale contour map as a background in areas with uncertain
results. One example to demonstrate this idea is shown in
Figure 12. A similar approach was proposed in [17] where
they used a red color map for representing SE residuals
(difference between the SE result and the measurements).
The problem with the red map is that it is too strong and
takes over and possibly hides other important information.
A more discrete gray toned map does not clutter the view
and the observer can directly relate the information about
violating elements to the background. In our example the
low voltage violations in the area in the upper right corner
might not exist in the reality. It could be a consequence of
uncertain data and the operator needs to analyze this further
before taking any actions.

F. Equipment status (Energized/de-energized)
Transmission lines can also have different status and it
should be obvious for an operator if a line is energized or
de-energized. This information is also sometimes mapped
to different colors and again color has no natural mapping
to this type of information. Instead we propose to use solid
lines for representing energized lines and dashed lines for
representing de-energized lines.
G. Equipment status (Normal or Abnormal)
Some equipment in a power system can be considered
to be in normal mode or in an abnormal mode. Breakers,
for example, can be normally or abnormally closed if an
operator has re-routed the power due to maintenance work.
One other example is power lines that can be normally or
abnormally de-energized. In some cases it is interesting to
know if equipment is in normal or abnormal mode but few
solutions how to visually identify the equipment status have
been presented or discussed.
The question is: What is a natural encoding of an abnormal condition? Abnormal is not the same as a problem and
should not automatically attract the user’s attention. If the
abnormal mode is at the same time critical, the use of colors
to highlight alarm conditions will instead draw the operators
focus to the interesting area. But it should still be possible
to see if equipment reporting an alarm is in abnormal mode.
Our suggestion in this case is to use two colors, red for
indicating the alarm and another, more neutral, color for
representing the abnormal condition. A voltage violation on
a transmission line that is abnormally energized would be
represented with a solid line with alternating red and another
color representing the abnormal condition. If the equipment
is in a abnormal mode without an alarm it should be colored
with the abnormal color.
The choice of color used for representing abnormal conditions is not trivial. It must contrast well with both cold
blue toned colors, warm red toned colors, grey tones and it
cannot be a green tone since green typically indicates ok.
One possible color is a brown tone. A brown color is also

Figure 12.

Gray color contour representing uncertain information.

V. D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
The main purpose and contribution of this paper are the
survey and analysis of previous proposed mappings. The
proposed solutions should so far be seen as suggestions and
inspiration to open up for new ideas. We will continue with
benchmarking tests to evaluate the efﬁciency of the proposed
mappings and the goal is to be able to formulate a “best
practice” guidance for the industry.

195

Some general conclusions, in addition to the ones already
presented, can be drawn.
Overview displays are about providing operators and other
roles in a control room with shared situation awareness. It is
not intended to give detailed information about voltage levels
at individual lines etc. Thus no numerical values should
be shown. Instead mapping of information to visual representations should result in visual patterns. The mappings
should be natural and the users should not have to remember
what the mappings mean. Colors should be used with care
and only for highlighting information and patterns, not for
static information like type of equipment. In many cases it
is possible to group a range of values together to simplify
the display and continuous mappings should be minimized.
Color contours are a good example of a mapping resulting
in a strong visual pattern. The problem is that it can be too
strong. It hides other important patterns and information. For
speciﬁc tasks it ﬁlls its purpose but for a display with a lot
of equally important information a better balance is needed.
3D shapes on a 2D display are a popular mapping of
quantitative data on a spatial 2D map, in this case an SLD. In
some situations this mapping could be very valuable as some
studies show. If there is a strong pattern it could potentially
be found in this type of mapping. In Figure 13 we have,
for example, used this mapping to visualize the phase angle
difference between one bus (the one in the top left corner)
and the others. It is clear that the phase angle difference
increases with distance from the reference bus and in this
case the 3D shape mapping could serve its purpose. But the
problem comes when the bars occlude other bars. Then the
user must rotate the view to see it from another angle. An
overview display on a large power wall is supposed to be
shared between many operators and other roles and relying
on interaction to be able to see the information is not the
best approach.

before being replaced by a new result. To discover a trend
in the data the operators must compare the snapshots and
remember information from previous results. This is not
only true for the SE result but also for the measured values
but these are changing more continuously so it is easier to
see if a value increases or decreases. The only proposed
solution for this problem is to animate historical values and
use the same visual mapping but it has been shown that
animation could be more time consuming and less accurate
for exploratory tasks [18] and is probably not the best option
when operating a time and safety critical system. Since it
also would require interaction it is not a good solution for
an overview display.
Finally more evaluations of new and previously proposed
techniques are needed. Especially evaluations of combinations of different mappings since they clearly affect each
other. One type of mapping can be very efﬁcient for one
type of task but it could, at the same time, reduce the ability
to see and understand other important information.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was partly supported by the ABB Industrial
Software Systems program and partly by the Swedish Research Council in the Linnaeus Centre CADICS.
R EFERENCES
[1] F. L. Greitzer, A. Schur, M. Paget, and R. T. Guttromson, “A
Sensemaking Perspective on Situation Awareness in Power
Grid Operations,” 2008 IEEE Power and Energy Society
General Meeting - Conversion and Delivery of Electrical
Energy in the 21st Century, pp. 1–6, 2008.
[2] P. M. Mahadev and R. D. Christie, “Envisioning Power
System Data: Concepts and a Prototype System State Representation,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 1084–1090, 1993.
[3] P. Mahadev and R. Christie, “Envisioning power system data:
vulnerability and severity representations for static security
assessment,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 9,
no. 4, pp. 1915–1920, 1994.
[4] J. Weber and T. J. Overbye, “Voltage Contours for Power
System Visualization,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 404–409, 2000.
[5] T. J. Overbye and J. Weber, “Visualization of power system
data,” Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, p. 7, 2000.

Figure 13.

[6] T. Overbye and J. Weber, “New Methods for the Visualization
of Electric Power System Information,” IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization 2000. INFOVIS 2000. Proceedings,
vol. 2000, pp. 131–, 2000.

Phase angle difference mapped to height of 3D bars.

One thing not discussed in this paper, but which must
be taken into consideration and is a suggestion for future
work, is change blindness and how it affects operators’
ability to achieve situation awareness. The SE application
runs cyclically and the results endure for a few minutes

[7] J. Ma, Y. Chen, Z. Huang, and P. C. Wong, “Detect Abnormal
SCADA Data Using State Estimation Residuals,” Power and
Energy Society General Meeting, 2010 IEEE, pp. 1–8, 2010.

196

[8] M. R. Endsley, “Situation awareness global assessment technique (SAGAT),” in Proceedings of the IEEE 1988 National
Aerospace and Electronics Conference. IEEE, 1988, pp.
789–795.
[9] R. R. Hoffman, “Protocols for Cognitive Task Analysis,” pp.
1–138, 2005.
[10] J. E. Tate and T. J. Overbye, “Contouring for Power Systems
Using Graphical Processing Units,” in Proceedings of the 41st
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS 2008). Ieee, 2008, pp. 168—-.
[11] D. A. Wiegmann, A. M. Rich, T. J. Overbye, and Y. Sun,
“Human Factors Aspects of Power System Voltage Visualizations,” in Proceedings of the 35th Hawaii Interational
Conference on System Sciences, vol. 2. HICSS, 2002.
[12] T. J. Overbye, D. A. Wiegmann, A. Rich, and Y. Sun, “Human
Factors Aspects of Power System Voltage Contour Visualizations,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 18, no. 1,
pp. 76–82, 2003.
[13] A. S. Meliopoulos, G. J. Cokkinides, M. Ingram, S. Bell,
and S. Mathews, “Visualization and Animation of State
Estimation Performance,” in Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, vol. 00. IEEE,
2005, p. 8.
[14] D. A. Wiegmann, G. R. Essenberg, T. J. Overbye, and Y. Sun,
“Human Factor Aspects of Power System Flow Animation,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 20, no. 3, pp.
1233–1240, 2005.
[15] D. A. Wiegmann, T. J. Overbye, S. M. Hoppe, G. R.
Essenberg, and Y. Sun, “Human Factors Aspects of ThreeDimensional Visualization of Power System Information,” in
2006 IEEE Power Engineering Society General Meeting, vol.
61801. IEEE, 2006, p. 7.
[16] H. S. Smallman, M. S. John, H. M. Oonk, and M. B. Cowen,
“Information Availability in 2D and 3D Displays,” IEEE
Computer Graphics And Applications, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 51–
57, 2001.
[17] B. Xu, C. Yuksel, A. Abur, and E. Akleman, “3D Visualization of Power System State Estimation,” in Electrotechnical
Conference, 2006. MELECON. IEEE Mediterranean. IEEE,
2006, pp. 943–947.
[18] D. Fisher, “Animation for Visualization: Opportunities and
Drawbacks,” in Beautiful Visualization, J. Steele and N. Iliinsky, Eds. Sebastopol: O’Reilly, 2010, ch. 19, pp. 329–352.

197

