2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Visualization Analysis of Student’s Notes Taken
in a Fully Online Learning Environment
Minoru Nakayama
Human System Science / CRADLE
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan
nakayama@cradle.titech.ac.jp

Kouichi Mutsuura
Faculty of Economics
Shinshu University
Asahi, Matsumoto, Japan

•

Abstract—In order to visualize and analyze the learning process of students who participated in a fully online engineering
course, note-taking activity was used and lexical analysis of
notes taken by students was made. The features of notes taken
were compared with the contents of the lecturer’s presentation
slides and oral instructions. Also, the latent semantic indexing
technique was applied to the student’s notes and the lecturer’s
presentations, and the lexical transformation of the course
content was analyzed.

•

Hiroh Yamamoto
Human System Science
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan

The visualization of the learning process and the behaviour of students who participated in a fully online
course, by analyzing student’s notes to extract the
features of the notes.
The relationship between the lexical features of the
contents of student’s notes and the lecturer’s presentation materials, which were provided online as course
materials, were analyzed to extract the features of each.

Keywords-Fully Online Learning; Note-taking; Learning activity; Text analytics

II. M ETHOD
A. Fully online course

I. I NTRODUCTION

Surveys of notes taken by students during an Information Systems Network course were conducted. The course
was fully online and given to undergraduate students in
Economics at a Japanese national university. It was not a
compulsory course, so students who prefer online courses
joined it because they were conﬁdent about information
technology based learning [11]. The online material consisted of modules with slides, audio ﬁles and online tests.
An example of a slide as is shown in Figure 1. Some
audio ﬁles were embedded in the slides as hyperlinks, and
students could listen to oral explanations of the slides. The
idea was to simulate face-to-face learning, as the lecturer
would ordinaryly have explained slides orally in traditional
classroom sessions. The contents of the online course were
designed to provide the same level of information as in the
classroom.
Participants studied modules, and took notes from the
online materials and their own textbooks, without any faceto-face sessions. The learning pace was set by the lecturer
and students were required to complete one module per
week. Proctored weekly conﬁrmation tests were conducted
to monitor their progress. Before each test, students could
check their comprehension of the module by taking an online test which functioned as part of the learning management system (LMS). The notes taken while online could be
referred to during both online practice and weekly tests.
These activities are an important part of the constructivism
learning paradigm and inﬂuence comprehension during the
course [13]. Though note-taking was not an obligation,

Online learning and e-learning are believed to provide
ﬂexible learning opportunities, enabling people to learn
things anywhere and at anytime. As a result, fully online
learning environments can be created virtually, without the
need for classrooms. However, as it is not easy to observe
this learning behaviour and activity, there are some obstacles
regarding both the evaluation and the improvement of the
learning process.
In tracking online learning, conventional note-taking activity has been introduced as a required learning technique
[1], with the contents of the notes being used to evaluate
students. The functions and effectiveness of note-taking have
already been reviewed and discussed in media articles [2]–
[4]. Note-taking activity is based on the extraction and
summarization of course context [5]; these note-taking skills
reﬂect learning performance at the university level [6]–[8].
A lexical analysis was conducted to extract term features
from student’s notes during blended learning, a form of
online learning with face-to-face sessions. Lexical characteristics of notes taken were then conceptualized, and compared
with note-taking performance [9], [10]. According to our
previous study, participant’s characteristics differ between
blended learning courses and fully online courses [11]. Also,
the learning materials and the support provided to students
were originally designed for a fully online course, thus these
differences should be made clear.
In this paper, the following topics are addressed, in
response to the above mentioned problems:
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.75

434

100
NT: Good

“ ”

Percentage (%)

80
“ ”

CPU
Windows Linux

n3

40

20

log(n)

NT: Poor

0

2/

Figure 1.

NT: Fair
60

2

3

4

5
6
7
8
9
Course session (weeks)

10

11

12

An example of a slide for the online course.
Figure 2.

students may have gradually learned that reviewing notes
during the course could be signiﬁcantly beneﬁcial and they
recognized the function of note-taking [12].

Grade percentages of note-taking assessments [12].

they were recorded. Both the texts of the slides and the audio
ﬁles were divided into parts for each course session.
Except for graphs and illustrations, all the information in
the images made of the student’s notes was made into text
ﬁles. This conversion was undertaken manually because the
Japanese character recognition equipment could not easily
process it all. Student’s notes were also classiﬁed separately
for each course session.

B. Note-taking assessment
All participants were required to present their notebooks
in weekly sessions during the 2nd to the 14th week of the
15 week course. The lecturer reviewed and assessed these
notes, then returned them to students afterwards. Prior to
doing so, all notes were scanned by the lecturer and stored
as images on a PC.
The contents of the students’ notes from the 2nd to the
12th week were classiﬁed into three categories: “Good”,
“Fair” and “Poor” [8]. If a student reproduced the same
information from the lecturer’s presentation in his or her
notebook, note-taking was rated as “Fair”. If any information
was omitted, a “Poor” rating was given. If some additional
information was written down, the note-taking was rated
as “Good”. The “Good” note-takers included those who
integrated the knowledge given in the lecture with relevant
prior knowledge [14]. Therefore, learning using “Good”
notes is recognized as a constructivistic learning activity
[13], [15].
The total number of valid participants in the course was
54.

2) Extraction of features of texts: A Japanese morphological term analytical tool [16] examined each set of text
from the lecturer’s slides, the lecturer’s audio ﬁles and the
student’s notes. The noun and adjective terms used in each
session were then extracted. A term-document matrix (X),
which consists of term frequency vectors of the frequencies
of the terms was composed for each class module. The term
frequencies can indicate the features of all information, from
both course materials and student’s notes.
For statistical features, frequencies of terms used in the
course sessions were compared between the lecturer and
students. A contextual analysis was conducted using the
Latent semantic indexing (LSI) technique [17] to determine
the degree of similarity of the texts.
The features of terms and course sessions were extracted
from the term-document matrix (term × course session)
using SVD (singular value decomposition analysis) [17]
as follows: X = T SD . The term feature matrix (T )
contains feature vectors of each term. The feature vectors
of a text (N ) for each course session (i) were calculated
using a summation of the term feature vectors (T ) which
was weighted by the term frequency (Fi ) in a course session
(i), therefore, Ni = T Fi . Once the term-document matrix
was deﬁned, the features of the text from all document sets
could be measured.

C. Text analysis
1) Text extraction from course materials and notes: To
conduct morphological analysis of the contents of the course,
all factual information provided to students was extracted.
For presentation slides, all written texts were extracted and
summarized. As the audio ﬁles had been produced from the
written course materials, these texts were also analyzed. The
lecturer wrote the texts for the audio ﬁles and the slides were
prepared in advance. Then a narrator read them aloud and

435

250
11

3

600
500

14

Number of student’s terms

Number of terms in audio files

700

2
13
10 12
14
9
11

400
300
6
200

8
7
5

4

100

5
8
7

150

9

12

3

10
2
6

100

4

50

0

High: Lecturer’s slides
Low: Lecturer’s slides
High: Lecturer’s slides+audio files
Low: Lecturer’s slides+audio files

0
0

50
100
150
200
Number of terms in slides

250

0

1.0

200

0.8
Term coverage rate

250

150

100

High: Lecturer’s slides
Low: Lecturer’s slides
High: Lecturer’s slides+audio files
Low: Lecturer’s slides+audio files

50

100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
Number of lecturer’s terms

Figure 4. The relationship between the number of terms in student’s
notes and lecturer’s slides with audio ﬁles.

Figure 3. The number of terms in slides and audio ﬁles according to
lecture number.

Number of terms

13

200

High: Lecturer’s slides
Low: Lecturer’s slides
High: Lecturer’s slides+audio files
Low: Lecturer’s slides+audio files

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.0
2

3

4

5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Course session (weeks)

2

Figure 5. The number of terms presented by the lecturer in notes taken
by students.

3

4

5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Course session (weeks)

Figure 6. Coverage ratio of terms in student’s notes compared to
lecture’s slides and audio ﬁles.

sum of the scores across the 11 weeks which were assessed
was calculated for each participant [8], [12]. As the scores
indicate the level of note-taking performance, all participants
were divided into two groups, consisting of high and low
assessment scores, using the mean of the scores. The high
and low scoring groups consisted of 30 and 24 students
respectively. It is supposed that note-taking activities contribute test scores [6], some relationships between these have
been analyzed [18].

III. R ESULTS
A. Note-taking assessment
The distribution of the note-taking assessment levels
across the weeks of the course are summarized as percentages in Figure 2 [12]. Note-taking assessment was conducted
during 11 of 15 weeks of the course, from the 2nd to the
12th week. According to Figure 2, the percentages for “Fair”
are almost always higher than those for the other assessment
levels throughout the course. Because students did not obtain
any note-taking evaluation feedback from the lecturer, most
students continued to take notes from materials presented
online. The percentages of note takers rated “Good” were
very low, and the percentages rated “Poor” were almost
always the lowest. These tendencies are typical of a fully
online course [8].
These three ratings were converted into scores, and the

B. Features of notes
First, the number of terms in slides of course materials and
in texts of the audio ﬁles were compared. The relationship
between the two is illustrated in Figure 3. In the ﬁgure,
the number of course sessions is indicated. The number of
terms in the audio ﬁles is 2.5 times the number of terms in

436

0.7

0.6
0.4

5

NT: High
NT: Low
Lecture

6
7

Second component of feature

Second component of feature

4

0.2
8
0
9
-0.2

3
11

2

-0.4
12
-0.6

13
10 14

3

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

4

5

7

6

0.1

9 11

12
10

13
14

8

2
NT: High
NT: Low
Lecture

0

-0.8
-0.9 -0.8 -0.7 -0.6 -0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0
First component of feature
Figure 7.

0.6

0

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
First component of feature

Figure 8. Conceptual map of student’s notes and lecturer’s slides with
audio ﬁles.

Conceptual map of student’s notes and lecturer’s slides.

the slides, and the ratio varies from 1 to 4 depending the
contents of the session.
Second, the mean number of terms in student’s notes
was measured and summarized according to the number of
terms presented by the lecturer, as shown in Figure 4. The
horizontal axis shows the number of terms in the lecturer’s
slides or in the lecturer’s slides and texts of the audio ﬁles,
and the vertical axis shows the number of terms in the
student’s notes. The hollow symbols indicate the number
of terms according to slides only, and the solid symbols
indicate the number of terms in slides and audio ﬁles.
Square blue symbols indicate the group with high notetaking performance, and circular green symbols indicate the
group with low note-taking performance. The error bars
indicate standard errors of the number of terms in student’s
notes.
All symbols for the number of terms in slides are suppressed by the number of slides, since the deviation of the
number of terms in the slides is small. The number of terms
in the notes sharply increases with the number of terms in the
slides. As shown in the ﬁgure, the differences in the number
of terms for slides are not clear because of the narrow range
of their distribution, though there are signiﬁcant differences
between the high and low performance groups. This suggests
that the number of terms in student’s notes may depend on
the number of terms in the lecturer’s slides.
Another set of plots shows the relationship between the
number of terms in student’s notes and the number of
lecturer’s terms in both slides and texts of the audio ﬁles.
When the total number of terms is greater than 400, students
wrote down the same number of terms, even when their
performance is low. When the total number of terms is less
than 400 words, the number of terms written in student’s

notes also decreases with the number of term presented.
In these sessions, most course content was provided as
mathematical formulae. Students have to write mathematical
notations, and thus the number of terms is relatively small.
C. Coverage of lecterer’s presentations
Students recorded related terms which they thought of
while the presentation was being made. Though this activity
is an important part of note-taking activity, student’s ability
to record terms from the lecturer’s presentation is also a
basic skill. The number of terms which were reproduced in
student’s notes is summarized in Figure 5. The blue symbols
denote the groups with high note-taking performance during
the course and the green symbols denote those with low
performance. Hollow symbols indicate the number of terms
originally in slides, and solid symbols indicate the number
of terms from slides and audio ﬁles. These are different
from the total number of terms which were presented by
the lecturer.
When looking at a set of terms which were only taken
from the slides, there is little difference in the number
of terms written between the groups with high and low
performance. Using the set of terms from both slides and
audio ﬁles, there are some differences in the number of terms
between the groups with high and low performance, except
for sessions 4-7. As the main topics of these sessions were
mathematical formulae, there were few differences. From
the 8th to the 14th session, the number of terms in student’s
notes gradually increased as the number of terms presented
also increased.
To compare the degree of coverage of terms presented by
the lecturer, a coverage ratio was calculated as a percentage
of the number of terms recorded by students. The coverage

437

and 3 are relatively higher than in other sessions. Therefore,
the overall concepts of sessions 2 and 3 may be different,
as the terms used distinguish these sessions from the others.
The features of the group with high performance deviate
widely from the features of the group with low performance
in these sessions.

ratios of the two sets of terms were summarized for each
session in Figure 6. As the ﬁgure shows, for the set of
terms from slides only, students recorded almost all terms
presented. The ratios were around or over 0.8, and gradually
increased with the sessions. For the set of terms from slides
and audio ﬁles, coverage ratios are always below 0.4. This
shows that students do not write down terms from the
audio ﬁles. There are some differences in the number of
terms in both sets for note-taking groups with high and low
performance, as note-taking performance may be related to
the ability to write down the terms presented.

IV. C ONCLUSION
The learning process of students who participated in a
fully online course was visualized and analyzed, using their
note-taking performance, to understand student’s behaviour
during course sessions. The following results were achieved.
Note-taking activities were introduced, and student’s notes
can be used as a record of their progress. Once student’s
notes were converted into digital texts, lexical analysis using
a term frequency matrix was conducted throughout the
course.
The number of terms in student’s notes increased with
the number of terms in the lecturer’s presentation slides.
Also, students recorded a greater number of terms than were
presented in the slides and audio ﬁles. When mathematical
formulae were recorded, the number of terms correlated with
the number of terms presented.
The number of terms recorded were compared between
groups exhibiting high and low levels of performance.
Though there was little difference between the two groups
according to the number of terms in the presentation slides,
there were some differences between the two groups when
the terms which were presented in the audio ﬁles were considered. These results suggest that note-taking performance
may be affected by the ability to record terms presented
orally.
Some lexical features from lecturer’s presentations and
student’s notes were extracted, and the features of these
materials and student’s notes were presented as a conceptual
map. The above mentioned tendencies conﬁrmed that the
notes of students in the group with low performance were
similar to the context of the lecturer’s presentations, while
the notes of the students in the group with high performance
deviated widely from notes of the group with low performance.
The development of an evaluation methodology for online
learning performance and a supporting methodology using
lexical analysis and the visualization of note-taking will be
the subjects of our further study.

D. Conceptual analysis of notes
Every student records his or her notes independently of
other students. The features of the contents are summarized
as a conceptural map using the LSI technique. The features
of the terms were generated using either all terms from
student’s notes and the lecturer’s slides or from student’s
notes and the lecturer’s slides and audio ﬁles.
First, the features of all of the student’s notes and the
lecturer’s slides were extracted using a set of features of
terms from the student’s notes and the lecturer’s slides. As
a result, all features are mapped, as shown in Figure 7.
The LSI technique uses the derived factor representation
to process the document features, the ﬁrst two-dimensions
are shown in Figure 7 [17]. The horizontal axis shows
the ﬁrst component of the features, and the vertical axis
shows the second component. The square blue symbols
indicate features of notes from the group of note-takers with
high performance, and the green circular symbols indicate
features of the group with low performance. The triangular
symbols indicate features of the lecturer’s slides, and the
number represents the session number of the course.
This ﬁgure also shows the relationship between the sessions. As noted in the previous section, session numbers 4 to
7 deal with mathematical formulae, and are located in upper
left hand corner. Other sessions are located in the lower half
of the graph.
For each session, most notes taken by the group with low
performance are clustered around features of the lecturer’s
slides, while most notes taken by the group with high
performance are widely distributed. These tendencies have
been conﬁrmed in previous analyses [9], [10]. The lexicon
of students in the group with low performance is based on
the lecturer’s presentations, but students in the group with
high performance are able to write down additional phrases
which are related to the concepts.
Second, the features of the notes of all participants and
the lecturer’s slides with audio ﬁles are measured using a set
of features of terms from these materials. In Figure 8, all
features across the sessions were mapped using the same
format. Though most tendencies are similar to Figure 7,
sessions 2 and 3 are different from the others. According to
Figure 3, the numbers of terms from audio ﬁles in sessions 2

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was partially supported by the Japan Society
for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), Grant-in-Aid for
Scientiﬁc Research (B-22300281: 2010-2012).
R EFERENCES
[1] P. Weener, “Note taking and student verbalization as instrumental learning activities,” Instructional Science, vol. 3, pp.
51–74, 1974.

438

[2] K. A. Kiewra, “Students’ note-taking behaviors and the efﬁcacy of providing the instructor’s notes for review,” Contemporary Educational Psychology, vol. 10, pp. 378–386, 1985.

[11] M. Nakayama, H. Yamamoto, and R. Santiago, “Impact of
information literacy and learner characteristics on learning
behavior of japanese students in on line courses,” International Journal of Case Method Research & Application, vol.
XX(4), pp. 403–415, 2008.

[3] ——, “A review of note-taking: The encoding-storage
paradigm and beyond,” Educational Psychology Review, vol.
1(2), pp. 147–172, 1989.

[12] M. Nakayama, K. Mutsuura, and H. Yamamoto, “Student’s
characteristics for note taking activity in a fully online
course,” in Proceedings of 10th European Conference of ELearning, Brighton, UK, 2011, pp. 550–557.

[4] G. J. Trafton and S. B. Trickett, “Note-taking for selfexplanation and problem solving,” Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 16, pp. 1–38, 2001.

[13] P. Tynaj¨a, “Towards expert knowledge? a comparison between
a constructivist and a traditional learning environment in the
university,” International Journal of Educational Research,
vol. 31, pp. 357–442, 1999.

[5] A. Piolat, T. Olive, and R. T. Kellogg, “Cognitive effort during
note taking,” Applied Cognitive Psychology, vol. 19, pp. 291–
312, 2005.
[6] P. A. Nye, T. J. Crooks, M. Powley, and G. Tripp, “Student
note-taking related to university examination performance,”
Higher Education, vol. 13, pp. 85–97, 1984.

[14] R. E. Mayer, R. Moreno, M. Boire, and S. Vagge, “Maximizing constructivist learning from multimedia communications
by minizimizing cogmitive load,” Journal of Edcational Psychology, vol. 91, pp. 638–643, 1990.

[7] K. A. Kiewra, S. L. Benton, S.-I. Kim, N. Risch, and
M. Christensen, “Effects of note-taking format and study technique on recall and relational performance,” Contemporary
Educational Psychology, vol. 20, pp. 172–187, 1995.

[15] M. Tam, “Constructivism, instructional design, and technology: Implications for transforming distance learning,” Educational Technology & Society, vol. 3(2), pp. 50–60, 2000.

[8] M. Nakayama, K. Mutsuura, and H. Yamamoto, “Effectiveness of note taking activity in a blended learning environment,” in Proceedings of 9th European Conference of ELearning, Porto, Portugal, 2010, pp. 387–393.

[16] MeCab: Yet another part-of-speech and morphological
analyzer. [Online]. Available: http://mecab.sourceforge.net
[17] S. Deerwester, S. T. dumais, G. W. Furnas, T. K. Landauer,
and R. Harshman, “Indexing by latent semantic analysis,”
Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
vol. 41, pp. 391–407, 1990.

[9] ——, “A feasibility study of learning assessment using student’s notes in an on-line learning environment,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Digital Information
and Communication Technology and its Applications (DICTAP 2011), Dijon, France, 2011, pp. 483–493.

[18] M. Nakayama, K. Mutsuura, and H. Yamamoto, “Effectiveness of learner’s characteristics for note-taking activity during
fully online learning,” IEICE, Technical Report ET2011-140,
2012.

[10] ——, “Evaluation of student’s notes in a blended learning
course,” International Journal of New Computer Architectures
and their Applications, vol. 1(4), pp. 1080–1089, 2011.

439

