2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Knowledge Visualization of large-size architectural heritage. A research experience
on Yanqing Section of Chinese Great Wall
Giovanni Issini
Dardus
Università Politecnica delle Marche
Ancona, Italia
g.issini@univpm.it
Abstract— This paper presents a research experience held in
Beijing since 2009 by Dardus Department of Polytechnic
University of Marche and Beijing University of Civil
Engineering and Architecture. During a wider research
campaign for knowledge and restoration of the Yanqing
Section of Chinese Great Wall, the research staff faced the
issues linked to the information management on a large size
heritage work. The main questions were the presence of many
different types of information, acquired across different times
and with many methods and techniques, and the needs to
visualize in the proper way that information in order to obtain
analytical reference for the design strategies. The staff defined
suitable methods for data acquisition and management, based
in a new reading criterion of the monument features. The
proposed visualization methods tried to collect the various data
in a unique, interactive and immersive environment.
Keywords- Survey, data
visualization of knowledge

I.

recording,

cultural

heritage,

INTRODUCTION (HEADING 1)

The Dardus department of Università Politecnica delle
Marche has been involved in international scientific
cooperation in the sector of knowledge and valorization of
the cultural heritage for 10 years. A dynamic international
network involving universities, institutions, local authorities,
enterprises and associations has consolidated and has been
working particularly in East Asia.
The mode of cooperation that has been developed over
the years has led to an approach to the analysis of the
languages of architecture and restoration that recognizes that
if the value expressed by the work is to be acknowledged and
handed down the generations, it requires first of all a critical
and interpretive effort on the part of the communities directly
involved.
Italian culture can provide an important contribution to
this process, not to replace the local sensitivity, but to
stimulate
comprehensive
solutions
that
combine
technological and functional requirements with the
preservation of cultural identity.
The decisions involving the route to be followed are
therefore up to the beneficiaries of the cultural identity. We
feel that our role is to provide, through our joint research,
both the cultural and the technical instruments that can help
make decisions that are as “conscious” as possible.

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.89

Where restoration is concerned, the central phase is
clearly the “knowledge” of the work, a process that has been
honed by the European tradition; the subsequent “critical”
intervention views each ancient building or monument
complex as an object entailing specific issues and problems
that must be met with suitable methods and design choices.
II.

PROJECT AIMS AND METHOD

According to this method, the Italo-Chinese research
team is working on the Beijing Section of Chinese Great
Wall, in order to innovate the knowledge process, testing
novel tools that it felt would better represent and organize the
complex contents of the monument site in terms of formal
solutions, construction techniques, the monuments’ relation
to their surroundings, as well as their proportions and
characteristics of the materials (Fig. 1).
The project regarding the Great Wall in China envisages
the application of innovative tools to refine and optimize the
“knowledge process” in view of two possible levels of
intervention.
The first involves monitoring the degradation and
ongoing transformation in the various sections of the Wall.
In fact the morphology and the vast geographical
deployment of the Wall require appropriate tools to manage
the various parameters and indicators.

Figure 1. Localization of Beijing Section of Chinese Great Wall

523

Monitoring also involves the need for collecting and
archiving all the data that have been acquired, to make them
available to technicians and administrators.
The second level of intervention involves the
communication of the values expressed by the work and its
surroundings, through new means. A research project that
did not take into account the role of the Great Wall as a
tourist attraction would miss the very reality of the
monument. Innovative communication tools are therefore
required, to promote a form of sustainable tourism that can
constitute an alternative to mass tourism.
The choice of the method to be adopted for the
knowledge process of the Great Wall has been determined by
some essential issues related to the nature of the monument
itself:
We asked ourselves these basic questions:
Can one speak of knowledge process in the case of a
work that is more than 500 km long? Can the sum of
multiple local projects that have already been carried out or
are still to be realized provide the same result as a general
theoretical knowledge process? What kind of information
should the knowledge process provide? Is it appropriate to
apply to the Great Wall a quantitative analytical method as if
it were a traditional monument?
These questions raised complex and stimulating issues,
which led the joint research group to lay down a number of
methodological premises:
• The Great Wall requires a comprehensive
knowledge process, because it alone enables overall
understanding, including the essential relationships
among different parts of the monument.
• Analytical tools are indeed appropriate, but they
cannot address the problem at hand, because the
exceptional size of the object would make any data
rapidly obsolete.
• It is unacceptable to consider the vast inexplorable
portions of the Wall as less worthy of a “knowledge
process”.
The Yanqing section, encompassed by towers 34 and 40,
where research is now being carried out, was selected to test
the knowledge process as defined above because it has many
distinctive and recurring features that also characterize the
entire monument (Fig. 2).

III.

INFORMATION RECORDING

Enacting a comprehensive knowledge process requires a
unitary survey programme; in fact, different surveys
conducted over the years have often been realized in
completely different periods and conditions, and
consequently cannot be integrated.
The survey project of the Beijing section of the Great
Wall must take into account not only its vast size but also the
fact that large tracts cannot be reached with any transport
means, and some not even on foot. Therefore analytical
surveys performed with high-precision instruments like the
laser scanner or stereoscopic photogrammetry are warranted
only for the purpose of restoration projects, which will
logically take place in sections that are easily accessed by
tourist flows.
Therefore, the object of the comprehensive knowledge of
the work was met by deploying faster, easier and more
flexible methods and tools, like spherical panoramic
photography, a technique optimized by the Dardus research
group, particularly by Prof. Gabriele Fangi. The method
provides morphological surveys of architectural objects
using homologous points on high-resolution spherical
panoramic photographs (Fig. 3, Fig. 4).
The advantage of this method is that it provides surveys
where the error margin is of the order of millimeters using
simple tools that can easily be carried by a single operator,
namely a digital camera, optics, a tripod and a laser distance
meter (or, where necessary, a total station). The point clouds
obtained from the panoramic photographs are then used to
make the 3D model (Fig. 5).

Figure 3. Panoramic view of Great Wall Yanqing Section. West side

Figure 4. Panoramic view of Great Wall Yanqing Section. South side

Figure 5. model and technical drawings of Yanqing Section between
tower 34 and 40

Figure 2. Plan of Yanqing Great Wall Section

524

The photographic textures of the panoramic images can
then be applied on the model in order to provide also visual
information.
The morphological survey is therefore instrumental to the
comprehensive knowledge of the monument, and it is the
appropriate instrument to identify any tracts of the Great
Wall that share extrinsic and intrinsic features, or Monument
Conservation Units (MCU). The aim of MCU defining is to
make easier to assess the degree of damage within a limited
number of types and to define appropriate conservation
strategies.
The identification of MCUs is a complex process for
which the morphological survey provides the necessary
tools. The critical and interpretive data (like construction
type, styles, proportions, construction system, and
architectural languages) are combined with environmental
information (like orography, type of subsoil) and with other
indicators (like accessibility and type and degree of
deterioration) to select the appropriate conservation
interventions.
These values and parameters are entered into a matrix to
identify the possible cases that can arise, and excluding those
that there is no sense in envisaging or that are useless, like
cases involving the units that have already been restored
(Fig. 6). The research group defined a matrix of the whole
Beijing section of Chinese Great Wall that has been realized
with data from the available surveys, which has defined
more than 65 MCUs. The aim of these Units is not to draw
up a restoration handbook of the Great Wall, but to identify
recurring characteristics and problems that will then be
investigated individually and specifically based on the type
of restoration that has been planned. The MCU definition is a
critical process, so it is strictly based on historical, artistic
and environmental contents of the work. But in the same
time it inspires the design principles of the architectural
informative system that will be fit in order to allow a MCUbased reading of the monument features.

Figure 8. MCU Samples in Yanqing Sectionl

Figure 9. Database Home Page

As mentioned above, the working group has tested this
method of investigation in Yanqing section, which in
encompassed by towers 34 and 40. The phase of acquisition
of the panoramic images required about 2 man days, and
rendering about 4. Fig. 7 shows the wireframe model of the
site and some technical tables. The morphological survey
and the analyses made onsite have identified 12 MCUs in
this experimental tract, as it is possible to see in the Fig. 8.
IV.

Figure 6. MCU definition system and MCU Matrix

Figure 7. Wireframe 3D model of Yanqing section Great Wall

CONNECTING INFORMATION

The second phase of the project involves the archiving
system of the data that have been collected from the various
types of investigations performed on the monument:
• Historical investigations;
• Topographic, morphological and details surveys;
• Materials and structural investigations;
An archiving system has therefore been devised where
the input phase allows both to draw up MCU files and to
enter individual data associated with a specific tract of the
Wall, like drawings and documents, as well as data relating
to structural or other monitoring activities (for instance
thermography, video endoscopy scans and materials
analyses). Beside the data acquired from the investigation
campaigns, the system can also store documents coming
from other sources.
The database is structured according to three criteria:
525

•
•

The geographical position of the object;
The architectural object (tower number, wall
encompassed by two towers, other elements);
• The MCUs;
It allows organization and extrapolation of all the data
regarding a given architectural element, or to learn the
distribution along the Great Wall of a specific MCU.
Fig. 9 shows the interface of the archiving system
designed for expert users, which the research group is now
developing.
The data output system has been designed to maximize
display interactivity. In addition, expert users are also
allowed to extrapolate reports on specialist topics.
The database, designed in that way, has been developed
through open-source instruments.
V.

INFORMATION STORAGE+VISUALIZATION

The device allowing data use, which is an integral part of
the archiving system, has been the object of special attention.
The key role of this system is to permit comprehensive
reading of the data, analyses and reports that support the
restoration project.
The system hinges on two essential elements:
The central role of the immersive interactive
environment as a workspace and as the space for the user’s
activities;
The possibility of superimposing on the 3D
environment specialist themes and contents that can be
activated on the basis of competence level and user needs.
This is realized by associating to the virtual environment the
data contained in the database, which can therefore be
displayed in real time, for a more complete experience;
Through Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 it is possible to demonstrate
the development of the integrated display system with
reference to the section that the Italy-Chinese team is now
studying.
From the panoramic photographs an ad hoc software
creates navigable environments that provide the display of all
parts of the monument, also from different viewpoints.
The navigation system allows selection of the optimal
viewpoint of the portion the user wants to examine.
However, navigation between viewpoints is also possible, by
selecting the desired direction.

Figure 11. Spherical views and recorded technical information linked in an
interactive environment

From this first level of pure communication, or
presentation, which provides direct knowledge of the
architectural object, one can go further by recalling the data
associated with the various portions of the monument found
in the database, and overlaying them on the neutral page.
In the environment shown we can see how references
placed in correspondence with the different portions recall
related information:
• VR indicates that there is a navigable 3D model of
the object;
• SURVEY refers to metric survey technical tables;
• MA indicates a materials report;
• DA indicates an analysis of the deterioration related
to collapse;
The use and management/storage of data are therefore
available in a unique informative system. It allows to join the
performance of a standard database with the multimedia
options, i.e. the simultaneous or selective data formats
reading. These knowledge tools can be very useful in
complex and large-size monuments as the Chinese Great
Wall, allowing the control of data finalized to particular
conservation actions.
The visualization system can show that the tower has
been surveyed and that the database contains the survey
technical tables, which in this file contain various views,
sections and geographical references (Figure 12).
Going back to the initial environment we can read the
materials reports for tower 35 and the tract of the Wall
encompassed by towers 35 and 36. The different elements
making up the structure have been analyzed and subjected to
chemical-physical study to assess the strength and degree of
deterioration of the more fragile materials, in this case brick.
The deterioration recorded in the course of the various
study campaigns has also been uploaded on the database and
can be viewed. In this case it is the fissured parts of the tower
and of the successive portion of the Wall, where some mortar
between the rows of bricks of the external parapets has been
lost in some places.

Figure 10. Visualization system Home Page
Figure 12. Technical data sheet linked to Towers Q and Wall Section

526

REFERENCES
[1]

S. Turnbull, The Great Wall of China 221 BC – AD 1644, Osprey
Publishing, 2007, ISBN 978-1-84609-004-8
[2] P. Clini, “Andrea Palladio, a critical catalogue of the survey
drawings. History and outlooks,” in Palladio: 1508-2008: the
quincentennial Symposium, Eds. Marsilio, 2008, ISBN 978-88-3179626-2.
[3] W. Bing, “History, Typology and Communication Research on Donggou Great Wall in Beijing,” unpublished.
Article in a journal:
[4] S.F. El-Hakim, J.A. Beraldin, M. Picard, G. Godin, “Detailed 3D
reconstruction of large-scale heritage sites with integrated
techniques,” Computer Graphic and Applications IEE, vol. 24, Issue
3, pp. 21-29, 10.1109/MCG.2004.1318815
Article in a conference proceedings:
[5] G. Fangi, “Multiscale multiresolution spherical photogrammetry with
long focal lenses for architectural surveys” Proc International
Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial
Information Sciences, Vol. XXXVIII, Part 5 Commission V
Symposium, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 2010
[6] G. Fangi, “Further developments of the spherical photogrammetry for
Cultural heritage” Proc. 22nd CIPA Symposium, October 11-15,
2009, Kyoto, Japan;
[7] G. Pomaska “Image acquisition for digital photogrammetry using „of
the shelf“ and metric cameras” Proc. CIPA International Symposum
Postdam 2001, Germany
[8] R. Owen, D. Buhalis, D. Pletinckx “Identifying technologies used in
Cultural Heritage” Proc. 5th Symposium on Virtual Reality,
Archaeology and Cultural Heritage (VAST 04), The Eurographic
Association, 2004, pp. 155-163 ISBN 3-905673-18-5.
[9] J. Visnovcova, A. Gruen, L. Zhang; “Image-based object
reconstruction and visualization; For inventory of cultural heritage”.
Institute of Geodesy and Photogrammetry, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology Zurich

Figure 13. Virtual reconstruction of the Section before decay process

Another interesting element, both in terms of the
communication of the value of the monument and of the
basic information supporting the restoration process, is the
virtual reconstruction of the original monument. In fact the
section of the Great Wall now being examined shows
significant defects, especially in correspondence with the
towers, the bridge, which is missing completely, and the
outer layer of the Wall.
The researchers have developed a 3D model of a putative
original monument inferred from historical documents and
the construction types of better preserved sections (Figure
13).
This content is also part of the archival data, which can
be recalled in the integrated display system as a movie.
Another interesting option for knowledge and analysis
purposes is interactive virtual reality, which provides a more
effective experience. In this case it is possible to access the
reconstructions of the original towers and make a virtual
visit.
At the same time we can see in a single environment the
distribution and location of the MCUs, so we can obtain in a
matter of seconds the first elements that will allow planning
of maintenance and restoration interventions.
VI.

CONCLUSIONS

One development that we are studying relates to the
possibility of obtaining the information associated with the
wall portions directly onsite, using Augmented Reality tools.
These tools allow to associate electronic data that can be
displayed on PDAs or even phone photo cameras to the real
site. This application can be useful for tourists and those
working at restoration sites.
Another option now being studied will make it possible
to upload increasingly precise and detailed data, like
analytical laser scanner surveys whose point cloud will be
managed by the information system.
This paper clearly regards the first phase of the project,
which is directed at promoting the acknowledgement of the
full historical and artistic value of the Great Wall in Beijing
province.
However, the intense cooperation between the Chinese
and the Italian researchers is providing a correct and
interesting approach based on the rigorous study and critical
analysis of the monument, with the increasingly critical
support of information technology tools.
The project can therefore be shared with other bodies or
subjects doing restoration and research work on the Great
Wall, adapting the IT protocols to different requirements
where appropriate.
527

