Graphic Data Display for Cardiovascular System
Case Study
James Agutter, March 1
Noah Syroid, MS 2
Frank Drews, PhD 3
Dwayne Westenskow, PhD
Julio Bermudez, PhD 1
David Strayer, PhD 3
1

2

Graduate School of Architecture, University of Utah
Department of Bioengineering, University of Utah
3
Department of Psychology, University of Utah

2

Abstract
Our multi-disciplinary group has developed a visual
representation for cardiovascular physiological variables.
This enhances a clinician’s ability to detect and rapidly
respond to critical events. The integrated and intuitive
display communicates a patient’s cardiovascular state so
that it is easily and quickly understood without prior
training. The display is designed to show patterns of
functional relationships that aid in the detection,
diagnosis, and treatment of a critical event.

and organization of graphical displays, clinicians would
likely detect, diagnose and treat critical anesthesia events
more effectively.

2. Traditional Anesthesia Displays
Anesthesia display design has primarily been bound by
tradition as opposed to helping clinicians detect critical
events. They still look like the strip chart recorder output
Sir Thomas Lewis used in 1912 to record the first ECG.

1. Background of Problem
Medical errors have cost tens of thousands of lives in
United States hospitals each year—a number greater than
deaths from highway accidents, breast cancer, and AIDS
combined. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) in its
landmark report "To Err is Human," (released in
November 2000 [1]), estimates the number of deaths due
to medical mistakes to be from 44,000 to 98,000 annually
Many of those errors occur in anesthesia, where it has
been estimated that human error is associated with more
than 80% of critical anesthesia incidents and more than
50% of anesthetic deaths.[2] This data is consistent with
other complex work environments involving humanmachine interactions such as aviation and process control.
Critical incident studies report that an adverse outcome
frequently became a catastrophic “evolving chain” of
subtle incidents, which alone might not have lead to a
disaster.[3] Many of these errors can be directly traced to
erroneous, or misleading information from patient
monitors or in the physician’s failure to recognize a
pattern in the data that would have led to a correct
diagnosis of the problem.[4] By optimizing the content

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

Figure 1.Traditional Display (Datex-Ohmeda)
These monitors use a “single-sensor-single-indicator”
display paradigm (Figure 1).[5] That is, a single variable is
displayed for each sensor used. As a result, clinicians must
observe and integrate information generated by the
independent sensors. This process of sequential, piecemeal
data gathering makes it difficult to develop a coherent
understanding of the interrelationship between the
presented information of physiological processes. [6] An
alternative to traditional SSSI displays is to develop

displays that integrate data at a higher level, provide the
user with graphic representation and present information
in a way that is consistent with the cognitive
representation of that user.

3. Display Design Background
It is well known that humans are largely visual
creatures. Throughout time humans have used pictures to
communicate difficult concepts quickly and effectively.
These pictures, like the ancient pictographs found in the
Lascoux caves, help us make inferences that lead to a
better and quicker understanding of the message behind
the picture. Recent cognitive research has indicated that
the human mind is better able to analyze and use complex
data when it is presented graphically, rather than textual or
numerical formats [7]. Research in thinking, imagination
and learning has shown that visualization plays an
intuitive and essential role in the association, correlation,
manipulation and use of information.[8] The more
complex and critical the information, the more imperative
it is to communicate the information effectively. [9]
When the information is consistent with cognitive
representation, performance is often more rapid, accurate,
and consistent. Conversely, a failure to use perceptual
principles in the appropriate ways can lead to erroneous
analyses of information. Therefore, it is imperative that
information be presented in a manner that facilitates the
user’s ability to process the information and minimize any
mental transformations that must be applied to the data.
[10]
It is this essentially qualitative filtering and depiction of
information towards achieving a clear end that constitutes
representation design.[11] Providing information in an
integrated way should increase the anesthesiologist’s
situation awareness, and thus reduce the risk of patient
injury.

(e.g., cubes, spheres, cylinders, prisms) that work as
metaphors of the critical functions of the system.

4.1. Design Process
We began by examining other cardiovascular displays and
generating a list of cardiovascular variables that have important
clinical information about the patient's cardiovascular state:
Central venous pressure (CVP, mmHg) measures the blood
pressure after gas exchange in the systemic tissues and organs.
Mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAP, mmHg) is the blood
pressure in the lungs. When PAP is high, such as in right
heart failure, fluid tends to cross the pulmonary-capillary
membranes and collect in the lung’s alveoli. The pulmonary
vascular resistance (PVR, dynes/sec/cm5) indicates
vasoconstriction or vasodilatation of the pulmonary
vasculature. Mean left arterial pressure (LAP, mmHg) in the
pulmonary vein is an indicator of left heart preload. Cardiac
Output (CO, ml/min) is the blood flow through the heart and is
a function of heart rate (HR, beats/min), and stroke volume
(SV, ml): CO HR u SV . Mean arterial pressure (MAP,
mmHg) is a primary clinical monitoring variable. The
systemic vascular resistance (SVR, dynes/sec/cm5) is an
indicator of arterial vessel constriction or dilation. Blood is the
substrate for oxygen transport. SaO2 is the ratio of oxygen
saturated hemoglobin in the arterial system
Using this set of variables, many preliminary ideas were
explored through the use of digital sketches. (Figure 2)

4. Display Description
To monitor an anesthetized patient the anesthesiologist
watches over 30 interrelated variables. This task is very
demanding, as it requires the clinician to keep a high level
of situational awareness while performing other duties,
such as caring for the patient, filing out patient record etc.
Current displays sub-optimally show the information as
waveforms and numerics.
Our research group has
designed an innovative, detailed, cardiovascular display
for anesthesiologists that aids in the detection, diagnosis
and treatment of critical cardiovascular events during
anesthesia. The display organizes measured and modeled
physiologic information, into relevant data sets or critical
functions. These data sets are mapped as graphical objects

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

Figure 2. Preliminary Sketches

4.2 Design Principles
After numerous discussions, we simplified and distilled
the ideas down to one design using design principles that
suggest normal uniform, regularly spaced elements to
create a smooth balanced design when variables are
normal that includes a reference frame.[12] The use of
these principles for designing clinical monitors allows for

rapid detection of change, which is consistent with the
ideas behind an artificial horizon and the symmetrical
polygon displays. When the patient status is abnormal,
deviations from a smooth balanced design occur they are
perceived very quickly because the normal shapes are preattentively processed [13]. That is to say that the objects
“pop out” from their surroundings.

as a cross-section of the pipe. When resistance is high, the
vessels are constricted and the circle is filled. When
resistance is low, the vessels are dilated and the circle is
expanded. (Figure 4)

4.3 Display Organization
The objects in the display are spatially located to show
a diagrammatic organization of the flow of the blood.
From the left, venous blood returning from the systemic
capillaries flows into the vena cava (a). The right heart (b)
pumps the deoxygenated blood through the pulmonary
arteries (c) to the lungs (d), the site of gas-exchange.
Oxygenated blood in the pulmonary veins (e) flows to the
left heart (f) where it is pumped via the aorta (g) to the
systemic tissues. This arrangement places all relevant
measurements together and contextulized, to allow rapid
understanding and diagnosis. This organization also
highlights important concepts such as left heart preload,
afterload and cardiac output. (Figure 3)

(a)

(e)

(c)
(b)

(f)

(g)

Figure 4. Resistance States
The left heart is responsible for delivering blood to the
vital organs and the tissues represented simply as a sphere.
Its visual dominance is purposely stated due to the severe
consequences of heart failure. The diameter of the sphere
is proportional to the stroke volume. When stroke volume
is low (poor contractility), then the heart object becomes
small, and a large heart object represents a large volume of
blood ejected during each heartbeat. Again, a gray circle
around the object reference frame indicates the standard
physiology. Animated "beating" of the sphere indicates
heart rate. Furthermore, if the heart is not receiving
adequate oxygen (myocardial ischemia, computed by ST
segment analysis of the ECG), then it changes shape
drastically in order to elicit prompt attention. (Figure 5)
An object for the right heart is intentionally missing
because sensors that distinguish between left and right
cardiac output continuously do not exist.

(d)

Figure 3. Cardiovascular Display

4.4 Display Metaphors
The display conveys the look of a 3-D pipe and is a
geometric graphic metaphor for a blood vessel. Vertical
movement of each part of the pipe represents a change in
blood pressure. In the cardiovascular system, blood
pressure is often used as a surrogate for a patient's volume
status. As the blood pressure increases for a portion of the
cardiovascular system, the corresponding object becomes
larger by increasing in the vertical direction. Thus, the
objects' movement provides a dual notion of the patient's
pressure and volume status. In addition, abnormal changes
in pressures can have clinical meaning. For example,
abnormally high LAP (or preload) could mean that the left
heart is not functioning optimally. The outline of the pipe
represents normal pressure for each cardiovascular object.
The object's size in relation to the reference pipe conveys
whether blood pressure is normal, high or low with respect
to a standard physiology.
Vascular tone in the pulmonary and systemic
cardiovascular systems is shown as circles and represented

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

Figure 5. Myocardial ischemia
Finally, the color of the LAP, left heart, and MAP
objects is proportional to SaO2. Brain and vital organ
damage rapidly ensues if the patient has even short
durations of arterial blood desaturation. If the arterial
blood is well oxygenated (SaO2 > 93%), then the objects'
color will be bright red. As arterial blood begins to
desaturate, when the patient has no ventilation for
example, the color rapidly changes from red to purple
(87% > SaO2 > 93%) to blue (SaO2 < 87%). (Figure 6)

Figure 6. SaO2 88%
In addition, the emergent shapes invoke a diagnosis by
the clinician because the objects look similar to the way an
anesthesiologist envisions them. For example, during
hypervolemia, blood pressure, systemic vascular

resistance, cardiac output falls which shows up as smaller
objects narrowed down like a nozzle with SVR increased
to compensate for hypotension. The hypovolemic patient
is referred to as a dry patient and the resultant graphic
shows an image that looks dry or like an empty pipe.
(Figure 7)

A simple approach to obtain an impression about the
participants' performance is to calculate the percentage of
correct answers. (Table 1) Calculating the percentages
does not correct for chance level performance; however,
such an analysis is appropriate for evaluating the design
using experts, as the possibility of chance performance is
less likely.

5. Future Work

Figure 7. Hypovolemia
These emergent features significantly supported
naturalistic decision-making by providing patterns that are
readily learned and applied to rapid diagnosis.

We are planning on proving the efficacy of the
cardiovascular display by creating a realistic surgical
environment using the METI simulator. We will be using
a between subject test protocol that will test detection time
and situation awareness with subjects using the traditional
display only or using the traditional with the new
cardiovascular display.

4.5 Iterative Design Evaluation

6. References

Each design iteration was evaluated using a 4-step
usability testing protocol. This shows how design
changes impact the intuitiveness (ability to recognize the
general organizational aspects, the ability to easily map
specific data to the general organization), and usability
(ability to recognize appropriate patterns). By maximizing
the ease of use we anticipate that acceptance of the display
will be greater.

[1] Kohn, L, Corrigan, J, Donaldson, M: To Err is Human
Building a Safer Health System. Institute of Medicine. National
Academy Press, Washington, D.C. 1999
[2] Runiciman W, Sellen A. et al. Errors, incidents and accidents
in anaesthesia. Anaesth Int. Care, 21 (5), 506-519 1993
[3] Gaba, DM, Maxwell, M, DeAnda A: Anesthetic mishaps:
breaking the chain of accident evolution. Anesthesiology:66:6706. 1987
[4] Reason, J. Human Error. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. 1990
[5] Goodstein, LP. Discriminative display support for process
operators, Human detection and diagnosis of system failure. Ed
by Rasmussen, J Rouse WB. New York Plenum, 433-49. 1981
[6] Vicente, KJ, Cristoffersen, K, Pereklita A: Supporting
operator problem solving through ecological interface design.
IEEE Transaction on Systems, Mass and Cybernetics; 25: 552945. 1995
[7] Rouse WB, Geddes ND, Hammer JM: Computer-aided
fighter pilots. IEEE Spectrum; 27: 38-41 1990
[8] Vicente KJ, Christoffersen K, Pereklita A: Supporting
operator problem solving through ecological interface design.
IEEE Transaction on Systems, Man and Cybernetics; 25: 529-45
1995
[9] Boff KR, Lincoln JE: Engineering Data Compendium:
Human Perception and Performance. Wright-Patterson AFB,
Harry G. Armstrong Medical Research Laboratory, 1988
[10] Tufte, E: The Visual Display of Quantitative Information,
Graphics Press, Connecticut, 1983
[11] Bennett K. B, Flach, John M. Graphical Displays:
Implications for Divided Attention, Focused Attention, and
Problem Solving Human Factors, 34:513-533 1992
[12] Wildbur, P, Burke M: Information Graphics; Innovative
Solutions in Contemporary Design, Thames and Hudson,
London, 1998
[13] Triesman, A. Preattentive processing in vision, Computer
Vision, Graphics and Image Processing 31: 156-177, 1980

1) Intuitiveness
- Are the visual objects in the designed metaphor easily
recognizable?
- Do the data clearly associate with the information to be
presented by the designed elements in the metaphor?
2) Usability
- Is the metaphor effective for visualizing the pertinent
patterns of information? Changes in design are made by
using the evaluation protocol for each design iteration. The
results direct which portions of the design need
refinement. The protocol is presented as static images on
paper or on a computer.
To assess the effect of changes in design on
intuitiveness and the confusion matrices for the original
and the new designs are compared. An improvement in
intuitiveness, for example, should show in a reliable
increase in correct judgments about the anatomical
features and the physiologic structures in the display.

Anatomical
Measurement
Diagnosis

Original Design
57%
48%
61%

Modified Design
62%
85%
67%

Table 1. Usability Testing Results

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

