2D vs 3D, Implications on Spatial Memory
Monica Tavanti
Department of Information Science, Uppsala
University Sweden
monica.tavanti@dis.uu.se
Abstract
Since the introduction of graphical user interfaces
(GUI) and two-dimensional (2D ) displays, the concept of
space has entered the information technology (IT)
domain. Interactions with computers were re-encoded in
terms of fidelity to the interactions with real environment
and consequently in terms of fitness to cognitive and
spatial abilities. A further step in this direction was the
creation of three-dimensional (3D) displays which have
amplified the fidelity of digital representations. However,
there are no systematic results evaluating the extent to
which 3D displays better support cognitive spatial
abilities. The aim of this research is to empirically
investigate spatial memory performance across different
instances of 2D and 3D displays. Two experiments were
performed. The displays used in the experimental situation
represented hierarchical information structures. The
results of the test show that the 3D display does improve
performances in the designed spatial memory task.

Mats Lind
Department of Information Science, Uppsala
University, Sweden
mats.lind@dis.uu.se
Creating 3D spaces are intended to provide cues that
naturally trigger natural cognition and actions. In contrast,
2D representations are thought to be more unnatural and
require training to be used.
There is, however, a general lack of comparable
experimental results assessing the supposed superiority of
3D in relation to 2D displays. This study tries to clarify
whether and how 3D displays can better assist spatial
cognitive abilities, specifically spatial memory. Two
experiments involving 40 subjects were performed. The
results of the experiments show that a realistic 3D display
better supports a specific spatial memory task, namely
learning the place of an object.
The following sections will first introduce some basic
considerations regarding 3D hierarchical representations
and the background work. Then, the two displays used in
the experiments are described, followed by the specifics of
the experimental design. For each experiment, there is a
discussion of the results. The work is then summed up in
the conclusions section at the end.

2. Hierarchical representations
1. Introduction
In everyday life, when we face the task of retrieving
objects, one of the strategies used is to encode their spatial
positions. Experimental results [7] established that
processing spatial locations of objects is an effortless and
unintentional process. Hasher and Zacks [5] demonstrated
that the spatial locations of objects is processed
automatically.
Many graphical user interfaces allow users to spatially
organize information. A typical example is the desktop
metaphor. This 2D environment is not an actual desktop
and doesn’t even look like one [8] but it nonetheless
contains files that not only have names but are located
somewhere, inside a certain folder, next to another file,
above an icon, etc.
A new trend in GUI design is the production of 3D
interfaces intended to support the storage and retrieval of
textual and abstract data. The common belief behind this
trend is that realistic 3D representations of the real world
allow a more direct connection between information
environments and their electronic representations.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

In visualization tasks involving abstract data, it is very
common that users are required to access structured
information arranged in a hierarchical fashion.
There are two conventional ways of representing
hierarchical data.
The first could be called symbolic because it uses
names and special characters to represent the hierarchical
structure. One example of a symbolic description of
hierarchical data is the path names in DOS. The standards
used in DOS need to be learnt by the users. For instance,
the slash sign is used in combination with verbal labels to
specify the sub-tree of the directories.
The second could be called diagrammatic because it
tries to convey the structure to the users by means of
visual expressions. A typical example can be found in socalled “tree views.” In “tree views,” the elements (folders
or files) of the trees are icons linked through thin dashed
lines; the depth of the nested elements is expressed
through their positions along the x axis, etc.
Diagrammatic forms have also been implemented in
3D, for instance, in the form of 3D trees [10] [6] , where

the leaves of the trees (files or folders and their labels) are
at the base of an inverted cone.
It should be noted that such 3D representations are still
abstract in that they require the user to learn certain
conventions, since they do not resemble the things they
refer to [11].
At a user interface level, those displays re-allocate the
body of notations typical of 2D diagrammatic trees into a
3D environment (e.g., there are thin lines that connect the
items of the structure at different levels of depth, etc.).
However, if we accept the use of 3D, a less abstract
way of representing the hierarchical structure becomes
available to us. If we position icons in space, we arrange
them so that they form visible clusters and with some
trickery these clusters can be made to convey a
hierarchical structure, by more realistic means.
This more realistic hierarchical representation of
information will be described and empirically evaluated in
this work.

3. 2D vs 3D: background
By “3D” in this paper we specifically refer to 2D
perspective projections of 3D environments. These 2D
projections may also include other pictorial depth cues
such as shading etc.
This work was inspired in part by some previous
studies. The first study conducted by Cockburn and
McKenzie [2] is an evaluation of the Cone Trees interface
[10]. The research compared an implementation of Cone
Trees to a normal tree-styled interface; subjects were
engaged in text-based search and location tasks. The
results showed slower time performances for the Cone
Trees interface.
The more detailed results of the study indicated that the
Cone Trees display had the special characteristic of
quickly providing a sense of the global structure and of
the density of information, because all the data was
available in a single screen. On the other hand, when the
amount of information was very dense, users found it
difficult to discern and to find the textual labels of each
item, since they overlapped.
In the Data Mountain interface [9], this problem has
been avoided. Data Mountain consists of a 3D inclined
plane in which the thumbnails of documents (in the
specific case, Web pages) are vertically positioned. Some
of the pages can be occluded by other pages, but no
thumbnail is completely hidden, so all the information is
accessible at the same time. An experimental investigation
[9] was carried out in order to compare Data Mountain to
the Microsoft Internet Explorer Favorites mechanism, a
typical 2D environment. The subjects’ task was to store
and retrieve Web pages using the two displays. The results
suggested a superiority of Data Mountain (both for time
and accuracy). The authors also speculated that spatial

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

memory played a role in the 3D environment, since
subjects explicitly stated that they remembered a page’s
location.
A follow-up study on Data Mountain [4] engaged 9 of
the same the subjects in a similar task, after 4 months.
This study also evaluated the role of thumbnails in the
performance. The results showed that spatial memory
performance was independent of whether the thumbnails
of the pages were present or not on the display. As a
matter of fact subjects performed well even with blank
icons as retrieval cues. Moreover, after 4 months, subjects
were still fairly good at retrieving the web pages they had
stored during the previous study.
Additional studies [3] compared Data Mountain to a
2D version of the same display across a very similar task
used in [9]. The results showed that subjects performed
faster using the 2D display. Nevertheless, Data Mountain
had the advantage of presenting the information in a single
screen and in an original and more natural way.
In real world environments documents are usually kept
horizontally on a surface (e.g. pages on a desk). In the
Data Mountain interface, every document is simply tilted
upwards and placed, vertically, on a surface. However, all
tested versions of Data Mountain lack precise techniques
to represent a hierarchical structure.
A study by Ark, Dryer, Selker and Zhai [1] made use
of homogenous and comparable displays to evaluate 2D
and 3D environments. The study compared reaction times
in an identification and location task using different
instances of the same display. It consisted of typical
objects which can be found in an office (telephone, desk
etc) represented in either a 2D or 3D fashion. These
objects were placed either on a flat 2D background or in a
3D representation of the office. The authors refer to the
3D depictions of objects and background as an
“ecological” layout, that is a more realistic and natural
layout. The results of the study revealed that the 3D
ecological layout improved subjects’ performance; the
authors also suggest that for tasks that require identifying
and learning the objects’ location, 3D realistic and
ecological layouts improve users’ performance.
The theoretical conclusions of these studies can be
summarized as follows:
a) 3D displays can be exploited to visualize large sets of
hierarchical data;
b) The perspective nature of 3D representations makes it
possible to show more objects in a single screen, objects
shrink along the dimension of depth;
c) if more information is visible at the same time, users
gain a global view of the data structure;
d) there is experimental evidence that 3D ecological
displays enhance subjects’ spatial performances.
It is possible to use this set of ideas together with the
notion of hierarchical organization to create more realistic

and ecological representations of hierarchically structured
information.
To do so, we created a 3D tree in which the spatial
relationships of the constituting elements were expressed
in a very natural way. The elements of the tree  simple
rectangles  were vertically arranged in space, as in the
Data Mountain display. But in our display (shown in

view port used was of exactly the same size in both
conditions.
The independent variable was “interface type” with
two levels (3D and 2D). In order to avoid potential carryover effects between the two instances, interface type was
a between-subjects factor.

4.1. The displays

Figure 1: The 2D display

The displays can be described as follows:
a) The 2D tree (shown in figure 1) was comprised of a
scrolling window whose visible part roughly corresponded
to 55% of the entire tree (329 pixels of width * 666 pixels
of height). The tree consisted of 27 white rectangles,
divided into four nodes (sub-trees) and articulated into
four levels of depth. Dashed lines connected the rectangles
to signify the nested structure of the tree. Subjects were
requested to click on any rectangle to uncover the
alphanumeric character associated with the rectangle. The
character was shown on a small window on the right of
the display. Every time a rectangle was clicked, it became
highlighted and the corresponding character appeared in
the small window. On the upper-right-hand corner of the
display, a time bar indicated the time flow.
b) The 3D tree (shown in figure 2) was composed of a

figure 2), the data are arranged in a hierarchy.
The z axis (depth) is used to indicate the position of the
nested elements; the rectangles are placed in perspective
from the user’s point of view (so, the elements placed in
higher positions of the tree are bigger, while the deeper
ones are smaller). The rectangles in the tree are also
properly juxtaposed so as to represent their logical
distribution within the nodes. The display we created was
experimentally compared to a more standard 2D tree
(similar to Windows Explorer). The main purpose of the
experiments was to evaluate one specific, but important,
aspect of interface usage: the support of spatial memory.
Does our proposed representation of hierarchical data
better support users in spatial memory tasks (memorize
the location of objects)?

4. Experiment I
The hypothesis formulated for this experiment was that
the 3D tree we created would be more effective, in a task
involving spatial memory, than a conventional 2D
representation of the same tree.
As stated above, it is obvious that in a 3D representation, more objects can be present in a screen than in a 2D
representation. Thus, the 3D display was a static
environment in which all the elements of the tree were
represented in the same screen, while the 2D display was
embedded in a scrolling window although the actual 2D

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

Figure 2: The 3D display
window whose size corresponded to the visible part of the
2D window. The tree consisted of 27 white rectangles,
divided into four nodes (sub-trees) and articulated into
four levels of depth. In this version, the nested structure of
the tree was expressed in terms of depth, so that higher
levels were represented by larger rectangles, while deeper
levels were represented by far smaller rectangles. Also,
the logical distribution of the rectangles in the four subtrees was respected and represented. A system of
shadowing was created to provide a more realistic three-

dimensional effect. As in the 2D condition, subjects were
requested to click on any rectangle to uncover the
alphanumeric character associated with the rectangle. It
was shown in the same window as in the 2D case, except
that the window was disposed above the 3D display.

4.2. Method
As mentioned above, the content of each element of the
trees was an alphanumeric character. There were important reasons for choosing this method. The first was that
spatial memory plays a significant role in information
storage and retrieval tasks. For such tasks, people mainly
deal with textual data, so we had to insert a textual
substance as the main object of the task. However,
labeling any element of the tree with a word would
involve a risk. Introducing semantics within the context of
the experiment could have shifted the experimental focus;
for instance, subjects may have different levels of
familiarity with the subject matters, which might affect
their ability (favorably or adversely) to remember the
words.
The alphanumeric characters used in the test were 27;
we used the Swedish alphabet, which actually contains 27
characters. Another point related to the alphanumeric
characters is that they were not shown directly in the
rectangles, but in a separated window. This choice can be
justified as follows.
In the 3D tree, the rectangles are different, i.e., they
have different sizes and different background luminance.
A separated visualization window made it possible to keep
to a single size and the same background luminance for all
the characters in both the 3D and 2D displays.
Furthermore, a separated visualizing window forced
subjects to sharply concentrate their attention on the
mnemonic task.
4.2.1. Subjects. 20 graduate students from the
University of Uppsala, Sweden, participated (10 females
and 10 males). Their ages ranged from 25 to 48 years
(mean: 30.9). All of them were native Swedish speakers,
used computers on a daily basis and took part in the
experiment as volunteers.
4.2.2. Equipment. The study was run on a Pentium II
machine, with 128 MB of memory and a 19-inch display
with 1024*768 resolution. All of the tasks were written in
Macromedia’s Lingo. The 3D display was made using
Cinema 4D, version 5.10 XL.
4.2.3. Tasks. Subjects were requested to click on the
rectangles in any order to uncover all the characters,
following a personal strategy. The subjects’ goal was to
memorize as many characters’ positions as possible.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

The test was articulated in three phases. First, the
subjects had to explore the displays (2D or 3D, depending
on the group), knowing that they had two minutes to
complete the exploration of the display. In the second
phase, subjects had to fill in a short questionnaire (which
could take from one to two minutes). The questionnaire
contained items that were unrelated to the task. It was
used to distract any possible rehearsing of the characters.
The third phase constituted the task phase. Subjects
were given 5 minutes to complete this part of the test.
During this phase, subjects were given a version of the
display that was identical to the one used in the
exploration phase (a 2D or 3D display, depending on the
group). This version of the display was constructed to
present the sequence of characters (one by one) to the
subjects. Ten different combinations of the sequences
were randomly arranged. Each sequence’s combination
was randomly assigned to one of the subjects.
Subjects were asked to associate any of the
alphanumeric character presented in the display to a
rectangle. They only had one guess per character. No
feedback concerning their decisions was given.
4.2.4. Procedure. Subjects were randomly assigned to
one of the two groups (10 subjects for the 2D condition
and 10 for the 3D condition), with the constraint that the
number of females and males in both groups was to be the
same.
Through written instructions, they were informed of
how to execute the tasks, and they were allowed to ask
questions about the instructions, but only before the
beginning of the test.

5. Results
As mentioned above, the goal of the experiment was to
investigate whether display (2D or 3D) effects spatial
memory performances. In order to structure the results,
two parameters were processed: a) the number of correct
responses (that is, all the characters that were associated
with the correct position during the task phase); this
parameter was used to evaluate the general performance
of the subjects interacting with the display; b) the
association of an alphanumeric character to the correct
depth level in the tree.
Since this was an exploratory study, a significance
level of .05 was chosen as the decision criterion, although
2 statistical tests were performed.

5.1. General performance
A comparison of performance using the two layouts is
shown in figure 3. Due to the non-homogeneous variance
between the two groups, a non-parametric test (the MannWhitney U test) was carried out. The analysis revealed a
statistically significant effect of the application (U=10.5,

p<.01). The average number of correct responses for the
3D condition was 10.2, while the average for the 2D
condition was 4.2. Performances were in other words
reliably superior with the 3D display.

Average of correct responses

Results experiment I
20
15
10
5
0

General
Results

Depth level

Mean 2D

4.2

10.5

Mean 3D

10.2

15.3

Figure 3: Means of the scores of the two groups

5.2. Position in the depth level
A second analysis was performed to compare how
many characters had been correctly associated to the
appropriate depth level of the tree. As already mentioned,
the trees of the displays were articulated in 4 levels of
depth. The mean of correct scores using the 3D display
was 15.3, while in the 2D case, the mean was 10.5. The
difference in performances is statistically significant (U=
20, p<.05).

To summarize, according to the results of the first
experiment, the 3D display seemed to contribute in
significantly improving spatial memory performance.
However, this effect may not be attributable to the use of a
realistic 3D tree, but to other factors. For instance, the
subjects of both groups had two minutes to explore the
displays and to memorize as many positions as they could.
But the subjects who had to interact with the 2D display
had to use a part of this time to scroll the window, while
the subjects who performed the task with the 3D were able
to exploit all the available time in the memorization task
(since they did not have to scroll). This difference in the
time allowance could be the reason behind the poorer
performance of the “2D group.”
This hypothesis was tested in a second experiment. The
following sections will describe the new experimental
conditions, the results, and the conclusions.

7. Experiment II
The second experiment aimed at testing whether the
3D tree was still superior in the spatial memory task, even
when compared to a non-scrolling and static 2D display.
The experimental design and the same conditions as in
experiment I were retained.

7.1.The displays
An identical version of the 3D display was used in this
experiment, while a new 2D display (shown in figure 4)
was created to test our hypothesis. This 2D tree contained

6. Discussion
The results of the experiments seem to confirm that
there is an improvement in performance with the 3D
realistic display. The results related to the correct location
of the alphanumeric character in the depth level reveal that
this played a role in increasing performance. It is feasible
to deduce that this result could be due to a special
characteristic of the rectangles disposed in the 3D display.
As a matter of fact, all of them are arranged in rows and
their sizes are homogeneous according to the depth in
which they are situated (as shown in figure 2). This
mapping of the size of the rectangles may be the reason
for the improved performance. In other words, it is
reasonable to argue that an ecological representation of
the logical relationships existing within a hierarchy, as
illustrated in figure 2, may enhance the ability to locate
horizontal structures in nested data.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

Figure 4: The 2D display
the same amount of rectangles (27) as in experiment I, but
their sizes were shrunk proportionally to allow for all of
them to be visible in a non-scrollable window. The
remaining elements and properties of the display were
equal to the 2D display of experiment I (i.e., the dashed

lines connected the rectangles, clicking on a rectangle
caused it to be highlighted etc).

7.2. Method
The same task and the same procedure as in experiment
I were used, with the exception that subjects of both
groups were given three minutes to explore the interface
and that the non-scrolling version of the 2D display was
used in the 2D condition.
7.2.1. Subjects. 20 undergraduate students from the
University of Uppsala, Sweden, participated (10 females
and 10 males). Their ages ranged from 19 to 30 years
(average 24.95). All of them were native Swedish
speakers, used computers on a daily basis and took part in
the experiment as volunteers

8. Results
As mentioned, our focus of interest was to find out if
layout (2D vs 3D) affects spatial memory performances
when two equivalent static displays are used.
The parameters involved in structuring the results were
the same as for experiment I: a) the number of correct
responses (that is, all the correctly placed characters in the

Average of correct responses

Results experiment II
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

General
Results

Depth level

Mean 2D

12.8

17.1

Mean 3D

20.03

24.7

Figure 5: Means of the scores of the two groups
task phase); b) whether or not a placed character belonged
to the appropriate depth level in the tree.

8.1. General performance
A comparison of performance using the two layouts is
shown in figure 5. Because of the non-homogeneous
variance between the two groups, a non-parametric test

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

(the Mann-Whitney U test) was carried out. The analysis
revealed a statistically reliable effect of the application
(U= 21.5, p<.05). The average for the 3D condition was
20.03, while the average for the 2D condition was 12.8.

8.2. Position in the depth level
In this experiment as well, the correct associations to
the appropriate depth level of the tree was examined. The
average for the 3D condition was 24.7, while the average
number for the 2D condition was 17.1. The difference
between the two performances is significant and reliable
(U= 14.5, p<.01).

9. Discussion and conclusions
According to the results of the second experiment, it is
feasible to sustain a general superiority of the 3D display
for the chosen spatial memory task, even when compared
to a 2D non-scrolling display.
The results of both experiments confirm that the 3D
display better supported the task of correctly locating the
characters on the depth level. For instance, the 3D version
of the display uses a simple rule of perspective to express
the nested relations among the rectangles: the deeper the
rectangles, the farther (along the z axis) they go and the
smaller they get. In contrast, in the 2D tree, those relations
are stated through diagrammatic means. The ecological
and natural style exploited in the 3D representation could
well explain the superiority of the 3D display in both the
experimental sessions. Thus, the creation of more natural
ways to visualize hierarchical data should be strongly
considered during the interface design process.
The results of the experiments also revealed that other
issues related to the design of 3D displays need to be
further investigated. It is, for example, reasonable to
hypothesize that the natural appearance of the 3D display
used in the tests did not actually affect the improved
performance. For instance, the rectangles of the 3D
display were characterized by different sizes; perhaps, the
very size of every rectangle was used as a retrieval cue in
the memory task. In other words, perhaps a single visual
property of any rectangle (i.e., size) was used as a
reminder for the memory task. If this hypothesis is true,
the simple size differentiation of the elements disposed in
the display would have been sufficient to better support
the task and to give improved results.
In conclusion, the results of the experiment showed
that subjects performed significantly better using the 3D
display. However, it is still unclear to what extent single
visual properties of the 3D space affected the
performance.
This last question will be the object of future work.

10. References
[1] Ark, W, Dryer, D.C., Selker, T., Zhai, S., Representation
matters: the effect of 3D objects and a spatial metaphor in a
graphical user interface, in H. Johnson, N. Lawrence, C. Roast
(Eds), People and Computers XIII, Proc of HCI'98,
Springer, 1998, pp 209 -219.
[2] Cockburn, A., and McKenzie, B., An Evaluation of Cone
Trees. People and Computers XIV: British Computer Society
Conference on Human Computer Interaction Springer-Verlag,
2000, pp 425--436.
[3] A. Cockburn and B. McKenzie, "3D or not 3D? Evaluating
the Effect of the Third Dimension in a Document Management
System". Proceedings of CHI 2001, ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI Letters 3(1), 434-441.
[4] M. Czerwinski, M. van Dantzich, G. Robertson, and H.
Hoffman, "The Contribution of Thumbnail Image, Mouse-over
Text and Spatial Location Memory to Web Page Retrieval in
3D", Interact '99, Edinburgh, UK, August30, 1999.
[5] Hasher, L., and Zacks, R.T., Automatic and effortful
processes in memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 1979, 108, pp. 356-388.
[6] Hearst, M. and Karadi, C., Cat-a-Cone: An interactive
interface for specifying searches and viewing retrieval results
using a large category hierarchy. In Proceedings of the Twentieth
SIGIR Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Association for
Computing Machinery, 1997.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

[7] Mandler, J.M., Seegmiller, D., and Day, J., On the coding of
spatial information. Memory & Cognition, 1977, 5, pp. 10-16.
[8] Nelson, T. H., The Right Way to Think About Software
Design. In B. Laurel (Ed.), The Art of Human-Computer
Interface Design Reading, Massachusetts, USA: AddisonWesley Publishing, 1990, pp.235-243.
[9] Robertson, G., Czerwinski, M., Larson, K., Robbins, D.,
Thiel, D., and van Dantzich, M., Data Mountain: Using spatial
memory for document management. In Proceedings of UIST’98,
San Francisco, California, November 1998, ACM Press, pp 153162.
[10] Robertson, G.G., Mackinlay, J.D. and Card, S.K., Cone
Trees: Animated 3D visualizations of hierarchical information.
In Proceedings of SIGCHI’91, 1991, pp.189-194.
[11] Scaife, M. and Rogers, Y., External cognition: how do
graphical representations work? International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 1990, 45, pp. 185-213.

