Distortion-based Visualization
for Long-term Continuous Acoustic Monitoring
Fujio Tsutsumi∗

Norihiko Itoh†

Takashi Onoda‡

Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry

A BSTRACT
Visualizing long-term acoustic data has been an important subject in the ﬁeld of equipment surveillance and equipment diagnosis. This paper proposes a distortion-based visualization method of
long-term acoustic data. We applied the method to 1 hour observation data of electric discharge sound, and our method could visualize the sound data more intelligibly as compared with conventional
methods.

dB

Acoustic
Spectrum
2

Temporal
frequency
map of
acoustic
spectrum

CR Categories: H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: Auditory (non-speech)
feedback—Graphical user interfaces (GUI); H.5.5 [Sound and Music Computing]: Signal analysis, synthesis, and processing—;

1 time[s]
0
0

0.9

3.7

8.3

14.6

Frequency[kHz]
(a) Electric discharge sound which is not
partial discharge (Before SS processing)

(b) Continuous partial discharge sound
(Before SS processing)

(c) Electric discharge sound which is not
partial discharge (After SS processing)

(d) Continuous partial discharge sound
(After SS processing)

Keywords: Acoustic visualization, distortion, monitoring
Figure 1: Spectrogram of electric discharge sound.

1

I NTRODUCTION

Long-term acoustic data of equipments (ex. insulator, transformer
or turbine) has been archived and analyzed in many equipment industries to observe the equipments and to reveal degradation mechanism of them. In the early phase of the analysis, detecting changing points in long-term data is important. Changing points, for
example, express the starting points of degradation of insulation
ability. Listening capability of professional observer is utilized to
distinguish the changing points. However, listening check of longterm sound by human is a hard task and long experience is required
for exact listening comprehension. On the other hand, visualization
of acoustic data, especially spectrogram is utilized in the domain
of speech analysis, since the visualized information can be checked
objectively, and easily recognized them with shallow experience.
There are two problems to visualize long-term acoustic data of
equipment by using conventional visualization method represented
by spectrogram. At ﬁrst, it is difﬁcult to discriminate different spectrograms of equipment unlike voice or music, since the equipment
sounds, such as discharge sound and oscillating sound are similar continuous sounds. Figure 1 (a) and (b) show two spectrograms of two different electric discharge sounds. It was difﬁcult
to discriminate the difference. Our method uses classical spectral
subtraction(SS)[1] as a pre-ﬁltering of visualization to solve the
problem.
Next problem is difﬁculty of detecting changing point in visualized image of long-term data. Conventional visualization methods
of long-term data ﬁx the form of time-series expression. For example, one-dimensional form with scrolling (ﬁg. 2-(1)) is used most
popularly. Multiple column form (ﬁg. 2-(2))[3] or spiral form (ﬁg.
2-(3))[2] are proposed. Visualized image of long-term data by the
ﬁxed form visualization is condensed and becomes to be miniature.
Consequently changing points are embedded into ﬁne texture of the
visualized result, and user can not ﬁnd signs of changing points.
In order to solve this problem, our method bends and extends
layout form according to the change of data. The method generates
∗ e-mail:tutumi@criepi.denken.or.jp
†

Screen Size

(1) 1D with scroll

(2) Multi-Column

(3) Spiral

Figure 2: Conventional visualization scheme of long-term data.

an easily browsable view expressing intelligible tendencies and features of data by reﬂecting local characteristics of data to the form
of view.
2

V ISUALIZING L ONG- TERM S OUND DATA

At ﬁrst, the acoustic spectrum distributions of sampled sounds from
long-term data are equalized for every frequency band, and let it
be a “base spectrum”. This base spectrum expresses the sound
feature peculiar to the equipment. The base spectrum is removed
from spectrum distribution of the archived sound data. By the subtraction, different sounds from the base spectrum is emphasized.
Since long-term sound data contains several types of data according to multiple conditions of a target equipment, the method generates multiple base spectrums and user can select a base spectrum
to emphasize their target phenomenon. Figure 1-(c) and (d) show
spectrograms after subtraction of a base spectrum. User can clearly
Frequency

rotatio

low

power (f1)
power (f2)
direction of
drawing
spectrogram

centroid

n

θ
∑fi

high
dt
(1) Visualization unit
(short-term spectrogram)

(2) Bending of spectrogram
by deviation of power ballance

e-mail:norihiko@criepi.denken.or.jp

‡ e-mail:onoda@criepi.denken.or.jp

Figure 3: Visualization unit and bending eﬀect.

Part turning
greatly expresses
big tendency
change in electric
discharge sound.

Start

- Texture expresses the frequency feature of
sound.
- If low-pitched sound is strong, path turns to
the left. Otherwise, path turns to the right.
Strong frequency band is emphasized
accordingly.
- This electric discharge sound data has long
low-pitched discharge sound. Therefore, it
continues turning to the right, and, finally it
has become a clockwise whirl.

Zoom in
time series

hig

h

Since electric discharge
sound stops suddenly,
path bents sharply.
low

Figure 5: Visualization results of 1 hour and 19 minutes electric discharge sound by proposed method.

small

The restricted range of drawing space by repulsion units

large

Figure 6: Visualization results by the diﬀerent layouts of repulsion units for conﬁning.

repulsion unit

direction of
drawing
spectrogram

direction of
drawing
spectrogram

repulsion

drawing
path

visualization
unit
repulsion

repulsion unit on path

drawing path
(1) Confining drawing space
by repulsion effect

(2) Avoiding overlap by repulsion effect

Figure 4: Role of Repulsion eﬀect.

discriminate their difference.
After the pre-ﬁltering, the method generates a visualized image
by distorting spectrogram. The visualization unit of our method is
short-term spectrogram (ﬁg. 3-(1)). We use this visualization unit
as a paint brush. The direction of drawing path is determined by the
power balance of spectrum. We consider that the visualization unit
is a rectangular rigid body, and the direction is determined with
a moment when the power proportional to the amplitude of each
channel is added as external force (ﬁg. 3-(2)). By this effect, local
feature of data reﬂects to the drawing path. Consequently different
data sequence comes to have clearly different form.
By simply bending a path, the path sometimes overlaps or it will
spread too large and browsability decreases. To avoid the problem, our method adopts the analogy of repulsion ﬁeld like Coulomb
force. Visualization unit has a quantity q0 which serves as a base
of repulsion (repulsion unit), and there is repulsion k(q0 q1 )/r2 be-

tween two repulsion unit q0 and q1 with distance r (k is a constant).
And this external force is applied to movement of visualization unit.
In order to limit drawing to the compact range, repulsion units
are arranged around an outside. If a visualization unit approaches
the repulsion unit arranged at the perimeter, the power pulled back
inside will work (ﬁg. 4-(1)). Visualization image becomes compact
as the result. In order to reduce overlaps and intersections, repulsion
units are also arranged on the history at a ﬁxed interval (ﬁg. 4-(2)).
We applied 6 methods containing our method to visualize longterm electric discharge sound and compare their browsability in
same size. The target data is an electric discharge sound recorded
in order to evaluate insulating ability. Figure 5 shows an example of visualized image of 1 hour and 19 minutes data by the proposed technique. Bending parts of the ﬁgure express the changing
points of data and it is easy to recognize the tendency of changes.
Moreover, form modiﬁcation helps to recognize the feature of the
whole data. The global visualization form in the proposed technique changes by the deﬁnition of repulsion ﬁeld (ﬁgure 6).
R EFERENCES
[1] Steven F. Boll. Suppression of acoustiic noise in speech using spectral
subtraction. IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech & Signal Process., ASSP27(2):113–120, April 1979.
[2] T. Rieger and F. Taponecco. Interactive information visualization of
entity-relationship-data. In Proceedings of WSCG 2002, pages SH–99–
106, February 2002.
[3] Chris Stolte, Diane Tang, and Pat Hanrahan. Polaris: A system
for query, analysis, and visualization of multidimensional relational
databases. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1):52–65, January-March 2002.

