Interactive Poster: faMailiar – Intimacy-based Email Visualization
Mirko Mandic*, Andruid Kerne†
Interface Ecology Lab, Center for Digital Libraries,
Texas A&M Computer Science Department
ABSTRACT
Email has developed into one of the most extensively used
computer applications. Email interfaces, on the other hand, have
gone through very few transformations since their inception, and
as the growing volumes of email data accumulate in users' email
boxes, these interfaces fail to provide effective message handling
and browsing support. Saved email messages provide not only a
vast record of one's electronic past, but also a potential source of
valuable insights into the structure and dynamics of one's social
network. In this paper, we present faMailiar, a novel email
visualization that draws upon email's inherently personal
character by using intimacy as a key visualization parameter. The
program presents a visualization of email use over time. faMailiar
facilitates navigation through large email collections, enabling the
user to discover communication rhythms and patterns.
CR Categories: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
User Interfaces - Graphical User Interfaces (GUI)
Keywords: information visualization, electronic mail
1
INTRODUCTION
Email is a pervasive medium of communication. Globally, as of
1999, almost every seventh human being (on average) owned an
email account [3]. In 1998 alone an estimated 3 billion email
messages were sent daily just in the USA [4]. However, the form
of the medium hasn't developed in a manner commensurate with
its rise in prominence. Popular email applications, such as
Microsoft Outlook, enable users to organize messages in folders.
Yet, according to several studies [1, 12], folders are not suitable
for retrieval and management of the large amounts and types of
data contained in email. Numerous problems that users encounter
when dealing with email folders are evidenced by the fact that
about half do not sort their messages into folders, but instead,
keep all of them in their inboxes [12].
The large data sets created by email use make it an obvious
medium in which to apply information visualization
methodologies. In approaching email visualization, as in other
visualization domains, a crucial question is: what are the
important parameters that can serve as the basis for visualization?
Our desired goals are to facilitate browsing, and to make visible
significant patterns within email usage that would otherwise
remain hidden. Because email functions as a primary electronic
“habitat” [2] for interaction between people, it would be valuable
to be able to see how social structure develops over time [10, 11].
In recognition of email’s personal and social role, we answer the
aforementioned question by focusing on intimacy.
Visual mappings and support for filtering help the user to see
patterns in the data. Zooming, panning and implicit semantic
zooming enable navigation across large email collections. We are
building this functionality using the Piccolo ZUI toolkit [9].

*e-mail: mirkokrug@tamu.edu
†

e-mail: andruid@cs.tamu.edu

Figure 1. Outgoing (top) and incoming (bottom) message icons.
Moving from left to right, decreasing contact intimacy is mapped
to the gradation in hue both for outgoing and incoming message
icons, and number of sides only for the incoming message icons.

2
VISUALIZING INTIMACY
Lamming and Flynn introduce intimate computing in a ubiquitous
computing context, referring to a computer’s “intimate
knowledge” of the user [6]. While providing several references to
relevant research in the field of psychology, they point out that
such an “intimate” computer could be crucial in supporting the
user’s autobiographical memory. Even though we consider
intimacy in a more traditional, interpersonal manner, we
recognize its potential to support human memory in the same way.
Furthermore, we acknowledge and underline email’s intrinsically
personal character. We define intimacy in the email domain as a
combination of the following two metrics:
contact intimacy category,
message intimacy weight.
Contact intimacy category is a user-defined parameter that
reflects how intimate the user feels about her email contacts.
faMailiar enables the user to categorize her contacts into five
intimacy categories ranging from the most to the least intimate
(Figure 2, right). As relationships change over time, the user can
change the intimacy rating for any of her contacts. On the other
hand, message intimacy weight is a derived parameter, based on
message data. Each message is procedurally assigned an intimacy
weight rating, using Lucene [7], as a result of information
retrieval analysis of the presence of intimate and “anti-intimate”
keywords. Additionally, forwarded messages and those having
more than one recipient are assigned decreasing intimacy weight.
faMailiar uses hue and iconography to represent contact
intimacy categories (Figure 1). Itten states, "cold-warm contrast ...
contains elements suggesting nearness and distance" [5].
Mackinlay points out that color hue is effective encoding in
nominal perceptual tasks [8]. faMailiar shows messages from the
contacts that the user categorized as the most intimate, using a
warm, yellow hue in contrast to the grey background. In the same
schema, messages from the contacts in the fifth, default category
are represented by a cold, grey hue, and by design, almost blend
into the background. Messages from contacts in the categories
between the two extrema are shown in red (second), green (third)
and blue (fourth). Similarly, there is a gradation in the number of
edges of the shapes that are used to represent incoming messages messages from the most intimate (closer) contacts are visualized
as triangles, while the messages from the least intimate (more
distant) ones are depicted as circles. While all the incoming
messages are represented as gradually more complex icons, the
messages that were sent by the user have a distinctly different
shape. They are represented as stars. Like incoming messages,
they are assigned an appropriate hue, based on the recipient’s
contact intimacy ranking. We realize that user may need to learn
these mappings.

Message intimacy weights are visually differentiated through
the use of color value. More intimate messages are brighter than
the less intimate ones, thus making it easier for the user to find a
specific message within a subset representing email interchange
with contacts from the same category, or with a single contact.

Figure 2. Daily view with a filter applied to email interchange with a
specific contact (left) and faMailiar contact window (right). The
visualization shows that the user and the selected contact email
each other almost daily, and almost always between 2 and 7 PM.

3
TEMPORAL COMMUNICATION RHYTHMS AND PATTERNS
When visualizing past email, preserving appropriate chronological
relations between messages, and accurately recreating the overall
temporal context are crucial for enabling the user to see her
communication relationships and rhythms. In order to achieve
this, faMailiar organizes message representations on a 2D grid in
a calendar-like manner. faMailiar provides daily, weekly and
monthly views of email activity.
Daily view is the most detailed. It shows all messages that the
user has sent and received. Days are shown along the x-axis, and
hours are represented along the y-axis. In this view, experience
patterns, such as “person A always emails me after 10 p.m.” or
“person B never responds the same day I email her” become
apparent (Figure 2, left). In order to accentuate the visibility of
such patterns, faMailiar supports zooming and filtering of
message icons. Messages can be filtered in two ways: using an
input box to specify a search (on subject, body, sender and/or
recipient), or by example, in a hypertextual manner, using the
reply sequence or contact associated with the selected message.
While the user can zoom infinitely in any of the three views,
she can also switch between different views through implicit
semantic-zooming. By clicking on a specific time view button, the
currently displayed view slowly fades out, and the newly chosen
view fades in. The calendar metaphor is also present in the weekly
and monthly views. In the weekly view, the x-axis is used to
represent weeks, and the y-axis to represent days in the week,
providing different labeling for weekdays and weekends. The
monthly view, on the other hand, lays out months along the x-axis
and weeks along the y-axis. Unlike the daily view, which uses
icons to represent messages, the weekly and monthly views show
aggregated average message intimacy weights (again, using color
value) and number of messages (using size) for each of the
contact intimacy categories. Multiple views of same data allow
for quicker browsing and recognition of communication patterns
during larger time intervals and help the user to quickly identify
the granular time intervals containing desired messages.

4
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced faMailiar, a novel email interface.
Intimacy-based visualization of email data over time, with a
choice of temporal resolutions is accompanied by zooming and
filtering capabilities that can help the user to browse through her
email collection more efficiently. The visualization also makes
observable communication rhythms and patterns that might
otherwise remain obscured. Our next step is to conduct a user
study to verify the efficacy of the visualization interface.

Figure 3. Zoomed-in daily view with an opened message. By
mousing-over an icon, the user can see the message subject
and the contact’s name; by clicking on an icon once, the user
can read the message preview (opening words); by doubleclicking, the user can read the entire message. Note different
color values of messages within the same contact intimacy
category, indicating different message intimacy weights.

REFERENCES
[1]

Becker, K., and Ferreira, S. Virtual Folders: Database Support for
Electronic Messages Classification, International Symposium on
Cooperative Database Systems for Advanced Applications, Kyoto,
Japan, December 5-7, 1996, pp. 239-246.
[2] Ducheneaut, N. and Belotti, V. Email as a habitat: an exploration of
embedded personal information management, Interactions, vol. 8,
no. 5, 2001, pp. 30-38.
[3] Gross, B. Navigation, Organization and Retrieval in Personal
Collections of Email, Redesigning Email for the 21st Century:
CSCW2002 Workshop, November 16, 2002.
[4] Gwizdka, J. TaskView – Design and Evaluation of a Task-based
Email Interface, Conference of the Centre for Advanced Studies on
Collaborative Research, Toronto, Ontario, 2002, pp. 4-14.
[5] Itten, J. The Art of Color: the subjective experience and objective
rationale of color, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, NY, 1973.
[6] Lamming M., and Flynn M. Forget-me-not: intimate computing in
support of human memory, FRIEND21 Symposium on Next
Generation Human Interfaces, Tokyo, Japan, 1994.
[7] Lucene - Text Search Engine, June 2004. Available at
http://jakarta.apache.org/lucene/docs/index.html
[8] Mackinlay, J. Automating the design of graphical presentations,
ACM Transactions on Graphics, vol. 5, no. 2, 1986, pp. 110-141.
[9] Piccolo – ZUI Toolkit, June 2004.
Available at
http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/piccolo/
[10] Tyler, J., and Tang, J. When Can I Expect an Email Response? A
Study of Rhythms in Email Usage, ECSCW 2003, Helsinki, Finland.
[11] Viegas, F., boyd, d., Nguyen, D, Potter, J, and Donath, J. Digital
Artifacts for Remembering and Storytelling: PostHistory and Social
Network Fragments, HICSS-37, Hawaii, HI, January 5-8, 2004.
[12] Whittaker, S. and Sidner, C., Email Overload: Exploring Personal
Information Management of Email, CHI ’96, Vancouver, B.C., April
13-18, 1996, pp. 276-283.

