Artifacts of the Presence Era:
Using Information Visualization to Create an Evocative Souvenir
Fernanda B. Viégas*
MIT Media Lab

Ethan Perry*
MIT Media Lab

ABSTRACT
We present Artifacts of the Presence Era, a digital installation that
uses a geological metaphor to visualize the events in a physical
space over time. The piece captures video and audio from a
museum and constructs an impressionistic visualization of the
evolving history in the space. Instead of creating a visualization
tool for data analysis, we chose to produce a piece that functions
as a souvenir of a particular time and place. We describe the
design choices we made in creating this installation, the
visualization techniques we developed, and the reactions we
observed from users and the media. We suggest that the same
approach can be applied to a more general set of visualization
contexts, ranging from email archives to newsgroups
conversations.
CR Categories: H.5.2 User Interfaces
Keywords: visualization, history, public space

1

INTRODUCTION

Artifacts of the Presence Era is an art installation that uses a
geological metaphor to create an impressionistic visualization of
video footage and audio data captured in a museum’s gallery. The
visualization challenge addressed by the piece is to represent, in a
highly compact manner, hundreds of hours of video footage to
create a compact artifact that encapsulates and commemorates a
particular time and place. The significance of this work is in its
novel application of visualization.
Historically speaking, visualization methods have been
utilized in the analysis of large datasets mainly for their power to
reveal unknown patterns of correlation between the thousands,
sometimes millions of data points in a dataset. To that end, several
techniques for investigating large datasets have been developed,
ranging all the way from multiscale and multidimensional
visualizations to clustering and pan & zoom methods. The
common goal in all of these techniques has always been to
facilitate data analysis and exploration. On the one hand, viewers
look, select, zoom in and out, change axes, and perform endless
manipulative and navigational steps to become ever more
acquainted with the dataset at hand. On the other hand, the data is
presented in its entirety and in its full complexity for inquisitive
probing and potential discovery in the hands of the capable viewer
or scientist. So far, this has been the paramount way in which
visualizations have been understood to aid our understanding of
the data around us.
In this paper we describe a different motivation and, hence, a
*{fviegas, ethanLP, ethanhow, judith}@media.mit.edu

IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2004
October 10-12, Austin, Texas, USA
0-7803-8779-1/04/$20.00 ©2004 IEEE

Ethan Howe*
MIT Media Lab

Judith Donath*
MIT Media Lab

different approach to the visualization of vast archives of video
footage. The motivation in Artifacts of the Presence Era was not to
probe or analyze long hours of video but to design a commemorative,
historical record of the passage of time inside a museum. Our
approach was to create a visualization that would convey the
historical essence of the piece in an aesthetically compelling
manner. Instead of being concerned with the analysis of specific
pieces of data from the video footage we captured in the museum,
we focused on highlighting the long-term temporal patterns in the
data. Moreover, instead of subscribing to the scientific
preoccupation with data manipulation present in most information
visualization work – with its multiple axes, explicit
measurements, and different levels of visual abstraction – we
chose to let our work be guided by the visual metaphor of
geological layers. In choosing a strong metaphor to guide our
efforts, we succeeded in creating a unique object that captured the
essence of a time and a place through the use of visualization.
Instead of viewing our piece as an isolated effort to represent
the passage of time in a museum, we believe that the visualization
approach and design lessons described here have implications to
personally or collectively meaningful databases ranging from
video footage in personal web cams to newsgroups’
conversations. We posit that, as the contents of digital archives
that permeate our daily lives become more emotionally charged –
the accretion of all the computer-mediated conversations people
have with their loved ones over email, the growing collection of
digital pictures parents keep taking of their kids – data analysis
ceases to be the only motivation for visualizing collections of
documents. We believe that these archives need to be regarded not
only as data repositories but also as the powerful catalysts for
memory that they are.
Artifacts of the Presence Era addresses the need to take the
data in extensive hours of video footage as the starting point of an
interesting visualization for posterity. The piece is less about
specific information and more about the evolving patterns of
people’s presence in a physical space.
This paper describes the design choices we made in creating
this installation, the visualization techniques we developed, and
the reactions we observed from users and the media. We also
discuss the implications of this kind of approach to a more general
set of visualization contexts, ranging from email archives to
newsgroups conversations.
2

THE ICA BOSTON

In September of 2002 our research group was contacted by
one of the curators at the Institute of Contemporary Art (ICA).
The Institute was going through a unique moment in its history
with the plans for a brand new building under way. In order to
celebrate the beginnings of this new site, the curator asked us to
create an art piece that would sum up some interesting aspect of
the ICA’s current building and something that could be exhibited
in the new site as a memory piece about the Institute’s current
space, a time capsule as it were.
We became immediately interested in the possibility of
documenting how the current building was used by its patrons on
an everyday basis. We set out to capture the public’s presence in

105

Figure 1: Diagram showing the hardware infrastructure in Artifacts of the Presence Era. The piece utilizes two main spaces: the source space,
where images and sounds are captured in the museum (input), and the installation space where the visualization is shown (output). In the
installation space there are two projections: the Present Display (showing real-time video) and the History Display (showing the growing stack of
layers from past moments in the museum.)

the Institute’s building. Visitors and their movement through the
galleries became the raw data feeding and shaping our
visualization. These data came from two sources: a camera that
captured the colors, shapes, and movements of people in the space
and a microphone that captured the ambient noise in the museum.
Artifacts of the Presence Era ran for three consecutive months
– January to April of 2003 – and was visited by over one thousand
people. It was well received by the public and it was critically
acclaimed in the local media.
3

the vertical arrangement of rock layers reveals the passage of
time, with the difference in layer composition – thicker v.
thinner, distinctly colored sediments – attesting to the
different conditions under which each layer was formed

2.

rock layers are highly compact representations of millions of
years worth of changes in a physical environment; most of
what happened during those millions of year is actually not
embedded in the rocks but has, instead, eroded away

3.

as time goes by, new layers continue to be formed on top of
rocks, pressuring and compacting even more the ancient
layers at the bottom of sedimentary rocks

METAPHOR

In trying to convey a sense of historical buildup over time, it made
sense to look at natural examples of accretion for inspiration. The
geological layers in sedimentary rocks and their function as record
keepers provided us with such an example. The accumulation of
geological layers over time transforms temporal change into
legible and appealing visual patterns that can, with care and
attention, be interpreted as history. The same possibility existed in
the interaction with Artifacts of the Presence Era: like
archaeologists, visitors could peek back into the past to learn more
about what the layered landscaped concealed.
In allowing our work to be inspired by a natural phenomenon
such as the formation of layers in sedimentary rocks, it became
important to understand the affordances and constraints of this
metaphor. The geological formation of sedimentary rocks,
especially as it relates to time and its effects on layers, offers
some key ingredients for creating a historical visualization:

106

1.

These elements guided the conception of the historical
visualization in Artifacts of the Presence Era. In the next sections
we describe the installation components and the design decisions
that shaped the visualization work.
4

INSTALLATION DESCRIPTION

In a small alcove near the front door of the museum – our source
space – a camera and microphone unobtrusively recorded all
sound and motion occurring in that space, day and night, for three
months. As the recording took place, the raw data was processed
to create the display visitors saw in a gallery in a separate area of
the museum [Fig. 1]. Here, two projections ran. The first, the
“Present Display” [Fig. 2], was real time footage from camera.

Figure 2: Present Display showing the video being captured by the
camera in real time. Below the video image, an audio wave is being
formed. After five minutes, the wave is done and is sent, together
with the chosen video frame, to the “history machine.”

Figure 3: History Display showing the growing stack of layers on the
left. Within the stack, the currently selected layer is highlighted with
yellow lines outlining it. To the right we see the image from the
currently selected layer from the stack. Below the image we see
indication of the day and time this image was captured.

The second, the “History Display” [Fig. 3], showed a growing
landscape of layered images.
Artifacts of the Presence Era used three networked personal
computers:

Each layer in Artifacts of the Presence Era represented five
minutes of time gone by1. During that time, we captured the
ambient sounds in the galleries and generated an audio wave. The
shape of this wave – with higher values at points where there was
more noise in the museum – became the shape of the layer being
created. The texture of the layer (its color and shade) came from
the images being captured with the camera. Each layer
encapsulated one still image from those five minutes of data. The
choice of this image was, as with the audio, based on simple
heuristics of what we defined to represent “people’s presence in
the space”:

o

Capture machine: used a simple web camera to capture
video from the source space. This machine had a custom
Java application using the Java Media Framework that
captured audio volume from the microphone of the web
camera. Audio volume values were transmitted every second
to the present machine. At the same time, the capture
machine broadcasted a video stream to the present machine.

o

Present machine: received and displayed data from the video
stream as well as the current audio volume in the space. In
order to simplify the processing and bandwidth requirements
of the piece, one frame of video was sampled – and displayed
– every second from the stream of video data.

o

History machine: received an image and audio data from the
present machine every five minutes. This machine then
added a “layer” to the sedimentary structure, compressing
and combining older layers as time progressed.

Connected to the History machine was a rotating knob
controller that users utilize to move vertically through the layers
and highlight each one in turn.
4.1

a) Shape - ambient noise: we assumed that noise, as opposed to
silence in a museum, suggested the presence of people in the
space. Therefore, we decided to keep more data during the
moments of more ambient noise in the museum, that is, “louder”
layers showed up as thicker layers in the history stack. The
present machine processed the audio data. The highest audio
value from each 20-second segment of the five-minute layercreation period was selected. These values were used to draw a
curve that shaped the layer for that period [Fig. 2]. We wanted to
create curves that were reminiscent of archaeological sedimentary
structures and, after experimenting with different possibilities, we
found that a 15-point curve seemed to be the optimal resolution to
achieve this aesthetic effect given the resolution of our projection
screens. We chose the highest value during each period rather
than the average value because a short increase in volume in the
space was sufficient indication that some activity had occurred in
the space.

Visualizing History Based on People’s Presence

Because the history we wanted to tell was one of people as they
visited the museum, we decided that we would favor images that
showed people and ambient sound that captured people’s
presence. In other words, footage that showed people and audio
that represented what we understood to be people in the space had
a much higher probability of surviving in our visualization than
footage and audio of the empty space.

b) Color - video images: we used difference of luminance between
video frames as a simple heuristic for defining the presence of
1

We experimented with different timings for the creation of
layers. Because this installation was being shown in a museum
environment, we wanted layers to be created quickly enough so
that visitors could see the entire formation process. It was
important that visitors experienced the connection between the
real-time display with its growing audio wave and the addition of
a new layer to the history stack. Given these constraints, five
minutes per layer turned out to be a good solution for our setup.

107

people in the space. Our assumption was that whenever the
camera captured abrupt changes of luminance in the museum, this
indicated that people were in the scene. This was achieved in the
present machine, which had a custom Java application that
compared each frame of video it obtained to the previous image
received. It compared the difference in luminance values to
identify movement in the space. The image with the greatest
change in luminance from each five-minute period was selected.
This process was a simple and effective solution for our needs.
c) Compression over time: it was clear to us that, as time
progressed and we captured more data about the space, the
accumulating layers would have to evolve in some way to become
more compact. The rationale here was that, as with real rocks,
older layers – i.e. the bottom layers – would suffer more pressure
from all the data accumulating on top of them and would become
more compact. At extreme points of pressure, when layers became
too compact, they would start to merge with each other in a
morphing process.
4.2

History Display: how layers are formed and stacked

The history display was the heart of the Artifacts of the Presence
Era installation because it showed the continuously growing
accumulation of layers captured in the gallery space [Fig. 3]. As
mentioned above, each layer consists of a piece of an image
selected from the five-minute video footage for that period. The
chosen image is cut into a shape formed from the audio curve
representing the audio volume in the space during that period.
Each new layer is added to the top of the stack and the resulting
shape of the layer depends on the shape of the “landscape” it rests
on; see Figure 4 for an explanatory diagram of the layer shaping
process.
Because being able to navigate the layer stack while
understanding the progress of time was key for making sense of the
piece, every layer had a timestamp attached to it. To the right of the
history stack was a grid of dots that represented the time when each
layer was created. As an individual layer was highlighted, its time
stamp appeared next to the corresponding dot to the right. The
original image for the highlighted layer was shown above the grid
of dots.
Whenever a combined layer was highlighted, its
corresponding combined image was shown. Below the image, all
of the time dots from the original time stamps of individual layers
were also highlighted – e.g. if a layer containing 8 original layers
became highlighted, all 8 dots of the original layers would be
highlighted as well [Fig 7].

Figure 4: Explanatory diagram of how layers were shaped:
(1) original audio wave created over five minutes of activity
(2) sampled height of the audio wave
(3) shape of top layer in history stack; this is the landscape on top
of which the newly-formed layer will be placed
(4) placement of sampled wave on top of previous layers
(5) resulting wave form, notice how the shape has changed from #1
(6) schematic masque showing how the final layer shape was “cut”
from the chosen video image.

108

4.2.1
Shallow Layers: normalizing the landscape
We captured video every day from 9 AM to 9 PM so that we
could generate layers where the colors would reflect the
differences between daylight in the museum and nighttime when
the galleries were closed. As the stack of layers grew, visitors
could see patterns of day and night reflected on the colors of
consecutive layers [Fig 5]. The layer-shaping algorithm also had a
mechanism to account for extremely quiet times in the museum –
for example, when the galleries are closed at night. In these
situations Artifacts of the Presence Era generated what we call
“shallow layers”. These were layers that “filled in” valley regions
of the history landscape. That is, these layers only showed up in
“depressions” of the stack instead of wrapping around peak areas
(as a normal layer would do). These layers were generated
whenever the audio being captured in the gallery stayed below a

Also important in terms of user interaction, was the fact that
visitors could, and did, take advantage of the camera to add
images of themselves to the historical record being created. As will
be discussed in more detail later, several visitors, after realizing that
the history stack was formed by images being recorded in the
museum, would walk up to the camera and stand there until their
image was captured and added to the collection of layers.
5

Figure 5: Zoomed view of growing layer stack; the difference in the
colors of layers as they transition from day to night is visible; layers
at the bottom of the stack are a lot more compact than layers at the
top; finally, the yellow outline around one of the top layers indicates
that it is currently being selected by a viewer.

minimum threshold. When the entire audio wave lied below this
threshold, the result was a shallow layer. These layers played an
important role of “normalizing” the stack landscape, allowing the
stack to become less bumpy and mountainous after a quiet night.
They also added texture to the entire piece by clearly highlighting
the different patterns of activity between busy open hours and
quiet, afterhours time in the museum.
4.2.2
Compression of layers
After a few hours in the history stack, layers began to be
compressed and combined with the layers adjacent to them. When
layers got combined, the original images in them got combined as
well, the top one being superimposed over the lower one with an
alpha value of 50% and, therefore, becoming semi-transparent.
This combination of images resulted in “ghostly” pictures, where
viewers could see “through” portions of the images from the
original layers. People usually became semi-transparent in the
combined images of these layers [Fig. 7]. During the three
months when this piece was running at the ICA, we got combined
layers that had as many as 16 originally individual layers merged
into one. The history stack could hold an archive of up to several
weeks worth of layers.
4.3

User Interaction

We designed the piece so that visitors could move through the
layers of the history. In this way they were able to take part in the
geological metaphor, behaving as archaeologists, “excavating” the
traces left by the visualization to unearth items of interest. The
simplicity of the browsing interface – the knob that was used to
move vertically up and down chronologically – was critical in a
public art environment in which users may have limited time and
patience to learn a new user interface. Browsing through the
layers also created a time-lapse effect with the images shown in
the upper right hand corner of the display. As the viewer scrolled
through the layers, these excerpts of events in the space animated,
effectively creating another way for viewers to get a sense of what
had occurred in the space.

PUBLIC REACTION

Even though we did not conduct a formal study of how
people reacted to the piece, we observed visitors interacting with
the installation in the gallery over the course of the three months
the piece was running. In general, Artifacts of the Presence Era
got a very positive response from viewers. The exhibition was
viewed by over a thousand people and was very well received by
the local media [12] [13]. Some of the key questions we hoped to
understand through our observations were: What drew people to
the installation? How did they interact with the piece?
People seemed to be drawn to the piece because of the
imagery in the history stack. Most visitors found the visualization
very intriguing. When they knew that a gallery guide or one of the
creators of the piece was in the room, they often asked detailed
questions about how the image was generated, curious to know
what data each visual element represented.
Maybe not surprisingly, seeing a recognizable face in the
projections boosted people’s interest in the visualization. Often if
groups of people visited the gallery together, one of them would
walk in front of the camera, and be seen by the other members of
the group who were near the projection screens. When learning
that only one image would be saved in the history display every
five minutes and that images with more motion were more likely
to be captured, some people went so far as to stand in front of the
camera for several minutes, sometimes waving their arms in the
process, in the hope of being captured.
Most people seemed to have understood that the piece was
evolving in real time, as they looked at the Present Display and
realized that it was showing what was currently happening in the
gallery. Several visitors were struck by the fact that the visualization
kept changing and that the layered landscape was continuously
growing. We observed visitors concluding that, if they were to
visit the piece again in the future, the then “current” stack of
layers would look different and most of the information that could
be clearly seen on that specific day would be compressed and
“merged” as composite layers by their next visit.
This sense of fluid, evolving time seemed to be one of the
most attractive aspects of the installation to visitors. Being able to
peek back at past moments in the gallery, seeing someone’s
glimpse, a person’s movement, a kid’s gesture provided visitors
with moments of surprise and amusement while giving them a
sense of how the museum space had been inhabited in the recent
past. Visitors also enjoyed looking back at the night layers of the
history stack because these displayed a peculiar view of the
galleries, one that showed what the museum looked like after it
was closed to the public. Visitors were excited to explore the
unusually thick and dark layers of evening parties held in the
museum (regular night layers were thin because they represented
times when the galleries were silent). Sometimes viewers would
also catch a glimpse of night layers that showed the cleaning staff
in the museum, vacuuming and tidying up the galleries.
From our observations it seemed that the audio part was the
one least understood by some of the visitors. We found out by
listening to the comments of visitors that, a lot of times, it was not
clear to them what the audio wave being formed at the bottom of

109

Figure 6: Layer showing a playful visitor who purposefully stood in
front of the camera in the gallery in order to have his picture taken
and added to the history stack.

the Present Display meant in the context of the piece. It seemed
that several visitors never made the connection of the audio wave
with the resulting shape of layers being formed. Visitors seemed
to think that the thickness of the layers had to do with how many
people where in the lobby area when the layer had been formed.
This conclusion, while incorrect, points to the fact that even those
visitors who did not grasp the technicalities of how the audio
input was connected to the rest of the piece could still understand
the fact that the shape of the layers reflected the presence of
people in the museum.
Finally, one of our main concerns when designing this piece
were the privacy and surveillance issues that arise when one sets
up continuously running, unobtrusive cameras and a microphones
in a public space. Based on previous work dealing with cameras in
public spaces [7], we were worried that people might find the
setup of the piece intrusive or even offensive. To our surprise,
however, visitors were amused by the camera and a lot of times
would pose in front of it (sometimes for many minutes in a row)
in order to get their picture taken and recorded in the history stack.
We witnessed several kids dancing and some others making faces at
the camera [Fig. 6]. People’s attitude towards the piece was
decidedly playful and light hearted.
6

RELATED WORK

Artifacts of the Presence Era used the available video and audio
footage data as raw material to piece together an overall,
impressionistic sense of the history of a physical space. Much of
the data captured via the camera was discarded and the motivation
for building the visualization piece was not based on a need for
data analysis. This approach differs greatly from the traditional
focus on annotation, analysis, and retrieval of information from
large archives of video footage [2] [8].
This artistic approach to visualizing large data sets places our
piece in a growing body of digitally based work that invites
people to more deeply consider the temporal patterns present in
the data around us. Salavon’s piece of the movie Titanic [11], for
instance, shows a single image where each pixel is the average
color of a single frame in the movie. The image lays out the
movie’s visual rhythm in pure color and an impressive pattern
emerges. Last is a clock visualization [1], in which each hand is
made from a slice of live video feed from the place where the clock

110

Figure 7: Composite layer showing a “ghostly” image, which is the
result of two originally separate layers having merged.

stands. Even though Artifacts of the Presence Era shares some of
the same goals as the works mentioned above, we wanted to enable
viewers to navigate our visualization. We felt that the simple but
interactive nature of the piece was crucial for maintaining its
souvenir quality. Its conception and aesthetics were strongly
attached to the notion of posterity that the museum curators
wanted to convey.
Media artists are not the only ones exploring novel
visualization approaches when it comes to the “socially
meaningful” digital archives that are beginning to surround us –
email collections, newsgroup archives, and IM conversations, to
name a few. Researchers ranging from the social sciences to the
field of human-computer interaction are starting to realize that the
nature of these compilations is so complex and nuanced that
thinking about them as solely exploratory territory for data
analysis is too limited a way of approaching the problem. For
instance, Erickson [5] points out that visualizations of social
activity should (1) allow for ambiguity, and (2) should focus on
providing grist for inferences, instead of trying to accurately
present information. Users have been shown to comfortably make
guesses from incomplete information in these visualizations [5].
In addition, a lot of times users utilize visualizations of these
archives of social data as objects for storytelling, for sharing
memories with others [14]. Such findings suggest that, in these
contexts, information visualization should function as more than a
probing tool for analysis.
7

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK

Data archiving is usually task oriented, designed for users who are
searching for a particular piece of information. Our visualization
is designed to be an end in itself, a compact and easily perceived
object that symbolizes an extensive time in a particular place.
In Artifacts of the Presence Era we discarded most of the
video footage that was captured in the museum. Because of this
decision, the piece did not necessarily retain the most interesting
data – and there were many great or poignant moments that it
discarded. Its algorithms were meant to be more like the forces and
rhythms that shape the geological record than the carefully
calibrated heuristics of a semantically based compression tool. Yet
the end result was very evocative of the time and place it
represented.

Periods of extreme activity, such as evening receptions in the
gallery, became dominant in the geological landscape of our piece
with large layers in the stack, while periods of inactivity were
represented with thin layers, reflecting the lack of notable events.
Because we made a decision to compress older layers together
as time went on, the piece emphasized the most recent layers more
prominently. While this phenomenon fit with the geological
metaphor, it distorted some of the patterns by deemphasizing
events as they faded into the past. Although designing the piece so
that all layers retained the same scale would have provided a more
accurate historical overview, it would have lost the sense of
temporal perspective the metamorphic process created.
The geological metaphor we used in Artifacts of the Presence
Era is a very rich one, and we would like to explore it in greater
depth. Sedimentary rocks often have embedded fossils – what
would be a "fossil" in a metaphoric installation? Some options we
considered ranged from retaining images from the video where
faces could be seen to allowing the viewer to deliberately leave a
spoken message or photographic piece that would be embedded as
a fossil.
We believe that this kind of visualization work can also be
applied to other sorts of digital archives. Email seems like an
obvious candidate: what would your email archive reveal if you
could see it as a slow accretion of varied conversations? How
would your evolving emailing habits – their rhythm, quality, and
frequency – look like over the years? What might a “fossil” be in
this geological formation? The same is true of newsgroups’
conversations: how would the layers of a particular newsgroup
differ from those of another newsgroup? What if one could create
an entire landscape where each peak was made up of
conversational sediments from different newsgroups?

[3]

Dunne, A., and Raby, F. Fields and Thresholds, profile 118.
In Architects in Cyberspace, Architectural Design, London.
1995.

[4]

Dourish, P. and Bly, S. Portholes: Supporting Awareness in a
Distributed Work Group. In proceedings of CHI 1992.

[5]

Erickson, T. Designing Visualizations of Social Activity: Six
Claims. In proceedings of CHI 2003.

[6]

Havre, S., E. Hetzler, P. Whitney, and L. Nowell.
ThemeRiver: Visualizing thematic changes in large
document collections. IEEE Transactions on Visualization

and Computer Graphics, 8(1):9--20, January 2002.
[7]

Jancke, G., Venolia, G., Grudin, J., Cadia, J., and Gupta, A.
Linking Public Spaces: Technical and Social Issues. In
proceedings of CHI 2001.

[8]

Lienhart, R., Pfeiffer, S., Effelsberg, W. Video Abstracting.
Communications of the ACM. December 1997.

[9]

Mynatt , E. D. , Back , M. , Want , R., Baer , M., Ellis, J. B.
Designing audio aura. In Proceedings of CHI 1998.

[10] Catherine Plaisant, Brett Milash, Anne Rose, Seth Widoff,

Ben Shneiderman. LifeLines: visualizing personal histories,
In Proceedings of CHI 1996.
[11] Salavon, J. The Top Grossing Film of All Time, 1 x 1. 2000.

http://www.salavon.com/TGFAT/Titanic.shtml (link verified
December 2003).
[12] Silver, J. Corridor at ICA a Walk Worth Taking. The Boston

Herald. Boston, Mass.; Jan 24, 2003.
[13] Temin, C. Slide Show. The Boston Globe, Staff Art Review

Date: Page: D21 Section: Arts. January 24, 2003
8

CONCLUSION

When the Institute of Contemporary Art first approached us, they
wanted a piece that would be an evocative souvenir of the
building in which they are currently housed. Our installation, by
continuously capturing and visualizing imagery from that space
over several months, succeeded in creating an artifact that was
infused with meaning and legibility, and that embodied the
aesthetic and evocative qualities the museum curators desired.
The same visualization approach used in Artifacts of the
Presence Era can be applied to a variety of personally or
collectively meaningful databases. We live in an era in which a
great deal of information accumulates around us, years worth of
email, home videos, webcam output. We often hold onto such
archives because they feel important to us; their meaning is
embodied not only in particular scenes or messages (through some
of those certainly exist), but in the entire passage of time that they
represent, the overall patterns and simply the vast accumulation of
material. Yet in their uncompressed state they are too vast and
unwieldy to be comprehended; compacting them into an evocative
visualization makes them graspable as a souvenir of their time and
place.
9

[14] Viégas, F., boyd, d., Nguyen, D., Potter, J., Donath, J. Digital

Artifacts for Remembering and Storytelling: PostHistory and
Social Network Fragments. In proceedings of HICSS-37, Jan.
2004.
[15] Weiser, M., and Brown, J. S. Designing Calm Technology,

PowerGrid Journal, v 1.01, http://powergrid.electriciti.com/1.01
July 1996.

REFERENCES

[1]

Cooper, R. and Ängeslevä. Last. Interactive Art: Honorary
Mention. Prixars Electronica, CyberArts 2003.

[2]

Derthick, M. Interactive Visualization of Video Metadata.
JCDL ’01, June 2001.

111

