Keynote Address
Visual Analytics: A Grand Challenge in Science Turning Information Overload into the Opportunity of the Decade
Jim Thomas

Director, National Visualization and Analytics Center

Abstract

Bio

Visual Analytics is an emerging field of study that brings
talents from many disciplines including statistics, mathematics, knowledge representation and synthesis, scientific and
information visualization, cognitive and perceptual sciences,
communications, decision sciences and more. The demand
for visual analytics is being stimulated by new requirements for homeland security but similar needs are present in
science, commerce, home, and almost any domain that deals
with complex, large information sources that require human
judgement to “detect the expected and discover the unexpected”. The definition of visual analytics is the science of
analytical reasoning facilitated by the interface visual interface. Jim will present the new needs for science and technology, referenced from the recent book Illuminating the Path:
the Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics.
Jim will also discuss the driving new characteristics of interaction and suggest the top technical challenges for visual
analytics, enlisting comments and recommendations.

Jim Thomas is a PNNL Lab Fellow and Chief Scientist for
Information Technologies at Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory. He is the Director of a Department of Homeland
Security founded National Visualization and Analytics
Center (NVAC) that also provides funding for 5 Regional
(university led) Visualization and analytics Centers (RVAC).
He has received several international science awards including “Top 100 Scientific Innovators” (Science Digest) and
twice the Research and Development’s Industrial Research
100 Significant Scientific and Industry Accomplishments
“Top 100 Innovators in Science and Industry”. In addition,
twice he was awarded the Federal Laboratories Consortium
Technology Transfer Award for innovation in transferring
research technology to industry and universities. In addition Thomas served as 2003 and 2004 IEEE Visualization
Conference Co-Chair, Chair ACM SIGGRAPH 1987–1992,
1998-2002 Editor-In-Chief for IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications, Founder of ACM User Interface Science
and Technology Conference, and has over 120 publications
and sets on several advisory boards.

ix

