Using Eye Tracking to Investigate Graph Layout Effects
Weidong Huang∗
IMAGEN Program, National ICT Australia Ltd.
School of Information Technologies, University of Sydney, Australia

A BSTRACT
Graphs are typically visualized as node-link diagrams. Although
there is a fair amount of research focusing on crossing minimization to improve readability, little attention has been paid on how to
handle crossings when they are an essential part of the final visualizations. This requires us to understand how people read graphs
and how crossings affect reading performance.
As an initial step to this end, a preliminary eye tracking experiment was conducted. The specific purpose of this experiment was
to test the effects of crossing angles and geometric-path tendency
on eye movements and performance. Sixteen subjects performed
both path search and node locating tasks with six drawings. The results showed that small angles can slow down and trigger extra eye
movements, causing delays for path search tasks, whereas crossings
have little impact on node locating tasks. Geometric-path tendency
indicates that a path between two nodes can become harder to follow when many branches of the path go toward the target node. The
insights obtained are discussed with a view to further confirmation
in future work.
Keywords: eye tracking, edge crossing, geometric path, evaluation, graph drawing
Index Terms: H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine
Systems—Human Factors; H.5.0 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces—Evaluation/methodology
1

I NTRODUCTION

Graphs are typically visualized as node-link diagrams. A graph can
be drawn in many different ways by simply changing the layout
of nodes. A growing number of empirical studies have shown that
graph layout affects not only readability, but also the understanding of the underlying data. In particular, edge crossings (or link
crossings) has long been a major concern in graph drawing; it is
commonly accepted and employed as a general rule that the number of crossings should be reduced as much as possible. However,
in practice, crossing minimization is a hard problem in designing
algorithms for graph drawing [2]. There are also many graphs in
which crossings are not removable. Although there is a fair amount
of research focusing on crossing minimization (e.g., [1, 8]) in the
literature, little attention has been paid on how to handle crossings
when they are an essential part of the final visualizations.
Some researchers have pointed out that different crossing styles
may have different degrees of impact. Take the two drawings in
Figure 1, as an example. These two drawings were of a graph
and drawn using two different approaches [8]: k-planarization and
minimal-crossing-number, respectively. The drawing in Figure 1(a)
has 34 crossings, which is 41% more crossings than the drawing in
Figure 1(b) has (24 crossings). However, as indicated in [8], an informal evaluation revealed that the former drawing was considered
as having less crossings and being more readable. Further, not only
∗ e-mail:

weidong.huang@nicta.com.au

Asia-Pacific Symposium on Visualisation 2007
5 - 7 February, Sydney, NSW, Australia
1-4244-0809-1/07/$20.00 © 2007 IEEE

the collective crossing pattern has a role in affecting graph perception, but also the individual crossing angle. For example, as mentioned in [5, 11], when edges cross at nearly-90-degree angles, they
are less likely to be confusing than when crossing at acute angles.

(a)

(b)
Figure 1: Two drawings of the same graph. (a) k-planarization drawing, (b) minimal-crossing-number drawing. Adopted from [8, Figure
2]

In addition, more and more empirical studies are available showing that in some situations, crossings may not be as bad as we normally think (e.g., [5, 6]). For example, in perceiving sociograms
(node-link diagrams for social networks), it was found that crossings are important only for tasks that involve path tracing [6]. Even
when sociograms are drawn to convey specific information, such
as how many social groups there are in the network, it is more
desirable to cross edges connecting the group members [6]. It is
also possible that drawing graphs without crossings can make some
structural features less apparent, such as symmetry.
Thus, when the cost of crossing reduction cannot be justified,
or when crossings become unavoidable, the questions arise: How
can we reduce the negative impact of crossings to the minimum?
In what situations can we simply ignore the presence of crossings,
or even make use of them? To answer these questions, we need to
have knowledge of how and when crossings, or visual layouts in
a broader sense, affect graph understanding. In addition, it is also
essential for us to have a good understanding of how people read
graphs.
1.1 Motivation
Many observations in graph layout evaluations are mainly based on
task response time and accuracy. This approach tells us what the
consequences will be in terms of task performance when a particular layout is to be used. However, this approach treats the human
mind as a “black box”, and therefore cannot explain where the time
is spent and how the accuracy is affected.
As an initial attempt to understand how people read graphs,
an eye tracking study was conducted in [5] to understand how
crossings affect task performance. Subjects were given five pairs
of crossing and non-crossing drawings and asked to find a shortest path between two given nodes for each drawing. Their response times and eye movements while performing the tasks were
recorded. It was reported that only one crossing drawing took the

97

subjects a significantly longer time than the corresponding noncrossing drawing. The video analysis showed that:
1. Crossings had little impact on subjects’ eye movements; it appeared that those crossings were simply ignored by the subjects during path searching.
2. It was the edges going towards the target node that distracted
eyes and caused delays. In other words, as illustrated in Figure 2, in performing the shortest path task, subjects tended
to follow edges which were close to the geometric path of the
two nodes. If the edges were not part of the shortest path, they
had to go back and start searching again, which took time and
caused errors. For simplicity, this graph reading behavior is
termed as geometric-path tendency.

Figure 2: Illustration of geometric-path tendency. Note that the
dashed line is not part of the graph. To find the path between nodes
1 and 2, if search always starts from node 1, people tend to follow
the path 1-7-5-6 first, the path 1-3-5-6 second, and the path 1-3-4-2
third.

This was quite surprising since it indicated that crossings were
not the major time consuming factor as expected. However, a closer
look at the study revealed the following facts:
1. The graphs used in [5] were sparse, and small with the largest
graph containing only 11 nodes and 15 edges.
2. The crossing angles in the crossing drawings were generally
quite large (nearly 90 degrees).
When graphs are small and crossing angles are large, the impact
of crossings may be too small to be significant. The user study
described in this paper was aimed to address the above points. It
was hoped that this experiment could provide some useful insights
for future design of more formal experiments investigating layout
effects.
2 E XPERIMENT
This experiment was conducted to: 1) see how crossing angles affect eye movements; 2) replicate geometric-path tendency. The first
is a drawing property and the second is a graph reading behavior.
2.1 Subjects
Sixteen subjects were recruited on a completely voluntary basis. All
of them had normal vision and were regular computer users. They
had different degrees of familiarity with node-link diagrams; two
of them had no knowledge at all at the time of participation. The
subjects were reimbursed $20 each for their time and effort upon
the completion of their tasks.
2.2 Apparatus
The testing room contained one operator PC on which an eye tracking system was running, one subject IBM T41 laptop on which
stimulus diagrams were to be shown, and adjustable chairs and tables. The eye tracking system used in the experiment was iViewX

98

with Headmounted Eye-tracking Device (HED) (SensoMotoric Instruments GmbH (SMI)). The HED is a helmet to be worn by the
subject that contains an eye camera.
The eye tracker tracks eye movements by observing the position
of the pupil and corneal reflex from the right eye. The system had
been reconfigured so that the content of the laptop monitor screen
with eye gaze position indicated by a gaze cursor can be recorded
into MPEG video files for offline analysis.
2.3 Stimuli
Six drawings (see Table 1 in [4]) were grouped into two threedrawing sets: Set 1 for testing crossing angles, and Set 2 for testing
geometric-path tendency.
The three drawings (c1, c2 and c3) from Set 1 were of a graph
containing 32 nodes and 43 edges. The graph had 2 components:
path component and condition component. In producing the three
drawings, the layout of the path component remained unchanged.
The layout of the other component was modified to make the three
conditions: no crossings on the path (c1), nearly-90-degree crossings on the path (c2) and small-angle crossings on the path (c3). c1
was the control condition that was to compare how eye movements
changed when crossings were introduced in c2 and c3.
In drawing graphs, reducing crossings normally causes a path
less continuous [11]. However, path continuity was also identified
as a notable factor affecting graph perception [11]. By using twocomponent graphs and keeping the path component the same, this
confounding effect can be removed. In addition, since the main purpose for Set 1 drawings was to test crossing angles, not to test how
easy or difficult it is to find the correct path, the path component
contained only one path to avoid any other confounding effects introduced by multiple paths and branches. However, subjects were
not made aware of these facts beforehand, although they might have
come to realize them after they had finished the tasks.
The three drawings (f1, f2 and f3) from Set 2 were of another
graph containing 20 nodes and 32 edges. In f1, the shortest path
between nodes 1 and 2 (1-11-15-2) was far away from the geometric
path of nodes 1 and 2 and had no crossings, while the shortest path
in f2 (1-6-11-2) and f3 (1-22-11-2) had three crossings (with nearly90-degree angles) and was near the geometric path. In addition,
there were more crossings in total in f2 than in f3.
2.4 Tasks
The following three tasks were used:
1. Path task: find the shortest path between nodes 1 and 2. Nodes
1 and 2 were highlighted.
2. Node+Path task: find the shortest path between nodes 1 and
2. Nodes 1 and 2 were not highlighted.
3. Node task: find the most connected node.
The first task is a pure path search task, the third is a target locating task, and the second is the combination of path search and
target locating.
2.5 Online Task Setting
A system had been developed for the subject to perform the tasks
online. The system displayed a question first. The subject pressed
the button on the screen, the question disappeared and the corresponding drawing was then shown. The subject answered the question by clicking one of the buttons above the drawing; each button
showed one of the possible answers. Once the button was clicked,
a new question was shown, and so on.
Subjects’ responses (time and accuracy) were logged by the online system. Their eye movements were recorded by the eye tracking system in real time.

The experiment included three sessions; one session for each
task. The order of the three tasks was random. In each session,
the subject had to perform the task with each of the six drawings.
The drawings in each session were displayed randomly. There was
a break between sessions. Just before each session a calibration was
conducted.
Each time when a drawing was shown, the nodes were labeled
differently to avoid possible recognition of the same graph.
2.6 Procedure
All the subjects were given time to read tutorial material, ask questions and practice. They were also instructed to answer each question as quickly as possible without compromising accuracy, and not
to use a mouse to help.
The experiment was conducted on an individual basis. After
some practice, subjects performed the tasks online. A post-task
questionnaire was given, and a short interview held with the subject, following the experiment. Seven of the subjects were chosen
to explain their eye-movement behaviors while watching their own
eye movement videos. The whole experiment took about 50 minutes.
3

R ESULTS

3.1

Quantitative Results

Although eye movement data was of the main interest for this study,
the performance data was also analyzed. Given the small number
of subjects and the limited variety of the stimuli used in the study,
quantitative results are presented as additional evidence in support
of eye movement findings, which are described in sub-section 3.2.
3.1.1 Response Time
Drawing ID
Node task
Path task
Node+Path task

c1
16.37
6.81
9.54

c2
19.97
14.74
16.28

c3
23.22
29.41
33.58

f1
16.54
13.61
15.72

f2
17.52
16.07
15.12

f3
16.20
13.33
21.91

Table 1: Median times (sec.) for all the drawings and tasks

A non-parametric test of Friedman was used for statistical analysis. The median times for all responses are shown in Table 1.
Node Task: Among Set 1 drawings, the shortest time was spent
with c1, followed by c2, then c3. The test indicated that there
were significant differences in response times (p = 0.047). Pairwise comparisons found that only the difference between c1 and c3
was significant (p = 0.006). For Set 2 drawings, a slightly shorter
time was spent with f3 than with f1. The longest time was spent
with f2. However, the test did not find any significant differences
(p = 0.144).
Path Task: From Table 1, it can be seen that the time spent
with c2 and c3 was longer than with c1; the longest time was spent
with c3. The test revealed that these differences were statistically
significant (p < 0.001). Pairwise comparisons indicated that the
time difference for each pair was also statistically significant (for
each pair, p ≤ 0.001). For Set 2 drawings, the subjects spent the
longest time with f2, followed by f1. The shortest time was spent
with f3. However, the test showed that these differences were not
statistically significant (p = 0.570).
Node+Path Task: For Set 1 drawings, the longest time was
spent with c3, followed by c2, then c1. The analysis revealed that
there were significant differences in response time among the three
drawings (p < 0.001). Pairwise comparisons indicated that the difference for each pair was also statistically significant (p < 0.05).
For Set 2 drawings, the shortest time was spent with f2, followed

by f1. f3 took the subjects the longest time. The test showed that
there were significant time differences among the three drawings
(p = 0.039). Pairwise comparisons found that the differences between f1 and f3, f2 and f3 were statistically significant (p < 0.05).
3.1.2 Error Rate
Drawing ID
Node task
Path task
Node+Path task

c1
0.00
0.00
0.00

c2
6.25
0.00
0.00

c3
25.00
0.00
0.00

f1
0.00
18.75
18.75

f2
0.00
0.00
12.50

f3
0.00
31.25
37.50

Table 2: Error rates (%) for all the drawings and tasks

The error rates for all the six drawings and the three tasks can be
seen in Table 2. For the Node task, all the responses were correct
except for c2 and c3; the error rates were 6.25% and 25% respectively. A visible inspection suggested that the angular resolution in
c2 and c3 was the worst among all the drawings. It is reasonable
to imagine that when the angular resolution is poor, the task will be
harder, thus causing more errors in counting the number of edges
that a node has. Although in this experiment, the bad angular resolution was the result of making crossings, angular resolution is not
necessarily linked to crossings in practice.
For the path search tasks, regardless of whether the nodes were
highlighted or not, the subjects made no errors for Set 1 drawings.
This was not surprising, since there was only one path (therefore
the shortest path) between nodes 1 and 2. For Set 2 drawings, when
the nodes were highlighted, the highest error rate was made with f3
(31.25%), followed by f1 (18.75%). No errors were made with f2.
When no nodes were highlighted, and following the same pattern,
the highest error rate was with f3 (37.5%), followed by f1 (18.75%),
then f2 (12.5%).
3.2 Eye Movements Video and Questionnaire Analysis
First, for the path search tasks with Set 1 drawings, it can be clearly
seen that the speed of eye movements was the fastest with c1. With
c2, the overall eye movements were still smooth but became slower.
Although some subjects claimed that they were not affected by
crossings here, the response time data did show that the subjects
responded significantly slower with c2 than with c1, as stated in
sub-section 3.1. With c3, eye movements were very slow, and more
significantly, on the edge connecting nodes 13 and 6 (see Table 1
in [4]). There were also quite a lot of back-and-forth eye movements around the crossing points on that edge. This indicted that
the viewer was uncertain about which way to go. Clearly, the lowangle crossings in c3 caused slow and extra eye movements, which
contributed to the longest response time. Subjects’ comments on
crossings included: crossings “force me to focus harder”, “help to
improve my concentration”; “crossings affect me except at right angles”; “I think edge crossings slowed me down”; “crossings make
graphs more complicated and confusing”; “if the angle is small, you
have to be careful when following the edge to make sure you end
up at the right node”.
Secondly, for finding the shortest path in f1, most of the subjects
searched on the paths near the geometric path first. For example, 15
subjects for the Path task and 12 for the Node+Path task searched
the nearest path of 1-20-8-18-2 first. Some simply missed the correct path of 1-11-15-2. Most of them detected the path either at a
later stage of search or just before pressing the button, as a subject
commented: “I often found the shortest route last”.
The high error rate with f3 was surprising. The video inspection
on f3 revealed that the subjects spent most of their time on the left
part of the drawing, where there were more crossings. This also

99

happened with f2. In addition, most of the subjects found the correct path (1-22-11-2) in f3 at the later stage. Six subjects mentioned
in the questionnaire that long edges had some influence and commented: “long edges need more time to reconfirm”; “the shortest
path of few long steps (edges) outside many short steps is harder to
see”. However, intuitively long-edge paths in sparse areas are visually more outstanding and should be easier to detect [7], such as the
shortest paths in f1 and f3. This was not the case in this study and
therefore needs further examination.
Third, for the Node task, it seems that the subjects searched for
the most connected node randomly rather than systematically. This
probably was because the distribution of the nodes was unorganized
in the drawings. However, it is clear that the eye movement pattern
was as follows: eyes stayed around the node for a while counting
the edges, then moved straight from one node to the next. Subjects’ eyes tended to start the task with nodes in dense areas first.
All the subjects claimed that for the Node task, crossings did not
have any influence on them. Some subjects preferred that edges
are attached to the same side of the node so that they can count
the edges at a glance, while others preferred that edges are evenly
distributed around the node. The significant difference in response
time between c1 and c3 for the Node task might be caused by the
difference in angular solution between the two drawings.

in general and the geometric-path tendency in particular, should assist us in better assessing the effectiveness of a particular layout.
More importantly, geometric-path tendency is independent of specific graph layouts. If this tendency can be extended for general
path search tasks in future research, it is expected that geometricpath tendency will be a more reliable factor in predicting performance, compared to layout features such as crossings.

4

4.2 Eye Tracking in Graph Evaluation
Eye tracking has been successfully used in psychology as well as in
HCI for many years [10]. Very few studies, however, are available
in graph evaluation (understanding graphs that are drawn as nodelink diagrams) [7].
This study demonstrated the promising usefulness of eye tracking in this area. Eye movement data offers additional insights into
how tasks are actually carried out, which is otherwise difficult to obtain with traditional performance measures alone. In other words,
the eye tacking technology can be used to approve and refine the
theories developed based on performance measures. In particular, since graph evaluations are all about how people visually process information from node-link diagrams, the use of eye tracking
should hold great promise for future research.

4.1

D ISCUSSION
Layout Effects

The subjects spent a significantly longer time with c3 than with c2.
Although we are unable to attribute this time difference exclusively
to the small crossing angles in c3 (c3 also has a larger number of
crossings), the eye movement data and user comments had made
it clear that the extra back-and-forth eye movements at and around
the crossing points were caused by the sharp crossing angles.
In the previous study [5], in which the graphs were small and
the target shortest path was short (three at most), the impact of
crossings was not so apparent. However, in this study, where a
larger graph was used for c2 and the length of the shortest path
was six, both eye movement data and quantitative data clearly indicted that crossings affected graph reading behavior and task performance negatively. We may conjecture that when a graph is larger
and the searching path is longer, the impact of crossings can build
up and become significant, even if edges cross at nearly 90 degrees.
Although the conjecture needs confirmation, an immediate implication for graph drawing is: when the graph to be drawn is small,
we may need to determine whether it is worthwhile removing crossings; when the graph is large, it may be better to minimize the number of crossings first. On the other hand, when crossings are to be
present in the final drawing, crossing angles should be increased to
nearly 90 degrees if possible.
The effects of crossings on eye movements can be summarized
as follows: when edges cross at nearly 90 degrees, eye movements
may be slightly slowed down, but still smooth. When edges cross
at small angles, crossings cause confusion, slowing down and triggering extra eye movements.
Geometric-path tendency is a graph reading convention; it seems
irrelevant to layout effects at first glance. However, it is highly related to crossings. In many cases, it is crossings that cause confusion, making all the paths between two nodes, and branches along
these paths, unforeseeable. Due to the geometric-path tendency,
human eyes can easily slip into the edges that are close to the geometric path but not part of the target path.
Further, the relevance of geometric-path tendency to layout effects goes beyond crossings. As illustrated in Figure 3, by changing
the positions of the unlabeled nodes in the left drawing, some edges
are made to go toward the labeled nodes, as shown in the right drawing. As a result of this, the path between nodes 1 and 2 may become
harder to follow. Therefore, understanding how people read graphs

100

Figure 3: Geometric-path tendency suggests that the path between
nodes 1 and 2 in the left drawing should be easier to detect than that
in the right.

R EFERENCES
[1] Eades, P. and Wormald, N.C. (1994) Edge Crossings in Drawings of
Bipartite Graphs. Algorithmica, 11: 379-403.
[2] Garey, M.R. and Johnson, D.S. (1983) Crossing Number is NPComplete. SIAM Journal on Algebraic and Discrete Methods, 4: 312316.
[3] Ghoniem, M., Fekete, J.-D. and Castagliola, P. (2004) A comparison
of the readability of graphs using node-link and matrix-based representations. In Proc. InfoVis’04, 17-24.
[4] Huang, W. (2006) An eye tracking study into the effects of graph layout. http://www.it.usyd.edu.au/∼whua5569/ex/.
[5] Huang, W. and Eades, P. (2005) How people read graphs. In Proc.
APVIS 2005, 47-53.
[6] Huang, W., Hong, S.-H. and Eades, P. (2005) Layout effects on sociogram perception. In Proc. GD’05, LNCS 3843, 262-273.
[7] Korner, C. and Albert, D. (2002) Speed of comprehension of visualized ordered sets. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8:
57-71.
[8] Mutzel, P. (1996) An alternative method to crossing minimization on
hierarchial graphs. In Proc. GD’96, LNCS 1190, 318-333.
[9] Purchase, H. (1997) Which aesthetic has the greatest effect on human
understanding? In Proc. GD’97, LNCS 1353, 248-261.
[10] Rayner, K. (1998) Eye movements in reading and information processing: 20 years of research. Psychological Bulletin, 124(3): 372422.
[11] Ware, C., Purchase, H., Colpoys, L. and McGill, M. (2002) Cognitive
Measurements of Graph Aesthetics. Information Visualization, 1(2):
103-110.

