12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Mining Scholarly Semantic Networks from the Web
Mizuki Oka, Yutaka Matsuo
The University of Tokyo, Japan
mizuki@cks.u-tokyo.ac.jp, matsuo@biz-model.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract

tic technologies [3]. We would like to provide an overview
of the entire research domain, the trend of the domain, and
also a detailed view of each research area. Social network
analysis on researchers, conferences, and journals serves
an important role to provide a macroscopic view of scholarly knowledge. More detailed text analysis and temporal data analysis also play an important role in providing
a microscopic view. Visualization of the mined scholarly
knowledge is another essential factor. Because the data
must be processed and because their results might have
many attribute types, not to mention that they might be
large, it would be difﬁcult to gain a comprehensive understanding at a glance. Intuitive visualization and easy
navigation complements provision of a global view of our
collective knowledge and wisdom.
Semantic network extraction and analysis have recently
attracted the attention of many researchers in various research areas such as Semantic Web [1], social network
analysis [23], and information visualization. A semantic
network is a collection of entities that are linked by a set
of relations [24]. Vastly numerous studies have been conducted using social network analysis [23]. Constructing semantic networks provides us with useful information such
as calculating trustworthiness of a person [7] and detecting relevance and relations among different people [15]. In
parallel efforts with semantic network extraction and analysis, visualization of social networks has been studied [5].
Studies have provided examples of the ways in which spatial position, color, size, and shape can all be used to encode information. With the widespread use of the internet, recent studies have applied such approaches to visualize and analyze domains such as e-mail communication [4]
and co-authorship networks in scientiﬁc publications [16].
A scholarly semantic network can be constructed by
recognizing relations among scholarly entities (e.g., papers, authors, keywords). Usually, classic databases of
papers such as MEDLINE 1 , PubMed 2 , DBLP 3 , and

With the increased usage of the Web and its availability of data, various scholarly information is now available
on the Web. Extraction, aggregation, and visualization of
such information is crucial for using our collective scholarly knowledge and expertise. Semantic network technology is prominent in structuring such knowledge. Our research project is designed to construct a scholarly semantic network from publicly available data that will be useful for researchers, business people in industry, and public
servants in governmental organizations who are expected
to make decisions appropriately. In this paper, we propose
a practical architecture to construct a scholarly semantic
network that integrates different scholarly entities such as
researchers, papers, and keywords by taking into consideration ontological and web mining perspectives. We also
provide an overview of our social network extraction system, which is used as an underpinning to build the architecture. The system, called POLYPHONET, employs several
advanced web mining and semantic technologies to extract
relations of researchers, to detect groups of researchers,
and to obtain keywords for a researcher. The public installation of the system at several academic conferences
provides evidence of the system’s usability and potential to
facilitate the discovery of scholarly knowledge.

1. Introduction
In this era of information explosion, advanced usage
of information related to the web is vital. To collect,
store, and integrate information related to the web, semantic technology, as well as web mining technology, is necessary. By integrating a vast amount of information semantically, we can build an advanced type of knowledge base by
web mining [18].
Our research, in particular, is intended to examine the
potential for structuring scholarly knowledge through constructing semantic networks using web mining and seman-

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.74

1 http://medline.cos.com/.
2 http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/PubMed/.
3 http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/

349

ley/db/.

CiteSeer 4 merely enable access of scholarly knowledge
through the Web. If we want to make greater use of web
information such as web pages on new projects and new
funds, press releases, user-generated knowledge on blogs
and Wikipedia 5 , each entity and relation must be deﬁned
in a more formal way. Usage of the web enables us to aggregate such various kinds of entities and relationships, but
it might also require visualization techniques that are suitable for exploration. Once the scholarly semantic network
is obtained and visualized accordingly, it becomes useful in
various ways by facilitating location of experts and authorities, and detection of topics among research papers and
conferences.
In this paper, we provide an overview of our research
project related to web mining: especially extraction, aggregation, and visualization for social network mining. We
then describe the architecture used for structuring scholarly
knowledge by web mining to improve the decision-making
of researchers and other people who are interested in research, e.g. funding organizations. The contribution of our
research is summarized as follows.
• We present an overview of our ﬁve-year project undertaken during 2003–2007 at JSAI 6 academic conferences on web mining for scholarly knowledge
structuring.
• We propose a practical architecture to construct a
scholarly semantic network that integrates different
scholarly entities by taking into consideration ontological and web mining perspectives.
• Our system might be used for locating experts and authorities, detecting topics among research papers, detecting relations among conferences and topics, and
providing an overview and trends of the research domain.

web [13, 25, 14]. It can recognize various kinds of collaborative relations among researchers. The co-occurrence of
researcher’s names on the Web is used as evidence of two
researchers’ collaboration using a general search engine.
Text analysis is further conducted to verify the relation.
The system called POLYPHONET has been used at several conferences and workshops in Japan to provide the
overview of a research domain and to facilitate collaboration among researchers. The public installation of the
system has provided evidence of the system’s usability and
potential for scholarly knowledge discovery. Because of
space limitations, we provide only a brief overview of the
project. We encourage the reader to visit the website for
UbiComp2005 7 and for JSAI2005 8 . Please refer to [14]
for additional technical details.

2.1. Methods to Extract Social Network
from the Web
A social network is extracted through two steps. First
we set nodes; then we add edges using a search engine. For
example, assume that we intend to measure the strength of
relations between two names, Yutaka Matsuo and Mizuki
Oka, using a search engine. The number of hits estimates
the strength of their relation by co-occurrence of their two
names. We add an edge between the two corresponding
nodes if the strength of relations is greater than a certain
threshold.
Several indices can measure co-occurrence [12]: matching coefﬁcient, mutual information, Dice coefﬁcient, Jaccard coefﬁcient, overlap coefﬁcient, and cosine. Depending on the co-occurrence measure that is used, the resultant
social network varies. Through comparison of the indices
with a co-authorship relation, among them we conclude
that the overlap coefﬁcient is best for our purposes [13, 25].
Not only the strength of the tie, but also the type of relation is detected in POLYPHONET. Inference of the class
of relationship is thereby reduced to a text categorization
problem that can be addressed using a machine-learning
approach. We ﬁrst fetch the top several pages retrieved
by the “X and Y” queries. Then we extract features from
the contents of each page to classify pages into classes
of relations. Especially, relations of four kinds are selected: Co-author, Lab (members of the same laboratory
or research institute), Proj (members of the same project or
committee), and Conf (participants in the same conference
or workshop). Table 1 shows error rates of ﬁve-fold cross
validation. Although the error rate for Lab is high, others
have about a 10% error rate or less. Precision and recall are
measured by manually labeling 200 additional Web pages.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The
following section brieﬂy provides an overview of our social network mining project with the technical description
of social network extraction and the implementation of interactive system called POLYPHONET. Section 3 presents
an architecture for structuring scholarly knowledge as an
expansion of the project. Section 4 describes related work
and Section 5 concludes this paper.

2. Social Network Mining among Researchers
As an underpinning towards the realization of scholarly knowledge semantic network, we have developed social network mining techniques for researchers using the
4 http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/.
5 http://www.wikipedia.org/

7 http://www.ubicomp-support.org/ubicomp2005/

.

6 http://www.ai-gakkai.or.jp/jsai/english.html.

8 http://jsai-support-wg.org/polysuke2005/

350

Table 1. Error rate of relation types, precision and recall.
class
Co-author
Lab
Proj
Conf

error rate
4.1%
25.7%
5.8%
11.2%

precision
91.8% (90/98)
70.9% (73/103)
74.4% (67/90)
89.7% (87/97)

recall
97.8% (90/92)
86.9% (73/84)
91.8% (67/73)
67.4% (87/129)

Figure 2. Shortest path from a person to a
person on POLYPHONET.

Figure 1. My page on POLYPHONET.

2.2

POLYPHONET:
port System

Conference

Sup-

POLYPHONET 9 is a Web-based system for an academic community to facilitate communication and mutual
understanding based on a social network extracted from
the Web. We implement every module described above in
POLYPHONET. The system has been used at JSAI10 annual conferences successively for three years and at UbiComp200511 .
A social network of participants is displayed in POLYPHONET to illustrate a community overview. Retrieval
tasks of various types are possible on the social network:
researchers can be sought by name, afﬁliation, keyword,
and research ﬁeld; researchers related to a retrieved researcher are listed; and a search for the shortest path between two researchers can be made. Even more complicated retrievals are possible: e.g., a search for a researcher

Figure 3. Social network among three persons on POLYPHONET.
who is nearest to a user in the social network among researchers in a certain ﬁeld. POLYPHONET is incorporated
with a scheduling support system [8] and a location information display system [17] in the ubiquitous computing
environment at the conference sites.
Figure 1 is a portal page that is tailored to an individual user, called my page. The user’s presentations, bookmarks of the presentations, and registered acquaintances
are shown along with the social network extracted from
the Web. Figure 2 shows the shortest obtained path between two persons on a social network. Figure 3 portrays
a screenshot that portrays at situation with three persons
at an information kiosk; the social network including the
three is displayed. More than 200 users used the system
during each three-day conference, as shown in Table 2.
Although POLYPHONET does not offer elaborate visualization of the extracted network and the interaction with
users remains rather simple, comments from users were
almost entirely positive; they enjoyed using the system.

Table 2. Numbers of participants at conferences.
#participants
#users
9 Polyphonet

JSAI03
558
276

JSAI04
639
257

JSAI05
about 600
217

UbiComp05
about 500
308

is a term that was coined using polyphony + network.

10 http://jsai-support-wg.org/polysuke2005/.
11 http://www.ubicomp-support.org/ubicomp2005/.

351

POLYPHONET presents evidence of potentials to facilitate scholarly knowledge discovery and provides an area
for future work in exploring different kinds of visualization and their interaction with users.

Although the above categorization of entities might not
be ontologically precise, in terms of web mining, we use
this simple view to mine important information efﬁciently
and to facilitate the integration of information.
By mining and recognizing the six entities and the relations among the entities, we can provide structured knowledge of various kinds. For example, the relevance of
the research topic is measurable in relation to (i) keyword overlap, (ii) paper/conference overlap, and (iii) researcher/organization overlap. In other words, the two
topics “stem cell” and “ontology” might be measured according to (i) how many relevant keywords the two topics
share, (ii) how many papers or conferences contain these
two topics, and (iii) how many researchers or organizations
conduct research on both topics. This research topic map
(or ontology of research topics) is useful for providing an
overview of an interesting research topic, and even for providing the changing of trends of various research topics
over time. This can assist, for instance, research funding
agencies and others to make decisions appropriately.
Identifying relations among researchers and organizations or journals and conferences can provide us various
useful information. The former relation is useful, for instance, for recruiting researchers, for locating researchers
for collaboration, and for ﬁnding paper reviewers [22].
The latter is useful to provide conference maps to help
researchers ﬁnd where to submit papers and to assess the
quality of conferences based on the key organizers of the
conference [26].

3. Scholarly Knowledge Mining
In this section, we describe an architecture to construct
a scholarly semantic network from an ontological and web
mining perspective as an extension of POLYPHONET. We
consider not only researchers but also other scholarly entities and their relations based on web mining and semantic
technology.

3.1. Architecture of Scholarly Web Mining
The web mining techniques we explained in the previous section mainly examine researchers speciﬁcally. Although a researcher plays an indispensable role in the research domain, entities of other kinds are also important:
papers, journals, conferences, research topics, and so on.
Although a very complicated system of interaction
might pertain among such entities [21], we use a rather
simple and practical architecture to represent the scholarly domain to fulﬁll the demand of system usage and the
feasibility of web mining. In our model, the three most
important entities are researchers, papers, and keywords.
Papers are the main outcome of research activities Keywords are the most commonly used information to represent the contents of a paper. As a superclass of the three
entities, we can deﬁne three other entities: organization,
journal/conference, and research topics.
The six important entities we deﬁne in our research are
as follows:

3.2. Methods to Recognize Entities and
Relations
To recognize three (or six) types of entities and relations among them, several approaches using web mining
are possible. For our previous studies, we extracted relations among researchers and their relations to keywords.
With the usage of the co-occurrence based approach and
web mining technology in our studies, we can extract relations of various kinds among these entities from digital
libraries as well as other information that is available on
the Web.

• Researcher: a subject who tries to conduct research
activity
• Paper: an outcome of the research activity by researcher(s)
• Keyword: a representation of the contents of a paper
• Organization/Project (as a superclass of researchers):
an organized subject which conduct research activities, which can be considered as a set of researchers.

Usage of Digital Library Database Existing digital library databases such as CiteSeer and DBLP provide us relational information among researchers, papers, and conferences/journals. Extraction of relations from such information corresponds to conventional bibliography studies,
which require no special web mining technology. Readily
apparent information such as citations, co-authorships, and
conferences and journals directly enable us to extract relations among these entities and run semantic analyses of the

• Journal/Conference (as a superclass of papers): an organized collection of papers as the outcome of broad
research activities, which can be considered as a set
of papers.
• Research topic (as a superclass of keywords): a set of
keywords to represent what the paper is about, which
is typically preprocessed using text processing.

352

obtained network.

vides information that is suitable for hierarchical visualization.
One means to offer such a seamlessly integrated network is to use a method called the Eigen Co-occurrence
Matrix (ECM) method we proposed previously [20, 19].
The ECM method represents all relations among entities in
a single matrix. In the example described above, the matrix
will contain the relations of paper-paper, paper-keyword,
and keyword-keyword in a single matrix. Through the application of principal component analysis (PCA) [10] to the
matrix, it produces a network with principal features. Depending on the number of eigenvectors used to construct
the network as a result of PCA, the resulting network can
be represented in various ways from a microscopic view
(with the usage of a larger number of eigenvectors) to a
macroscopic view (with the usage of fewer eigenvectors).
In other words, the ECM method enables us to integrate
various networks seamlessly and enables us to inspect the
results in a hierarchical manner. We plan to explore the potential of the method further through analyses of the actual
data mined from the web.

Usage of the Web We can further consider potential extraction of relations of other kinds among entities from the
Web; for example, co-reference of two papers on the same
Web page (not on the same paper). These two papers might
be two “to read” papers for a class in the university or for
individuals, which implies that both papers similarly have
good quality and are mutually relevant. This type of information is obtainable from collaborative bookmarking sites
such as the del.icio.us 12 and the CiteULike 13 .
The recognition of keywords and relation of keywords
can be enhanced through several web mining techniques as
well. For example, we can measure the popularity of a keyword by simply using the web count produced by a general
search engine. The usage of web hit counts to measure the
relevance of two given words has been a common approach
in web mining and natural language processing recently.
Another example of the usage of the Web is to recognize relations of terms (especially, named entities) using
Wikipedia. Although the interest of researchers and that
of common web users are not exactly the same, the recent
growth and popularity of Wikipedia enables us to recognize the relation of two keywords that seem at ﬁrst to be
unrelated. The textual information, category information,
and link information all contribute the recognition of two
keywords.

4. Related Work
With the availability of digital libraries, numerous studies have been conducted to measure the quality and impact
of scholarly entities such as authors, papers, and publication venues. Many such studies use citation-based metrics
for ranking these entities from a digital library. A citation
index enables the user to discover where and how often
a particular article is cited in the literature, thereby providing an indication of the importance of the article (e.g.
an impact factor). In the late 1990s, CiteSeer was introduced as an automatic citation indexing system. More recently, Google Scholar has become popular, which indexes
not only papers and articles from various scholarly organizations, but also those available on the Web. Other services such as the DBLP, Thomson Scientiﬁc 14 , and the
ACM Digital Library 15 provide information related to coauthorships: listings of all papers by author, co-author, and
co-author links are available for access.
The most widely adopted method to measure the quality of entities is to use Garﬁeld’s impact factor (IF) [6]
which counts the average number of times the published
papers are cited up to two years after publication. However,
the IF has been criticized for its sole dependency on citation counts; many alternatives such as PageRank have been
used to rank journals [2]. Our project is intended to beneﬁt
from the availability of the data from the Web and aggregated data not only from the digital libraries but also data

3.3. Integration and Visualization of Scholarly Networks
Given a set of networks of relation among scholarly
entities, how to integrate and visualize such various networks to obtain an overview is a challenging task. One
way to integrate a set of networks is to process them one
by one in a pipeline manner. Let us consider an example in which our goal is to extract the relation of authoritative papers with their related keywords given the networks of paper-paper relation, paper-keyword relation, and
keyword-keyword relation. We can perform analyses of all
three networks and detect authoritative entities on each network independently using a metric such as PageRank. We
can then integrate them by connecting all the detected authoritative entities.
Although such a pipeline approach provides a means
to integrate networks, it might cause errors to compound
and allow decisions to be inconsistent because relation formation decisions are made independently from each other.
Our project therefore seeks to provide a method that integrates such networks more seamlessly and that also pro12 http://del.icio.us/.

14 http://scientiﬁc.thomson.com/

13 http://www.citeulike.org/.

15 http://portal.acm.org/

353

mined from other sources such as blogs and Wikipedia.
The earliest work to beneﬁt from the development of
the Web dates back to work in the mid-1990s by Kauz and
Selman. They developed a social network extraction system from the Web, called Referral Web [11]. Nevertheless,
we share the basic concept with their work on the usage
of the Web, the rapid development of the WWW, and the
potential of semantic network technology. Our automatic
extraction of relations among scholarly entities has much
greater potential and demand now than when Referral Web
was ﬁrst developed. A recent work by Zhuang et al. underscores an instance of this development. They extract
researchers’ relations by mining the characteristics of Program committee members extracted from Call for Papers
available on the Web to measure the quality of publication
venues (e.g., conferences) [26]. Their method enables differentiation of conferences that have greater impacts from
the remainder.
In terms of visualization of social networks, several social visualization projects have been proposed [9]. A notable work was reported by Heer and Boyd, who developed a system to visualize social network information collected from Friendster 16 , a popular online social network
service (SNS). Compared to studies of mining and visualizing network from the Web, these works are attempts to
visualize social networks that are constructed by users collected at service providing sites. A system that visualizes
social networks that have been mined automatically from
the Web was proposed by P. Mika called Flink [15]. Flink
extracts, aggregates and visualizes online social networks
for a Semantic Web community. Social networks are obtained using analyses of Web pages, e-mail messages, and
publications and self-created proﬁles (FOAF ﬁles). Our
project therefore seeks how best to beneﬁt from a long history of social network visualization as well as information
visualization in general to provide a rich user interaction
and exploration of the collected knowledge from the Web.

to methods of semantic network extraction and analysis
but also to their visualization. We believe that structured
scholarly knowledge can be useful for researchers, business people in industry, and public servants in governmental organization who must make appropriate decisions.

References
[1] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila. The Semantic
Web, 2001. Scientiﬁc American.
[2] J. Bollen, M. A. Rodriguez, and H. V. de Sompel. Journal
Status. Scientometrics, 69(3):669–687, 2006.
[3] P. J. Carrington, J. Scott, and S. Wasserman. Models and
Methods in Social Network Analysis. Cambridge University
Press, 2005.
[4] D. Fisher and P. Dourish. Social and temporal structures
in everyday collaboration. In Proc. of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, pages 551–
558, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM.
[5] L. C. Freeman. Visualizing Social Networks. Journal of
Social Structure, 1(1), 2000.
[6] E. Garﬁeld. Citation Indexes for Science: A New Dimension
in Documentation through Association of Ideas. Science,
122(3159):108–111, 1955.
[7] J. Golbeck and B. Parsia. Trust network-based ﬁltering of
aggregated claims. International Journal of Metadata, Semantics and Ontologies, 1(1):58–65, 2006.
[8] M. Hamasaki, H. Takeda, I. Omukai, and R. Ichise. Scheduling Support System for Academic Conferences Based on Interpersonal Networks. In Demonstration and Poster. Proceedings of Hypertext, pages 50–51, 2004.
[9] J. Heer and D. Boyd. Vizster: Visualizing Online Social Networks. In Proc. of the Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, page 5, Washington, DC,
USA, 2005. IEEE Computer Society.
[10] I. Jolliffe. Principal Component Analysis. Springer Series
in Statistics, 2 edition, 2002.
[11] H. Kautz, B. Selman, and M. Shah. Referral Web: combining social networks and collaborative ﬁltering. Commun.
ACM, 40(3):63–65, 1997.
[12] C. D. Manning and H. Schuetze. Foundations of Statistical
Natural Language Processing. The MIT Press, 1999.
[13] Y. Matsuo, J. Mori, M. Hamasaki, K. Ishida, T. Nishimura,
H. Takeda, K. Hasida, and M. Ishizuka. Finding social network for trust calcularion. In Proc. of the 18th European
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 510–514, 2004.
[14] Y. Matsuo, J. Mori, M. Hamasaki, K. Ishida, T. Nishimura,
H. Takeda, K. Hasida, and M. Ishizuka. POLYPHONET: An
Advanced Social Network Extraction System from the Web.
In Proc. of the 15th international conference on World Wide
Web, pages 397–406. ACM Press, 2006.
[15] P. Mika. Flink: Semantic Web technology for the extraction
and analysis of social networks. Web Semantics: Science,
Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, 3(2-3):211–
223, 2005.

5. CONCLUSIONS
This paper provides an overview of our social network
extraction system called POLYPHONET and presents an
architecture for structuring scholarly knowledge using web
mining and semantic technology. Usage of web mining technology enables the detection of relations among
scholarly entities not only from conventionally available
databases of papers but also from other information such as
user-generated knowledge related to blogs and Wikipedia.
Using our interdisciplinary approach, which enhances
the usage of web mining and semantic technology over
various scholarly entities, we hope to contribute not only
16 http://www.friendster.com

354

[16] M. E. J. Newman. Coauthorship networks and patterns of
scientiﬁc collaboration. In Proc. of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, pages 5200–5205,
2004.
[17] T. Nishimura, Y. Nakamura, H. Itoh, and H. Nakashima.
System Design of Event Space Information Support Utilizing CoBITs. In Proc. of the 24th International Conference on
Distributed Computing System Workshops, pages 384–387,
2004.
[18] N. F. Noy. Semantic integration: a survey of ontology-based
approaches. SIGMOD Rec., 33(4):65–70, 2004.
[19] M. Oka, T. Koiso, and K. Kato. Extracting Features of Patients using the Eigen Co-occurrence Matrix Algorithm. In
Proceedings of the the 15th ECML/PKDD Workshop on Discovery Challenge, pages 86–97, 2004.
[20] M. Oka, Y. Oyama, H. Abe, and K. Kato. Anomaly Detection Using Layered Networks Based on Eigen Co-occurrence
Matrix. In Proc. of the Seventh International Symposium on
Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection (RAID), pages 223–
237, 2004.
[21] M. A. Rodriguez, J. Bollen, and H. V. de Sompel. A practical ontology for the large-scale modeling of scholarly artifacts and their usage. In Proc. of the 2007 conference on Digital libraries, pages 278–287, New York, NY, USA, 2007.
ACM.
[22] M. A. Rodringuez and J. Bollen. An Algorithm to Determine Peer-Reviewers. ArXiv Computer Science e-prints,
May 2006.
[23] J. P. Scott. Social Network Analysis: A Handbook. Sage
Publications Ltd, 2 edition, 2000.
[24] M. Steyvers and J. B. Tenenbaum. The Large-Scale Structure of Semantic Networks: Statistical Analyses and a Model
of Semantic Growth. Cognitive Science, 29(1):41–78, 2005.
[25] Y. M. H. Tomobe, K. Hashida, H. Nakajima, and
M. Ishizuka. Social network extraction from the web information. Journal of the Japanese Society for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 20(1E):46–56, 2005.
[26] Z. Zhuang, E. Elmacioglu, D. Lee, and C. L. Giles. Measuring conference quality by mining program committee characteristics. In Proc. of the 2007 conference on Digital libraries, pages 225–234, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM.

355

