12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Emergent Structure and Awareness Support for Intelligence Analysis
Claus Atzenbeck, David L. Hicks and Nasrullah Memon
Department of Software and Media Technology
Aalborg University Esbjerg
Niels Bohrs Vej 8, 6700 Esbjerg, Denmark
{atzenbeck, hicks, nasrullah}@cs.aaue.dk

Abstract

glish version of Wikipedia currently contains over 2.3 million articles.)
The Web, however, also became an important medium
for illicit activities, such as those of terrorist organizations,
who utilize it to communicate, spread information to followers, or recruit new members. This is known as the
“Dark Web” [6]. Terrorist groups gain advantages from
using the Web as a means of communication [24]. It supports various kinds of media, such as text, audio, or video,
permits potential members easy and quick access to information and permits them to engage in debates. Group
members can be easily assisted from a distance. According to [26] “The media platform most favoured by activists
and supporters of Islamist organizations is the Internet,
due to its anonymity, availability, low cost and instantaneous communication.” Due to its extensive use by terrorist groups, the Web acts as an important data source for
intelligence services and counterterrorism efforts [21, 6].
An important methodology to analyse and track terrorist groups and their structures is to collect and analyse any
and all relevant available data. Special tools are necessary to deal with the vast amount of data that is carried
over the Internet, such as e-mail communication or WWW
content. This class of applications includes data collection
(e. g., Web mining [15]) and social network analysis (SNA)
[16]. The latter aims at finding and evaluating connections
between members of terrorist groups in order to show how
such a group can be destabilized.
Outputs from SNA tools are not the only source intelligence agents use for decision making. There are various
other sources and information elements that are not part
of the repository the analysis tools use. This may include
for example personal e-mail files or information provided
by the phone or in meetings, as well as any reasoning that
intelligence agents come up with.
Intelligence agents merge and organize pieces of information from different sources in order to reason about them
and support their decision making process. The structure
of the relationships between these pieces of information

Based on the emergent nature of terrorist groups, we
propose spatial hypertext as a tool for intelligence analysts for representing, reasoning upon, and communicating information. Furthermore, we evaluate awareness as
an important feature for analysts to realise hidden associations between various people or objects. Finally, we
discuss our prototype Socs, a general spatial structure application with high level support for awareness, under the
umbrella of intelligence analysis requirements.
Keywords— intelligence analysis, emergent structure, spatial structure, awareness, knowledge representation

1

Introduction

The World Wide Web has been initially envisioned as
a space where information can be seamlessly interlinked
and accessed. Consequently, research has concentrated on
ways to make the process of publishing, interlinking, and
accessing information on the Web semantically rich, more
effective, and convenient. Hypertext has played an important role in this context, because it acted as the conceptual foundation of the WWW. Many concepts, ideas, and
methods introduced in the field of hypertext can now be
witnessed in the WWW context.
The latest movement on the WWW is “Web 2.0”.
The term was introduced by Tim O’Reilly [19] and describes Web applications that focus (among other things)
on user participation and community building. Another
recent trend on the WWW is working collaboratively
on shared documents. Examples include new services
based on Web 2.0 technology, such as Google documents
(http://docs.google.com), including shared text documents,
spreadsheets, and presentation documents. Another popular tool for shared document creation are wikis which enable a large number of users to edit text corpora collaboratively. A well-known example is Wikipedia, a free Webbased encyclopaedia with a vast number of articles available in many different languages. (For example, the En-

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.44

326

is fragile by nature, since new information may change it
substantially. Besides supporting the emergent nature of
incoming information, such structures should also be an
appropriate medium for communicating with others. Finally, their presentation should foster awareness and permit
notification services that inform the analyst about potential
unseen and non obvious connections beyond the borders of
individual data sources.
For example, the need for associating information and
communicating those associations is clearly stated in the
9/11 report [10]. It identifies both as important factors. For
instance, it points out that “not sharing information linking
individuals in the Cole attack to Mihdhar” and “not linking
the arrest of Zacarias Moussaoui, described as interested
in flight training for the purpose of using an airplane in a
terrorist act, to the heightened indications of attack” [10]
played a role in failing to prevent the attack.
In this paper we identify the need in the intelligence
analysis process for supporting emergent structures that
foster communication and awareness. We propose them as
well suited companions for intelligence agents that would
enable them to represent and communicate their thinking
processes. They can serve as a means for merging, associating, and further processing information provided by a
variety of sources, including SNA tools.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes
how spatial structures can serve as a means for handling
emergent information, and help solve some of the problems the node–link paradigm encounters when used for
that task. Due to the emergent nature of terrorist networks,
spatial structures appear to be an attractive medium for intelligence analysis. Furthermore, we describe how they can
serve as a means for communication and discuss briefly
support for awareness and notification services. Section 3
discusses our prototype and points out its benefits in the
context of intelligence work. Finally, Section 4 concludes
the paper and briefly describes future research directions.

2

their focus on computation, most of them model relationships as graphs. Graphs have been well researched and
thus permit the application and use of efficient mathematical models and algorithms.
Even though machines are necessary to deal with the
vast amount of information, final decisions, however, are
taken by humans. Analysts need support for their decision making process, of which SNA tools play an important role. Special applications may support agents in this
phase by fulfilling the following requirements:
1. Supporting the emergent and fragile nature of the
created structure and fostering its communication
among analysts.
2. Integrating with the information sources used by the
analyst, permitting them to be represented and structured in a common information space.
3. Supporting awareness of linked information beyond
the boundaries of the sources that provided it, such
that notification becomes possible.
Supporting emergent structure as a means for knowledge representation, communication, integration, and
awareness/notification has been and still is discussed in
depth in hypertext research. Thus, we apply this research
direction to the needs of intelligence analysts, including
structuring and representing data delivered by web mining
or SNA tools.

2.2

Emergent Structure Support

Organizing and making sense of information is an important task for knowledge workers and the main focus of
hypermedia research from its very beginning. Hypermedia systems aim at augmenting human intellect, that is “increasing the capability of a man to approach a complex
problem situation, to gain comprehension to suit his particular needs, and to derive solutions to problems” [7].
The most widely used structure abstractions in hypertext are nodes and links. Nodes are informational units
that can be connected through links. Users can traverse
links and thereby navigate through a hypertext. Nodes and
links, however, can be criticised for a lack of support for
emergent structures. In fact, this was clearly pointed out
over 16 years ago when Frank Halasz in his 1991 Hypertext Conference keynote address demanded “Ending the
Tyranny of the Link” [9]. He proposed so-called “supranetwork hypertexts”, that are structures other than those
based on networks. Spatial hypertext (e. g., Aquanet [12]
at that time) was such an example.
Spatial hypertext is often described as being based on
a card metaphor. Like cards on a table, nodes positioned
in a virtual space can be moved and organized. The idea

Supporting Intelligence Agents

2.1 Overview
Intelligence analysts deal with information from a variety of sources, all of which are important to their decision
making process. Additionally, as pointed out by the 9/11
report [10], linking and communicating those pieces of information is an important issue.
In order to deal with the increasing amount of data available especially through the Internet, automatic tools are
used to harvest relevant information and compute relationships that implicitly exist in the “raw data”. The output
is a pre-selection that helps analysts to focus on the most
relevant parts.
Those tools, however, focus on a predefined repository
and are limited in their structural representation. Due to

327

is to permit the structuring of information and authoring of associations through visual cues (e. g., colour, size,
shape) and spatial proximity. Recent examples of systems
that provide these capabilities are the Visual Knowledge
Builder (VKB) [22] and Tinderbox [3].
Spatial hypertext was designed for and is well suited
for dealing with emergent structures [14]. It serves “like
sketch representations [8] for hypertext authoring” [25]
and fosters reflections in early design phases [17]. Spatial
hypertext is more than just another visualization technique:
“it is also a way to take advantage of human perceptual
abilities in hypertext navigation, and to provide users with
a fairly intuitive medium through which they may express
new structures and manipulate existing structures” [13].
Even though graph-like structures (e. g., nodes and
links) are good prerequisites for the automated processing of networks of information and are commonly used
for SNA (e. g., [6]), the characteristics of spatial hypertext
make it the tool of choice for the human reflection on and
reasoning about emergent structures. Referring to [23],
[22] argues that “[u]sing node and link hypertext to express an emerging or evolving understanding means structuring and restructuring the material over time. This overhead makes traditional hypertexts ill-suited to many types
of analysis and design tasks – particularly, situations where
a lot of information must be interpreted rapidly or where a
group shares and restructures information in order to coordinate or reach consensus.”
Due to the emergent and dynamic nature of Internet communities (e. g., Web 2.0 online communities [5]),
spatial hypertext becomes a natural tool for modelling
those. For example, virtual communities can subdivide
into smaller groups when new members join. [20] uses
the expression “ ‘fractal’ aspect of virtual communities” to
describe this process.
Intelligence analysts are supported by Web mining and
SNA tools to harvest vast repositories and find implicit relationships in the information gathered. However, to support later phases of the analysis process, such as the postprocessing of this information, and also the enrichment of
it through the identification of additional relationships, spatial structures would be beneficial. Similar to designers,
information or intelligence analysts need tools appropriate
to the task at hand: “What is important is to give designers
representational media that allow them to externalize what
they want to externalize in ways they like.” [17]

tem for processing and using what it has. The
system of ‘need to know’ should be replaced
by a system of ‘need to share.’ ” [10]
Protocols are important for sharing information. Those
include technical (i. e., the software and hardware infrastructure) as well as social protocols (i. e., the social role
and interaction among team members) [4]. The structure
type used as a means of communication must foster the
appropriate encoding and decoding of the passed message.
Spatial hypertext has been proposed as an alternative to
formalised structures, especially for collaborative environments. “Users are hesitant about formalization because of
a fear of prematurely committing to a specific perspective
on their tasks; this may be especially true in a collaborative setting, where people must agree on an appropriate
formalism and the conventions for encoding information
into them” [23]. Thus, spatial hypertext is more appropriate for communication than formalized structures (e. g.,
node/link-based).

2.4

Awareness and Notifications

Awareness is another important issue for collaborative
information spaces, even though it has not yet been implemented in many relevant applications, as a survey of 19
Web-based collaborative systems indicates [18].
Different types of awareness have been discussed in
the research community. Those include personal (“Who
am I?”), social (“Who communicates with me?”), informal (“Who is doing what?”), group (“Who is in my
group?”), and workspace awareness (“What is happening?”) [11]. Analysis and notification capabilities would
support collaboration among intelligence agents and foster
better communication. Furthermore, workspace awareness
would enable agents to realise and understand hidden connections between what they have already structured and the
subjects of their investigations (i. e., terrorists and their networks).
Structuring tools for intelligence agents should provide
high level awareness for better collaboration support as
well as workspace awareness for getting notified about important implicit connections of the analyst’s current context (e. g., open documents) to terrorists or their organizations. In order to ensure this, such tools must be integrated
into the user’s computer environment. They should have
access to various digital information sources that are available through different applications (e. g., SNA tools or email), permit associating and sharing them in a common
information space, and support sending notifications about
context related implicit connections to the user.

2.3 Communication Support
As mentioned in the introduction, a major problem identified in conjunction with the tragic events of 9/11 was the
lack of communication among U.S. government agencies:

3 Socs – a Prototype

“The U.S. government has access to a vast
amount of information. But it has a weak sys-

In the following we will describe our prototype Socs,
that integrates important parts of a typical computer sys-

328

tem used by knowledge workers for their daily work. It
has been implemented in the Mac OS X environment. This
prototype version of Socs provides a space for representing
and visualizing the people with which a person interacts
and collaborates. (In an upcoming version Socs will also
support arbitrary documents.) The security concerns of intelligence agencies make it difficult to observe and analyse
in detail the work processes of intelligence analysts. Therefore the prototype will be explained from the perspective
of knowledge workers who are authoring Wikipedia articles collaboratively. This setting, however, is not unique
and the information source can be replaced by any other
source, such as open source intelligence (OSINT) or SNA
data.
Figure 1 depicts a screenshot of the Socs prototype. In
the centre of the Figure the so-called “social space” can
be seen, on which representations of people (e.g., those
with which a person collaborates) can be arranged. In addition to spatial attributes (i. e., proximity or alignment),
colours and size can be used for expressing associations
among collaborators. “Drop groups” are marked regions
in the background, as shown in the screenshot. They represent groups. In order to address the focus–context problem when a large number of objects are placed in a space,
Socs features zooming techniques to switch between an
overview and a detailed view [1].
Socs integrates the system-wide address book available
in the Mac OS environment which is used by various other
applications, such as Mail (i. e., an e-mail client) or iCal
(i. e., a calender application) to find e-mail addresses or
identify meeting attendees. The user can add new “people” to the social space by dragging & dropping from the
address book or the built-in address book browser (see Figure 1). They are represented on the space by the person’s
picture, name, or Wikipedia ID (whatever is available).
“Drop groups” are represented as groups in the address
book. They get instantiated by dragging a group from
the address book onto the space. This also adds all current members of the group on top of the newly created
drop group. If a person is removed from or moved onto
a drop group in Socs it will be synchronised immediately
in the address book database. Even though much information expressed via the spatial structure on the space is
not represented in the address book (e. g., spatial arrangement or colour), the basic group-based structure is equivalent and usable by all applications connected to the address
book framework. Drop groups look similar to adornments
in Tinderbox [3], however, they have narrower semantics,
since they are used primarily for grouping people.
Socs’ integrated Web-browser can be used to browse arbitrary Web pages. However, if Socs discovers a supported
Web site, it will extract and display user relevant data. At

the moment Socs supports only the Wikipedia website as
an information source. For any article displayed in the
browser, Socs can display its authors. The screenshot in
Figure 1 shows them listed at the Wiki Author’s window.
In addition to the Wikipedia login name, the user can see
the authors’ activity count (i. e., how many changes were
submitted), which ones are already part of the Socs social
space (“S”), and who is part of the address book (“AB”, not
shown in the screenshot). Authors of the currently viewed
Wikipedia article who are also on the Socs social space will
be highlighted there in red.
Records at the Wiki Author’s window can be dragged
onto the space. This will create a new instance of that person on the space as well as one in the address book. If
a corresponding entry exists already in the address book
database, Socs will use that one as reference instead.
The linking of information about who is on the social
space, who is in the address book, and who authored the
currently displayed article increases various kinds of the
awarenesses that were described earlier, especially group
awareness and workspace awareness. Considering other
integrated applications that are used by intelligence analysts, Socs would be able to provide awareness of team
members and their activities as well as awareness of subjects of interest who can be found on the space, and are
also related to a currently viewed document or Web page.
Following spatial hypertext research, the space provided
by Socs can serve as a means for communicating with others. This includes local or geographically distributed meetings as well as asynchronous communication. Due to easy
manipulation, spatial structures are well suited for meetings. Changes can be seen and discussed immediately.
This serves the emergent nature of many meeting situations
well.

4 Conclusion and Future Work
Based on the emergent nature of covert groups such
as terrorist organizations we propose spatial hypertext as
a means for intelligence agents to support their reasoning
and decision making. This solves some problems that occur with explicit structures (e. g., nodes and links). Further,
spatial hypertext is an appropriate medium for communication and thus addresses an important aspect and core problem for intelligence services that was pointed out by the
9/11 report [10]. Due to their communicative capabilities
and reduced cognitive overhead requirement (compared to
formal structures), they are also an appropriate means for
structuring information collaboratively.
Various data sources, including those provided by SNA
tools, can be used as input channels. By overcoming the
border of individual sources of information and permitting a common information space, rich structures become
possible that can support the analysis and decision making

329

Figure 1: Screenshot of Socs (social space, web browser, wiki authors list, address book)

330

process.
We propose the Socs prototype as a tool to support
knowledge workers in general and intelligence analysts in
particular. Socs provides the discussed features of a high
level of integration into the user’s environment, various
types of awarenesses, support for emergent structures, and
effective communication. It provides a common information space across the borders of individual data sources
through integrating services, such as the system-wide address book framework or the World Wide Web. To our
knowledge, Socs is the first application of its kind that
targets the field of intelligence analysis with a special focus on social structures: It provides spatial hypertext techniques to author and modify social relationships and thus
changes the primary scope of existing spatial hypertext applications (e. g., VKB [22] or Tinderbox [3]) from generic
information pieces to social structure abstractions (see also
[2]).
Socs is still at an early development state. We plan
to open Socs’s API to other applications as well as write
modules to connect to additional tools. This will increase
the potential for awareness and add further data sources.
Furthermore, analysing applications used by intelligence
agents or for police investigations would be beneficial to
help tailor Socs for their specific needs.

[6] Hsinchun Chen. Computer-assisted “dark web” website and forum collection, analysis and visualization.
In Boaz Ganor, Katharina von Knop, and Carlos
Duarte, editors, Hypermedia Seduction for Terrorist
Recruiting, volume 25 of NATO Science for Peace
and Security Series: Human and Societal Dynamics,
pages 119–139. IOS Press, 2007.
[7] Douglas C. Engelbart. Augmenting human intellect:
A conceptual framework. Summary Report AFOSR3233, Standford Research Institute, 10 1962.
[8] Mark D. Gross and Ellen Yi-Luen Do. Ambiguous intentions: a paper-like interface for creative design. In
UIST ’96: Proceedings of the 9th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology,
pages 183–192. ACM, 1996.
[9] Frank G. Halasz. “Seven Issues” revisited. Keynote
address, Hypertext ’91 conference, San Antonio,
Texas. WWW, 12 1991.
[10] Thomas H. Kean, Lee H. Hamilton, Richard BenVeniste, Bob Kerrey, Fred F. Fielding, John F.
Lehman, Jamie S. Gorelick, Timothy J. Roemer,
Slade Gorton, and James R. Thompson, editors. The
9/11 Commission Report. Executive Summary. Norton, 2004.

References

[11] Ilaria Liccardi, Hugh C. Davis, and Su White.
CAWS: a wiki system to improve workspace awareness to advance effectiveness of co-authoring activities. In CHI ’07 extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, pages 2555–2560. ACM,
2007.

[1] Claus Atzenbeck. WildDocs – Investigating Construction of Metaphors in Office Work. PhD thesis,
Aalborg University, Denmark, 7 2006.
[2] Claus Atzenbeck and Manolis Tzagarakis. Criteria
for social applications. In Vania Dimitrova, Manolis Tzagarakis, and Julita Vassileva, editors, SociUM:
Adaptation and personalization in social systems:
groups, teams, communities. Workshop proceedings
in conjunction with the 11th international conference
on User Modeling, pages 45–49, 2007.

[12] Catherine C. Marshall, Frank G. Halasz, Russell A.
Rogers, and William C. Janssen. Aquanet: a hypertext tool to hold your knowledge in place. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Hypertext,
pages 261–275. ACM Press, 1991.

[3] Mark Bernstein. The Tinderbox Way. Eastgate Systems, 2006.

[13] Catherine C. Marshall and Frank M. Shipman. Spatial hypertext: designing for change. Communications of the ACM, 38(8):88–97, 8 1995.

[4] Uwe M. Borghoff and Johann H. Schlichter.
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work. Introduction
to Distributed Applications, chapter 3, pages 145–
183. Springer, 2000.

[14] Catherine C. Marshall, Frank M. Shipman, and
James H. Coombs. VIKI: Spatial hypertext supporting emergent structure. In Proceedings of the 1994
ACM European Conference on Hypermedia Technology, pages 13–23. ACM Press, 1994.

[5] Susan L. Bryant, Andrea Forte, and Amy Bruckman. Becoming Wikipedian: transformation of participation in a collaborative online encyclopedia. In
GROUP ’05: Proceedings of the 2005 international
ACM SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group
work, pages 1–10. ACM Press, 2005.

[15] Nasrullah Memon, David Hicks, Henrik Legind
Larsen, and Abdul Qadeer Khan Rajput. How investigative data mining can help intelligence agencies in
understanding and splitting terrorist networks. Studies in Conflict & Terrorism, 2008.

331

[16] Nasrullah Memon and Henrik Legind Larsen. Structural analysis and destabilizing terrorist networks. In
Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on
Data Mining DMIN’06, pages 296–302, 2006.

Builder: a second generation spatial hypertext. In
Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia, pages 113–122. ACM Press,
2001.

[17] Kumiyo Nakakoji, Yasuhiro Yamamoto, Shingo
Takada, and Brent N. Reeves. Two-dimensional spatial positioning as a means for reflection in design. In
DIS ’00: Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Designing interactive systems, pages 145–154. ACM,
2000.

[23] Frank M. Shipman and Catherine C. Marshall. Formality considered harmful: Experiences, emerging
themes, and directions on the use of formal representations in interactive systems. Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW), 8(4):333–352, 1999.

[18] Sylvie No¨el and Jean-Marc Robert. How the web is
used to support collaborative writing. Behaviour and
Information Technology, 22(18):245–262, 2003.

[24] Gabriel Weimann. Using the internet for terrorist recruitment and mobilization. In Boaz Ganor, Katharina von Knop, and Carlos Duarte, editors, Hypermedia Seduction for Terrorist Recruiting, volume 25
of NATO Science for Peace and Security Series: Human and Societal Dynamics, pages 47–58. IOS Press,
2007.

[19] Tim O’Reilly. What is Web 2.0? Design patterns and
business models for the next generation of software.
WWW, 9 2005.
[20] Don Radlauer. Virtual communities as pathways to
extremism. In Boaz Ganor, Katharina von Knop,
and Carlos Duarte, editors, Hypermedia Seduction
for Terrorist Recruiting, volume 25 of NATO Science
for Peace and Security Series: Human and Societal
Dynamics, pages 67–75. IOS Press, 2007.

[25] Yasuhiro Yamamoto, Kumiyo Nakakoji, and Atsushi
Aoki. Spatial hypertext for linear-information authoring: Interaction design and system development
based on the art design principle. In Proceedings of
the 13th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia, pages 35–44. ACM Press, 2002.

[21] Yael Shahar. The internet as a tool for intelligence
and counter–terrorism. In Boaz Ganor, Katharina von
Knop, and Carlos Duarte, editors, Hypermedia Seduction for Terrorist Recruiting, volume 25 of NATO
Science for Peace and Security Series: Human and
Societal Dynamics, pages 140–153. IOS Press, 2007.

[26] Yael Yehoshua. Islamist websites as an integral part
of jihad: A general overview. In Boaz Ganor, Katharina von Knop, and Carlos Duarte, editors, Hypermedia Seduction for Terrorist Recruiting, volume 25
of NATO Science for Peace and Security Series: Human and Societal Dynamics, pages 59–66. IOS Press,
2007.

[22] Frank M. Shipman, Haowei Hsieh, Preetam Maloor, and J. Michael Moore. The Visual Knowledge

332

