12th International Conference Information Visualisation

A Tourism Information Analysis Tool for Mobile Devices
1

Sergio Clayton Viana Pinheiro, 1Bianchi Serique Meiguins, 2Aruanda Simões Gonçalves
Meiguins, 1Leandro Hernandez Almeida
1
Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciência da Computação – Universidade Federal do Pará (UFPA)
2
Área de Ciências e Tecnologia – Centro Universitário do Pará (CESUPA)
serclay@yahoo.com.br, {bianchi, aruanda, leandro}@redeinformatica.com.br
Besides, the user’s mobility may be guided by the
exploration of georeferenced information in dynamic
maps. For instance, a tourist needs to look for a
restaurant that takes credit cards, has a parking lot and is
located in no more than 500 meters of distance. The
tourist would use data filters and would quickly find all
the restaurants that have those characteristics, as well as
the best way to get to such destination from his/her
current place. The use of multiple visualization
techniques could facilitate the process of search,
visualization and analysis of information, and problems
like occlusion of information in maps could be solved,
enhancing the user’s perception on the data.
This work aims to implement a prototype that uses
multiple information visualization techniques in a
coordinate way in mobile devices. As a case study, its
application is directed to the tourist sector. The
developed techniques are data dispersion in maps and
treemap. Both are coordinated and have a data table. The
information is manipulated by filters, facilitating its
analysis by the user. This application was completely
developed in JavaME, what guarantees portability and
modularity (inclusion of new IV techniques). Preliminary
usability essays have been performed; their results are
shown in the end of this article.
This article is arranged in the following order: in
Section 2, some related works are presented; in Section
3, the prototype is presented in details, as well as its
operation and the technologies used, in section 4 the
results of the usability essays are presented; in final,
there are the final considerations and future works

Abstract
This paper presents a data analysis tool for mobile
devices. Coordinated views are used to enhance the
user's perception over data and diminish the difficulties
caused by the lack of resources these mobiles present,
specially when it comes to display size. The tool was
totally developed in JavaME, what guarantees
portability, scalability and code reuse. It presents two
visualization techniques, implemented and coordinated
with filters, scatterplot graph with georeferenced maps
and treemap. Besides, preliminary usability tests were
performed with users.
Keywords--- Information Visualization, Coordinated
Views, Visualization Tools, Treemap, Scatterplot, Mobile
Devices.

1. Introduction
Mobile devices, such as Handhelds and
Smartphones, have become more and more common and
necessary tools for people in very different fields of
interest: business, entertainment, information seeking,
among others. The greatest challenge of all, when it
comes to developing applications for these devices,
which present a certain limitation of resources, is to
make them “comfortable“ and easy-to-use as desktop
applications.
That limitation becomes more significant
particularly in activities which require mobility and
decision making at the same time, especially due to a
limited visual area for analysis. One of the ways to
reduce the problem would be the use of Information
Visualization (IV) techniques, in order to enhance the
presentation, search and analysis of data.
One can consider a tourist as an example. The tourist
is always in constant movement and needs to make
decisions every time, especially when the previously
made decisions have to be changed due to an adverse
context, such as a closed tourist attraction, price rise of
tickets, missing of transportation, among others[1].

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.53

2. Related Work
Among the related works, three must be remarked:
• Heimonen [2] studied several visualization
techniques that could be used in mobile devices.
Besides, presents an assessment framework that
can be used to assess the adequacy of the
utilization of visualization techniques in mobile
devices.
• Engdahl [3] implemented the Treemap
technique of Information Visualization in

264

•

mobile devices for the analysis of discussion
forums’ databases. This technique uses colored
rectangles, which make use of 100% of the
available screen in the device. This study also
demonstrates that the Treemap technique’s
advantages in desktop environments are also
valid in mobile devices environments (Figure 1).
Carmo [4] developed a prototype that integrated
filter mechanisms, semantic criteria and
multiple representations with different detail
levels, in order to generate intelligible
representations as searching results on
geographical
information
in
mobile
environments (Figure 2)

device’s secondary memory, so that in the next search a
connection would not be necessary, unless the user needs
another part of the map or a different zoom level.

Figure 3. A scatterplot technique with
georeferenced maps on a Handheld device.
3.1.2 Treemap Technique

Figure 1. Treemap on
a Handheld [3].

Treemap is a space-constrained visualization of
hierarchical structures [9].
Its main characteristic consists of the organization of
data items in terms of size (area – rectangle) of a
determined continuous value of an attribute. Thus, the
biggest rectangles are located in the lower right part
(Figure 4).

Figure 2. Carmo’s [4]
work.

The tool developed in this work uses the idea
proposed by Engdahl [3] (Treemap in mobile devices)
and the idea proposed by Carmo [4] (georeferenced
information visualization), and gathers them both in a
single tool. Furthermore, the techniques are coordinated
and used for decision making based on tourist
information.

3. The Prototype
The prototype was developed by using the
programming language JavaME [5] and the hardware
used was a Dell Axim X51v. Since Sun [6] has no virtual
machine (JVM) for pocketPCs, it was necessary to use
the paid version of JVM VSICOM’s CrEme JVM [7] in
its evaluation mode.
Its main functionalities, which implement
coordinated IV techniques in mobile devices, are shown
below.

Figure 4. Treemap Technique in operation on a
Handheld.

3.2 The User Interface
The user interface consists basically of two contexts:
the Views context and the Menu context. In Views, the
user can change the visualization techniques by clicking
the corresponding button. In Menu, all the other
functionalities of the prototype are located, such as
database, filters, configuration and finalization of the
application.

3.1 Visualization Technique
3.1.1. Scatterplot Technique
The scatterplot module consists of a visualization
area, where the data are georeferenced in the map,
through their latitude and longitude (Figure 3). The maps
used in this activity are the ones supplied by Google™,
through its Google Maps service [8]. Once loaded
through an internet connection, the maps are stored in the

265

Figure 7. Small sample of the Hotel Database

Figure 5. The Prototype’s Interface.
Figure 8. Small sample of the Restaurants-PubsSnack Bars Database.

3.3 Access to Different Databases
The databases used in the essays have information
on restaurants, pubs, snack bars and hotels. There are
other bases, which were not used in the essays, such as
tourist attractions, car rental agencies, exchange offices
and hospitals. All bases have their respective latitude and
longitude, which are used to georeferencing their
information in the Scatterplot-Map technique.
In order to let the user access one of the available
databases, he/she has to access the Base menu (Figure 5)
and choose one of the options presented (Figure 6). All
the filters, configurations and visualizations will be
reconstructed.

A detailed look of the data can be taken by the user
through the Table (Figure 9)

Figure 9. All the data can be
seen in the Table.

3.4 Coordinated Views
The implemented techniques have some common
aspects in their configurations and actions. These
common aspects coordinate the views, although they are
not in the same viewing area.
The first common aspect is the color. When the
color-related attribute is selected, this selection is
reflected in both techniques. For instance, if the attribute
“Parking” is selected (“yes or “no” values) in the
restaurant base, the visible points are divided into red
and blue ones, which represent the values of the Parking
attribute. Figures 10 and 11 present the changes in the
Map Data Dispersion Technique and Treemap
techniques, respectively.

Figure 6. Selecting
restaurants-pubs-snack bars
database.

Next, there is a small sample of hotel (Figure 7) and
restaurants-pubs-snack bars (Figure 8) databases. Most
of the data used are public and some were given by the
companies mentioned. Their latitude and longitude were
loaded through free tools that convert addresses into
latitude and longitude degrees. In the end, some adjusts
were necessary after getting the first results on the map.

266

Figure 10. Color
Attribute in the
Scatterplot Technique.

Figure 11. Color
attribute in the
Treemap Technique.

The second common functionality is the brushing
technique. Its operation occurs following these steps:
when one or more data items in one of the visualizations
are selected, the item(s) will also be highlighted in the
other visualizations and data tables (Figure 12). Thus, if
the user finds out the restaurant he/she is interested in
either in the Table or in the Treemap technique, he/she
will be able to select the item and figure out the
geographic region he/she is in, according to the
dispersion technique.

Figure 13. Coordination of the filter functionality in
all views.

3.5 Dynamic Filtering.
The filter’s main objective is to enable the user to
focus a minor group of data, enhanceing his/her
perception, facilitating his/her process of gathering
relevant information. This tool uses two kinds of filters:
continuous and discreet.
The continuous filter (Figure 14a) is represented by
an interval bar, which is configured while each database
is being loaded, and is associated with attributes of
numerical values that are considered continuous by the
tool. It’s not a very common component of traditional
tools, though it is easy to be understood and manipulated.
This filter enables the user to choose a range of values
(intervals) for an attribute. When the user interacts with
this component, dragging its extremities and setting new
intervals, the items which are not located in the interval
presented by the filter are automatically excluded.
(Figure 13).

Figure 12. Brushing coordination in the three views.

The third common functionality is the filters. Once the
filters are applied in the base, they reflect in all
visualizations and data tables, diminishing or increasing
the visible data. Figure 13 shows the application of a
filter when the data searched is only air-conditioned
restaurants that present an average expense of R$25 to
R$30 a person. As a result of the application of this filter,
all views will have their visualization items filtered.

(a)

(b)

Figure 14. Examples of continuous
(a) and discreet (b) filters.

267

The discreet filter (Figure 14b) is represented by a
set of CheckBoxes that represent the values of a nonnumerical attribute. In relation to its operation, when a
checkbox is unchecked, the points that represent its value
in the visualization are automatically excluded (Figure
13).

3.7. Identifying Routes
The use of georeferenced information enables the
implementation of a very important characteristic for the
tourist: the possibility of building routes. To access this
functionality, it is necessary to touch the screen of the
handheld with the stylus pencil. As the functionality
menu appears, it is necessary to provide the system with
information about the user’s location.
Next, the user only has to repeat the previously
mentioned steps, but, instead of informing his/her
location, it is necessary to input the final destination.
This place can either be selected in the table or the point
selected by the stylus pencil (Figure 19)

3.6 Configuration of the visualization items.
The Configuration menu has all the existing
visualization configuration. It presents four tabs:
Subtitles, Colors, Maps and Treemap. In the subtitles tab,
the visibility of some information, such as texts and
landscapes, is configured; in the color tab, the colors of
the visualization items are set (figure 15); in the Map tab,
the shapes of the visualization items shown in the map
are configured; finally, in the Treemap tab (Figure 17), It
is possible to choose which attribute will be used to
grouping items of the visualization (Figure 18).

Figure 19. Building Routes.
4. Usability Essays

Figure 15. Color
Configuration.

Figure 17. Group
Configuration for
Treemap Technique.

The tests performed with the users have been
developed following the taxonomy of user tasks for the
visualization of multidimensional information defined by
Pillat [10]. Three tasks have been elaborated and applied
in ascendant order of complexity – simple, average and
complex.

Figure 16. Scatterplot
Configuration.

The specified tasks for the restaurants-pubs-snack bars
database are:
• Are there seafood restaurants which deliver?
• Are most of the air-conditioned restaurants that
have parking more expensive in the districts of
Nazaré or Reduto?
• What are the restaurants which deliver like (what
are their profiles)?
• The specified tasks for the hotel database are: Are
there hotels with multi-sports courts in the districts
of Nazaré?
• What is the district that has more hotels with
parking and business offices?
• What are the hotels that have gyms like (what are
their profiles)?
Eight users took part in the tests. None of them
had any experience with handheld devices, but they all
had good knowledge on information visualization
techniques. Each test was supervised by an observer,
who wrote down the usability problems mentioned by
the users. The observer also took note of the interaction,

Figure 18. Subdivided
Treemap after
Configuration.

268

the sequence of subtasks involved in the solution of each
task, and the technique used to solve each task
effectively.
In order to analyze the level of right procedures
by the users in the tasks, they were ranked according to
their correction ratio: correct, partially correct and
wrong. The graphs show few users getting the tasks
completely wrong, and most of the incorrect procedures
were performed in the first questions (Figure 20).
In order to analyze the time spent by the users,
they were ranked according to four time intervals: less
than two minutes, between two and four minutes,
between four and six minutes, and more than six
minutes. The graphs show that few users took more than
6 minutes to perform the tasks, and the majority takes no
more than four minutes to perform the tasks (Figure 21)

analysis of the data, for there was a reduction in the
quantity of data for the available techniques. The time
needed to perform the tasks was not very long, especially
if taken into account their complexity. The level of
success in the predefined tasks was between average and
good, since there were lots of errors caused by the
unfamiliarity of the users with the tool and its interaction
mechanisms.
Moreover, there is a wide range of possibilities
of application of this project – from management of
herds of cows or bulls in order to medicate or slaughter
them, to the manual inspection and maintenance of
pressure valves in an industrial facility.
Future Work
•
•
•

•

Figure 20. Level of right
procedures by the users
in the tasks.

Figure 21. Time spent by
the users to deal with the
questions in the
restaurants database.

Finally, the users’ main suggestions were to
enhance the interaction with the filters, and the action of
checking and unchecking the boxes. They also suggested
that some new interaction tasks to be added to the map,
such as selecting objects inside an area. In general, they
implied that some details in the interface should be
enhanced. All users found the tool very interesting and
promising.

Final Remarks
This work presented a prototype that
implements coordinated information visualization
techniques in mobile devices. The case study was
directed to the tourist sector, more specifically to the
tourist support field. The tool presented two
implemented visualization techniques – Treemap and
Map Data Dispersion. Furthermore, modules of filters,
tables and georeferenced maps were also developed.
The fact that it has been developed in the JAVA
language assures especially portability, modularity and
code reutilization.
Initial tests were performed with eight users
from the computer field. All shared a good knowledge of
visualization techniques. A frequent use of the filters was
noticed. According to the users, the filteres enhanced the

269

To perform comparison studies with other
coordinated views tools
Development of more flexible coordination
mechanisms
Development of additional views such as dynamic
maps, 3D scatterplot and graphic visualization
techniques
Development of an intelligent module to
automatically select the most appropriate
techniques and the corresponding settings for each
dataset

References
[1]

BROWN. B. and M., Chalmers, “Tourism and Mobile
Technology”, The Proceedings of the Eight European
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work.
Helsinki, Finland, 2003.
[2] HEIMONEN, T., Information Visualization on Small
Display Devices. Master's Thesis, Department of
Computer Sciences, University of Tampere, 2002.
Disponivelc em <http://www.cs.uta.fi/research/theses/
masters/Heimonen_Tomi.pdf>. Acesso em 22 Jan 2008.
[3] ENGDAHL, B., Malin K. and Gary M. Using Treemaps
to Visualize Threaded Discussion Forums on PDAs. In
Proceedings CHI 2005, Portland, Oregon.
[4] CARMO M. B., Afonso A. P., Pombinho P.,
Visualization of Geographic Query Results for Small
Screen Devices, Proceedings of GIR-2007, ACM Press,
Lisbon, Portugal, November 2007, pp. 63-64.
[5] MUCHOW, John W.. Core J2ME: Tecnologia e MIDP.
Palo Alto: Makron Books, 2004.
[6] SUN, 2008. Disponível em: <http://www.sun.com.br/>.
Acesso em: 15 march 2008.
[7] NSICOM's CrEme JVM, 2007. Disponível em:
<http://www.nsicom.com/>. Acesso em 20 nov. 2007.
Proceedings of ECUE’99. Estocolmo, Suécia. Dezembro.
[8] GoogleMaps, 2008. Disponível em: <http://www.google
maps.com/>. Acesso em: 15 march 2008.
[9] Shneiderman, B. and Wattenberg, M. (2001) Ordered
Treemap Layouts. Proceedings of IEEE Information
Visualization (InfoVis), New York: IEEE.
[10] PILLAT, R. M., Valiati, E. R. and Freitas, C. M. D.
Experimental Study on Evaluation of Multidimensional
Information Visualization Techniques. In: CLIHC'05,
Cuernavaca, 2005 - Mexico. p. 20 - 30.

