12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Visualizing Time-Dependent Data in Multivariate Hierarchic Plots Design and Evaluation of an Economic Application
Tatiana Tekuˇsov´a
Fraunhofer Computer Graphics Institute
Darmstadt, Germany
tatiana.tekusova@igd.fraunhofer.de

Tobias Schreck
Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
tschreck@gris.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract

through time - ‘Which consumer basket components have
caused the higher price level in the last month, compared to
the previous month?’ The contribution of the items in the
consumer basket to the overall rate of price level changes
evolves over time as the price of each item fluctuates substantially from month to month. For example, a higher price
of oil on the world market may significantly raise the price
of fuel goods, or bad weather conditions may cause higher
wheat prices. However, composition and time are not the
only dimensions that need to be included in the analysis.
Often, additional dimensions such as the pattern of inflation, or product profitability will need to be considered.
To reflect the data and analytic requirements, we have
developed an interactive visualization of multi-dimensional
structural data, which is able to display time variation in the
data as well. Our system displays the data in a three dimensional hierarchic circular or column plot. We use animation
to convey the data changes through time. The detailed timedependent development of selected data items can be shown
in an additional view. Our system provides interactive tools
supporting the economic data analysis in a visual way. In
addition, the users may set up the data display so that it best
suits their analytical needs. We apply our system to an extensive real-world database of monthly European consumer
price data from January 2000 to July 2007, taken from the
Eurostat database [7], thereby illustrating its usefulness for
effective visual analysis in a complex application area. The
system can be used in other application areas, e.g., in the
analysis of other economic or socio-demographic areas.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
In Section 2, we review relevant analytical tasks and data
specifics of price analysis, and we describe the data used
in our application. In Section 3, we recall important related work on visualization of time-dependent hierarchic
data. In Section 4, we describe our visualization system and
its functionality regarding analysis of European consumer
price data. Section 5 provides results of a qualitative user
study showing the usefulness of the system for economic
analysis. Finally, Section 6 concludes.

For successfully competing in a modern economy, large
amounts of hierarchic time-dependent data need to be analyzed. As an example, one could consider the geographic
composition of inflation in the European Union, or the revenue by product (sub) categories of a firm in the last month.
Analysts wish to interpret the structure of the data not only
at a single point in time, but examine the changes in the
data categories through time. The analysts may need to consider additional dimensions to composition and time, such
as the growth rate or profit rate. To reflect such analytic
requirements, we have developed an interactive visualization of multi-dimensional, structured data taking the time
dimension into account. The data are displayed in a three
dimensional hierarchic circular or column plot. The timedimension of the data is represented by animation. Our system provides interactive tools for the visual data analysis
and variable set-up of the data display. For better orientation in the data space, we have enhanced the visualization
with smooth transitions between different data selections in
case of 3D hierarchic plots. The techniques presented can
be applied to various data domains. A user study using European inflation data has shown the usefulness for effective
economic analysis.

1. Introduction
In a modern economy, large amounts of hierarchic timedependent data need to be analyzed. As an example, one
could consider the (geographic) composition of consumer
prices in the EU or the revenue by product (sub) categories
of a company in the last month. Analysts may wish to investigate the structure of the data, e.g.: ‘Which countries have
predominantly contributed to higher consumer prices in the
EU?’ Moreover, they may need to examine the changes in
the contribution of different components to an aggregate

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.51

143

2

Economic Analysis

these changes over time in the plot as well as to allow the
user to compare the compositions of the price indices across
countries.

In this section, we introduce the studied consumer price
data and associated analytic tasks.

2.2
2.1

Analytic Tasks

Consumer Price Data
In economic terms, inflation is defined as the on-going
increase in the price level. The analysis of inflationary
developments therefore entails the need to identify the comovement in consumer prices across a broad set of item categories. More specifically, it is important to distinguish between movements in the overall HICP index resulting from
changes in the prices of any individual consumer goods and
services, and movements in the HICP as a whole, reflecting
a broadly based increase in the cost of living. For example, in recent years oil and other energy prices increased
substantially, while on the whole, inflation in the EU remained low and stable. Generally, this could be due to a
small weight of high inflation goods and services in the consumer basket, or due to a compensation by falling prices of
other goods. Therefore, one of the main tasks in the analysis of inflation development is to examine the composition
of the inflation by its components. In the current analysis,
the development of the contributions to inflation by main
categories is mainly visualized in a stacked column chart
(see Figure 1, b). The chart shows the monthly development
of the Euro area inflation over the period of the year 2006.
The dotted line represents the total annual consumer price
increase in this period, and the column segments represent
the contribution (composite of weight and price increase)
of a component to the total price increase. For example, the
blue segment explains almost half of the total price increase
in December 2006. However, this view does not allow for
discrimination of whether this was caused by high inflation
goods and services with small weight in the index, or by low
inflation category with large weight. Moreover, it does not
allow for displaying multiple levels of hierarchy of item categories (i.e. the composites of each category). This is supported by results of our user study, indicating that the main
shortcoming of currently used visualizations ”is the lack of
presentational tools for multidimensional hierarchical problems [...] in a convenient, automatic way”. Therefore, we
have applied 3D hierarchic circular and column plots for
visualization of inflation data (see Section 4). As the static
hierarchic plot offers only display of inflation components
regarding a single point in time, we have used animation to
convey the data changes over time.
In recent years, economists have been increasingly interested in the calculation of so-called core inflation measures,
which try to capture the broad-based nature of the inflation
process. Such measures are calculated by deriving the median of price increases across the consumer basket or by calculating the mean of price changes trimmed at 75% or 90%

Decision making in the economic and financial domain
often relies on the analysis and evaluation of large amounts
of time-dependent data in a timely way. The data often have
a hierarchic structure. In this work, we address analysis of
European consumer price data and its meta-data from the
Eurostat database [7]. Eurostat reports the so called harmonised consumer price indices (HICPs), which measure
the changes over time in the prices of consumer goods and
services acquired, used or paid for by households. The index differentiates twelve main item categories ranging from
food to clothing and education. Broken down to the lowest
level of aggregation (5), the index for a country consists of
165 individual item series (see Figure 1, a).
The Eurostat database contains, among others, monthly
data on the price index for each individual item category,
data on the composition of the overall price index by item
category (weights in the consumer basket), and the annual
rate of change of the price series, the so-called rate of inflation for each component and the overall index. The inflation
data is used for a wide variety of purposes, for example, as
a guide for monetary policy of the European Central Bank
(ECB), during wage negotiations for the indexation of earnings, or in public finance for calculating changes in national
consumption or living standards [6]. We have downloaded
the data for the European Union and each of its member
states.
A Consumer Price Index is generally calculated as Laspeyres index [6]. A Laspeyres index for period t with reference to period 0 is the growth (from time 0 to time t) of
a weighted average of prices p for every component c of
consumer basket C, where the weight w for each item reflects the consumption of the item c in the consumer basket
C (Equation 1).
pc,tt × wc,t0
Itt ,to =

c∈C

pc,t0 × wc,t0

(1)

c∈C

The indices are often compiled also as a weighted arithmetic
mean of component indices (Equation 2).
wc,t0 × Ic,tt ,t0

Itt ,t0 =

(2)

c∈C

For HICP, the weight of each item or category in the consumer basket may change every year and differ from country to country. Therefore, we need to be able to display

144

All-items HICP

1.00

……

Transport

……

Clothing and
footwear

0.17

0.08

…
Purchase
of vehicles

Transport
0.1
services

0.05

…………

Restaurants
and hotels

…

Clothing

0.03

………

0.10

0.07

…

………

Footwear

Accomodation
services

Catering
services

0.02

0.02

…………

…

…….

0.08

………… ………

(a) Hierarchy of consumer basket items

(b) Contributions to HICP inflation

Figure 1. Illustration of a hierarchy of consumer basket items. Each node represents an item category. Item weights are given next to each category (a). Contributions to HICP inflation from main
components (b; taken from ECB [5]).

quantile. Appropriate visualization methods can be used to
identify the items which fall out of the trimmed basket. A
display of a selected threshold would be of advantage for
this task (see Section 4.2). Such threshold levels allow also
for a quick identification of consumption items/categories
whose inflation rate exceeds a set threshold (for example
2%) or is higher than a certain category. Similar tasks are
relevant also to other economic and financial analysis areas, e.g., analysis of other macro-economic data, portfolio
analysis, or analysis of product revenues.

3

structure and time-varying values of prices of companies in
a stock market. Treemaps are also used for the visualization
of stock prices on the stock market (see Map of the Market
[20]) and portfolio holdings (see Csallner et. al. [4]). Moreover, Ghoniem and Fekete [8] presented animated transition
between two weight distributions in a treemap. Visualization of changes using treemaps has been recently presented
by Tu and Shen [21]. Mansmann et. al. [15] propose an explorative framework for OLAP data to analyze data cubes of
various data sources including financial data using graphs.
Koenig et. al. [14] present a combination of DagMaps and
Sugiyama Layout for navigation of hierarchical data on an
example company subsidiary network. In [13], Keim et. al.
visualize hierarchical data by so-called pixel bar charts.

Related Work

As the main contribution of the paper is the display of
multivariate hierarchic time-dependent data, we concentrate
on a review of literature for this type of data visualization. We mainly focus on relevant works applied to analysis
of economic data. Although hierarchy visualization techniques, in general, are more widely applied in other areas
of economic and financial analysis, from our survey it is
apparent that only few systems apply these techniques to
economic or financial data. A survey of techniques for visualization of tree graphs can be also found in [11].
Both Hao et. al. [10] and Schreck et. al. [18] concentrate on visualization of hierarchical financial time series.
They use a modified treemap layout to show the hierarchical

In financial and economic applications, pie charts and
stack column or area charts (see Section 2.2) are the techniques used for display of structural information of economic time series. As our system uses a circular presentation of data, we further concentrate on methods for hierarchic data presentation in a circle or column plot. Keim
et. al. [12] present a combination of hierarchic visualization
and circular layout techniques based on circle segments [2]
for time dependent data. The hierarchic circle plots were
also used in [12] and [3]. Although the cascading semicircular disks were already presented in [1], only recently
an animated transition between different focus views was

145

Figure 2. Circular data visualization (left) and column data visualization (right). 3D views are shown
in the top row, 2D views are shown in the bottom row.

4.1

presented in [16]. Additionally, an application of circular
graphs to business process analysis is shown by Hao et. al.
[9].
Hierarchic circular plots have until now rarely been used
for providing multiple information in 3D. In 2D, Keim [12]
presents hierarchic plots with color as an additional dimension. Recently, 3D representation has been used in [17]. At
the same time, multiple 3D treemap designs were presented
in [19]. However, they often do not allow for display of
time-dependent data in addition to the hierarchic data structure. To the best of our knowledge, there are no applications of 3D circular or column plots for multivariate timedependent data in the economic or financial field.

4

3D Hierarchic Data Visualization

Our first prototype of the interactive visual analysis system displays the multi-dimensional hierarchic data at a certain point in time in a three dimensional hierarchic circular
or column plot. We decided to use these graphical representations as they are often used by and familiar to financial
analysts, so the users are able to interpret the displayed data
very easily. The Treemap technique, another well-known
hierarchic data visualization, has beeen deemed not suitable
as it does not scale for multiple dimensions and, owing to
the nesting-based layout of the method, overplots the parent nodes with their children nodes. Therefore, the values
of the parents are not directly visible to the user. Moreover,
the height dimension is difficult to convey without blending.
In the circle view (see Figure 2 left), the center of the plot
represents the root of the hierarchy (‘all items HICP’). Each
layer of the circle represents one layer of the item hierarchy.
For each node, the children are displayed as a segment in
the next layer, bordering with the parent. The sweep of the
child segment is calculated as a proportion of the weight of
the child to the weight of the parent multiplied by the sweep
of the parent. In our case, the item weight of the subcategory is proportional to the weight of the parent category in
the consumer basket. The height of the segments is determined by another dimension of the data, the annual inflation rate of the item. As the rate of consumer price change
can be negative, also negative heights are supported. We

Description of the System

To reflect the analytic requirements, we developed an interactive visualization of multi-dimensional structural timedependent data. Our system displays the data in a three
dimensional hierarchic circular or column plot. We use
animation and time-series plots to show time-dependent
changes in the data. Furthermore, our system provides interactive tools for analysis support. We apply our system
on an extensive real-world database of monthly European
inflation data from January 2000 to July 2007 (see Section
2.1), illustrating its usefulness for effective visual analysis
in a complex application area.

146

Figure 3. Smooth data animation over time showing transition between two time points.
have included colored gridlines, which are reflected also in
the circle parts so that the analyst can better compare the
data values encoded as height. The color of the graph segments is dependent on a chosen additional variable (e.g., the
monthly price index).
The user can also choose to view the data in a column
plot (see Figure 2 right) where the top column represents the
root of the hierarchy, and the children are laid out similar
to the circular view. In general, the data visualization is
adjustable to user preferences. The analysts may choose
between a 2D and a 3D view, they can turn on or off coloring
of the segments, and switch between column and circular
layout.
As users need to view the data changes over time, we
have implemented animation over a selected time period
(see Figure 3). The linear interpolation of the data shows
smooth data changes over time. As all data dimensions
(item values) change over time, we have to interpolate both
width and height of each segment of the graph. In addition,
in case that a data dimension is represented by the color,
also segment colors change smoothly over time. The main
advantage of animation is that users can see the time dependent changes in all dimensions, i.e structure (item weights)
and values (inflation rates), simultaneously. Based on a user
suggestion, we added a visualization of time development
of selected data items in a separate view (see Figure 4).

4.2

Figure 4. Time development of a selected
data item. The yellow highlight in the background indicates the current time period displayed in the main hierarchic plot.

item in the basket. A number of item selection methods are
implemented:
• Select items up to a specified depth in the hierarchy;
• Selected items (and thereby, also its sub-items) in the
basket;

User Interaction Techniques

• Select a given hierarchy level.

The system functionalities have been developed to support the analytical needs of economic and financial analysts,
who need to examine multi-dimensional structural data over
time. In addition to the data visualization and data animation described above, interactive features such as focus and
zoom, threshold and details on demand are also incorporated in the system. To better recognize structures in the
data, users are given the possibility to zoom in and out, to
rescale the Y axis, and to rotate the plot. As users may wish
to receive more information on the visualized data, data legends and further details on demand are provided in a pop-up
window. The layout of data legends has been inspired by [3]
- the size of the label text is determined by the weight of the

These selection methods allow for an explorative data
analysis in particular if an analyst wishes to examine only a
certain category of the consumer basket, e.g., food. For focusing, we have developed an algorithm for animated transition between different foci which improves the work of
Pula [16]. He uses different techniques for setting focus in
column and pie charts and finds animation the most suitable
method. We have enhanced the animation technique for hierarchic column and circle plots in three dimensions. The
algorithm concurrently blends out the items of the graph
which are out of focus and then iteratively minimizes the
width and height of those items while enlarging the area of
the focused part of the graph. Additionally, the user can

147

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

(i)

(j)

(k)

(l)

Figure 5. (a-d) Transition steps during change of focus on selected maximum hierarchy depth. (e-h)
Transition steps during change of focus on selected part of the category hierarchy. (i-l) Transition
steps during change of focus on selected hierarchy level.

5 User Survey and Evaluation

see the full graph with highlighted focused area in the left
upper corner of the display. This feature allows the user to
better orientate in the data space. Figure 5 illustrates the
implemented selection and animation methods.

We have also conducted a qualitative user survey to evaluate the techniques for visualization of hierarchic multivariate data with time dimension as presented in this paper (see
Section 4). We have asked ten potential users, all professionals in the financial data analysis domain, to asses the
usability of the proposed visualization system for their analytical work. In the detailed survey, the participants were
asked to evaluate the different options of data display - compare 2D with 3D display, and assess the advantage of encoding additional variables using color, and using animation to
reflect time-dependent data changes. Next, we informally
present the main findings we obtained from our survey.

As analysts also often need to answer the question
‘Which items have higher inflation as item X?’, we implemented a threshold function. A benchmark can be set to
a selected item, then a semi-transparent threshold plane is
shown (see Figure 6). This allows a quick identification of
the items which are above the set benchmark, and support
possible discovery of unknown patterns in the data, especially in combination with the animation feature. This also
helps to mitigate a common problem of three dimensional
plots, namely, that users have difficulties to assess or compare precisely the height of the segments in the 3D environment.

User Background. The analysis background of the surveyed users covers various fields of economic and financial
analysis including internal financial data, macro-economic
data, monetary data and financial market data. In general,

148

Figure 6. Threshold visualization

ferent color scales) or to color-code the data by category
was deemed necessary for some analytical tasks.
In general, animation can be a good communication tool
for data development over time [22] and therefore, was expected to be useful for many tasks, e.g., identification of
volatile subcomponents, or sub-components with recurring
patterns. According to the surveyed users, animation is useful to get a rough assessment of the data development, while
for more accurate analysis of time series, line charts are
better suited. We therefore included an option to show selected time series in an additional detail view. The users
also voiced that interaction facilities to select time periods,
and control the speed of the animation would be desirable.

they analyze and visualize data on a daily or weekly basis. Time series data is analyzed on a very frequent basis.
The analysis and visualization of hierarchic data is evenly
distributed from frequent (daily) to seldom (several times
per year). For their analysis, the participants regularly employ pie and stacked column charts. None of the participants routinely uses hierarchic plots for multiple levels of
aggregation. The reason for this, according to the survey,
is that the users are not sufficiently familiar with the latter
techniques. The major disadvantages of the currently used
visual analysis tools were stated to be (a) for pie charts: the
lack of showing data over time and (b) for stacked column
charts: the lack of showing multiple aggregation levels, and
a tendency to over plotting on large data sets.

Assessment of the Interaction Facilities. The participants were also asked to assess usefulness of the interactive features in the visualization for their analytic work. In
general, the interactive functionality is deemed very useful allowing the users to analyze the data more efficiently
from different view points. Focussing functions (selection
of maximum hierarchy depth, focus on the subcategories
of a selected item and focus on a single hierarchy level)
help to undertake a detailed analysis of the composition of
the data and reduce data complexity. Setting up a threshold
permits users to evaluate the data according to a criterion.
Highlighting of selected data items is good for localizing
the outcome of the visual search, for example the identified
outliers.
Summary. The main practical advantage of the proposed
visualization tool was seen in its support to quickly get a
complete overview of developments in the total data and its
components, allowing a summary over all levels of aggregation and potential interrelationships. Moreover, it was recognized by the survey participants that the display of multidimensional data allows for a more comprehensive data
analysis in a single view. It was stated that the tool can
more adequately present data along structure and time dimension, than common tools currently in usage by the survey participants. The animation feature was judged useful
for assessing general time dependent developments in the
data.

Assessment of the Visualization. Most participants preferred the 3D display because it immediately allows to visually filter different magnitudes of developments in addition
to the color. Additionally, it is a ”more interesting visualization of data”. Participants who prefer 2D display argued
that the 3D tends to be more complex and therefore may be
difficult to interpret for users unfamiliar with the display.
The 3D display is preferred by experienced users for more
complicated tasks with multiple data dimensions.
Comparing the column and circular plot, most users preferred the circular display. However, the suitability of circular or column plot was stated to depend on the type of
data analyzed and the task at hand. Experienced users, who
spend more time with data analysis claimed that the column
plot is better suitable for more accurate data analysis as the
amount of data distribution (e.g. weights) is better readable
and comparable in a column plot. As a consequence, the
option to switch between layouts is deemed necessary.
The usage of color for encoding a variable in the display
is preferred by all users. Color was stated to be beneficial in
enhancing the differences in the variables, as the values are
easily estimated and exceptions in data values are apparent
immediately. The possibility to change color schemes (dif-

6 Conclusions and Future Work
We presented an effective visualization of time-dependent structural data. To reflect the analytic requirements,
our system displays the data in a three dimensional hierarchic circular or column plot. The time-dimension of the
data is represented by animation. Our system provides interaction facilities for explorative data analysis. The system allows to examine the data from various perspectives,

149

thus enhancing the analytic process. We applied our system to real European inflation data, showing its usefulness
for effective visual analysis. An evaluation of the system
by expert users has shown that our approach significantly
improves over the functionality offered by many tools currently in use in the economic data analysis domain. Specifically, the visualization of time-variation in addition to the
structural information over multiple aggregation levels has
been deemed very valuable. An animation feature has been
implemented which shows very useful for assessing general
time dependent developments in the data.
As an improvement of the system, we are considering
the incorporation of time-varying data visualization into a
static view similar to the one presented in [10]. This feature would allow for better comparison of the developments
in time-series data. Following user suggestions, we like to
extend the analytic functionalities of the system, e.g., by
visual comparison of data from various countries, or with
additional economic data analysis features.
The visualization and analysis techniques described in
this paper can be applied to various fields of economic and
financial analysis. E.g., it is also expected to be useful for
the analysis of portfolio composition and analysis of financial markets (bonds, yields, or exchange rates). In business management, it can be used for analysis of sales data
(turnover and profits of various product (sub-)categories).
In macroeconomic analysis, for example, development of
the gross domestic product, or money demand composition
and growth can be studied with the help of our system. Potential users also suggested applications in data warehousing (e.g. data from management information systems) or in
the socio-economic domain.

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

Acknowledgements
[17]

The authors thank all participants of the user study for
their valuable feedback and suggestions provided.

[18]

References
[1] K. Andrews and H. Heidegger. Information slices: Visualizing and exploring large hierarchies using cascading, semicircular discs. In IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 1998. Late Breaking Hot Topic Paper.
[2] M. Ankerst, D. A. Keim, and H.-P. Kriegel. Circle segments:
A technique for visually exploring large multidimensional
data sets. In Proceedings of the IEEE Visualization, 1996.
[3] C. Collins. Docuburst: Document content visualization using language structure. In IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, pages 112–113, 2006. Poster Paper.
[4] C. Csallner, M. Handte, O. Lehmann, and J. Stasko. Fundexplorer: Supporting the diversification of mutual fund portfolios using context treemaps. In Proceedings of the IEEE

[19]

[20]
[21]

[22]

150

Symposium on Information Visualization, pages 203–208,
2003.
European Central Bank. Annual Report 2006.
Eurostat. Harmonized Indices of Consumer Prices (HICPs)
- a short guide for users. European Commission, 2004.
Eurostat. http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu. European Commission, 2007.
M. Ghoniem and J.-D. Fekete. Animating treemaps. In Proceedings of 18th HCIL Symposium - Workshop on Treemap
Implementations and Applications, 2001.
M. Hao, D. A. Keim, U. Dayal, and J. Schneidewind. Business process impact visualization and anomaly detection. Information Visualization, 5(1):15–27, 2006.
M. C. Hao, U. Dayal, D. A. Keim, and T. Schreck. Importance-driven visualization layouts for large time series
data. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, pages 203– 210, 2005.
I. Herman. Graph visualisation and navigation in information visualisation: A survey. IEEE Transactions On Visualisation And Computer Graphics, 6(1):24– 43, Jan. 2000.
D. A. Keim, H. Barro, C. Panse, J. Schneidewind, and
M. Sips. Exploring and visualizing the history of information visualization. In IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 2004. Contest Poster.
D. A. Keim, M. C. Hao, and U. Dayal. Hierarchical pixel bar
charts. IEEE Transactions On Visualisation And Computer
Graphics, 8(3):255–269, July 2002.
P.-Y. Koenig, G. Melancon, C. Bohan, and B. Gautier. Combining dagmaps and sugiyama layout for the navigation of
hierarchical data. In Proceedings of the International Conference Information Visualization, pages 447–452, 2007.
S. Mansmann, F. Mansmann, M. H. Scholl, and D. A.
Keim. Hierarchy-driven exploration of multidimensional
data cubes. In GI-Fachtagung fr Datenbanksysteme in Business, Technologie und Web, 2007.
K. Pulo. Navani: Navigating large-scale visualisations
with animated transitions. In Proceedings of the International Conference Information Visualization, pages 271–
276, 2007.
M. Schedl, P. Knees, G. Widmer, K. Seyerlehner, and
T. Pohle. Browsing the web using stacked three-dimensional
sunbursts to visualize term co-occurrences and multimedia
content. In Poster Compendium of IEEE Visualization, 2007.
T. Schreck, D. A. Keim, and S. Mansmann. Regular treemap
layouts for visual analysis of hierarchical data. In Proceedings of the Spring Conference on Computer Graphics, 2006.
H.-J. Schulz, M. Luboschik, and H. Schumann. Exploration
of the 3D treemap design space. In Poster Compendium of
IEEE Information Visualization Conference, 2007.
SmartMoney. Map of the market. www.smartmoney.com/marketmap/.
Y. Tu and H.-W. Shen. Visualizing changes of hierarchical
data using treemaps. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 13(6):1286–1293, 2007.
B. Tversky, J. B. Morrison, and M. Betrancourt. Animation:
can it facilitate? International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 57(4):247–262, Oct. 2002.

