12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Augmented visualisation
Designing experience for an interpretative cultural heritage
Bernadette Flynn
The Griffith Film Schoo1, Griffith University
b.flynn@griffith.edu.au
interpretative archaeology employs the conceptual, the
way people make sense of the world as social practice
[1].

Abstract
The use of visualisation technologies is well
established in digital cultural heritage. The earlier IT
challenge of presenting material culture has largely been
addressed with the production of high quality digital
artefacts. A number of projects have drawn on the
potential for augmented visualisation offered by mobile
technologies,
game
engines
and
responsive
environments. Alongside these advances is a recognition
that a relevant digital cultural heritage needs to reflect
contemporary interpretative practices rather than
relying on outmoded systems of material science. While
leading research in interpretative heritage has
incorporated the hermeneutic aspects of previously lived
cultures there have been less recognition of the
importance of the users’ role in the formation of cultural
knowledge.

Within digital cultural heritage there has been an
increasing drive to bring together these interpretative or
experience-based accounts of the past with compelling
user experiences. A key debate in the field has been
around how the human dimensions of past experiences
can be visualized in digital environments. UNESCO’s
cultural heritage charter recognises that a responsibility
of heritage management is to reflect and represent not
only the material culture of the past, but also intangible
heritage as expressed through cultural activity and social
practices pertaining to myths, oral traditions and
ceremony.
In general traditional models for heritage visualisation
has ill prepared designers to take up the challenge of
representing experience-based accounts of the past. The
role of visualisation in conveying the contextual
experiences of the lived past has at times been taken as a
give or considered unworthy of fuller exploration. The
representation of knowledge associated with the
duplication or reconstruction of cultural objects has
frequently limited user interaction to access, retrieval
and display of digital artefacts. Although the role of HCI
design has gained prominence, the simulation of material
evidence as the basis of knowledge has remained the
priority in much digital cultural heritage practice.

The paper proposes that we take a step back to
investigate the processes of knowledge formation. It
provokes a series of new research questions on
visualizing cultural heritage knowledge in light of
theoretical readings on perception and knowledge
formation. It points to the need to devise alternative
methods for the design and production of an
interpretative digital cultural heritage. Such methods
detail the generative potential of a complex process
rather than the replication of a complex structure.
Keywords--- Digital heritage visualisation,
phenomenological archaeology, interpretation, spatial
praxis, somatic impulse.

2. Social and cultural significance of digital
cultural heritage
The paper proposes the need for designing projects
that move beyond the giveness of heritage as a digital
representation of pre-existing or reconstructed material
evidence. As such it proposes a rethinking of an
interpretative agenda for digital cultural heritage.
Interpretative archaeology has moved away from
material science to propose that the process of
interpretation is neither simple nor objective, but is
constituted from multiple perspectives. For the
interpretative archaeologist an understanding of the past
is experientially derived through a process of embodied
communication rather than presented. Central to this

1. Experiential visualisation
Interpretative digital cultural heritage is identified as
an emerging theoretical and research practice area within
digital heritage. Interpretative digital cultural heritage
draws on contemporary practices in archaeology that
foreground multi-vocal and culturally embedded
interpretations of the past. Interpretative archaeology
tries to bring the past to the human scale rather than
considering it in an abstracted, detached way. Rather
than relying on material science to understand the past

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.103

447

formulation is that material culture is produced from the
dialogue between the past and the present and thus
contextually derived and embedded in contemporary
relationships.

investigation into the phenomenology of responsive
systems to identify how technologies might be used to
enable the generative potential of somatic immersion.

3.1. A phenomenological model of perception

Emerging responses to this interpretative turn in
archaeology is evident across a number of digital heritage
projects over the last decade. Researchers have moved
beyond a simple equation between representation and
meaning to inquire into the complex relationship between
types of visualisation and cultural learning. Many have
argued that knowledge of the past demands more than the
verisimilitude of the visual display by paying attention to
the affectivity of user participation. As Gillings notes
visualisation methods by themselves are not enough to
provide the user with an embedded experience of the past
[2]. Efforts have been made to represent more experience
based accounts of the past through such strategies as
corpothetics [3]; peripatetic videowalks [4] and the
representation of lived knowledge systems associated
with the landscape and movement through the landscape
[5].

‘A phenomenological perspective provides an
ontological ground for the study of things, places and
landscapes, a means of approach and a way of thinking
through the body in its’ participatory relation with the
world’ [12].
In phenomenological archaeology embodiment is taken
as the starting point for analysing human participation in
a cultural world [11-14]. Bodily activity within material
space functions as an interpretative device for
understanding the past and also by extension an
expressive device [15]. In this framework, interpretation
is a practice grounded in the body and archaeological
knowledge arises from this interpretation. Typically,
phenomenological frameworks have been applied to
interpretations of British and European prehistory
focusing on the experience of ritual or monumental
landscape through sensory bodily devices [15].

While these emerging strategies have recognized the
value of dynamic user participation for cultural learning,
they have been perhaps less able to identify the users’
role in knowledge formation. Forte, for instance, outlines
that visual immersion and interaction are both important
aspects in the integration of cultural values, while
acknowledging that the precise nature of the relationship
between representation and user experience remains
uncertain [6]. The paper extends on this research by
inquiring - what is the relationship between knowledge
formation and material culture? How do these knowledge
processes function for an interpretative digital cultural
heritage?

This archaeological framework is of relevance for digital
cultural heritage. Rather than behaviorist models of
learning, which presuppose mechanistic transfer of
knowledge, phenomenological models of perception
assume that knowledge emerges from embodied
experience. This embodied experience is defined by
perceptual experience, modes of presence and
engagement in a world [10]. For digital cultural heritage,
such issues as encounter, performance and spatial
navigation then become critical in conceptualising and
designing the parameters of digital space and user
engagement.

3. Phenomenological knowledge processes

3.1.2 Heightened attention

One avenue for reinstating an interpretative digital
heritage is to draw on an established body of
archaeological enquiry, which specifically theorizes how
knowledge processes function. Phenomenological
research in archaeology has been debated since the early
1980s and has reached a stage of maturity, which
references the complexity of the interpretative process
and attends to the embodied aspects of representing the
past.

The paper now turns to the important work by
Csordas on perception as an embodied aspect of
knowledge formation [10]. Csordas, brings together the
writings of Merleau-Ponty on the phenomenology of
perception and Bourdieu on the body as the locus of
social practice to describe a somatic mode of attention.
For Csordas, a somatic mode of attention is a ‘culturally
elaborated ways of attending to and with one’s body in
surroundings that includes the embodied presence of
others’ [10, p.138].

A number of arguments for attending to the embodied
aspects of user engagement have been previously
established by the author [7-9]. Rather than reiterating
these arguments, the paper explores how knowledge
formation functions within an interpretative archaeology.
It describes a methodology for using models of
perception drawn from phenomenological archaeology
[10-12]. It frames these through interpretations of the
landscape and the application of a somatic praxis
distilled from movement based systems of inquiry.
Related to this, but outside the scope of this paper is an

Csordas positions attention as fundamentally somatic
(relating to or affecting the body) in that it involves a
turning towards – a way of paying attention with ones
body to the phenomenal world. In relation to this,
Csordas argues that particular cultural modes of attention
- processes in which we attend to and objectify our
bodies - can be learnt and that our selves are constituted
in and through socially meaningful embodied

448

experiences. His somatic modes of attention are both
conscious processes of knowledge generation and
habituated through cultural patterning. Drawing on his
observations on the processes of meditation or dance
performance Csordas identifies that it is not just what
bodies do but how they feel that generates a somatic
mode of attention.

space incorporates not only habituated movement as
‘habitual and unselfconscious action’ but also modes of
walking, turning, reaching, crouching, the performance
of particular acts and body movements [11, p.16].
An emphasis for Tilley is on the body in the form of
somatic space, which takes as its starting point the
upright human body looking out onto the world. Tilley
adopts movement categories from gestalt of front/back,
vertical/horizontal, left/right or up/down and here/there
polarities arguing that these movements are foundational
to all human experience. These bodily dyads form the
axes of spatial orientation which impose ‘a schema on
space through which it may be experienced and
understood’ [11, p.16]. Applying this to heritage, the
visitor engages with a site from an embodied spatial
location. The perceiving subject approaches and
conceives of the world as a lived, dynamic field of
potentiality. This approach operates as intentionality
towards an object, which depends on who is
experiencing it and how it is created, reproduced and
transformed in relation to previous spatial interpretations.

The framework advanced by Csordas’s research suggests
how attending to ones body functions as a process of
knowledge production. Put simply ‘attention can tell us
something about the world and other things that surround
us’ [10, p. 139]. Knowledge of a past culture emerges
from bodily engagement with the world in such a way
that the material form of, for instance, rocks and
figurines, along with the intangible aspects of a cultural
heritage are enmeshed with human corporeality. The
richness of a cultural heritage experience emerges from
being able to enter into a framework of understanding
associated with these experiences. ‘To understand is
ultimately always to construct, to constitute, to bring
about here and now the synthesis of the object’ [16,
p.80].

In this action of intentionality motion, vision and
comprehension are inseparable. What is being proposed
is the unity of the whole body in movement where
reasoning and conceptualisation, as much as vision, sight
and smell are embodied processes. Such a
phenomenology of perception and attention establishes
the affect of the human body on the production of
knowledge. In the encounter between subject and pregiven world things and landscapes alter our
consciousness and constitute us beyond ourselves. Thus
our own embodiment provides a way of opening up a
dialogue with a past cultural horizon, which produces
knowledge of material culture.

3.2. Spatial practice
Central to a phenomenological archaeology is an
emphasis on movement. The world is seen as composed
of relationships, grounded in the sensuous embodied
relation between persons and things. Phenomenological
archaeology articulates the nature of encounter between
human and artefact suggesting that the process of
knowledge production emerges from performance or
enactment. Such an understanding has particular
relevance for extant buildings and architecture where the
spatial affect of bodies in the heritage setting can be
articulated through somatic engagement.

4. Landscape and knowledge formation

In relation to prehistory, Tilley outlines how the effects
of landscape and architecture on the movements of
people are generated through the human body and the
sensory perceptions of persons [12]. Fundamental to any
meaning making function is spatial motility and an
attitude or posture towards objects. Modes of bodily
engagement, such as, navigation and tactile apprehension
of rocks and artefacts are processes for producing
spatialized
understandings.
These
spatialized
understandings involve reciprocity between the body and
the world - an active relationship where places affect
bodies and bodies in turn affect perception.

Following recent trends in archaeology and critical
studies digital heritage scholars have taken up a
phenomenological concept of landscape. As a way of rethinking spatial bodily inhabitation the landscape has
been used to describe embodied sets of relationships
linked to human feeling, movement and dwelling [11,
17]. As Tim Ingold points out, the perception of the
environment proceeds along patterns of activity and
observation leading to the continuous formation of the
environment. Through the engagement of the mobile
actor ‘we know as we go from place to place’ [17,p.
230]. Rather than the location of geographical objects
within an imaginary birds-eye view of the landscape or
single universal system of spatial coordinates landscapes
are created and experienced through the manner in
which they are explored and sensed, approached and left
[12].

For Tilley, the space of the world rather than being
reducible to an objective and geometric grid when
considered somatically is the space of sensory experience
and bodily movement [11]. Any experience of space is
grounded in the body itself, its capabilities and potentials
for movement. Through time-space routines of
movement and praxis or bodily practice a person knows
where she or he is in relation to familiar places and
objects and how to 'go on' in the world. Lived body-

From this framework, walking is a process of knowledge
transfer where consciousness is shaped by the spaces it
passes through, and where consciousness in turn shapes

449

the spaces it passes through. These landscapes then are
not merely sites for viewing but are spaces of bodily
motility and exploration ‘invested with mythological
understandings and ritual knowledges intimately linked
with bodily routines and practices’ [11, p.22]. In this
way navigating a terrain, is a dynamic constellation
between bodies, imagination and space.

[22]. Bodily experiences of the landscape then
necessarily involve translating from present day
condition to the past. Feminist academics and cultural
theoreticians have pointed out the dangers of
universalising bodily experience. Acknowledging the
contingency of cultural experiences, Thomas opines that
our own selves do however provide a point from which
we can engage with the past. He proposes that the most
we can do is to experience and interpret prehistoric
artefacts and landscape through our own embodiment
and our own subjectivities and cultural positioning
knowing that we create contemporary experiences [13].

This idea echoes De Certeau’s notion of walking as an
act of practice in the world where movement through
space generates different types of understandings [18].
Tactics and strategies deployed by the walker form
modes of spatial expression. Walking is thus an act of
speaking the language of the terrain and through the
improvised movements of the walker spatial elements are
transformed or abandoned. Through the activity of
walking, space (an unbounded notion) becomes a
practiced place (made familiar through memory and
familiar modes of encounter).

The implications of Tilley’s interpretative methodology
is that bodily spatial praxis can operate as a mode of
interpretation. Paying attention with the body and to the
body creates a relationship with heritage monuments and
artefacts that articulates cultural heritage at the level of
the sensing, feeling, body. Cultural knowledge is made
perceptual through the materiality and sensory
corporeality of the body as an aspect of the
interpretational process. Rather than thinking that this
provides a fixed truth about the past, our embodiment
provides a way of opening up a dialogue with a past
cultural horizon [13].

Grima and Bradley introduce a cosmological function to
landscape encounter by suggesting that spatial praxis in
relation to the heritage of monuments and landscape sites
allows for a potentialization of the past [19, 20]. The
multiple changing functions of landscape as performed
over time by the mobile body are designated as a potent
medium of knowledge. As Grima notes, this may lead to,
for instance, an understanding of tasks and activities that
evoke symbolic and ritual meaning [21]

5. An interpretative
cultural heritage

methodology

The interpretative methodology outlined above suggests
that cultural heritage might attend to the ways in which
varying forms of bodily practice can provide an
embodied approach to accessing the past. Following
Tilley’s method of walking the landscape suggests it is
proposed that digital cultural heritage researchers
actively engage with heritage space – that knowledge
emerges from body-centered real world experience. If we
take it that cultural knowledge is perceptual through
body performance that it behooves us to engage directly
with bodily process of learning.

for

The phenomenological frameworks outlined so far
in the paper draws attention to spatial practice as a
necessary part of the archaeological process. What is
referring to is an encounter between places, landscape
and the body and the affects of that encounter. For Tilley
and other archaeologists walking the landscape is then
proposed as an integral aspect of the archaeological
interpretative process. Tilley suggests archaeologists
should themselves walk through the landscapes, which
still contain traces of prehistoric monuments. Tilley’s
embodied exploration across Megalithic remains in the
Welsh Black Mountains and the Dorset Cursus forms an
elaborate reading of the heritage environment. His
reading of the heritage environment moves past a
visualist
methodology
to
argue
that
past
phenomenologies of the body can be understood through
the body as interpretative apparatus. As outlined by
Thomas our own embodied experience becomes
analogous for those of past people [13]. The somatics of
movement and gesture reveals ‘the invisible in the
visible, the intangible in the tangible’ [12, p. 30].

Such a process demands a digital media process that
operates as embodied interpretative practice through all
stages of the knowledge chain. A preliminary proposal
for including embodied interpretative practice is outlined
below:
1.
2.
3.
4.

The lived body functions as a methodological
starting point for an understanding of encounter
between monument and user.
The capturing of somatic gesture as the material
evidence of a somatic knowledge system.
The translation of body-centered real world
experiences into modes of interaction
The identification of technologies and
representational treatments that articulate the
generative potential of emergent embodied
processes.

6. Body performance

As Shanks and Tilley suggest bodily experiences involve
a stretching out of the past in the present in the sense that
past experiences and structures are carried into the future

This section of the paper seeks to attend to the
proposal for an embodied interpretative practice. It

450

briefly advances a process for capturing somatic
impulses made evident by performance. Documenting
movement provides a methodological starting point and a
foundation for articulating movement in the heritage site
and its translation to the affective responsive engagement
of users. It outlines how Tilley’s notion walking the
landscape as formative archaeological process might be
extended to incorporate movement based expertise. A
prehistoric structure is utilized as an example of somatic
knowledge formation. The aim is to record a carnal or
sensuous engagement with space that emerges from
experiential movement and bodily gestures.

archaeological site might be displayed in relation to the
living moving bodies of visitors in the virtual
environment. One response to this is to explore the
phenomenological investigations of new media artists
working with interaction visualisation technologies. The
work by artists such as Char Davies and David Rokeby
suggests further avenues for productive exploration [2527]. Further discussion of digital design using immersive
technologies is outside the parameters of this paper and
will be addressed in later publications.

The first stage is to translate the phenomenological
foundations of interpretative archaeology into a design
methodology. An investigation of somatic praxis such as
mind body centering techniques and ideokinesis offers
some possibilities [23, 24]. Bonnie Bainbridge Cohen’s
somatic methodology uses the intentionality of the
sensing, feeling and acting body. This provides an entry
point into an understanding of how prehistoric
architecture might be explored [23].

The paper has set out to investigate the
processes of knowledge formation in an interpretative
digital cultural heritage. It has argued that in order to
redefine a cultural agenda for heritage visualisation we
need to establish how aspects of cultural knowledge are
embodied. That is – to identify how the body, as both
interpretational constraint and enabling condition informs
present day understandings of the past.

The somatic method outlines the encounter between the
human body and prehistoric architectural space. This
approach is characterized by an awareness of movement
as an essential component in an encounter with the
spatial matrix of the site. The movement practitioners
‘map’ the environment through developing a sensitivity
and receptivity to the morphology and the sensuous
qualities of the site. Movement is initiated by an impulse
towards an element in the landscape, which might be a
portal doorway, the texture of globigerina limestone, an
artefact of the floor, the play of light and shade. The
environment explored through bodily navigation is
experienced as a place for contemplation, fluid or
disjointed movement, dance or other performative acts
rather than something merely gazed upon.

The paper has pointed out the limitations of assuming a
straightforward transfer of cultural heritage knowledge
between the user and the digital representation. It argues
that cultural knowledge is a complex process irreducible
to the parameters of a visualisation model. It suggests
that the past is culturally constructed as well as lived and
experienced. The paper proposes a methodology for
capturing the varying forms of bodily practice and
somatic encounter. It outlines how the user is an active
participation in the processes of knowledge formation
and how interpretative practice from a phenomenological
archaeology might be leveraged for the design of a
digital cultural heritage environment. Overall, the paper
throws up a number of questions rather than providing
answers. Many of these require further theoretical
development and attention through the trialing of
methods of practice and prototype development.

7. Conclusion

The process for identifying somatic responses to space
focuses on capturing and analyzing the specifics of body
movement in the heritage environment. High quality
video recording of the movements is proposed to
document the movement of the performers body in the
heritage space. This details specific inflections or gesture
patterns in relation to architectural morphology. Analysis
of these recordings provides a database of key
movements in the heritage environment.

References
[1] I. Hodder, Theory and Practice in Archaeology. London
and New York: Routledge, 1992.
[2] M. Gillings, "The Real, the Virtually Real, and the
Hyperreal: The Role of VR in Archaeology," in Envisioning
the Past: Archaeology and the Image, S. Smiles and S. Moser,
Eds. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2005, pp. 223-239.
[3] S. Kenderdine, "Somatic solidarity, Magical Realism and
Animating Popular Gods: Place-Hampi ' where intensities are
felt'," IEEE Multimedia, 2007.
[4] R. Tringham and M. Ashley, "Senses of Places:
Remediations from Text to Digital Performance," 2005.
[5] B. Leavy, J. Hills, C. Barker, and S. Gard, "Digital
Songlines: Digitising the Arts, Culture and Heritage
Landscapes of Aboriginal People," in New Heritage Forum,
Hong Kong, 2006.
[6] M. Forte, "Ecological Cybernetics, Virtual Reality, and
Virtual Heritage," in Theorizing Digital Cultural Heritage: A
Critical Discourse, F. Cameron and S. Kenderdine, Eds.
Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2007, pp. 389-407.

For digital design the challenge is to translate the
movements of people through the landscape and its
consequent effects on spatiality into digital interaction
scenarios. The intention is to create an environment
where the mobile interaction of the body in encountering
the heritage environment forms a framework for user
experience. Taking account of and analysing
‘performers’ embodied experience provides a template
for the design of interaction scenarios for the users
movement in the digital environment. The emerging
question is how the spatiotemporal characteristics of an

451

[7] B. Flynn, "Prehistoric Archaeology in a Dynamic Spatial
Visualization Environment," 2006.
[8] B. Flynn, "Somatic Knowledge and Simulated Spaces,"
in 11th international Congress: Cultural Heritage and New
Technologies, Vienna, 2006.
[9] B. Flynn, "Digital Knowledge as Archaeological Spatial
Praxis," in 13th International Virtual Systems and Mutlimedia
Conference, Brisbane, 2007.
[10] T. J. Csordas, "Somatic Modes of Attention," Cultural
Anthropology, vol. 8, pp. 135-156, 1993.
[11] C. Tilley, A Phenomenology of Landscape: Places, Paths
and Monuments. Oxford: Berg, 1994.
[12] C. Tilley, The Materiality of Stone: Explorations in
Landscape Phenomenology. Oxford: Berg, 2004.
[13] J. Thomas, "The Great Dark Book: Archaeology,
Experience, and Interpretation," in A Companion to
Archaeology, T. Earle and C. S. Peebles, Eds.: Blackwell
Publishing, 2004.
[14] R. Tringham, "Engendered Places in Prehistory," in
Interpretive Archaeology, J. Thomas, Ed. London and New
York: Leicester University Press, 2000.
[15] Y. Hamilakis, M. Pluciennik, and S. Tarlow,
"Introduction: Thinking through the Body," in Thinking
through the Body: Archaeologies of Corporeality, Y.
Hamilakis, M. Pluciennik, and S. Tarlow, Eds. New York:
Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2002, pp. 1-21.
[16] M. Reuter, "Merleu-Ponty's Notion of Pre-Reflective
Intentionality," Synthese, vol. 118, pp. 69-88, 1999.
[17] T. Ingold, The Perception of The Environment: Essays in
Livelihood, Dwelling and Skill. London: Routledge, 2000.
[18] M. DeCerteau, The practice of everyday life. Berkley:
University of California Press, 1984.
[19] R. Grima, "Monuments in Search of a Landscape: The
Landscape Context of Monumentality in Late Neolithic Malta,"
in Institute of Archaeology London: University College
London, 2005.
[20] R. Bradley, The Past in Prehistoric Societies. London:
Routledge, 2002.
[21] R. Grima, "An Iconography of Insularity: A
Cosmological Interpretation of some Images and Spaces in the
Late Neolithic Temples of Malta," Papers from the Institute of
Archaeology, pp. 48-65, 2001.
[22] M. Shanks and C. Tilley, Re-Constructing Archaeology:
Theory and Practice. London and New York: Routledge, 1992.
[23] B. B. Cohen, Sensing, Feeling and action The
Experiential anatomy of Body-Mind Centering. Northhampton,
MA: Contact Editions, 1993.
[24] M. Todd, The Thinking Body. New York: Dance
Horizons, 1972.
[25] J. a. W. Shaw, Peter, Future Cinema: the Cinematic
Imaginary after Film. Cambridge, Massachusetts: ZKM and
The MIT Press, 2003.
[26] M. Hansen, New Philosophy for New Media.
Cambridge, M.A.: The MIT press, 2004.
[27] D. Rokeby, "The Construction of Experience : Interface
as Content," in Digital Illusion: Entertaining the Future with
High Technology, J. Clark Dodsworth, Ed.: Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company, 1998

452

