12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Cluster-Based Visualization of Concept Associations
Nees Jan van Eck, Flavius Frasincar, and Dwain Chang
Econometrics Institute, Erasmus School of Economics, Erasmus University Rotterdam
P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands
{nvaneck,frasincar}@few.eur.nl 279457dc@student.eur.nl

Abstract

tioning of items in a low-dimensional space based on the
similarities, and (6) visualization of the low-dimensional
space.
In this paper the main focus is on the last step of
the KDViz process, i.e., the visualization of the lowdimensional space in which the items under analysis are positioned. In previous work [11] we have used concept maps
that present associations between concepts in a scientific
field. In such maps, the stronger the association between
two concepts, the smaller the distance between them. A
shortcoming of the used visualization method is that labels
used for identifying concepts have the tendency to overlap
each other.
One way to improve the visualization of concept maps is
to combine it with the presentation of concept density estimates [8]. Based on the concept density maps we were
able to detect concept clusters (i.e., regions of high density), which represent areas of strongly associated concepts.
The concepts on top of each region give an indication of the
topic of the cluster. One of the deficiencies of this method
is that clustering is based on the user’s visual interpretation
of the map.
In this paper we look at an alternative way of clustering
concepts, which allows the automatic computing of clusters
and their content. We choose to use hierarchical clustering [7] because one does not have to specify the number
of clusters in advance and because it returns a hierarchy of
clusters instead of a set of flat clusters, as is the case for
most other clustering methods. The proposed clustering enables us to understand the hierarchical structure of the domain knowledge under analysis.
A map of concepts can be shown as an undirected graph,
where an edge is generated if the association between two
concepts is above a certain threshold value. Drawing these
edges as straight lines usually produces additional cluttering
(besides the cluttering due to concept labeling). In addition
to concept clustering, in this paper we also investigate the
bundling of edges [1, 6] between concepts corresponding
to two clusters, as a way to eliminate the visual cluttering
associated with edge drawing.

One of the steps in the knowledge domain visualization
process is the display of the low-dimensional space in which
the items under analysis are positioned. In this paper we investigate the visualization of concept associations by means
of concept clustering and edge bundling, two techniques
that help alleviate the cluttering caused by concept labels
and edges. Hierarchical clustering is used for the identification of the different domain categories (i.e., clusters).
The edges between pairs of concepts belonging to two clusters are aggregated in a single edge connecting the clusters’
centers. The proposed approach enables us to discover the
hierarchical structure of our knowledge domain and analyze the strength between the different domain categories.

1

Introduction

Researchers that want to investigate a certain scientific
domain are faced with a large number of documents to be
explored. Search engines are only a partial solution to this
problem as hundreds of documents are usually returned in
response to a query of a user. The manual inspection of
these documents is a time-consuming and effort-intensive
task. Moreover, due to the dynamics of scientific fields
such activities need to be repeated over and over again. The
field of knowledge domain visualization (KDViz) [3, 4, 5]
aims at alleviating this problem by proposing techniques
that support the visual exploration of the knowledge of a
scientific domain. These techniques are able to automatically distill from large document corpora the most relevant
aspects of a domain and present the extracted information
in a visual manner.
Following [3], we divide the process of KDViz into the
following six steps: (1) collection of raw data, (2) selection
of the type of item to analyze, (3) extraction of relevant information from the raw data, (4) calculation of similarities
between items based on the extracted information, (5) posi-

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.54

409

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Our approach for the implementation of the KDViz process is discussed in Section 2. The proposed cluster-based visualization approach that fits in the KDViz process is presented in
Section 3. Finally, conclusions and future research directions are discussed in Section 4.

descriptive words or concepts. Each type of item can be
used to visualize a different aspect of a scientific field. In
the present study, we choose to analyze concepts.

2.3

The third step of the KDViz process is the extraction of
relevant information from the raw data collected in the first
step. In this paper, the relevant information consists of the
co-occurrence frequencies of concepts extracted from the
corpus of abstracts taken from the Economics & Management section of the RePub repository. The co-occurrence
frequency of two concepts is extracted from the corpus of
abstracts by counting the number of abstracts in which the
two concepts both occur. To identify the concepts that occur
in an abstract, one needs a thesaurus of the scientific field
with which one is concerned. In the present study, we make
use of the OECD Macrothesaurus2 . The OECD Macrothesaurus is a multilingual thesaurus containing concepts from
the field of economics. The concepts in the thesaurus are
organized into 19 main categories. We consider 11 out of
these 19 categories as relevant to our corpus of abstracts.
From these 11 categories, we only take into consideration
those concepts that occur in at least four abstracts in the
corpus. This is done because we consider the amount of
data on concepts occurring in less than four abstracts too
limited for a reliable analysis. In total, 252 concepts occur
in at least four abstracts of the corpus. For these concepts,
the co-occurrence frequencies are counted.

2 Knowledge Domain Visualization Process
In this section, we discuss the way in which we implemented each of the KDViz steps identified in the previous
section. Our approach, which we successfully applied in
our previous work [9], is summarized in Table 1.

2.1

Step 1: Collection of raw data

The first step of the KDViz process is the collection
of appropriate data. Since domain visualizations are typically constructed on the basis of a corpus of scientific texts,
one has to collect these texts first. In this paper, the raw
data consist of a corpus containing abstracts of publications
taken from the repository of the Erasmus University Rotterdam1 . This repository, called RePub, provides access to
all electronic publications of researchers affiliated with the
Erasmus University Rotterdam. The repository is organized
into three main research themes: Economics & Management, Medicine & Health, and Law, Culture & Society. In
this paper, we focus on the theme of Economics & Management. At the time of collecting the data, the repository
contained 1,889 publications for this theme. The abstracts
of these publications were retrieved using an RSS feed.

2.2

2.4

The second step of the KDViz process is the selection
of the type of item to analyze. The type of item to analyze
depends on the question one wants to answer. The most
common types of items are journals, articles, authors, and
(accessed on February 28, 2007).

Table 1. Summary of the way in which the
KDViz process is implemented in this paper.
Step of the KDViz Process
(1) Collection of raw data
(2) Selection of type of item
(3) Extraction of information
(4) Calculation of similarities
(5) Positioning of items
(6) Visualization

Step 4: Calculation of similarities

The fourth step of the KDViz process is the calculation
of similarities between items based on the information extracted in the third step. Similarities between items are usually calculated by normalizing the co-occurrence frequencies of the items. In this paper, we also take this approach.
To normalize the co-occurrence frequencies of the 252 concepts obtained in the previous step, we use the so-called
association strength [9]. The aim of this measure is to normalize co-occurrence frequencies in such a way that concepts occurring in many abstracts and concepts occurring in
only a few abstracts can be compared in a fair way. The
association strength aij of the concepts i and j is defined as

Step 2: Selection of type of item

1 http://repub.eur.nl

Step 3: Extraction of information

aij =

Implementation
Abstracts of papers in the field
of economics and management
Concepts
Co-occurrences frequencies
Association strength
VOS
Cluster-based visualization

mcij
cii cjj

for i = j,

(1)

where cij denotes the number of abstracts in which the concepts i and j both occur, cii denotes the number of abstracts
in which concept i occurs, and m denotes the total number
of abstracts.
2 http://info.uibk.ac.at/info/oecd-macroth/
cessed on February 28, 2007; no longer available).

410

(ac-

2.5

Step 5: Positioning of items

the effect of local minima, we run the majorization algorithm using ten random starts. A computer program that
implements the majorization algorithm is available online.3

The fifth step of the KDViz process is the positioning
of items in a low-dimensional space based on the similarities calculated in the fourth step. This step is usually performed using a dimensionality reduction technique. These
techniques are able to represent multivariate data in a small
number of dimensions. In the case of KDViz, this means
that high-dimensional item similarities are represented in a
two- or three-dimensional space that can be visually interpreted. Multidimensional scaling (MDS) [2] is one of the
most commonly used ordination method in the literature on
KDViz. However, it is our experience that MDS does not always provide satisfactory results when it is used for KDViz.
In this paper, the positioning of the 252 concepts in a lowdimensional space based on their association strengths is
therefore accomplished using a method that we called VOS,
which is an abbreviation for visualization of similarities.
We now briefly introduce this method. A more elaborate
discussion of VOS, including an analysis of the relationship
between VOS and MDS, is provided elsewhere [10].
Let there be n concepts. The aim of VOS is to provide
a two-dimensional space in which the concepts 1, . . . , n are
located in such a way that the distance between any pair
of concepts i and j reflects their association strength aij as
accurately as possible. Concepts that have a high association strength should be located close to each other, whereas
concepts that have a low association strength should be located far from each other. The idea of VOS is to minimize
a weighted sum of the squared Euclidean distances between
all pairs of concepts. The higher the association strength
of two concepts, the higher the weight of their squared distance in the summation. To avoid solutions in which all
concepts are located at the same coordinates, the constraint
is imposed that the sum of all distances must equal some
positive constant. In mathematical notation, the objective
function to be minimized in VOS is given by
aij xi − xj

E(x1 , . . . , xn ) =

2

,

2.6

Step 6: Visualization

The sixth step is the visualization of the low-dimensional
space that results from the fifth step. The low-dimensional
space should be visualized in such a way that it gives an
overview and understanding of the structure of the knowledge domain under consideration.
A straightforward approach to visualize the lowdimensional space is by displaying a label at the computed
location of an item. This basic approach is still taken in
many studies in the literature on KDViz. Another approach
that can be taken is to visualize the low-dimensional space
as an undirected graph. In this approach, a label is displayed
at the computed location of an item and an edge is generated if the strength between two items is above a certain
threshold value.
Figure 1 shows a graph-based visualization of the 252
concepts that were positioned in a two-dimensional space
in the previous step. As one can see, the large number of
overlapping concept labels and edges obscure the structure
of the visualization and make it rather incomprehensible. It
is for example difficult or almost impossible to differentiate
the individual concepts and to investigate the distances between the concepts. As a consequence, it is not easy to get
an overview and understanding of the important topics of
3 http://www.neesjanvaneck.nl/vos/.

(2)

i<j

where the vector xi = (xi1 , xi2 ) denotes the location of
concept i in a two-dimensional space and · denotes the
Euclidean norm. Minimization of the objective function is
performed subject to the constraint
1
n(n − 1)

xi − xj = 1.

(3)

i<j

Note that the distances xi − xj in the constraint are not
squared. We numerically solve the constrained optimization
problem of minimizing (2) subject to (3) in two steps. We
first convert the constrained optimization problem into an
unconstrained optimization problem. We then solve the latter problem using a majorization algorithm [2]. To reduce

Figure 1. Graph-based visualization of concept associations.

411

Figure 2. Visualization of concept associations using non-overlapping labels and
transparent circles.

Figure 3. Cluster-based visualization of concept associations.

a single concept we made the circles transparent. In order
to visually emphasize relevance we used bigger circles for
more relevant concepts and smaller circles for less relevant
concepts.
Figure 2 shows the resulting visualization. First of all
the visualization looks less chaotic than the visualization
presented in Figure 1. Moreover, the visualization provides
us with a first overview of the most relevant concepts of the
analyzed domain knowledge. To gain more insight into the
visualization presented in Figure 2, the amount and complexity of the presented information needs to be reduced
further. In order to do this, we investigated the use of concept clustering.
We chose to use hierarchical clustering [7] because one
does not have to specify the number of clusters in advance
and because it returns a hierarchy of clusters instead of
a set of flat clusters, as is the case for most other clustering methods, e.g., k-means. We used bottom-up hierarchical clustering (also called agglomerative clustering)
starting from clusters of size one (containing one concept)
and further aggregating clusters based on their proximity
(second level clustering, third level clustering, etc.). We
tried out several methods to compute the distances between
clusters: complete-linkage, single-linkage, and averagelinkage. Based on the cluster analysis that we subsequently
performed we decided to use average linkage as it produced
the best results for our data. To represent the different clusters in the visualization, we displayed the circles belonging
to concepts from different clusters using different colors. In
addition, we showed large transparent ovals in the color of

the Economics & Management part of the RePub repository
and the relation between these topics. In the next section,
we propose a visualization approach that attempts to overcome the above-mentioned problems.

3

Cluster-Based Visualization

As demonstrated in the previous section, straightforward
visualization approaches that fit in the KDViz process may
produce incomprehensible visualizations with many overlapping labels and connections. As a result, the visualizations do not provide a good overview and understanding of
the structure of the knowledge domain under consideration.
Our first attempt to make the visualization in Figure 1
more comprehensible dealt with the presentation of the 252
concepts. First of all we prevented that concept labels overlap each other in the visualization. This was done by displaying only the labels of the most relevant concepts and
by displaying these labels only if they are non-overlapping.
We computed the relevance of the concepts based on their
occurrence frequency in the corpus of abstracts. As a consequence, the labels of some concepts are not displayed. It is
nevertheless interesting to display the location of these concepts, since the distribution of all concept locations provides
insight into the structure of the visualization. Therefore we
displayed the location of a concept using some shape. After experimenting with different shapes we decided to use
circles instead of rectangles, as circles reduced the visual
cluttering. In order not to put too much attention on just

412

Figure 4. Cluster-based visualization of concept associations including edge-bundles.
Table 2. Most frequently occurring concepts per cluster.
Cluster 1 (•)
marketing
interest
technology
economics
managers
uncertainty
discipline
science
suppliers
indicators

Cluster 2 (•)
risk
investment
capital
pricing
income
exchange rate
unemployment
interest rate
assets
insurance

Cluster 3 (•)
business
competition
trade
entrepreneurship
economic growth
shares
case studies
productivity
ownership
entrepreneurs

Cluster 4 (•)
developing countries
developed countries
private sector
property rights
trade liberalization
poverty
know how
transnational corporations

a cluster around most of the cluster’s concepts in order to
better emphasize the clustering.

Cluster 5 (•)
demand
design
production
evaluation
efficiency
probability
supply
state
planning
measurement

Cluster 6 (•)
financial market
government
law
employment
banking
crisis
budget
minimum wage
debt
new products

Cluster 7 (•)
comparison
sales
profit
goods
yields
decision making
trends
promotion
weight
growth rate

Cluster 8 (•)
time series
tests
testing
observation
methodology
forecasts
statistics
density
sampling
duration

contains concepts from the field of management and business, and the green cluster contains concepts from the field
of operations research.
In order to reduce the visual cluttering due to edge drawing, as we saw in Figure 1, the edges between concepts
belonging to two separate clusters are bundled in a single
edge which connects the centers of the corresponding clusters. The thickness of an edge between two clusters is proportional to its strength, which is calculated as the average
association strength of all pairs of concepts from the two
connected clusters. In order not to disturb the visualization
too much, only those edges which have a strength above a
certain threshold value are displayed.
Figure 4 shows a cluster-based visualization containing
eight clusters that includes edges between the clusters. Each

Figure 3 shows a cluster-based visualization containing
three clusters. We believe that the visualization gives an accurate high-level overview of the analyzed domain knowledge. As mentioned earlier, the analyzed domain knowledge consists of abstracts of publications taken from the
Economics & Management section of the RePub repository. The authors of these publications are affiliated with
the Erasmus University Rotterdam and, more importantly,
most of them are active in the fields of economics, management and business, or operations research. By inspecting
the concepts in each of the three clusters in Figure 3 we
concluded that, more or less, the red cluster contains concepts from the field of economics, the blue cluster contains

413

of the eight clusters has been numbered in the figure. The
concepts in each of the eight clusters give an indication of
the topics of the clusters. Table 2 lists the most frequently
occurring concepts per cluster. By inspecting and analyzing the visualization in Figure 4 in detail we were able to
find out that the discovered clusters correspond in a natural way to research topics in the fields of economics, management and business, and operations research. We labeled
the clusters as follows: (1, •) marketing, (2, •) investment
and risk, (3, •) business (with emphasis on entrepreneurship), (4, •) macroeconomics (with emphasis on development countries), (5, •) operations research, (6, •) finance,
(7, •) microeconomics, and (8, •) econometrics. It should
be noted that for some clusters the topic was somewhat ambiguous and that therefore the labels may not completely
cover the contents of the clusters. By considering the proximity of clusters and the edges between clusters in Figure 4,
some additional observations can be made. First, it can be
seen that the topic of marketing is located close to the topic
of business. This observation makes sense, since marketing
and business are two closely related research fields. The
observation is also in agreement with the visualization in
Figure 3. In this figure the topics of marketing (•) and business (•) both belong to the blue cluster, which represents the
field of management and business, as we discussed earlier.
Likewise, in Figure 4 it can be seen that the topic of finance
(•) is located close to the topic of investment and risk (•).
Again, this is in agreement both with what one would naturally expect and with the visualization in Figure 3. In this
figure the two topics both belong to the red cluster, which
represents the field of economics. More similar observations can be made, but due to space constraints we cannot
discuss them all in detail.

4

structure of the knowledge contained in the corpus.
In the future we would like to provide zooming facilities, which would allow us to navigate through the clustering hierarchy and also inspect the edges involved in an edge
bundle. We further plan to enhance the visualization of individual clusters by displaying them as densities [8] rather
than as transparent ovals. We also plan to investigate advanced edge bundling techniques, such as hierarchical edge
bundling [1, 6], by exploiting the concept hierarchy given
in the used concept taxonomy. Finally, we consider further evaluating our approach by applying it to other corpora
from the same domain and by comparing the obtained results with the ones presented in this paper.

References
[1] M. Balzer and O. Deussen. Level-of-detail visualization of
clustered graph layouts. In Proc. of the Asia-Pacific Symposium on Visualisation, pages 133–140. IEEE Computer
Society, 2007.
[2] I. Borg and P. J. F. Groenen. Modern Multidimensional Scaling. Springer, 2nd edition, 2005.
[3] K. B¨orner, C. Chen, and K. W. Boyack. Visualizing knowledge domains. Annual Review of Information Science and
Technology, 37:179–255, 2003.
[4] C. Chen. Mapping Scientific Frontiers: The Quest for
Knowledge Visualization. Springer, 2003.
[5] C. Chen. Information Visualisation: Beyond the Horizon.
Springer, 2nd edition, 2006.
[6] D. H. R. Holten. Hierarchical edge bundles: visualization
of adjacency relations in hierarchical data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(5):741–
748, 2006.
[7] A. K. Jain, M. N. Murty, and P. J. Flynn. Data clustering: a
review. ACM Computing Surveys, 31(3):264–323, 1999.
[8] N. J. van Eck, F. Frasincar, and J. van den Berg. Visualizing
concept associations using concept density maps. In Proc.
of the 10th International Conference on Information Visualisation, pages 270–275. IEEE Computer Society, 2006.
[9] N. J. van Eck and L. Waltman. Bibliometric mapping of
the computational intelligence field. International Journal
of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems,
15(5):625–645, 2007.
[10] N. J. van Eck and L. Waltman. VOS: a new method for
visualizing similarities between objects. In Advances in
Data Analysis: Proc. of the 30th Annual Conference of
the German Classification Society, Studies in Classification,
Data Analysis, and Knowledge Organization, pages 299–
306. Springer, 2007.
[11] N. J. van Eck, L. Waltman, and J. van den Berg. A novel algorithm for visualizing concept associations. In Proc. of the
16th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications, pages 405–409. IEEE Computer Society,
2005.

Conclusions

Two techniques that can help understanding the visualization of concepts spaces in a scientific domain are concept
clustering and edge bundling. Our approach uses a hierarchical bottom-up algorithm for clustering because of the advantage that one does not need to specify a priori the number of clusters. Also the chosen clustering method enables
us to understand the hierarchical structure of our domain.
For edge bundling we aggregate edges between two clusters
as a single edge connecting the clusters centers. The thickness of the aggregated edge depends on average association
strength of the concepts in the two connected clusters.
We experimented with our approach by visualizing the
associations between concepts extracted from a corpus containing abstracts in the field of economics and management. Using concept clustering and edge-bundling we were
able to produce comprehensible visualizations that provide
a quick overview and understanding of the (hierarchical)

414

