12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Recent Advances In The User Evaluation Methods And Studies Of Non-Photorealistic
Visualisation And Rendering Techniques
Christos Gatzidis1, Stylianos Papakonstantinou1, Vesna Brujic-Okretic1, Stuart Baker2
giCentre, Department of Information Science, City University, London, EC1V 0HB, UK
{c.gatzidis, stelios, vesna}@soi.city.ac.uk1
Alcatel-Lucent Telecom Limited, Christchurch Way, Greenwich, London SE10 0AG
Stuart.e.Baker@alcatel-lucent.co.uk2
The method of pen and ink NPR is based on the
traditional human illustration method and is easily, out
of the aforementioned four, the method mostly
associated with artistic hand-driven work. Pen and ink
NPR is based on strokes with further engagement and
added detail introduced by hatching, a group of strokes
with spatial coherent direction and quality, usually in
the form of diagonal lines. Hatching can express
shadow, depth and even lighting. Representative work
in pen and ink NPR tends to focus either on direction
fields as shown by Girshick et al. [7] or textures as
shown by Praun et al. [8].
The combination of NPR with volume rendering
has been a recent, if predictable, development since
the first can clearly offer reduced parameterisation
requirements to the latter’s inherent ability to visualise
complex medical or weather information. Two
methods of NPR volume rendering can generally be
recognised. The first is via feature enhancement
through traditional volume rendering models which
was first introduced by Ebert et al. [9]. However, by
avoiding traditional volume rendering approaches,
alternate NPR methods can be produced such as the
one described by Lue et al. [10], methods capable of
producing results closer to the ones produced by a
human hand while still using volume sets.
Edges and silhouettes (with silhouette defined as
the outline of an object and coming in five different
types, silhouette edges, ridge edges, valley edges,
border edges and shadow or texture boundary outlines)
NPR techniques have the most sub-classifications
when compared to the other three. They can generally
be categorized as image-space and object-space
methods. Image-space methods utilize discontinuities
in the image buffers and extract silhouette edges using
image processing methods. They are thus a simple yet
effective way to generate the silhouettes of a 3D scene
with some representative work in the area conducted
by Mitchell et al. [3] and Nienhaus et al. [4]. Object-

Abstract

While traditional computer graphics research to this
day still focuses on the production and assessment of
photorealism, a relatively new field, the one of nonphotorealistic rendering (NPR), has produced results
that focus on viewer engagement by the use of
stylization, abstraction and expressiveness. In this
paper we briefly describe some of the techniques used
today and then proceed to identify some the most
important evaluation studies associated with NPR by
categorizing them and outlining the applications they
have been used in, their methods and finally the results
and their impact on future work in this area.
Keywords--- Computer graphics, Non-photorealistic
rendering, User studies, Experiment design,
Human-computer interaction.

1. Introduction
Non-photorealistic rendering techniques can
today be broadly considered as derivatives of four
different methods: a) stylized lighting b) pen and ink
c) volume illustration and finally d) edges and
silhouettes. Comprehensive surveys of these
techniques have been conducted by Strothotte et al.
[25], Gooch et al. [26] and Sayeed et al. [27].
Stylised lighting is usually facilitated either by
tone shading or cartoon rendering. The standard
method for tone shading was introduced by Gooch et
al. [1] and consists of a lighting model simulating the
cool-to-warm shades found in technical illustration.
On the other hand, cartoon rendering can be defined as
a distinctive style, primarily characterised by large
uniformly or widely-banded coloured surfaces with
detail restricted mostly to outlines. A representative
example is the work by Lake et al. [2].

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.75

475

space silhouette algorithms on the other hand differ
from the image-based ones by relying on geometry
description and information. Work in the area includes
the one conducted by Buchanan et al. [5], who
presented a method based on a technique called the
edge buffer while Benichou et al. [6] mapped the
hierarchical Gaussian sphere (used to extract silhouette
edges) and its arcs to a cube surrounding it in order to
accelerate their algorithm. There have also recently
been hybrid techniques combining both approaches
such as the one demonstrated by Kalnins et al. [6] that
introduce brush path parameterisation to represent a
silhouette, combined with an image-space local search
to track silhouettes between frames providing frame
coherence.

order to examine and analyze more recent empirical
results on judgment and rendering.
Another very interesting study in the subject [12]
conducted an experiment where conclusions where
drawn from the cognitive processes of NPR via the use
of eye-tracking. The method of eye-tracking was
chosen to determine where viewers look in regular
photographs and then NPR images. 74 viewers
examined the same number of locations in photos and
in expressively rendered images with uniformly high
or low detail (in five different conditions).
Results show that the subjects were attracted to
areas where detail is locally preserved in meaningfully
abstracted images. These results agree with the
concept that traditional art chooses to carefully
manipulate drawn detail to captivate the prospective
audience.
Moreover, it also seems to validate the method of
the usage of meaningful and not vague abstraction
used in DeCarlo et al. [13], another piece of research
work by some of the same authors, describing the
importance of suggestive contours in nonphotorealistic, computer-driven illustration. It should
also be noted that results also suggest eye-tracking,
despite its unorthodox nature, can be a useful tool for
further evaluation in the non-photorealistic field.
In a similar vein, Halper et al. [14], [15] are
advocates of the necessity of the development of a
psychological theory within non-photorealistic
rendering since they argue that despite the inherent
flexibility of the rendering style in question, the
psychological functionality of NPR remains largely
unexplored. They support that argument by
considering aspects of NPR in terms of general,
biological, social and environmental psychology
paradigms plus also by using results from a number of
recent evaluation studies.
One of these studies (on figure ground
segregation and NPR-guided selection) involved
subjects clicking on three objects from a set of twenty.
Close to 50% of the objects used in the experiment
were toon-rendered with the other half rendered with
the water-colour style used for the background. One of
two test conditions to control for biasing based on
object preference were assigned to all human subjects.
In the end, the participants were geared towards
selecting at least two or more of the cartoon-style
objects. This suggests the very interesting result that
the shading was a greater factor in selection choice
than the object and its features.

2. Evaluation Studies And Methods Of
NPR Techniques
For obvious reasons, such as most notably the
short life span of the field so far plus also the artistic
individuality associated with it, only a few number of
publications to this day have focused on evaluation
studies of non-photorealistic approaches, models, still
images and applications and their overall impact.
While this situation is certainly improving and
more researchers begin to realise the potential and
tackle the subject by conducting user studies on this, at
the moment the evaluation experiments addressing it
can be broadly categorized in the following seven
types.

2.1. Psychological Applications
Psychology and computer graphics rendering
have been two fields where a lot of work has been
conducted, including a large number of evaluation
study experiments. Unfortunately, most of these
studies have largely concentrated on photorealism or
photorealistic virtual reality rather than the
investigation or assessment of issues related to stylized
NPR depictions of either still images or 3D objects and
environments. Despite this fact, the possibilities
expressive rendering has to offer because of its
flexibility and also association with traditional artwork
in various psychology paradigms is recognized and
notable research in the area has been emerging.
For example, Duke et al. [11] summarized and
investigated the affective qualities of images in a
series of experiments that addressed the emotive
qualities of images and their effect on human subjects.
The authors, via their evaluation experiments, explain
how the interpretation of the results they acquired
requires a high-level model of cognitive information
processing and then proceed to use such a model in

2.2. Architectural Applications
One of the first, if not the first non-photorealistic
rendering evaluation was conducted by Schumann
[16]. In this study, the usability of computer-generated

476

images was measured particularly regarding the
potential communicative goals during design concept
development with professionals of the area (architects,
a large number of them using existing CAD systems)
serving as participants.
The 54 architects used as human subjects for this
study were shown three different images depicting the
same building plan. First, a CAD plot image, then a
constant shading image and finally an expressively
rendered image generated by a sketch-renderer
developed by some of the co-authors of the work [17].
After being shown the three images, subjects
were asked to answer various questions. First, they
were asked to say which image or images they would
want to use to show a first draft to a client plus which
image they would ideally use for a final presentation
of an idea. The subjects were also asked to provide a
verbal explanation of the choice above. Furthermore,
subjects were asked about a number of possible effects
of the images, to be rated on a scale of 5 (strongly
disagree) to 1 (strongly agree). Participants were also
asked to give an additional verbal judgement about the
images and also specifically state how they would
make changes to the design being visualized. For this
they were given four clear options to choose from, a
verbal description, by gesturing or by pointing relative
to the image, by drawing on another new sheet of
paper, or by drawing directly onto the image / images
given.
The results show that the different kinds of
renditions actually have a very different effect on
viewers. Moreover, from the three image types, the
stylized images appear much more appealing for
interaction compared to the other two (as indicated by
the last, third, task of the experiment). This indicates
that non-photorealistic images actually do deserve
their place in the repertoire of all CAD systems.

Results indicate that silhouettes are an appropriate
extension of the existing visualization possibilities. In
a direct comparison between the transparent surface
and the hybrid visualization, the silhouettes are
regarded as superior. While the exclusive application
of silhouettes without any further information about
shape or colour of the objects was regarded by the
participants in an unfavourable manner, with
additional information such as coloured silhouettes or
highly transparent surfaces, the silhouettes were rated
to be very good.
Overall, from the experiment it emerges that
stylised silhouettes are appropriate to convey spatial
information based on clinical data.

2.4. Perception Of Space
The first publication presenting an approach
towards quantitatively evaluating spatial perception in
a functional, non-photorealistic, stereo, immersive
environment [19] borrows from both the art and
perceptual psychology communities with the aim of
providing a methodology for conducting user studies
to perceptually validate new rendering approaches
within immersive environments.
Experiments involved a number of direct walking
tasks of approaching a mark both in a physical hallway
and also in a non-photorealistic approximation of that
in a 3D model of the same hallway, visualized through
an HMD (head-mounted display). The mark was
placed on the ground at distances of 2m, 3.5m, and 5m
from the 12 participating subjects.
From the results the authors have found that there
is a significant statistical difference in performance
between the real world condition and the immersive
virtual environment condition. The results of the
perceived versus intended distance analysis of their
direct walking task experiments are approximately
66.0% of the intended distance in the feature edge
(NPR) immersive environment and about 97.0% in the
real world. These results are expected, particularly
given the previous body of work in perception. While
66% does seem to be a low number, in context it does
correspond well with previous findings in traditionally
(and not NPR) rendered immersive environments in
which perceived distances were found to be 50% to
75% of the intended distances.

2.3. Medical Applications
Surgery planning and training is yet another area
where non-photorealistic rendering techniques can be
applied, proved by the work shown by Tietjen et al.
[18], which again was the sole pioneering publication
in this area.
Firstly, a scene graph-based combination of
silhouette, surface, and volume rendering is described.
This is further facilitated by stroke extraction and
stroke rendering being decoupled from each other to
allow for the display of correctly determined visible
lines with stylization applied. The authors go on to test
the potential of this combination of silhouette
rendering with the traditional rendering styles for
medical visualization by collecting feedback from 33
medical professionals and laypersons.

2.5. Texture-Based Depiction
A pilot study by Jackson et al. [20] examines how
expert graphic design knowledge can provide a fast
and robust visualization evaluation methodology, that
is one that could potentially assess scientific
visualizations for their scientific value whilst also

477

attempting the improvement of the composition and
the design of the visualizations.
Graphic designers are trained to judge how well
visual designs convey specific pieces of information so
the authors of this particular publication believed they
can evaluate scientific visualizations for how well they
fulfill design goals based both on the scientific task
represented and the actual visual design and put that
claim to the test.
One designer gave grades to the visualization
methods as an estimate of user performance for an
advection task on two data sets with each method. To
begin with, he ran through a previous study as training
in order to understand the advection task and was then
presented with two sets of images.
Results from the pilot study demonstrate that the
subjective results of the designer’s critique
corresponded well to previously measured numeric
values for performance.
Two comprehensive experiments that assess the
effectiveness of texture patterns in conveying 3D
shape information have been conducted by Kim et al
[21]. The investigation was focused on how particular
texture components influenced shape perception so
participants were asked to identify intrinsic shape
features and surface orientation using different
viewing conditions.
Results in general confirmed the hypothesis that
accurate shape perception is facilitated to a statistically
significantly greater extent by some principal direction
texture patterns than by others. Specifically, it was
showed that a) assuming conditions of perspective
projection are met for both viewpoint conditions, the
correct identification of shape type and surface
orientation of the stimuli was achieved best when the
visualization of the textured quadric patch was with a
pattern displaying indications of the first and second
main directions and b) shape classification judgments
of the surface do largely rely on whether critical shape
indicators are resembling the features of a form, a fact
that seems to be interpreted in a preferential way by
the participant subjects and consistently with what
would be the case if these aforementioned indicators
followed a line of curvature on a convex form.
Acevedo et al. [22] have more recently evaluated
2D visualization methods and how effective they were
by drawing subjects from the pool university design
educators, namely the Illustration Department at the
Rhode Island School of Design (RISD). The authors
first defined a space of visualization methods using
basic visual elements including icon hue, icon size,
icon density, and background saturation and then
conducted their pilot study by presenting the subjects
with single variable visualization methods. Results
verify the effectiveness of individual visual elements
according to the design factors set by the authors.

An approach that is also very similar to the one
followed by Isenberg et al. [23] (and more recently
extended to a more technical study by a group of the
same authors in [28]), consisting of an observational
study with three groups of users to examine their
understanding and assessment of hand-drawn pen-andink illustrations of varying objects in comparison with
NPR renditions of the same 3D objects.
For this observational study, the authors decided
to focus on eight illustration end users (general
university population, 5 male, 3 female), eight
professional illustrators (either advanced art students
or professional artists and illustrators, both with a
background in drawing; 3 male, 5 female), and eight
NPR researchers (graduate computer graphics students
with an NPR background, 7 male, 1 female), with 24
participants in total. Use of three methods were made
during the study, a pile-sorting task, a semi-structured
interview task and a questionnaire task.
Overall results show that people perceive
differences between those aforementioned two
different types of illustration but that those that look
computer-generated are still highly valued as scientific
illustrations.
For example, during the semi-structured
interview task, from the comments made by
participants it emerges that computer-generated
images are recognized because of their cleaner and
tighter appearance as compared to the hand-drawings
ones, since they are too perfect (by employing round
dots and long lines), too sterile and do vary in their
lines or stipples. These images are also often
characterized by the subjects as having too much detail
and complexity resulting in a tedious illustration and
thus impossible production process for a human
artist’s hand.
Finally, computer-generated images look threedimensional, closer to appeasing as 3D objects and use
a lot of shading and lighting. As for hand-drawn
images, some of the characteristics identified
according to the participants included line variability,
organic feeling, weighted lines, not too much detail
and looseness. Mark direction, variability in the mark
or mark placement were features named most often, by
20 out of the 24 participants.

2.6. Learning Applications
Gooch et al. [24] present a method for creating
black-and-white illustrations from photographs of
human faces. In addition to that an interactive
technique is demonstrated for deforming these blackand-white facial illustrations to create caricatures
which highlight and exaggerate representative facial
features. The authors then proceed to evaluate the
effectiveness of the resulting images through

478

psychophysical studies to assess accuracy and speed in
both recognition and learning tasks.
Participants at the experiments were presented
with sequences of images of familiar faces. Each
participant was asked to say the name of the person
pictured as soon as that person’s face was recognized.
For this, reaction times but also accuracy of the
answers were recorded. All images were presented to
the participants in three separate conditions or
combinations, a) using either photographs and facial
illustrations, b) photographs and caricatures, or finally
c) facial illustrations and caricatures.
The results from these studies show that the facial
illustrations and caricatures generated using the
techniques mentioned in the publication are as
effective as photographs in recognition tasks with
human subjects. For the learning task the NPR
illustrations generated are learned two times faster
than photographs and NPR caricatures are learned one
and a half times faster than photographs.
It is finally suggested from the results that NPR
facial illustrations and caricatures, particularly the
ones generated using the authors’ techniques, are
useful in a number of potential applications which can
range from entertainment and education to lowbandwidth telecommunications and psychology
research.

3. Conclusion
In this paper we have attempted to first briefly
summarize the main NPR rendering techniques today
and then proceeded to list a wide range of experiments
and studies conducted utilizing them. We have
categorized these experiments in seven different
distinct types according to the application they
targeted and reported on their aim, objectives,
methodology and finally individual results.
It is expected to see NPR techniques and methods
embraced even more in the future, especially
considering the incessant technological advances in
modern graphics hardware technology and also realtime algorithms and this will of course have an
immediate effect and impact on user studies focused in
the same field. For example, particularly exciting
fields which are yet to be explored but because of the
ever-increasing computational power we should
anticipate user studies to emerge soon, are that of NPR
in augmented reality and also mobile computing.

Acknowledgements
Part of the research work presented in this paper
was funded by ALCATEL Lucent Telecom UK
Limited, the employees of which are also thanked for
their input and insight.

2.7. Natural Phenomenon Applications
Healey et al. [29] conducted a user study in order
to explore the capabilities of their NPR techniques
(which employs approaches from master paintings and
human perception to visualize multidimensional
datasets), by running a validation experiment with 15
subjects and a set traditional weather displays versus
NPR-enhanced weather maps (both showcasing
temperature, precipitation, wind speed and wind
direction).
The aim was to test the ability of their
visualization approach to support common analysis
tasks on real-world data, compare them with a more
traditional display method and finally study whether
the common method of the combination of images that
work on their own can also offer an engaging
multidimensional visualization.
Results showcased that the subjects preferred the
NPR approach of representing temperature and wind
speed while the standard visualization method was
favoured for precipitation. Also, the human subjects
were surprisingly better at identifying high
temperature, rapid temperature change and the
combination of high precipitation and high wind speed
in the NPR visualization rather than the traditional
one.

References
[1] Gooch A., Gooch B., Shirley P. and Cohen E. A nonphotorealistic lighting model for automatic technical
illustration. In Computer Graphics 32, Annual Conference
Series (1998). 447-452. 1998.
[2] Lake A., Marshall C., Harris M. and Blackstein M.
Stylized rendering techniques for scalable real-time 3d
animation. In NPAR '00: Proceedings of the 1st international
symposium on Non-photorealistic animation and rendering.
ACM Press. 13-20. June 2000.
[3] Mitchell J. L., Brennan C. and Card D. Real-time imagespace outlining for non-photorealistic rendering. In
SIGGRAPH (2002). ACM Press. 2002.
[4] Nienhaus M. and Dollner J. Edge-enhancement - an
algorithm for real-time non-photorealistic rendering. In
WSCG (2003). 2003.
[5] Buchanan J. W. and Sousa M. C. The Edge Buffer: A
Data Structure for Easy Silhouette Rendering, In
Proceedings of the 1st International Symposium on Nonphotorealistic Animation and Rendering. ACM Press. 39-42.
June 2000.
[6] Kalnins R. D., Davidson P. L., Markosian L. and
Finkelstein A. Coherent stylized silhouettes. In ACM Trans.
Graph. 22, 3 (2003). 856-861. 2003.
[7] Girshick A., Interrante V., Haker S. and Lemoine T. Line
direction matters: an argument for the use of principal

479

directions in 3d line drawings. In NPAR '00: Proceedings of
the 1st international symposium on Non-photorealistic
animation and rendering. ACM Press. 43-52. June 2000.
[8] Praun E., Hoppe H., Webb M. and Finkelstein A. Realtime hatching. In SIGGRAPH '01: Proceedings of the 28th
annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques. ACM Press. 581. 2001.
[9] Ebert D. and Rheingans P. Volume illustration: nonphotorealistic rendering of volume models. In VIS '00:
Proceedings of the conference on Visualization '00. IEEE
Computer Society Press. 195-202. 2000.
[10] Lu A., Morris C. J., Ebert D., Rheingans P. and Hansen
C. Non-photorealistic volume rendering using stippling
techniques. In VIS '02: Proceedings of the conference on
Visualization '02. IEEE Computer Society. 2002.
[11] Duke D. J., Barnard P. J., Halper N. and Mellin M.
Rendering and Affect. In Computer Graphics Forum 22, 3
(Sept.). 359-368. September 2003.
[12] Santella A. and Decarlo D. Visual Interest and NPR: an
Evaluation and Manifesto. In Proc. of NPAR 2004. ACM
Press. 71-78. 2004.
[13] Decarlo D., Finkelstein A., Rusinkiewicz S. and
Santella A. Suggestive Contours for Conveying Shape. In
ACM Transactions on Graphics 22, 3 (July). 848-855. July
2003.
[14] Halper N., Mellin M., Herrmann C. S., Linneweber V.
and Strothotte T. Towards an Understanding of the
Psychology of Non-Photorealistic Rendering. In Proc.
Workshop Computational Visualistics, Media Informatics
and Virtual Communities. Deutscher Universitats-Verlag.
67-78. 2003.
[15] Halper N., Mellin M., Herrmann C. S., Linneweber V.
and Strothotte T. Psychology and Non-Photorealistic
Rendering: The Beginning of a Beautiful Relationship. In
Mensch & Computer 2003. Teubner Verlag. 277-286. 2003.
[16] Schumann J., Strothotte T., Raab A. and Laser S.
Assessing the Effect of Non-photorealistic Rendered Images
in CAD. In Proc. of CHI ’96. ACM Press. 35-42. 1996.
[17] Strothotte T., Preim B., Raab A., Schumann J. and
Forsey D. R. How to Render Frames and Influence People.
In Computer Graphics Forum 13, 3 (Aug.). 455-466. August
1994.
[18] Tietjen C., Isenberg T. and Preim B. Combining
Silhouettes, Shading, and Volume Rendering for Surgery
Education and Planning. In Proc. of EuroVis 2005.
Eurographics Association. 303-310, 335. 2005.
[19] Gooch A. and Willemsen P. Evaluating Space
Perception in NPR Immersive Environments. In Proc. of
NPAR 2002. ACM Press. 105-110. 2002.
[20] Jackson C. D., Acevedo D., Laidlaw D. H., Drury F.,
Vote E. and Keefe D. Designer-Critiqued Comparison of 2D
Vector Visualization Methods: A Pilot Study. In ACM
SIGGRAPH 2003 Conference Abstracts and Applications.
ACM Press. 2003.
[21] Kim S., Hagh-Shenas H. and Interrante V. Conveying
Shape with Texture: Experimental Investigation of Texture’s
Effects on Shape Categorization Judgments. In IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 10, 4
(July). 471-483. July 2004.
[22] Acevedo D., Laidlaw D. H. and Drury F. Using Visual
Design Expertise to Characterize the Effectiveness of 2D

Scientific Visualization Methods. In Poster Comp. of IEEE
VIS & InfoVis 2005. 111-112. 2005.
[23] Isenberg T., Neumann P., Carpendale S., Sousa M. C.,
and Jorge J. A. Non-photorealistic Rendering in Context: An
Observational Study. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Symposium on Non-Photorealistic Animation
and Rendering (NPAR 2006). 115-126. ACM Press. June
2006.
[24] Gooch B., Reinhard E. and Gooch A. Human Facial
Illustrations: Creation and Psychophysical Evaluation. In
ACM Transactions on Graphics 23, 1 (Jan.). 27-44. January
2004.
[25] Strothotte T. and Schlechtweg S. Non-Photorealistic
Computer Graphics: Modeling, Rendering, and Animation.
San Francisco, Morgan Kaufmann. 2002.
[26] Gooch B. and Gooch A. Non-Photorealistic Rendering.
AK Peters Ltd. July 2001.
[27] Sayeed R. and Howard T. State Of The Art NonPhotorealistic
Rendering
(NPR)
Techniques.
In
Eurographics UK: Theory And Practice Of Computer
Graphics. 89-98. 2006.
[28] Maciejewski R., Isenberg T., Andrews W. M., Ebert D.,
Sousa M. C. and Chen W. Measuring Stipple Aesthetics in
Hand-Drawn and Computer-Generated Images. In IEEE
Computer Graphics And Applications, 28(2). 62-74. March /
April 2008.
[29] Healey C. G., Tateosian L., Enns J. T. and Remple M.
Perceptually-Based Brush Strokes for Nonphotorealistic
Visualization, In ACM Transactions on Graphics, vol. 23,
no. 1. 64-96. January 2004.

480

