12th International Conference Information Visualisation

The Visualization of Relatedness
Tsung Teng Chen, Liang Chi Hsieh
Graduate Institute of Information Management
National Taipei University
{timchen.ntpu@msa.hinet.net, viirya@gmail.com}
American Society for Information Science (JASIS) of the
American Society for Information Science (ASIS) [2].
However, the study of relatedness or similarities between
documents and web pages are essential to both subdisciplines. An effective information retrieval system
needs algorithms that compute the similarities or
relatedness from contents to facilitate retrieving
documents relevant to the user query. The study of
literatures structure, such as the research of intellectual
structure of disciplines, derives these structures based on
the relatedness of documents [3]. The intellectual
structure of a discipline is usually presented graphically
by placing related subfields closed to one another
spatially [1]. Cocitation is one of the most commonly
used literature relatedness measurements and the
visualization of cocitation network is an important
technique for information scientists to illustrate the
intellectual structure of a knowledge domain.
The raw cocitation count as a relatedness
measurement between literatures suffers some limitations
as illustrated by Ito et al. [4]. The first limitation is that
this scheme regards two documents are unrelated
although these two documents is cocited with a third
document, respectively. The relationship between these
two documents may be weaker than a direct cocitation,
but they are nevertheless related indirectly. The second
limitation is that the cocitation relationship does not
account for the dilution effect of high citation count.
When a document is cocited with two other documents,
the relatedness strength between this document and the
other two documents are considered equal regardless
how often these two other documents were cited. The
relatedness strength between two cocited documents is
reduced if one of the documents is cited frequently by
other documents. The rationale of dilution effect is that a
document which is cociting with a popular document
does not necessarily denote a meaningful relatedness
relationship between the document and the highly cited
document.
The traditional cocitation visualization is usually
carried out by drawing an undirected arc between two
articles that are cocited by other papers. Since
visualization should be a faithful presentation of its
underlying data, the limitation of cocitation relatedness is

Abstract

The relationships between documents are usually
derived by accounting on the links between them. These
linkages may take the form of citation, cocitation,
hyperlink, or co-terms. The relatedness between
documents is derived from link analysis, which is widely
used in the information science disciplines. We use
kernel functions to overcome the limitations of the
relatedness measurement based on cocitation count
which does not account on the indirect relationships. We
then elicit all maximal cliques from the resultant kernel
graph and visually explore the graph of connected
cliques. The meaning of a clique in the graph is
interpreted based on a preliminary content analysis of
the literatures underlying the clique. We also study
overlapping cliques by examining their sharing nodes.
The common nodes of adjacent cliques seem to play a
bridging role between distinct fields.
Keywords--- Relatedness Visualization, Kernel
Functions, Cliques, Link Analysis

1. Introduction
The proliferation of knowledge, i.e., research
literature in digital formats, poses a great opportunity and
challenge for information scientists. There are two
important subdisciplines in the study of information
science: (1) domain research – analytical study of
literatures and (2) information retrieval (IR) research –
IR theory and retrieval algorithm [1]. The domain
research includes the study of, to name a few, the
analytical study of literatures and their structures; the
studies of texts as content-bearing objects; the scientific
communication etc. The IR research encompasses IR
theory and retrieval algorithms; practical IR processes
and systems; human-computer interaction etc. These two
subdisciplines of information science have little
coordination and cooperation and each has their own
interest group and publication – Special Interest Group
on Information Retrieval (SIGIR) of the Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM) and Journal of the

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.52

415

therefore inherited by its visualization – indirect
relatedness and the dilution effect won’t be taken into
consideration. If we can overcome the limitations of
relatedness measurement represented by the cocitation
counts with another relatedness metrics and present our
visualization with this metrics, some latent relationships
which are not visible before may be displayed.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 presents the theoretical ground of the “better”
relatedness metrics. The visualization procedure is also
discussed in this section. Section 3 describes the
experiment setup and the parameters setting. Section 4
presents experimental results. Section 5 summarizes our
findings and offers suggestion about possible future
researches.

exponentially with the path length. It has been illustrated
by Ito et al. [4] that the elements in the kernel matrix is a
relatedness measurement when λ → 0, and an important
metrics when λ → (1 / ρ), ρ is the spectral radius of the K
kernel matrix and also is the upper bound of λ.

2.2. Link analysis with regularized Laplacian
kernels
The Von Neumann kernels serve as the foundation
upon which the regularized Laplacian kernels are
developed. The regularized Laplacian kernels aimed to
overcome the two limitations we discussed in Section 1.
The Laplacian L, in our case, is defined as L(K) = D(K) –
K, where K is the cocitation matrix XXT and D(K) is a
diagonal matrix with D(K)(i, i) = Σj K(i, j). The
regularized Laplacian kernels are given by:

2. Link analysis

 (λ ) = ( I + λ L( K ))
L
(4)
When λ < (1 / ρ)(L(K)), the equation (4) is the closed
form solution of the series:
−1

Link analysis is a type of algorithms that are used to
find useful information from the structure of graphs. The
citations and hyperlinks relationships between
documents and web pages are usually abstracted into
graphs to facilitate further analysis. Information
scientists particularly interest in two types of
information: importance of individual nodes in the graph,
and relatedness between them.

 (λ ) =
L

2.3. Visualization of the relatedness relationships
computed by the regularized Laplacian kernels
The cocitation matrix is usually a sparse matrix with
integer cocitation counts (between documents) as the
matrix elements. The regularized Laplacian kernel matrix
transformed and enriched the relatedness metrics by
adding edges which denote the induced indirect
relationships. The kernel matrix has positive real value
elements which represent relatedness strengths with
infinite granularities. We want to keep the induced
indirect relationships but also filter out the noise
introduced by the weakest relationships with a floor
threshold value. We then take all maximal cliques out of
the kernel graph as our base visualization data set. To
keep only the significant clusters, cliques with few
elements, e.g., less than six, are left out to simplify the
graph. A clique in an undirected graph G is consisted of
a set of vertices V such that for every two vertices in V,
an edge exists and connects the two vertices. A clique is
shown in Figure 1.

−1
−1
Kˆ ( λ ) = K ( I − λ K ) and Gˆ (λ ) = G ( I − λG ) (2)

Equation (1) implies an alternative representation based
on the Neumann series:

n =0

∞

n n
Gˆ (λ ) = G ∑ λ G

(5)

Similar to Neumann kernels, the infinite series
representation allows the interpretation of kernel
computation as path counting. The regularized Laplacian
kernels take the negative of cocitation Laplacian as the
adjacency matrix, which punishes the self-loop edges
with negative weights. The solution of the regularized
Laplacian kernel is an unbiased relatedness measurement
which overcomes the limitations of the indirect
relatedness and the dilution effect [4].

Von Neumann kernel is a system of equations which
was developed to define term similarity based on
document similarity [5, 6]. The Neumann kernel in its
original form is defined in terms of the document-byterm matrix; it was utilized in link analysis by replacing
the original document-by-term matrix with an adjacent
matrix of a citation graph [4]. Let X be the adjacent
matrix of the citation graph, then XTX gives the cocitation
matrix K and XXT gives the bibliographic coupling
matrix G. The relatedness matrices between documents
are defined by
T ˆ
T ˆ
Kˆ = λ X GX
+ K and Gˆ = λ X KX
+G
(1)

∞

∑ λ n ( − L( K )) n
n =0

2.1. Neumann kernels

n n
Kˆ ( λ ) = K ∑ λ K and

∞

(3)

n =0

The relatedness between document i and j is given by the
(i, j) element of Kˆ . λ is a non-negative diffusion factor
which ensures the long range effects decay exponentially.
Equation (3) shows the Neumann kernel matrix is a
weighted sum of Kn over n from one to infinity. Given
that the (i, j) – element of the term Kn represents the
number of paths of length n between nodes i and j in the
cocitation graph, we can see that each element of the
kernel matrix equals the sum of the number of paths
between nodes weighted by a λ factor which decaying

416

value of ρ makes the kernel matrix a better relatedness
metrics.

3.3. Cliques matrix computations
We utilized the Bron & Kerbosch clique detection
algorithm and found 116 maximal cliques from the
kernel matrix. The cliques’ size is in the range of one to
ten. We kept cliques with more than six nodes and came
up with 28 cliques. The matrix that stores the cliques is
reduced from the kernel matrix by removing rows and
columns which correspond to nodes not included in any
cliques. The dimension of the cliques’ matrix is 141.

4. Experimental results
Figure 1 A clique of eight nodes

For comparison purpose, we first present the
cocitation graph, follow by kernel graph, and then the
cliques’ graph.

3. Experiment setup
3.1. Data collections
We drew the citation data from the online citation
database CiteSeer [7]. Our citation data collection
procedure utilizes the CiteSeer citation index by firstly
using a key phrase to query the index and retrieve all
matching documents’ hyperlinks from it. Secondly, the
hyperlinks retrieved by this query are then used as the
initial seed set to retrieve hyperlinks of these papers
which are citing or are cited by literatures in the initial
seed set [8]. The full citation graph is built by linking all
hyperlinks retrieved, which include many more citation
information than the traditional citation expansion
schemes that only search references found in the initial
set of papers retrieved by a query. The resulting citation
graph was built from the citation information retrieved
using the term “Information Visualization” (IV) to query
CiteSeer during February, 2007. The initial seed set
contains 947 qualified IV-related literatures. The
complete citation graph contains 695,171 document
nodes and 1,858,996 citation arcs. The average in-degree
of the nodes in the citation graph is 3.34. To keep the
highly cited papers to a more manageable size, we only
kept papers that were cited over 120 times. The resulting
citation graph contains 302 nodes and 913 citation arcs.
The cocitation graph contains 235 nodes.

Figure 2 The cocitation graph
The floor threshold value of the Laplacian kernel is
set to 10-3, i.e., the relationship with relatedness metrics
less than the floor threshold will be suppressed. The
cliques’ graph is shown in Figure 4. By definition of
clique, an edge exists between all nodes in a clique.
Therefore, the distance between all the nodes in a clique
is one if we take the number of edges between two nodes
as the distance measurement. This characteristic allows
us to apply a distance filter to filter out nodes with
distance larger than one from an anchor node. A clique
emerges from the cliques’ graph in Figure 4 when we
applied the distance filter one length one. The filtered
graph is shown in Figure 5. It would be a reasonable
proposition that the nodes in a clique represent relevant

3.2. Relatedness matrix calculations
A 302 by 302 adjacent matrix X is used to represent
the citation relationships among these documents. The
cocitation matrix K is obtained by matrix multiplication
XTX. The cocitation matrix is a 235 by 235 square matrix.
The dimension of a cocitation matrix is always smaller
than the dimension of its adjacent matrix because the
adjacent matrix contains documents which are not
cocited with other documents. Removing un-cocited
elements reduces the matrix dimension. The regularized
Laplacian kernel is computed using equation (4). The
diffusion factor λ is set to 5 × 10-3 × (1 / ρ), ρ is the
spectral radius of the Laplacian kernel matrix. A small

417

literatures. We therefore listed the underlying literatures
of these nodes in table 1 for further analysis.

Figure 5 A single clique emerges by applying a
distance filter, the red node is the anchor node.

Table 1 Titles of literature in Figure 5
No.
9
13
19
20
86
114
125
126
127
128

Title (year)
Support-Vector Networks (1995)
The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory (1995)
A Weighted Nearest Neighbor Algorithm for
Learning with Symbolic Features (1993)
Instance-based learning algorithms (1991)
Multi-interval discretization of continuous-valued
attributes for classification learning (1993)
Experiments with a New Boosting Algorithm
(1996)
Very simple classification rules perform well on
most commonly used datasets (1993)
Bagging Predictors (1996)
A Decision-Theoretic Generalization of on-Line
Learning and an Application to Boosting (1995)
Statistical Learning Theory (1998)

Figure 3 The Laplacian kernel graph
We can clearly see that all literatures listed in Table
1 related to statistical learning. Our proposition is
tentatively supported by examining the literatures
underlying nodes in the clique. The cliques’ graph is
meshes of cliques with some nodes belong to multiple
cliques. The clique in Figure 5 contains two nodes which
are also members of the adjacent clique as shown in
Figure 6. The anchor node in figure 4 and figure 5 is the
same one but the connectivity filter distance is set to 30
and 1, respectively. If we keep the filter setting
unchanged and select a new anchor node, cliques that
share this anchor node will emerge since the distance
between the anchor node and all the nodes in these two
cliques are the same. We list the underlying literatures of
nodes in this adjacent clique in table 2. We are curious to
see if these two adjacent cliques are of slightly different
subjects but sharing some common “gate” literatures.
Figure 4 The cliques’ graph

Figure 6 Two adjacent cliques are visible by
selecting a common node as the anchor

418

Table 2 New titles of literature of the clique
emerged in Figure 6
No.
8
10
11
12
14
15
16

Table 3 Titles of nodes in the smaller clique in
Figure 7
No. Title (year)
Fast Algorithms for Mining Association Rules
21 (1994)
Mining Association Rules between Sets of Items
22 in Large Databases (1993)
29 Mining Sequential Patterns (1995)
Finding Interesting Rules from Large Sets of
72 Discovered Association Rules (1994)

Title (year)
Term weighting approaches in automatic text
retrieval (1988)
A Comparative Study on Feature Selection in Text
Categorization (1997)
WebWatcher A Tour Guide for the World Wide
Web (1996)
C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning (1993)
Machine Learning (1996)
An algorithm for suffix stripping. Program (1980)
Relevance feedback in information retrieval
(1997)

If we select node #100 as the anchor, we see the
clique as shown in Figure 8. The underlying nodes in the
clique in Figure 8 begin to associate with our query
phrase – information visualization. One may wonder
why the literatures seem to unrelate to information
visualization were included by using “information
visualization” as the query term. This phenomenon is due
to our multi-staged citation information collection
process [8] which searches forward and then backward
the citation information and may bring in a whole new
field of literatures through an unwitting citation link. The
underlying literatures in the nodes of the clique in Figure
8 are listed in Table 3.

The titles listed in Table 2 are mostly related to
information retrieval. However, two titles relate to the
study of machine learning and data miming. The theme
of this clique seems to be utilizing the machine learning
and data mining techniques in the IR field. We can see
the two adjacent cliques are related to statistical learning
and information retrieval, respectively. The statistical
learning clique seems to be a self-contained study
whereas all the nodes in the clique are highly related to
the statistical learning theme. On the other hand, the
information retrieval clique has a big percentage of
literatures related to machine learning and data mining.
Since Support Vector Machine (SVM) is used widely in
text categorization and information retrieval, the
constituent nodes in the information retrieval clique
appear to support this fact. If we select node 12 as the
anchor, we bring up another clique of which the
underlying literature are listed in table 3. It appears that
all literatures in table 3 are related to data mining. The
article underlying the sharing node #12 is on C4.5
program which is an example of inductive methods that
find generalized rules by identifying patterns in data. We
can see from the clique that the study of data mining
seems to grow from the research of machine learning.

Figure 8 Nodes are literatures relate to
information visualization
Table 4 Titles in Figure 8
No.
39
49
89
99
100
101

Figure 7 Node 12 bridges the study of machine
learning and data mining

419

Title (year)
The Design and Analysis of Spatial Data
Structures (1989)
The R* - tree: An Efficient and Robust Access
Method for Points and Rectangles (1990)
R-trees: A dynamic index structure for spatial
searching (1984)
Pattern Classification and Scene Analysis (1973)
Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval
(1983)
Introduction to statistical pattern recognition

102
103

References

(1990)
Computer Vision (1982)
Voronoi diagrams - A survey of a fundamental
geometric data structure (1991)

[1]

H. D. White and K. W. Mccain, "Visualizing a
Discipline: an Author Co-Citation Analysis of
Information Science, 1972-1995," Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, vol. 49, pp.
327-355, 1998.
[2] T. Saracevic, "Information Science," Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, vol. 50, pp.
1051-1063, 1999.
[3] H. Small and B. C. Griffith, "The Structure of Scientific
Literatures I: Identifying and Graphing Specialties,"
Science Studies, vol. 4, pp. 17-40, 1974.
[4] T. Ito, M. Shimbo, T. Kudo, and Y. Matsumoto,
"Application of kernels to link analysis," in Proceeding
of the eleventh ACM SIGKDD international conference
on Knowledge discovery in data mining Chicago,
Illinois, USA: ACM Press, 2005.
[5] J. Kandola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and N. Cristianini,
"Learning Semantic Similarity," In NIPS, vol. 15, pp.
P673-680, 2003.
[6] J. Kandola, J. Shawe-Taylor, and N. Cristianini, "On the
Application of Diffusion Kernels to Text Data," 2002.
[7] K. D. Bollacker, S. Lawrence, and C. L. Giles, "CiteSeer:
an Autonomous Web Agent for Automatic Retrieval and
Identification
of
Interesting Publications,"
in
Proceedings of the second international conference on
Autonomous agents Minneapolis, Minnesota, United
States: ACM Press, 1998.
[8] T. T. Chen and L. Q. Xie, "Identifying Critical Focuses
in Research Domains," in Proceedings of the Information
Visualisation, Ninth International Conference on (IV'05),
London, 2005, pp. 135-142.
[9] L. Leydesdorff and L. Vaughan, "Co-occurrence
matrices and their applications in information science:
Extending ACA to the Web environment," Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and
Technology, vol. 57, pp. 1616-1628, 2006.
[10] H. D. White, "Pathfinder Networks and Author
Cocitation Analysis: A Remapping of Paradigmatic
Information Scientists," Journal of the American Society
for Information Science & Technology, vol. 54, pp. 423434, 2003.

5. Discussion
The conventional approach of visualizing cocitation
related information takes cocitation count or its
normalized variants as the underlying data
representation. This data is often further processed using
some dimensional reduction methods such as multidimensional scaling (MDS) or principle component
analysis (PCA) [9] to suit the data for visualization. The
presentation of the information is usually a graph to
show the structure of a discipline. The similarity or
relatedness of literatures may also be visually shown by
the closeness of nodes in the graph. This graph may be
furthered processed by eliminating the “redundant” or
“less significant” edges using minimum spanning tree
(MST) or Pathfinder network (PFN) [10]. The cocitation
count suffers some limitations as we have discussed in
Section 1. Therefore, the relatedness metrics which
directly based on cocitation count maybe problematic.
The dimension and edge reduction practices may further
complicate the problem by eliminating informative
information. The outcome of this processing may be an
aesthetics graphic layout but useful information may be
lost by this process. Our approach adopts a more
comprehensive relatedness metrics and keeps all linkage
information
during
visualization
stage.
The
overwhelming links that may impede our visual
comprehension can be overcome by suppressing out-offocus links with a distance filter. Our approach differs
drastically from the conventional one.

Conclusions
A clique is unique graph structure where all nodes
link to one another. We naturally assume a clique
represents a set of highly inter-related nodes. We carried
out an experiment which seems to support our
proposition that a clique is consisted of a set of related
literatures. Our study also found the shared nodes
between cliques appear to represent the bridging
literatures between two fields. We have observed that a
field utilizes the study of another field through the
bridging literatures, for example, the information
retrieval study utilizes the support vector machine and
statistical learning theory. This is a preliminary study
that explores the visualization of relatedness. There are
many adjustable parameters which may affect the
outcome. The kernel diffusion factor, the floor threshold
value, the clique size, the distance filter may all have
some effects of the visual analysis. In addition, since the
clique detection algorithm operates on a simple graph,
the edges’ weight existed but did not play any role in the
analysis. The effect of taking the edges’ weight into
consideration may provide further insight.

420

