12th International Conference Information Visualisation

An Information Visualization Tool with Multiple Coordinated
Views for etwork Traffic Analysis
1

Andre Luiz da Silva Kauer, 1Bianchi Serique Meiguins, 1Ricardo Melo Casseb do Carmo,
2
Marcelo de Brito Garcia, 2Aruanda Simões Gonçalves Meiguins
1
Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciência da Computação – Universidade Federal do Pará (UFPA)
2
Área de Ciências e Tecnologia – Centro Universitário do Pará (CESUPA)
Belém-Pará-Brasil
andrekauer@terra.com.br;{bianchi, ricardo, marcelo, aruanda}@redeinformatica.com.br
from the network inside resources [1]. Besides, the
Internet bad use can decrease the employers productivity,
denigrate the company image, create new security
failures or even use the resources which are directed for
the clients, damaging the service quality offer.
Even with the advances in information security
mechanisms and preventive technologies, there is still
much work to be done in detection and analysis of
attacks, frauds or inappropriate use of network resources.
The large amount of daily registers recorded in logs of
intrusion detection and traffic control tools requires
differentiated tools and techniques to better analyze the
information. These tools are mostly composed by
statistics, information visualization and data mining
techniques applied to logs of packages transiting on the
network.
Particularly, the use of information visualization
techniques and tools for network traffic data is increasing
everyday [2][3][4][5]. And more specifically, there has
been crescent interest in tools that support multiple
coordinated views. [6][7]. The multiple views allow the
user to more easily identify patterns through visual
comparison since the tool is able to reduce the
complexity of the view.
The goal of this paper is therefore to present the
results of the analysis of Internet traffic data from a large
company using PRISMA, a multiple coordinated views
tool. The paper focuses on the user-selected approaches
to interact with the tool, and the most interesting
identified patterns to improve the security policy and
optimize the use of the company resources.
This paper is organized as follows: related work of
monitoring and analysis of package traffic and
information visualization; description of the tool
PRISMA; the selected dataset for the experiments; the
analysis results; final considerations; and future work.

Abstract
Information Visualization techniques have been
successfully used to build visual and interactive analysis
of data and data relationships. One of its possible areas
of application is computer network monitoring and
traffic analysis. The analysis of the internal behavior of a
company with high demand for Internet services helps to
determine if the company is competing with its own
clients over the available resources for online
transactions, or event putting client information in risk.
PRISMA, a tool with multiple coordinated data views has
been analyzed to find patterns involving transactions
against the company security policies. The goal is to
suggest changes to improve the quality of service.

Keywords--- Information Security, Information
Visualization,
Multiple
Coordinated
Views,
Monitoring Traffic etwork

1. Introduction
The use of the Internet for financial operations, ecommerce and generation of corroborative documents,
among others, has become more mature and natural
every day, even though the possibility of frauds and
attacks still exists.
More and more people use online services through
the Internet. Maintaining and Monitoring these services
24 hours a day, 7 days a week has become essential to
keep the good image of companies in terms of
confidentiality, integrity and information availability.
These measures are effective not only to keep current
costumers, but also to obtain new ones, as well as to
develop new business opportunities by minimizing
damage and maximizing investment profit.
The statistics shows that the traffic that leaves the
network is as important as the traffic that arrives. Fifty
percent (50%) of the security failures were originated

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.59

151

2. Related Work

•

This section presents related work about
visualization information tools for monitoring and data
traffic analysis in computer networks.
Komlodi proposed an information visualization
framework for intrusion detection, where the monitoring,
analyzing and answering steps were defined and for each
step it was defined which analysts’ tasks and
characteristics of visualization techniques were more
appropriate (Fig 1), highlighting the use of multiple
views [2]

•
•

•

•

The graphic interface is automatically
customized to data types and the range of
data values in each dataset.
The filter components are optimized for the
user tasks using the same principle.
Coordination is supported in filter, color,
shape and size settings, as well as in the
details-on-demand component.
Many data sources are supported, such as
relational databases, XML files and preformatted text files.
Pie, bar and line graphics and
automatically-generated
reports
are
additional coordinated components.

The tool implements three information visualization
techniques, each favoring a different kind of data
analysis: parallel coordinates, Treemap and scatterplot
[9] [10]. PRISMA allows the user to analyze data either
individual or simultaneously in all views.
PRISMA stores an user interaction history including
manipulation and configuration data and allows the user
to save the state of an explored visualization.

4. Dataset
Fig. 1. Monitoring, analyzing and answering
steps [2]

The used dataset is originated from ISA SERVER
logs. It corresponds to seven days a week, containing
information about IP of origin, IP of destiny, user, port,
protocol, quantity of sent and received bytes, web
address, transaction status (success, redirection, client
error, server error, etc), date, time and application. From
the seven selected days, only the interval from 8 to 12
was taken under consideration, for being the part of the
day with the largest number of transactions, totalizing
approximately 105.000 registers to analyze after preprocessing. The pre-processing has taken from the
dataset IPs destiny and website addresses without
identification.

Koike e Ohno developed a visualization module to
add to Snort, called SnortView, which is aimed at
analyzing in real time to detect attacks, to dispose a 2d
multidimensional data visualization [3].
Malécot developed a monitoring and package
analyzing tool based on multiple visions (two), a
bidimensional and a tridimensional one [4].
Takada & Koike developed a log visualization tool
to detect in traffic through tridimensional visualization
[5].

3. PRISMA

5. Analysis Results

PRISMA is an information visualization tool based
on
multiple
coordinated
views
to
explore
multidimensional datasets using three visualization
techniques: treemap, scatterplot and parallel coordinates
[8].
The main characteristics of the tool are the
following:
• Extensible, portable and easy to maintain
since it has been developed in Java using
design patterns.

Companies have been adopting improvements in
safety practices to make sure the information resources
are used in a safe way. Monitoring and analysis of
network traffic are mechanisms to restrict actions that
can put information in risk. PRISMA was used to help
the analysis of situations when a great volume of data is
involved. The tool is composed by multiple coordinated
views that allow a better perception of data and its
relations.

152

Fig. 2. Brushing technique in PRISMA

many sites or one or many users. In this example, it was
possible to identify that the same user performed several
downloads from different source IP addresses. It is also
possible to associate a specific user to an IP address or
port.
For a more criterious analysis, zoom was applied to
the scatterplot as highlighted in red in Fig. 2. The
differentiated behavior in Fig. 3 is identified in the
parallel coordinates and highlighted in other techniques.
The security officer is then able to identify the port and
perform a more detailed search in other logs. In this case,
the security officer identifies an attempt to use P2P
applications forbidden in the company network policy,
and the associated date and IP. This information helps
the manager to contact the responsible users and
reinforce the company policy on user behavior.

At first moment, a one-week log of events was
loaded. In treemap module, the information was grouped
by day and IP of origin. With this information layout, it
was fast discovered that some machines had
differentiated behavior, with great number of received
files. Fig. 2 shows the use of the brushing technique,
which highlights the same data in the three techniques,
allowing the confirmation of a supposition of network
misuse in a more precise way.
The selection of a visual item in scatterplot (Fig.2)
that shows a great number of received bytes (outlier)
allowed through the use of brushing to identify in the
treemap technique the associated IP and dates, as well as
to compare the items in terms of data quantities.
For the same data items the parallel coordinates
technique shows whether they are associated to one or

153

Fig. 3. Zoom technique in PRISMA

resource such as using websites to download videos (Fig.
5), degrading the network in times when there is a great
number of transactions, and accesses to external proxy
websites that work as a bridge to access unallowed
websites under the rules of the proxy software of the
company, easily detected through the filters.

A new information layout was created, using only
the treemap technique with items grouped by site and
dates. The third most visited website in data volume was
discovered to be an online shopping website (Fig. 4). The
inappropriate use for network resources in a time of
intense traffic may interfere on the quality of the
available services.

Fig. 5. Video data in network traffic.
Fig. 4. Unauthorized access data highlighted in
the PRISMA treemap view

The multiple coordinated views of PRISMA allowed to
identify related sites that behave in the same pattern,
which allowed the analysis of more improper accesses,
according to Fig. 6. In this example, the selected sites on
the treemap view highlights an interesting behavior in

In another moment, only a determined day was filtered,
resulting in the detection of improper use of information

154

the scatter plot and parallel coordinates views allowing
the identification of groups of websites in terms of traffic

volume and a more specific analysis of each group.

Fig. 6. Multiple coordinated view in PRISMA to detect patterns.

•

Conclusions

•

Inappropriate network usage may threaten the security
policy of a company. Access to non reliable sites may
originate spywares, viruses, trojans and other undesirable
programs if the computer is not using the most up to date
protection mechanisms. Network traffic analysis helps to
know the user behavior and improve the user
consciousness for better information security in the
company.
This paper presented the use of a multiple coordinated
views tool for the visualization and analysis of web traffic
data. The goal was to evaluate the Internet access policy.
We believe the use of PRISMA can facilitate the
analysis and monitoring of security officers in great
volume of data generated in security logs.
The tool can be used to analyze several types of
existing logs, such as IDS (Intrusion Detection System)
logs, and is not limited to network traffic. These were the
first PRISMA experiments to analyze network traffic,
and others are necessary to adapt the tool to the needs of
the monitoring and analyzing of information safety area.
We highlight the following future developments:

•
•

Apply the tool to different security manager
groups
Use multiple views of different logs (IDS and
Apache);
Improve traffic behavior analysis through the
use of different visualization techniques;
Monitoring online traffic with automated preprocess analyses..

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

155

CSI/FBI - Computer Crime and Security Survey
http://www.gocsi.com/forms/fbi/csi_fbi_survey.jhtml,
2005.
Komlodi, A. Goodall, J. R. Lutters, W. G. An
Information Visualization Framework for Intrusion
Detection. CHI 2004, April 24–29, 2004, Vienna,
Austria.
Koike, Hideki; Ohno,
Kazuhiro. SnortView:
Visualization
System
of
Snort
Logs
VizSEC/DMSEC’04, October, 2004, Washington, DC
,USA.
Takada, T. Koike, H. Tudumi: Information Visualization
System for Monitoring and Auditing Computer Logs,
Proc. on Information Visualization (IV2002), IEEE/CS,
pp.570-576, 2002.

[5]

Malécot, E. L Interactively Combining 2D and 3D
Visualization for Network Traffic Monitoring
VizSEC’06, November 3, 2006, Alexandria, Virginia,
USA.
[6] Baldonado, M. Q. W.; Woodruff, A.; Kuchinsky, A.
Guidelines for using multiple views in information
visualization. Proceedings of the working conference on
Advanced Visual Interfaces, pp. 110 – 119. Palermo.
Italy. 2000.
[7] Pillat, R. M.; Freitas, C. D. S. Coordinating Views in the
InfoVis Toolkit. Proceedings of Advanced Visual
Interface. pp. 496-499. Venezia, Italy. 2006.
[8] Godinho, I; Meiguins, B.;Gonçalves, A.; Carmo, C.;
Garcia, M.;Almeida, L.; Lourenço, R. PRISMA – A
Multidimensional Information Visualization Tool Using
Multiple Coordinated Views. Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Information Visualization,
pp. 23-32. Zurich, 2007.
[9] Spence, R. Information Visualization. Addison Wesley ACM Press, 2001. 459 p.
[10] Card, S. K.; Mackinlay, J. D.; Shneiderman, B.
Readings in Information Visualization—Using Vision to
Think. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.

156

