12th International Conference Information Visualisation

A Design Supporting System for Kimono Pattern Preservation
1st Ching-jung Lin, 2ndJhong-Jyun Guo
Graduate School of Computational Design,123 University Road, Section 3,
Douliou, Yunlin 64002, Taiwan, R.O.C.
g9534703@yuntech.edu.tw, g9434715@yuntech.edu.tw
Abstract
Kimono is a key point in Japanese culture. In the
kimono market, one type of kimono was called Yukata.
Yukata is always produced in mass production in
considering price. In order to promote prestigious
kimonos, kimono stores usually present new styles or
customer-tailored designs in response to different
seasons. Of the varied kimonos, it is possible to let
customers choose the style they prefer. From this
point of view, this study tries to explore the behavior
of the customers who get involved in the design
process of a kimono where they participate and
endeavor to create and even to promote their
individual appreciation and value. This study
collected many cases consisting of different kimono
patterns and tried to analyze and induce the grammar
of kimono patterns. Then, based on this grammar, a
design system of kimono pattern can be built.
Customers use this design system to input their likes
such as floriography and various flowers. This system
provides information concerning visualized patterns
such as pattern elements (color, alignment, and etc.).
Finally, the pattern elements generated by the
customer’s likes are incorporated into the kimono
grammar. In other words, the grammar of kimono
pattern is constructed and refined on the basis of the
results of this design system. The refined grammar can
be used to analyze the existing kimono patterns as
well. Through the continuing refinement and analysis
of the kimono grammar, we could trace back the
history of a kimono by its pattern, and by use of the
cycling work people are able to preserve one of the
cultural assets - the kimono pattern, its design
knowledge and Japanese cultural heritage.

1. Introduction
1.1 The importance of kimono in Japan culture
The pattern of Kimono provides a rich and visual
language for connecting this important legacy of
Japanese with the history it is situated. The kimono is
not only the national costume of Japan, but also the
important legacy of Japanese. Duo to it records the
history variation of Japan, most of culture issues and
traditional techniques are inherited by patterns of
kimono. The flourishing age of the kimono history is the
history of Japanese[1].Furthermore, a set of kimono can
be divided to several parts; each part represents the
different generation, history and rank of owners
respectively. This information helps the research for the
history of Japan significantly.

1.2 Digitize Culture Heritage
The information for culture heritage does not only
preserve the heritage but also the experience and
knowledge behind the heritage. Therefore, digitalizing
the kimono should not just digitalize the texture and
pattern of kimono, but should also digitalize the
design itself. This is to say, with advance technology
like grammatical and 3D computer graphics
approaches, how designers or craftsmen design
kimono according to who the owners are in a context
of traditional Japanese society should be visualized or
simulated. With this approach, we will be able to
represent a design in the traditional context with the
text remained in our time. Preservation and testing
over existing information is an immediate task.

2. Review

Keywords---Kimono Design, Culture
Conservation, Shape Grammar, Generative Design,
Information Visualization.

2.1 Computer Added Kimono Design
There were some studies focuses on alignment of
kimono pattern. The study of Kawasaki Sachikon
provides a framework of layout, style, and some
method of composition[1, 2]. It helped yukata in mass

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.101

458

described as followed. The first stage is to collect
kimono cases. This study uses shape grammar to analyze
the rules of kimono pattern. Finally, these rules would be
used to implement system.

production process[2, 3]. The other one was
simulation how kimono looks like on human body. It
could help kimono designer preview the kimono
pattern when human wore it before kimono has been
produced. This study would collect pattern
composition style, layout method, and kimono
elements into a database to build system help user
organize this elements.

3.1 Digital preservation of Kimono Pattern
According to Kimono's features it can be separated
into several parts, uchikake, shiromuku, tomesode,
furisode, hikizuri, haori, and obi, shows in figure 1. This
study which accounted the pattern of the kimono is
differentiates into three parts analysis:
(1)Element of pattern
kimono pattern usually are composed by different
elements, so between two or more kinds of pattern
elements should has some relationship.(Shows in
figure 2.)
(2)Layout of pattern
Sachikon provides a framework of layout, style, and
some method of composition[1, 2]. Layout could be
considered as pattern direction and size. (Shows in
figure 2.)
(3) Distribution of pattern
The kimono is folded when we wear it. Thus the
motif of kimono has to be designed to attach suitably.
(Shows in figure 3.)

2.2 Texture Conservation
The purpose of conserving texture or pattern of culture
heritage is to conserve the design idea and knowledge of
craftsman. There were many researches focus on texture
conservation of architecture. The computer technology of
culture heritage conservation has been developed a lot,
such as “Three High Resolution 3D Digital Scanner” or
“Laser Scanner” systems. These systems could be
applied for conserving antiques[4-7]. The most of
conservations of woofs were how to describe the design
process of pattern, and how to analyze image, then
visualize these information of image[8]. In this approach,
the culture conservation was not only conservation, but
also provided an environment for learning and
understanding culture.

2.3. Shape Grammar of Culture Conservation
The analysis of Grammar of Kimono Pattern is a
complex work. With Shape Grammar, the pattern can be
represented and manipulated as a generative process that
can be used to understand and simulate the generation of
Kimono’s Pattern as well as its consciousness when they
are designed [9]. Shape grammar was a method to
analyze, and formalize symbol. It could help people to
understand the complex symbol, and the characteristics
of graphic[10]. There were many researches focus on
symbols of architecture[11]. However, shape grammar
was not a perfect method to analyze any kinds of
symbol, so there were some researches used shape
grammar, genetic algorithm to analyze symbol, then
provide CAAD tools to prove the rules of symbol[5, 6,
12]. This kind of methods was used on visualization[4,
13-16]. Broadly speaking, shape grammar was a method
used to analyze visual graphic into rules. According to
these rules, it is possible to implement system to
represent the specific visual symbol. In this point of
view, this study would use shape grammar to analyze
kimono pattern into rules. Due to components of kimono
and layout of pattern, the rules of kimono pattern would
be analyzed in different conditions to find out details of
design rules of pattern. These rules would be used to
implement system which could represent idea,
knowledge, and experience of craftsman to reach the
purpose of culture conservation.

Figure 1 Components of Kimonon

Figure 2 Layout of Kimono’s pattern Design and
Element of pattern

3. Research Process
With the related works above, we propose a grammatical
approach over the kimono design. The research steps are

Figure 3 Distribution of pattern

459

This study would analyze the rules and relationship
in these three dimensions, and conserve visual
information into database. Then, this study should
organize these rules to implement system, so it is
necessary to parametric or formalize these rules. This is
first purpose of this study to formalize kimono pattern
design, and conserve the idea, knowledge in digital
method. The purposes in this part are: 1) Conservation
of kimono pattern. 2) Define the Grammar of kimono
pattern. 3) Build knowledge base of kimono pattern, and
visualize this information.

customer preference would become parameter of
genetic algorism, and this part would get some
kimono grammar to generate new kimono pattern.

3.3.1 Texture preservation
Researcher can input the kimono’s pattern which
including the element, layout, distribution of kimono.
According to the rules of kimono Grammar and history
of kimono, we can know the kimono’s data which was
researcher input. Researcher also can create the kimono
data in this texture conservation databank by themselves.
The system processes shows in green arrow of figure 4.

3.2 Kimono Pattern Representation
The process of methodology is to analyze kimono pattern,
then translate into computational rules, finally,
implement system to prove these rules in this study. In
order to represent kimono pattern, the system would be
designed as generative system. This generative system
would generate kimono pattern due to the rules which
analyze in shape grammar. Previous researcher
mentioned about this kind of generative system.
Researchers analyzed pattern or image in shape grammar,
and implemented system using genetic algorism or cellar
automata method[17, 18]. In this point of view, genetic
algorism would provide optimize answer, or generative
new design, so it is helpful to set up genetic algorism
method and element system[10]. This study proposes to
provide an environment which could let customer input
their preferences. System would generate new kimono
pattern due to user’s preference.
Customer could choose elements of kimono pattern,
color, or flower semantics of pattern. This system would
generate optimize patterns which users could choose. For
example, user input semantic of pattern “Passion”, this
system would show “Rose”, “Anthurium”. Then, user
chooses color “Pink”, system would generate some
background pattern is pink, due to rules of kimono shape
grammar. Finally, system would generate new kimono
pattern due to user’s preference.

3.3.2 Create new kimono pattern
This study differentiates into two parts to preserve
kimono, 1) Symbolic meaning 2) Pattern of kimono.
The system processes shows in blue arrow of figure 4.

Figure 4 System Architecture
1) Symbolic meaning
According to the existing language of flowers, the
system considers the types, colors and languages as the
input datum. Base on this datum, it creates the forms as
reference for users.
2) Pattern of kimono
The differentiation of kimono’s pattern into three
phases. 1. Motif and colors, 2. Distribution and layout,
and 3. The apparel of wearing the cloth. Users can adjust
it and give suggestions. Furthermore, the generated
layout is able to be saved in compute and simulate the
apparel of wearing the cloth. (Shows in figure 6.)

3.3 System Architecture
To sum up, this system has two main purposes.
One is to conserve kimono pattern, and build
knowledge base of kimono pattern. Second is to
generate new kimono pattern for customer. System
structure shows in figure 4. There are two kinds of
users. One is kimono researcher who could collect
kimono cases, and this system would help them to
classify the pattern elements, pattern layout, and
kimono components. Then system would analyze each
part in different conditions of kimono pattern. In this
process, kimono knowledge base would increase.
As kimono knowledge base has building, customer
could use this system for generating new kimono
pattern. Customer could enter his/ her preference, such
as pattern elements, pattern semantics, and color. The
choices were got from kimono knowledge. Then,

Figure 6 simulate the apparel of wearing
the cloth

460

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

Figure 5 System processes

4. Conclusions

[12]

This study tries to purpose a system which could help
kimono researchers to conserve kimono pattern, and
build a kimono knowledge base. Further more, this
knowledge base could be used to preserve new kimono
pattern. This system could conserve visual kimono
pattern, and the knowledge of kimono craftsmen. In the
point of culture conservation, this is a way to conserve
culture to let people join and understand culture. It is the
reason why this system needs to generate new kimono.
Customers could get more understanding and idea of
kimono by join kimono pattern design. The value of
kimono pattern would be increase by adding owner’s
personality.
The future work of this study is to evaluate system when
it really applied to culture conservation, or market. The
kimono grammar might need to do more research, to
help kimono researcher get more understanding of
kimono design, and could let customer preserve diverse
kimono pattern.

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

References
[1]

Briscoe, S., Japanese Quilted Blocks to Mix and Match.
2007: Kodansha America.

461

Dalby, L.C., Kimono : fashioning culture 1993, New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Gyunghee, K. and M. Hideki, The Effects of Japanese
Ornamanet Patterns upon The Art Deco Decorative
Pattern : In View of Commonalities in Textiles Pattern
Composition. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of
JSSD, 2003. 50: p. 106-107.
Wang, W.-Y., A Computational Environment for
Learning Basic and Additive Shape Grammars with
Logic Programming, in Electronic and Computer Science
Information Engineering 2004, National Yunlin
University of Science Taiwan. p. 89.
Chen, P.-Y., A Dynamic Geometry Environment with
Mechanical Theorem Proving, in Electronic and
Computer Science Information Engineering 2004,
National Yunlin University of Science Taiwan. p. 51.
Cho, C.-t., A Computational Environment for Learning
Basic Shape Grammars, in Electronic and Computer
Science Information Engineering 2003, National Yunlin
University of Science Taiwan. p. 45.
Li, A.I.-k., A shape grammar for teaching the
architectural style of the Yingzao fashi, in Department of
Architecture. 2001, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology: Massachusetts
Marshall, J., Make your own Japanese clothes: patterns
and ideas for modern wear. 1988, New York: Kodansha
International.
Gips, J. and G. Stiny, Production System and Grammars:
a Uniform Characterization. Environment and Planning
B., 1980. 7: p. 399-408.
Renner, G.b. and A. Eka´rt, Genetic algorithms in
computer aided design. Computer-Aided Design, 2002.
35: p. 709-726.
Sachiko, K. (1983) Design of the Kimono patterns.
Research bulletin of Ohtemae Women's Junior College,
Ohtemae Bunka Gakuin Volume, 95-102
Sachiko, K., Design of the Kimono patterns (PART II)
Organize of Kimono patterns. Research bulletin of
Otemae College, Otemae Bunka Gakuin, 1986. 16: p.
217-223
Sano, T., H. Nagahata, and H. Yamamoto, Design
Support System for Japanese Kimono, in Industrial
Electronics Society, 1998. IECON '98. Proceedings of
the 24th Annual Conference of the IEEE. 1998: Aachen,
Germany.
Tapia, M., A visual implementation of a shape grammar
system. 1999.
Speller, T., From Aesthetically Appealing Chinese
Lattices to Routing or Circuitry Systems Using Shape
Grammar-Cellular Automata Methodology, in NKS2007
Wolfram Science Conference. 2007, WolframScience.
Li, C.-Y., Generative Design System VS. Evolutionary
Design System, in Graduate school of Architecture. 1998,
National Taiwn University of Science and Technology:
Taipei.
SasakiI, Y., M. Nakagawa, and R. Shibasaki,
AUTOMATION AND APPLICATION OF TEXTURE
MAPPING FOR 3D MODELING OF THE WORLD
HERITAGE, in ACRS. 2002: Kathmandu.
Sano, T., H. Ukida, and H. Yamamoto, Adaptive Texture
Alignment for japanese kimono design, in IMTC 2005Instrumentation
and
Measurement
Technology
Conference. 2005: Ottawa, Canada.

