Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2008
A. Vilanova, A. Telea, G. Scheuermann, and T. Möller
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 3

Visual Clustering in Parallel Coordinates
Hong Zhou1 , Xiaoru Yuan2 , Huamin Qu1 , Weiwei Cui1 , Baoquan Chen3
1 Computer
2 School

Science & Engineering Department, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong
of EECS & Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (Ministry of Education), Peking University, China
3 Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China

Abstract
Parallel coordinates have been widely applied to visualize high-dimensional and multivariate data, discerning
patterns within the data through visual clustering. However, the effectiveness of this technique on large data is
reduced by edge clutter. In this paper, we present a novel framework to reduce edge clutter, consequently improving
the effectiveness of visual clustering. We exploit curved edges and optimize the arrangement of these curved edges
by minimizing their curvature and maximizing the parallelism of adjacent edges. The overall visual clustering
is improved by adjusting the shape of the edges while keeping their relative order. The experiments on several
representative datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

Keywords: Parallel coordinates, visual clustering, multivariate data visualization, clutter reduction.
1. Introduction
Understanding complex high-dimensional datasets is an important yet challenging problem. Among various techniques
developed, parallel coordinates [ID90] have been widely
adopted for the visualization of high-dimensional and multivariate datasets. By using parallel axes for dimensions, the
parallel coordinates technique can represent N-dimensional
data in a 2-dimensional space. Parallel coordinates can be
considered as special node link diagrams, in which the nodes
are on the parallel axes and the edges are those polylines
linking the nodes on two neighboring axes.
Although parallel coordinates have been proven to be an
effective tool, edge clutter prevents effective revealing of underlying patterns in large datasets. Many enhancements of
parallel coordinates have been developed [ED06, AdL04,
HLD02, JLJC05]. Clustering is one of the most frequently
used methods to reduce the visual clutter and improve the
perceptibility of the patterns in multivariate datasets. The
main cause of the visual clutter comes from too many
polylines. Most of the existing clutter reduction efforts are
mainly data centric, i.e., data are clustered before they are
plotted. Thus the revealed patterns are limited by the used
data clustering algorithm. On the other hand, multidimensional data clustering itself is a very hard problem. Many
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

methods have been proposed, while most of them are only
good for certain kinds of data. In addition, it is difficult for
users to control the clustering level through setting parameters without expert knowledge.
Instead of using data-centric clustering, in this paper we
propose to perform visual clustering by geometrically deforming and grouping polylines while they are being plotted. Our clustering is achieved by analyzing the geometric
relationship between polylines rather than the data itself. An
optimization scheme is designed to minimize the curvature
of the edges and maximize the parallelism of adjacent edges
through an energy function. By adjusting the weight of each
term in the energy function, users are capable of controlling
the level of visual clustering according to their preferences.
Instead of assigning cluster tags to the data items, our visual
clustering only groups potential cluster lines into visual bundles and allows users to identify the clusters by themselves.
Users can then further explore the clustering results through
color and opacity enhancement.
In this paper, we propose visual clustering for parallel
coordinates as a novel technique to reduce visual clutter
and enhance patterns. Curved lines are used to form visual
bundles for clusters in parallel coordinates. Through this
method, patterns will become visually better organized and
have a higher chance to be revealed. We design an energy
function and an optimization framework to perform visual
clustering in parallel coordinates. Our energy function is for-

1048

H. Zhou et al. / Visual Clustering in Parallel Coordinates

mulated under the intuitive observation that spatially close
and visually parallel lines tend to be clustered together. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that such an
energy formulation has been proposed for parallel coordinates. We further introduce a color and opacity specification
tool and some animation schemes to enhance and reveal the
patterns while preserving the context. We demonstrate that
visual clustering in parallel coordinates has a wide range of
applications, especially for datasets with fuzzy clusters or
outliers. Compared with previous methods, visual clustering
exploits the geometry channel of the visual representation to
reveal or enhance the patterns and can thus free up the color
and opacity channels for other important information.

2. Related Work
Since the early introduction by Inselberg [ID90], parallel coordinates have been widely used to visualize multivariate
data. To deal with the visual clutter problem, many schemes
have been proposed [ED07].
Dimension reordering Dimension ordering, spacing and
filtering can improve the parallel coordinates layout and facilitate data exploration. Ankerst et al. [ABK98] clustered
data dimensions according to their similarity, then data dimensions are rearranged such that dimensions showing a
similar behavior are positioned next to each other. Yang et
al. [YPWR03] proposed a hierarchical approach to improve
the interactivity of dimension ordering, spacing and filtering.
Peng et al. [PWR04] defined a visual clutter measure as the
ratio of outlier points to the total data points. The optimized
dimension order is then computed to minimize the proposed
clutter measure. These methods are very useful, but our paper addresses a different problem, i.e., how to further reduce
clutter for parallel coordinates which may already have good
dimension ordering and spacing.
Clustering and filtering Fua et al. [FWR99] used hierarchical clustering and proposed a variation on parallel coordinates to convey aggregation information for the resulting
clusters. In their scheme, proximity-based coloring is used
to assure that clusters from similar parts of the hierarchical structure are shown in similar colors. Novotny [Nov04]
represented each cluster as a polygonal area and used different opacity values and textures to distinguish different
clusters. In [AA04], striped envelope and ellipse plots have
been proposed for exploring properties of subsets. Artero et
al. [AdL04] tackled the overlapping problem by filtering out
the information in parallel coordinates based on frequency
or density information computed from the dataset. Ellis and
Dix [ED06] used a sampling lens to facilitate foucs+context
viewing of particular regions. Compared with these clustering and filtering techniques, our method aims at presenting
the entire information to users in a visually enhanced way so
that users can more easily identify any potential patterns.
Interaction techniques To further assist the exploration,
navigation tools are designed to support data localiza-

tion and subspace drilling operations. Wong and Bergeron [WB96] developed a wavelet brushing technique for
high-dimensional data. Hauser et al. [HLD02] used angular brushing to pick out data subsets with specific trends
between adjacent axes. Siirtola [Sii00] directly manipulated
parallel coordinates by dynamically summarizing a set of
polylines and interactively visualizing the correlation between polyline subsets. These brushing and interactive techniques are considered very effective tools in exploring the
structures within the clusters, while our method can further
provide an overview of the global structures and reveal the
relationships between clusters.
Visual enhancement Various visual enhancement schemes
have also been proposed for parallel coordinates. Johansson et al. [JLJC05] used high-precision textures and transfer functions to reveal clusters detected by numerical methods. Inspired by their work, we also use transfer functions,
but our algorithm first geometrically enhances patterns before applying any color enhancement. Novotny and Hauser
[NH06] presented a useful outlier-preserving focus+context
visualization tool. Kosara et al. [BKH05,KBH06] developed
various extensions to parallel coordinates to interactively explore categorical data. If free-form curves are used [The00],
the space between two adjacent axes can be efficiently exploited to encode more information of other axes, which can
help detect correlations among more than two dimensions.
Graham and Kennedy [GK03] also used smooth curves to
allow users to discern individual paths through the curve
knots. However our method not only curves lines to reduce
visual clutter but also adjusts their shapes to form visual
clusters.
Other than the aforementioned methods, clutter reduction
has also been applied to other visual representations like
graphs [PWR04, QZW06, WCG03, YPWR03]. For example,
Holten [Hol06] bent and bundled edges in graphs for relationship exploration in data with known hierarchical information. This work further demonstrates the potential of using curves to enhance the patterns in the data.
3. The Visual Clustering Algorithm
This section describes our visual clustering algorithm for
parallel coordinates based on energy minimization. We first
introduce our framework to model visual interaction between lines. Then we describe in detail our energy function
and the optimization process.
As discussed in Section 2, many researchers have worked
on reducing visual clutter through filtering, clustering, and
dimension reordering. We take an approach that directly
considers the visual interaction among edges. Since it is difficult to directly measure the visual clutter of a given drawing of parallel coordinates by quantitatively estimating human perceptibility, we develop a simplified model to represent the interaction between the individual lines of the parallel coordinates.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Zhou et al. / Visual Clustering in Parallel Coordinates

We model the parallel coordinates as a system with force
interaction between lines, where the force is defined towards
reducing visual interference between edges. The status of the
system can be described as the energy level of the whole
system. By allowing edges to be curved and their shapes to
be adjustable, visual clutter can be reduced. After computing the system status with minimized energy, the optimized
configuration of the parallel coordinates can be obtained.
Unlike previous approaches which use numerical methods
to detect clusters, our algorithm achieves visual clustering
without data classification.
In our model, the total energy of the edges can be divided
into two major terms as represented by the following equation:
E = αc Ecurvature + (1 − αc )Egravitation

Next, we describe in detail each energy term and its corresponding visual clustering effect we intend to achieve
through energy minimization. As a design guideline, we intend to construct a linear system so that it can be solved efficiently through linear programming. Therefore, both energy
terms are formulated using linear functions.
Curvature Energy Term:
In our model, we allow edges to be bent to reduce excessive intersections between lines. We set a curvature energy
term that prevents each line from being bent too much. For
a given drawing, we assume there are n data points (lines in
the plot). The curvature energy term can be approximated as:
n

m

∑ ∑ |Pi j − Pi j |

i-1

i-1

i

i
Pij’

Pij’

Fij

Pij

Pij
i+1

i+1

(a)

(b)

l1

α
l2

(1)

where E is the total energy of the whole system, Ecurvature
is the energy term representing the bending of each line,
Egravitation is the energy term representing the interactions
between neighboring line pairs, αc and (1 − αc ) are the
weighting coefficients of the energy term Ecurvature and
Egravitation respectively.

Ecurvature =

1049

(2)

i=1 j=1

where Pi j is a control point on a curved line i (the red line
in Fig. 1(a)). Altogether there are m control points sampled
for each line, and with these control points, the corresponding curve can be drawn by using any well-known curve (e.g.,
Bezier or Catmull-Rom curves). We can change the curve
shape by moving the control points up or down. All control
points with the same horizontal position form a column of
control points. Point Pi j is the corresponding point on the
straight line connecting the same two endpoints that Pi j is
associated with (the green line in Fig. 1(a)). Points Pi j and
Pi j share the same horizontal coordinates. The more bending
the curve, the larger the curvature, and the longer the distance between the Pi j and Pi j pair, therefore, the higher the
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Energy Terms: (a) Curvature energy term; (b)
Gravitation energy term; (c) Computing the force for the
gravitation energy term; (d) The range of neighboring lines
for gravitation interaction. m is set to be 3 for Eq. 2 and 3.

energy contribution from the curve. Note that our modeling
of the curvature is a simplified one. It is more like a deviation
energy which models the distance between the lines before
and after the bending. In our system, we usually set m to be
2 or 3 which can form edge bundles efficiently without causing many zig-zag curves. Although directly measuring the
curvature would be more accurate, it is computationally expensive, and furthermore, will result in a non-linear system.
Gravitation Energy Term:
We use another term called gravitation energy to model
the interaction between neighboring lines. To minimize excessive intersections between lines, it is desirable to have
neighboring lines as parallel as possible and parallel lines
pulled as close to each other as possible. Based on this
intuitive observation together with extensive experiments,
we design an empirical gravitation function. For the n data
points (lines in the plot), our function is:

Egravitation =

n

m

∑ ∑ −Fi j · (Pi j − Pi j ) + Ei j

(3)

i=1 j=1

where Fi j is the force computed based on the initial state
of the neighboring edge arrangement and Pi j − Pi j is the
moving distance of the control point i j along the force direction as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). Note that the negative sign
is used to guarantee that the energy will become lower when
the control points move along the force directions. Ei j is defined to keep the relative vertical order of control point i j for

H. Zhou et al. / Visual Clustering in Parallel Coordinates

1050

As illustrated in Fig. 1(d), all lines interacting with the solid
green line are dotted green lines. Note n is 6 in this example. All lines that have no interaction with the green solid
line are in red and will not participate in the computation.
We solve the above energy minimization problem with a
linear programming solver l p_solve [Sof] based on the revised simplex method and the Branch-and-bound method.
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 2: The effect of energy term weighting on visual clustering: (a) No visual clustering; (b) αc = 0, qα = qd = 15;
(c) αc = 0, qα = qd = 30; (d) αc = 0.15, qα = qd = 30.

non-intersecting edges. If point i j is still “in order”, Ei j = 0,
while if point i j crosses over the corresponding points of the
nearest non-intersecting edges, Ei j = in f inite. For each control point i j, the force Fi j is computed as the summation of
its interactions with all the neighboring edges. Assume that
we consider n neighboring edges for line i. The force Fi j
can then be computed as:

The effect of the visual clustering also depends on the
relative weighting between the energy terms Ecurvature and
Egravitation . In Fig. 2, we demonstrate the effect of the
weighting factor αc on the final clustering. The coefficient
αc controls the contribution from Ecurvature which tends to
keep each line as straight as possible. Fig. 2(a) shows a plot
before applying our energy minimization. From Fig. 2(b) to
(d), the value of αc varies between 0 to 0.15, while qα and
qd vary between 15 to 30. We observe that without the contribution from the energy term Ecurvature , the level of clustering can be solely controlled by qα and qd (Fig. 2(b) to
(c)). By increasing αc , the clusters of curved edges can be
distributed more evenly over the coordinate space, thereby
achieving better visual clarity (Fig.2 (c) to (d)).
4. Visualization and Interaction Techniques

Fi j =

n

∑ f(l ,l )

i k j

(4)

k=1

where li and lk are the two lines forming a neighboring
pair, and li represents the line to which the candidate control
point i j belongs. The force of each line pair (li , lk ) at the jth
sampling point is:

f(li ,lk ) j =

1
1
q · q
αliα,lk D(ld ,l

(5)

i k) j

The αli ,lk is the angle between the two lines, as illustrated
in Fig. 1(c). D(li ,lk ) j is the distance between sample point
pairs of the two lines.
D(li ,lk ) j = |Pi j − Pk j |

(6)

where Pi j is the jth sampling point of line i. Intuitively,
this term intends to pull all line pairs as close to each other as
possible, and as parallel to each other as possible, although
the Curvature Energy Term will counter-balance this term.
The exponents qα and qd control the influence of αli ,lk and
D(li ,lk ) j respectively.
When computing the interaction between line pairs, we
only consider a subset of neighboring lines for each line to
minimize the computational cost. We first include all the
lines that intersect with the line under consideration. Then
we also consider the neighboring lines formed by n nearest endpoints which are closed to each endpoint of the line.

In this section, we introduce two visualization techniques
which can be used together with visual clustering to further
increase the expressive power of parallel coordinates.
4.1. Color and Opacity Enhancement
Applying alpha blending to parallel coordinates drawings
can highlight different aspects of the data [JLJC05]. To further improve the visual effectiveness, we also assign color
and opacity to the plot of our work. After the optimization,
lines with similar properties are aggregated to form bundles.
We can then assign opacity and color according to the local
density of the lines.
The computation of local line density and the assignment
of color and opacity are illustrated in Fig. 3. We compute
the line density using a histogram method. Each vertical
column of the control points is first divided into a number
of bins (green rectangles in Fig. 3(a)). The number of bins
depends on the total number of lines. We normally set the
number of bins to 1/16 or 1/32 the number of lines. Then
for each bin, we count the number of control points falling
into it (see Fig. 3(b)). The number of points in each bin is
then normalized to approximate the bin density. As illustrated in Fig. 3(c), for the red line, the density values of the
bins containing the line’s control points are computed. The
density values of the up and down two neighboring bins for
each control point are also computed. The density value of a
given control point is the convolution of the three bin densities with a Gaussian function based on the distance between
the bin’s center and the control point. The averaged density
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Zhou et al. / Visual Clustering in Parallel Coordinates

(a)

(b)

(c)

1051

(d)

(e)

(f )

Figure 3: Applying color and opacity based on line density: (a) Density bins for each control point column; (b) Accumulation
of line density for each bin; (c) Computation of the local density for each line by averaging the density values of all control
points; (d) Applying color and opacity based on user specified transfer function; (e) Parallel coordinates before applying color
and opacity; (f) Parallel coordinates plot after applying color and opacity.

value of all control points of a line is then used to represent
the density of the line.
Afterwards, a user specified transfer function is utilized to
map the average density value of each line to color and opacity for rendering. We design an interface similar to the transfer function specification in volume rendering to assign the
color and opacity value based on density (Fig. 3(d)). Users
can then interactively manipulate the transfer function and
selectively enhance line bundles according to their local density values and the histogram curve showing how many lines
fall into each density value bin. By assigning different colors
to different density values, clusters can be easily differentiated from noises. It is possible that two distinct clusters with
similar line density values may be assigned similar colors.
But users can easily distinguish them based on their position
differences. Fig. 3(e) and (f) show the plots before and after
the application of the transfer function.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 4: Visual clustering on synthesized datasets.

4.2. Animation
Animation can be exploited to facilitate the effective use
of the visualization by keeping viewers oriented, facilitating clutter reduction [ED07], and enhancing comprehension
of state transitions [HR07]. We take the advantage of animation techniques to reveal more information in the visual
clustering process. By storing the intermediate results of the
optimization process, then interpolating and displaying them
consecutively, the animations reveal the interaction of edges
and help users identify clusters by walking through the visual clustering process. In such animations, clusters which
emerge early and become absorbed in further optimization
iterations can be identified and then investigated based on
users’ requests.
5. Experimental Results
In this section, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our visual clustering framework through the experiments on several datasets.
First we examined the effectiveness of our proposed
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

method on some synthesized datasets with simple patterns.
In Fig. 4, seven examples are shown. The images on the top
and bottom rows are plots of before and after applying visual clustering respectively. Our method successfully forms
visual bundles for clusters in Fig. 4(a) to (d). Note there is
one outlier edge in Fig. 4(e). Our visual clustering layout
successfully distinguishes this outlier from the rest of the
edges. Two clusters with fuzzy boundaries in Fig. 4(f) become more discernible after applying our algorithm.
Next we tested our algorithm on more sophisticated multivariate datasets. In Fig. 5, a car information dataset with
seven variables, widely used in many previous publications [PWR04], is visualized. Fig. 5(b) is the visual clustering result over the original plot shown in Fig. 5(a). Our result successfully shows the major clusters and outliers even
without the assistance of the color and opacity channels.
Some interesting details are further illustrated in the subfigures of Fig. 5(a) and (b). The interesting areas are highlighted with the black circles. In the region labeled with a ,
the data values of the lines in the circled area become dis-

H. Zhou et al. / Visual Clustering in Parallel Coordinates

1052
C ylinders
MP G

Dis placement

Hors epower
Acceleration
W eight
Y ear

(a)

(a’)

(b’)

(c’)

Figure 6: Experiments on a dataset with 5 variables and
3848 data items: (a) Original plot; (b) After visual clustering
optimization and color and opacity enhancement. Data is
from http://rosuda.org/Mondrian/.

(a)

(a’)

(b’)

(c’)

(b)

Origin:

US A

(b)

J apan

E urope

(c)

(d)
Figure 5: Experiments on a dataset with 7 variables and
392 data items: (a) Original plot; (b) After visual clustering optimization; (c) With color encoding the 8th variable,
the origin of cars; (d) With one transfer function. Data from
http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/datasets/cars.data.

cernable, because the lines are well organized and the intersections are grouped to leave clear spaces between lines.
The four edges highlighted in the circled area in region b
are the fuzzy boundaries/outliers between the two neighboring clusters (See the black lines in Fig. 5(a)). Our algorithm
isolates them from the major clusters. The lines in region c
likewise become discernable and beautifully grouped by our
visual clustering method (See the corresponding circled area
in Fig. 5(a)). As illustrated, the curved bundles can enhance
the patterns within the data, and thus the color and opacity
channels can be spared for other information. In Fig. 5(c),
the origin of cars, the eighth variable in the dataset, is encoded by the color so that any possible correlation between
this variable and all other variables can be conveniently examined. A transfer function can also be applied to reduce
line density and separate different clusters (see Fig. 5(d)). In
this example, we can see clearly that our geometry-based visual clustering scheme can effectively reduce visual clutter
and enhance patterns.
For highly dense datasets, only using curved lines may not
clearly reveal patterns, and it is in this manner that the color
and opacity enhancement tool becomes indispensable. Fig. 6
illustrates our results on a five-dimensional Pollen dataset
with 3848 entries. Fig. 6(a) is the parallel coordinates drawing without optimization, while Fig. 6(b) with optimization
and enhancement. In Fig. 6(b), the only major cluster, the
dark orange one in the center, is successfully detected by
our scheme. This experiment demonstrates that our color and
opacity enhancement method can be used together with visual clustering to reveal patterns in large datasets.
To further illustrate the effectiveness of our method, we
worked with a synthesized dataset of 7736 five-dimensional
items, with 2936 of its items distributed into four clusters
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Zhou et al. / Visual Clustering in Parallel Coordinates

1053

ory. The computation times of our visual clustering for
datasets used in Fig. 5, Fig. 6, and Fig. 7 are 27s, 1714s,
and 7797s respectively.
6. Discussions
(a)

(b)

(1)

(c)

(2)

(3)

(d)

Figure 7: Experiments on a dataset with 5 variables and
7736 data items: (a) Original plot; (b) Hierarchical parallel
coordinates result [FWR99]; (c) Applying a transfer function before visual clustering; (d) Applying a transfer function after visual clustering.

with 876, 752, 608 and 700 items respectively. The other
4800 items are noise generated randomly. Fig. 7(a) shows
the original parallel coordinates without optimization. In
Fig. 7(c) and (d), we apply the color and opacity enhancement scheme to the straight line drawing and the curved optimization result respectively. It is very hard to specify transfer functions in traditional parallel coordinates because the
clusters are totally blended into the noise (see Fig. 7(c)).
However, after applying visual clustering, we can immediately observe three major peaks in the histogram curve of
Fig. 7(d): peak 1 corresponds to the pink cluster; peak 3 is for
the green cluster; and peak 2 is for the two blue clusters. After checking with the data, we found that these four detected
clusters are indeed the real patterns we planted in the data.
Based on the information from the histogram curves shown
in Fig. 7(d), appropriate transfer functions can be set to not
only reveal a certain focusing cluster but also keep the context. Similar curves have also been obtained for the dataset
used in Fig. 6. We further tested datasets consisting of purely
random numbers and found that our histogram curves did not
show any obvious major peaks and thus no artificial clusters were generated. Fig. 7(b) shows the result generated by
the hierarchical parallel coordinates [FWR99]. Due to the
dense noise, their algorithm cannot detect and show the four
known clusters very well. This experiment demonstrates that
the color and opacity enhancement becomes more effective
after performing visual clustering.
We implemented our algorithm on a Dell Optiplex 745
desktop with Intel Core 2 Duo E6400 CPUs and 3GB Memc 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

From the experiments we can see that our visual clustering
scheme has some clear advantages. Our scheme is visually
pleasing and can greatly reduce visual clutter and enhance
patterns. Compared with data-centric methods, our method
does not filter out data when performing visual clustering
so that the context can be preserved. Compared with other
visual-centric methods, our technique exploits the geometry
channel to expose patterns. Color and opacity enhancement
will become more effective after visual clustering. In addition, our visual clustering scheme can be configured using
different energy coefficients (see Fig. 2). However, we found
that the default setting usually works well for most datasets.
For example, all the experiments in this paper have been generated using the setting αc = 0.15 and qα = qd = 10.
Our method can enhance some patterns but it may also
alter some otherwise obvious patterns and make them less
discernible (see Fig. 4(b)). Thus users are suggested to use
our system together with other parallel coordinates systems.
In rare situations, our method may generate some artificial
clusters so users should double check the results using the
original parallel coordinates if in doubt.
One major disadvantage of our method is that solving the
linear system may be time-consuming. The linear system
can be constructed in O(nlg(n)) time complexity and the
specification of color and opacity can be done in linear time
while the used linear programming solver l p_solve [Sof] has
polynomial-time complexity. Therefore, it may take minutes
or hours to generate the results for very large datasets. However, it is a one-time process that can be performed as a preprocessing. Once the layouts are generated, interactive visualization with different transfer functions can be achieved.
As one of the most active projects to develop open source
software for simplex-based linear programming, l p_solve
still may fail to solve some large feasible models. Therefore,
for very large datasets, some data-centric clustering and filtering techniques can be used to reduce the data size to a
manageable level before applying our method. If GPUs are
exploited to solve the linear system, we believe that the computation time can be dramatically reduced.
7. Conclusions and Future work
In this paper, we have presented a novel framework to reduce edge clutter, consequently improving visual clustering
for parallel coordinates. We exploit curved edges and adjust their shapes according to the curvature of each edge and
its interaction with neighboring edges. We resort to an optimization method to optimize the configuration of the curved
edges by minimizing the energy of the system through linear

1054

H. Zhou et al. / Visual Clustering in Parallel Coordinates

programming. The overall visual clustering is achieved by
geometrically bundling lines and forming patterns. We further enhance the visualization by varying color and opacity
according to the local line density of the curves.
Our proposed work can be further improved in several
ways. In our current implementation, the coherence along
two sides of each coordinate axis has not yet been fully investigated. We plan to consider this coherence issue by enforcing curvature continuity across the axes for certain data
entries. In our system, the interaction is mainly through the
adjustment of transfer functions to selectively reveal features
in large datasets. In the future, we plan to further augment
our system with more sophisticated interaction tools such as
brushing.
Acknowledgments

Proc. of IEEE Symp. on Information Visualization (2002),
pp. 127–130.
[Hol06] H OLTEN D.: Hierarchical edge bundles: Visualization of adjacency relations in hierarchical data. IEEE
Trans. on Vis. and Comp. Graph. 12, 5 (2006), 741–748.
[HR07] H EER J., ROBERTSON G.: Animated transitions
in statistical data graphics. IEEE Trans. on Vis. and Comp.
Graph. 13, 5 (2007), 1240–1247.
[ID90] I NSELBERG A., D IMSDALE B.: Parallel coordinates: a tool for visualizing multi-dimensional geometry.
In Proc. of IEEE Visualization (1990), pp. 361–378.
[JLJC05] J OHANSSON J., L JUNG P., J ERN M., C OOPER
M.: Revealing structure within clustered parallel coordinates displays. In Proc. of IEEE Symp. on Information
Visualization (2005), pp. 125–132.

We thank Amit Shesh, Nathan Gossett, and Jie Chen for their
valuable suggestions. This work was supported by Hong
Kong RGC grant CERG 618705 and 618706.

[KBH06] KOSARA R., B ENDIX F., H AUSER H.: Parallel
sets: Interactive exploration and visual analysis of categorical data. IEEE Trans. on Vis. and Comp. Graph. 12, 4
(2006), 558–568.

References

[NH06] N OVOTNY M., H AUSER H.: Outlier-preserving
focus+context visualization in parallel coordinates. IEEE
Trans. on Vis. and Comp. Graph. 12, 5 (2006), 893–900.

[AA04] A NDRIENKO G., A NDRIENKO N.: Parallel coordinates for exploring properties of subsets. In Proc. of
International Conf. on Coordinated & Multiple Views in
Exploratory Visualization (2004), pp. 93–104.

[Nov04] N OVOTNY M.: Visually effective information visualization of large data. In In Proc. of the 8th Central
European Seminar on Computer Graphics (2004).

[ABK98] A NKERST M., B ERCHTOLD S., K EIM D. A.:
Similarity clustering of dimensions for an enhanced visualization of multidimensional data. In Proc. of IEEE
Symp. on Information Visualization (1998), pp. 52–60.

[PWR04] P ENG W., WARD M. O., RUNDENSTEINER
E. A.: Clutter reduction in multi-dimensional data visualization using dimension reordering. In Proc. of IEEE
Symp. on Information Visualization (2004), pp. 89–96.

A RTERO A. O., DE O LIVEIRA M. C. F., L EVH.: Uncovering clusters in crowded parallel coordinates visualizations. In Proc. of IEEE Symp. on Information Visualization (2004), pp. 81–88.

[QZW06] Q U H., Z HOU H., W U Y.: Controllable and
progressive edge clustering for large networks. In Proc.
of Intl. Symp. on Graph Drawing (2006), pp. 399–404.

[AdL04]

KOWITZ

[BKH05] B ENDIX F., KOSARA R., H AUSER H.: Parallel
sets: visual analysis of categorical data. In Proc. of IEEE
Symp. on Information Visualization (2005), pp. 133–140.

[Sii00] S IIRTOLA H.: Direct manipulation of parallel coordinates. In CHI’00 Ext. Abstr. (2000), pp. 119–120.
[Sof]

S OFTWARE : http://lpsolve.sourceforge.net.

[ED06] E LLIS G., D IX A.: Enabling automatic clutter reduction in parallel coordinate plots. IEEE Trans. on Vis.
and Comp. Graph. 12, 5 (2006), 717–724.

[The00] T HEISEL H.: Higher order parallel coordinates.
In Proc. of the Conference on Vision Modeling and Visualization (2000), pp. 415–420.

[ED07] E LLIS G., D IS A.: A taxonomy of clutter reduction for information visualization. IEEE Trans. on Vis.
and Comp. Graph. 13, 6 (2007), 1216–1223.

[WB96] W ONG P. C., B ERGERON R. D.: Multiresolution multidimensional wavelet brushing. In Proc. of IEEE
Visualization (1996), pp. 141–148.

[FWR99] F UA Y.-H., WARD M. O., RUNDENSTEINER
E. A.: Hierarchical parallel coordinates for exploration
of large datasets. In Proc. of IEEE Visualization (1999),
pp. 43–50.

[WCG03] W ONG N., C ARPENDALE S., G REENBERG S.:
Edgelens: An interactive method for managing edge congestion in graphs. In Proc. of IEEE Symp. on Information
Visualization (2003), pp. 51–58.

[GK03] G RAHAM M., K ENNEDY J.: Using curves to enhance parallel coordinate visualisations. In Proc. of Intl.
Conf. on Information Visualization (2003), pp. 10–16.

[YPWR03]

[HLD02] H AUSER H., L EDERMANN F., D OLEISCH H.:
Angular brushing of extended parallel coordinates. In

YANG J., P ENG W., WARD M. O., RUNDEN E. A.: Interactive hierarchical dimension ordering, spacing and filtering for exploration of high dimensional datasets. In Proc. of IEEE Symp. on Information
Visualization (2003), pp. 105–112.
STEINER

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

