Pacific Graphics 2008
T. Igarashi, N. Max, and F. Sillion
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 7

Interpolatory and Mixed Loop Schemes
Zhuo Shi †1,2 , Shujin Lin ‡2,3 , Xiaonan Luo1,2 and Renhong Wang4
1 School
2 Key

of Information Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
Laboratory of Digital Life (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, China
3 School of Communication and Design, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
4 Department of Applied Mathematica, Technology University of Dalian, Dalian, China

Abstract
This paper presents a new interpolatory Loop scheme and an unified and mixed interpolatory and approximation
subdivision scheme for triangular meshes. The former which is C1 continuous as same as the modified Butterfly
scheme has better effect in some complex models. The latter can be used to solve the "popping effect" problem when
switching between meshes at different levels of resolution. The scheme generates surfaces coincident with the Loop
subdivision scheme in the limit condition having the coefficient k equal 0. When k equal 1, it will be changed into a
new interpolatory subdivision scheme. Eigen-structure analysis demonstrates that subdivision surfaces generated
using the new scheme are C1 continuous. All these are achieved only by changing the value of a parameter k. The
method is a completely simple one without constructing and solving equations.It can achieve local interpolation
and solve the "popping effect" problem which are the method’s advantages over the modified Butterfly scheme.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Line and Curve Generation

1. Introduction
Subdivision has become one of the significant modeling
tools in computer graphics due to its superior properties.
Subdivision can easily handle arbitrary topological control
nets with a powerful ability that parametric surfaces such as
Non-Uniform Rational B-splines (NURBS) do not possess.
The simplicity and the hierarchical structure of the generating procedure also make subdivision surfaces attractive for
interactive applications and multi-resolution representation
of large data models.
When old vertices are changed during refinement, the obtained subdivision is approximate, otherwise it is an interpolatory scheme. Subdivisions obtained by generalizing spline
curves and surfaces are usually approximate and therefore
they receive more attention in the surface modeling commu† This research was supported by the National Science Fund for
Distinguished Young Scholars (No.60525213) and the Key Project
(No. 60533030) of NSFC, 973 Program (No.2006CB303106) and
863 Program (No.2007AA01Z236) of China.
‡ Corresponding Author
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

nity. However, interpolating the control net of an approximation subdivision surface often suffers from noise. Interpolatory subdivision surfaces are highly efficient for applications
requiring interpolating specified points. Interpolatory subdivisions are successfully used for multi-resolution analysis of
complex mesh models.
In several recent developments in computer graphics and
numerical analysis [A. Nasri 1987; N. Dyn et al. 2002; Reif
U. 1995; C. T. Loop 1978; J. Maillot et al. 2001], the Loop
subdivision scheme [C.T. Loop 1978] have played a key role.
In these developments, the Loop subdivision scheme is used
to construct a finite element function space in a discretization
process of a partial differential equation. However, the convergence analysis or error estimation in these discretization
processes requires estimates of the interpolation error by the
function in the finite element function space. Currently, this
type of result is not available. So introducing interpolatory
characteristics into approximation subdivision scheme is an
open target.
Current subdivision rules applied to the problem of generating level of detail suffer from two major limitations.
Firstly, the most popular spline-based schemes produce sur-

1830

Zhuo Shi &Shujin Lin & Xiaonan Luo & Renhong Wang / Interpolatory and Mixed Loop Schemes

faces that approximate the base mesh. The limit surface,
especially in locally convex areas, is smaller than the base
mesh. This is because the refined control meshes progressively shrink towards the limit surface. Consequently, noticeable “popping effects” occur when switching between
meshes at different levels of resolution. To solve this problem, researchers try to change the initial control mesh [M.
Halstead et al. 1993], not the subdivision rules. But it requires to construct and to solve a linear equation which
causes higher computation complexity. Moreover, [J. Maillot 2001] adds a push-back step where each original vertex
is moved back towards its original position and newly introduced vertices are also adjusted by linear interpolation of
the adjusted original vertices. [Zhang Hongxin 2002] modifies Maillot’s method and gives a whole process to generate
the surface. Their methods all do several push-back steps and
cannot get the result surface directly.
In this paper, a new Interpolating Loop scheme and a unified subdivision scheme for composting approximation and
interpolatory Loop subdivision are constructed. The former
which is C1 continuous as same as the modified Butterfly
scheme has better effect in some complex models. The latter
is proposed, by adding a parameter k, to control the subdivision surfaces to approach the control meshes. By changing
the value of the parameter, it forces the limit surface to go
through a particular set of control points. The mixed method
is a completely simple one without any complicated computations. It can achieve local interpolation and solve the
"popping effect" problem which are the method’s advantages
over the modified Butterfly scheme. This unified scheme was
first introduced by [Shujin Lin, Xiaonan Luo 2007,2008],
however she just applied
√ it on on catmull-clark subdivision,
√
3 subdivision and 2 subdivision. But it is not achieved in
the most commonly used triangle subdivisions, such as loop
subdivision schemes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2
reviews some basic aspects on Loop subdivision. Section 3
introduces a new Interpolating Loop scheme mask. Section
4 presents the Mixed Loop scheme which integrates Loop
schemes and Interpolatory Loop schemes in the same framework. Section 5 proves the Mixed Loop scheme to be C1
continuity everywhere. Section 6 sketches the numerical examples. Section 7 draws some concluding remarks and directions for future work.
2. LOOP SUBDIVISION SCHEME
In Loop’s subdivision scheme, the initial control meshes
M(0) and the subsequent refine meshes M(k) consist of triangles only. In the refinement, each triangle is subdivided
into 4 sub-triangles. The vertex position of the refined mesh
is computed as the weighted average of the vertex position
of the unrefined mesh. Consider a vertex P0k at level k with
neighbor vertices Pik for i=1,. . . , n, where n is the valence of
vertex P0k . The positions of the newly generated Edge ver-

Figure 1: Mask of Loop subdivision scheme: (a) Edge mask;
(b) Vertex mask; (c) Boundary Edge mask;(d) Boundary Vertex mask.

tices Pik+1 on the edges of the previous mesh are computed
as

k
k
+ Pi+1
), i = 1, · · · , n, (1)
E0k+1 = 3 8(P0k + Pik ) + 1 8(Pi−1

Where index i is to be understood modulo n. The Vertex vertices get new positions according to
n

V0k+1 = (1 − nβ)P0k + β ∑ Pik ,
i=1

β = 1 n 5 8 − 3 8 + 1 4 cos 2π n

2

(2)

Note that all newly generated vertices have a valence of 6,
while the vertices inherited from the original mesh at level
zero may have a valence other than 6. Refer the former case
as ordinary and the latter case as extraordinary. The limit surface S of Loop’s subdivision is C2 -continuous everywhere
except at the extraordinary points where it is C1 -continuous.
3. NEW INTERPOLATORY LOOP SCHEME
This section proposes the modified rules for Interpolatory
Loop subdivision scheme from the corresponding Loop subdivision scheme. In this method, the positions of Vertex vertices remain stable.
Let Pik be the control point.
Let E k+1 (Pik ) and E k (Pik ) be the positions of the EdgeVertices after k+1 and k iterations in the new Interpolatory
Loop subdivision.
Let V k (Pik ) be the positions of Vertex-vertices in the classic Loop subdivision.
Let Dk (Pik ) be the displacement of V k (Pik ) after k iterations in the classic Loop subdivision.
Let ΔPik be the difference of the Edge-vertices position
E (Pik ) and the displacement of Vertex-vertices Dk (Pik ).
k

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Zhuo Shi &Shujin Lin & Xiaonan Luo & Renhong Wang / Interpolatory and Mixed Loop Schemes

ΔPik = E k (Pik ) − Dk (Pik )

(3)

When Pik are regular vertices, the proposed new nonboundary Edge vertices mask is depicted as follow:
E k+1 (Pik ) = E k (Pik ) + ΔPik = 2E k (Pik ) − Dk (Pik )
1 k
3 k
E k (Pik ) =
P + Pbk +
P + Pdk
8 a
8 c
1
V k (Pak ) + V k (Pbk )
Dk (Pik ) =
8
3
+ V k (Pck ) + V k (Pdk )
8

(4)
(5)

(6)

Fnk+1
(Pik ) = F k (Pik ) − ki ΔPik
i
= (1 − ki )F k (Pik ) + kiV k (Pik )

1831

(10)

When Pik are extraordinary vertices, the proposed new
non-boundary Edge vertices mask is as same as the new Interpolatory Loop scheme in equation (8).
The original value of the parameter ki of each control
point is given by the user. When ki = 0, it produces the classic
Loop subdivision scheme. When ki = 1, it produces the new
Loop subdivision scheme. When ki ∈(0,1), the shrinking or
bulge between the limit mesh and original mesh is smaller
than the approaching scheme or the interpolating scheme.
This can be used to solve the "popping effect" problem when
switching between meshes at different levels of resolution.

n

V k (Pik ) = (1 − nβ)P0k + β ∑ Pik ,
i=1

β=

1 5
−
n 8

3 1
2π
+ cos
8 4
n

2

(7)

Figure 4 describe the Edge mask of new scheme for regular vertices in 1-ring, extraordinary vertices in 1-ring and
boundary edge vertices. When Pik are extraordinary vertices,
the proposed new non-boundary Edge vertices mask is depicted as follow:
4iπ
2iπ 1
+ 2 cos
, i >= 5
Fi = 1 n 1 4 + cos
n
n
F0 = 3 8, F2 = −1 8, F1 = F3 = 0, i = 4
F0 = 3 8, F1 = F2 = −1 12, i = 3

It also provide the possibility to locally choose an interpolating variant of the conventionally approximation subdivision scheme. Let ki of the interpolated original control point
be 1, ki of the approached original control points be 0, examples are shown in figure 6.
5. CONTINUITY ANALYSIS
The C1 continuity of subdivision surfaces for meshes required to demonstrate the characteristic maps of the subdivision scheme are regular and injective. The proof is similar
to that of [L. Kobbelt. 1996], which is also numerical.

(8)

Here i is the valence of vertex. This rule of extraordinary
vertices is as same as the Modified Butterfly scheme.
Note that, the weight coefficients of the new Interpolatory
Loop scheme mask can be described in an explicit formulation equation (7) wherever at regular vertices or extraordinary vertices in 1-ring are shown.
4. MIXED LOOP SCHEME
In this section, a unified scheme for composing approximation and Interpolatory Loop scheme is proposed by adding
a parameter to control the subdivision surfaces to approach
the control meshes.
The difference regards to the Interpolatory Loop scheme
is computing new positions Fnk+1 (Pik ) of the already existing vertices. When Pik are regular vertices, the proposed new
non-boundary Edge vertices mask is depicted as follow:
E k+1 (Pik ) = E k (Pik ) + ki ΔPik
= 2E k (Pik ) − ki Dk (Pik )

(9)

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 2: A sector of 3-neighborhood stencils. The solid-line
sector is initial while the dotted line sector is initial while
the dotted-line one is the result around the same irregular
center after one step of refinement. The big numbers label
the vertices of the coarse sector and the small numbers label
the refined sector.
A subdivision matrix is initially established between similar stencils centered at an extraordinary vertex of three subsequent subdivision levels. Based on the approach described
in [D. Zorin. 2000], such stencils are generated by adding a
layer of faces to the smallest invariant stencil. They are 3neighborhood stencils of the extraordinary vertex in this setting. Figure 3 depicts a sector of such stencils. In addition,

1832

Zhuo Shi &Shujin Lin & Xiaonan Luo & Renhong Wang / Interpolatory and Mixed Loop Schemes

to take advantage of the Fourier transform for analyzing the
eigen-structure of the subdivision matrix, the stencils of the
vertex of valence n are partitioned into n+1 blocks with one
block consisting of only the center and other blocks consisting seven vertices. In each block, the vertices are labeled as
shown in Figure 2.
It is not surprising to find out that the leading eigenvalues
of the new interpolatory loop subdivision matrix have the
following values:
n =3, λ0 =1,λ1 = λ2 =0.4265, λ3 =0.4089
n =4, λ0 =1,λ1 = λ2 =0.3850, λ3 =0.3429
n =5, λ0 =1,λ1 = λ2 =0.4840, λ3 =0.3429
n =6, λ0 =1,λ1 = λ2 =0.5000, λ3 =0.3439
n =7, λ0 =1,λ1 = λ2 =0.5478, λ3 =0.3352
n =8, λ0 =1,λ1 = λ2 =0.5849, λ3 =0.3844
A characteristic map of a n-valence vertex is defined as
the planar limit surface whose initial control net consists
of two eigenvectors corresponding to the two subdominant
eigenvalues. The x- and y-coordinates of a vertex of the
control net come from the corresponding elements of the
two eigenvectors, respectively, with the same index. The zcoordinate of all vertices is set to zero. Such initial control meshes are calculated for a wide range of valences
(n=3,. . . 20) all of which are well behaved. Figure 3 depicts
the local structure near the extraordinary vertex of the initial
control meshes and the corresponding subdivided meshes after several refinement steps using the new subdivision masks
for n=3,. . . ,20. The numerical results illustrates that the corresponding limit surfaces are injective and regular. This concludes that the new scheme also produces C1 continuity at
extraordinary vertices.
When the parameter ki has unequal values, it is a nonuniform subdivision scheme. However, the convergence
analysis of such non-uniform schemes on extraordinary vertices is still an open question.
6. EXAMPLE
The new interpolating Loop subdivision scheme is applied
to a number of examples. Figure 5 shows a comparison example after 4 refinement steps between the Loop scheme,
the Modified Butterfly scheme and the Interpolatory Loop
scheme. The difference of the Loop scheme and the Interpolatory Loop scheme and the similarity of Modified Butterfly scheme and the Interpolatory scheme are found. Figure 6 depicts locally choosing an interpolating variant of
the conventionally approximation subdivision scheme. The
example is generated by locally interpolating one, two and
three original control point with Mixed Loop scheme. Figure 7 depicts a group of experiments for modeling shapes
from Approximating to Interpolating using the Mixing Loop
scheme. When ki =0, the subdivision scheme produces a

Figure 3: Visualization of regularity and injectivity of characteristic maps for valence n=3,4,5,6,7,8. The first and third
rows are initial control nets, which are constructed from the
eigenvectors of the corresponding subdominant eigenvalues,
The second and fourth rows are generated through refining
the corresponding control nets.

Loop scheme. On the other hand, when ki =1, the schemes
are Interpolatory. When ki ∈(0,1), the shrinking or bulge between the limit mesh and original mesh are smaller than
the approaching scheme or the interpolating scheme. Figure 8 depicts an complex comparison example after 4 refinement steps. The result of the Interpolatory Loop scheme is
smoother than the Modified Butterfly scheme because the
original control points of the former are more than the latter.
7. DISCUSSION
The present study introduces an Interpolatory Loop scheme
and a Mixing interpolating and approximating subdivision
scheme. The latter can mix Loop schemes and Interpolatory Loop schemes in the same framework. This paper focuses entirely on triangular schemes. However, quadrilateral schemes can be treated in a similar way. During the
processes, a new Interpolating subdivision mask for the triangular mesh whose limit surface is C 1 continuous everywhere is produced. The parameter ki which controls the transition from Approximating to Interpolating gives the Mixing
scheme more flexibility. It can be used to solve the "popc 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Zhuo Shi &Shujin Lin & Xiaonan Luo & Renhong Wang / Interpolatory and Mixed Loop Schemes

ping effect" problem and design models which interpolate
some of the original control points only. These functions are
realized by merely adjusting the values of ki . Compared to
the existing methods which need construct and solve equations, this new approach is absolutely simple and efficient.
It can achieve local interpolation and solve the "popping effect" problem which are the new method’s advantages over
the modified Butterfly scheme. The mathematical characters
of the Mixing subdivision scheme need future research.
8. REFERENCES
A. NASRI , Polyhedral subdivision methods for free-form
surfaces. ACM Trans Graph 6(1)1 (1987), 29– 73.
N. DYN, D. L., Subdivision schemes in geometric modeling. Acta Numerical 11 (2002),73–144.
U. REIF , A unified approach to subdivision algorithms
near extraordinary vertices. Computer Aided Geometric Design, 12 (1995):153–174.
C. T. LOOP, Smooth subdivision surfaces based on triangles. Master’s thesis. Technical report, Department of Mathematics, University of Utah 1978.
J. MAILLOT, J. STAM, A unified subdivision scheme
for polygonal modeling. Computer Graphics Forum, 20(3)
(2001), 471–479.
M. HALSTEAD, M. KASS, T. DEROSE, Efficient fair interpolating using catmull-clark surfaces. Computer Graphics
Forum, 8 (1993),35-44.
ZHANG HONGXIN, WANG GUOJIN, Semi-stationary
subdivision operators and their applications in geometric
modeling, Progress in Natural Science, 12 (7) (2002).772 –
776.
D. ZORIN., Ck continuity of subdivision surfaces. Thesis,
California Institute of Technology 1997.
L. KOBBELT, Interpolatory subdivision on open quadrilateral nets with arbitrary topology. Computer Graphics Forum, 15(3) (1996).409-420.
D. ZORIN., A method for analysis of C1-continuity of
subdivision surfaces. SIAM journal of Numerical Analysis,
37(5) (2000).1677-1708.
A. NASRI, M. SABIN, Taxonomy of interpolation constraints on recursive subdivision surfaces, The Visual Computer, 18(5-6) (2002).382-403.
SHUJIN LIN, XIAONAN LUO, A Unified Interpolatory
and Approximation Subdivision Scheme, Eurographics 07,
Prague, Czech, Sept.3-7, 2007, Short paper, In Eurographics
Digital Library.
SHUJIN LIN, XIAONAN LUO, Deducing Interpolating Subdivision Schemes from Approximating Subdivision
Schemes. (Submit to SIGGRAPH Asia 2008)
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1833

1834

Zhuo Shi &Shujin Lin & Xiaonan Luo & Renhong Wang / Interpolatory and Mixed Loop Schemes

Figure 4: (a) Edge mask for regular vertices in 1-ring; (b) Edge mask for extraordinary vertices in 1-ring; (c) Edge Mask for
boundary edge vertices.

(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure 5: A comparison example after 4 refinement steps: (a) the initial mesh; the result of (b) Loop scheme, (c) Modified
Butterfly scheme, (d) Interpolatory Loop scheme.

Figure 6: A example is generated by locally interpolating one, two and three original control point with Mixed Loop scheme.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Zhuo Shi &Shujin Lin & Xiaonan Luo & Renhong Wang / Interpolatory and Mixed Loop Schemes

1835

(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
Figure 7: The comparison examples after 4 refinement steps. (a) the initial mesh; From (b) to (e) , they are the result of Mixed
Loop scheme for ki =1, ki =0.66,ki =0.33 and ki =0.

(a) (b) (c)
Figure 8: An complex comparison example after 4 refinement steps: (a) the initial mesh, (b)the result of Modified Butterfly
scheme ,(c) the result of Interpolatory Loop scheme.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

