Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2008
A. Vilanova, A. Telea, G. Scheuermann, and T. Möller
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 3

Evaluation of illustration-inspired techniques for
time-varying data visualization
Alark Joshi †1 and Penny Rheingans‡1
1 Computer

Science Department, University of Maryland Baltimore County

Abstract
Illustration-inspired techniques have provided alternative ways to visualize time-varying data. Techniques such as
speedlines, flow ribbons, strobe silhouettes and opacity-based techniques provide temporal context to the current
timestep being visualized. We evaluated the effectiveness of these illustrative techniques by conducting a user
study. We compared the ability of subjects to visually track features using snapshots, snapshots augmented by
illustration techniques, animations, and animations augmented by illustration techniques. User accuracy, time
required to perform a task, and user confidence were used as measures to evaluate the techniques. The results
indicate that the use of illustration-inspired techniques provides a significant improvement in user accuracy and the
time required to complete the task. Subjects performed significantly better on each metric when using augmented
animations as compared to augmented snapshots.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): H.1.2 [Human factors]:

1. Introduction
Illustration-inspired techniques have been found to be effective at conveying information succinctly and effectively.
Techniques inspired by photography as well as illustrations have been adapted to visualizing time-varying data
[WS03, SJEG05]. Practitioners currently use large panoramas of snapshots (as shown in Figure 1) taken over time or
watch an animation of these snapshots to perform feature
tracking. However, as can be seen by looking at the series of
snapshots as shown in Figure 1, it is very hard to identify the
direction in which the contained three-dimensional features
are moving.
To measure the visual tracking ability of human observers,
Pylyshyn [Pyl03] showed subjects a series of moving objects
over time. Subjects were asked to visually track these objects as they moved. The study found that a human observer
can successfully track up to five objects moving at a relatively moderate speed, but as the number of moving objects
increased, the user’s ability to track the features decreased
† Alark Joshi: alark1@cs.umbc.edu
‡ Penny Rheingans: rheingan@cs.umbc.edu

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

dramatically. He also found that the user’s ability to track
features dropped sharply as the speed of the moving objects
increased.
In previous work, we proposed the use of techniques
inspired by comics to augment time-varying data visualizations with illustrative cues to provide temporal context [JR05]. We presented four techniques: speedlines, flow
ribbons, strobe silhouettes and opacity modulation techniques to convey positional change in time-varying data. It
was claimed that the use of illustration-inspired techniques
would aid the visual feature tracking abilities in visualizing
time-varying data.
We evaluated the effectiveness of the illustration-inspired
techniques by conducting a formal user study. The techniques were evaluated using three measures: accuracy in
completing a task, time required by the users to complete
a task and user confidence. Illustration-inspired techniques
can be classified into two groups: Speedlines and flow ribbons are similar in nature and opacity modulation and strobe
silhouettes are similar in the way they communicate path
positions of features. We evaluated speedlines and opacitybased techniques, since they were representative of these two
classes of illustration-inspired techniques.

1000

Alark Joshi & Penny Rheingans / Evaluation of illustration-inspired techniques for time-varying data visualization

Figure 1: These are a set of snapshots from evenly spaced time steps of the turbulent vortex dataset [FS98]. As is evident from
looking at the snapshots, it is very hard to correlate and track a particular feature over different time steps. These images were
generated using Volview [Kit06].

Figure 2: The image depicts change over time in a feature
for CFD data. The rightward motion of the flow feature is
conveyed using speedlines.

Figure 3: The image conveys change over time using
opacity-based techniques. The upward motion of the feature is conveyed using opacity-based techniques. The older
timesteps, shown by the faded representations of the feature
over time, provide temporal context.

1.1. Speedlines
Speedlines are defined as lines that convey information to
the viewer about the path traversed by a particular feature
over time. They are basically lines that follow a particular
feature over time. Illustrators have used speedlines to convey motion by altering the characteristics of these lines. The
thickness, line style, and variation of the line’s opacity are
among the characteristics that successfully convey change in
direction. Darker, thicker regions of the line convey an older
time step whereas lighter, thinner regions of the speedline
depict a more recent time step.
In our study, the speedlines technique was applied to synthetic data as well as real-world data from the computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) domain. In Figure 2, the speedlines
depict the rightward motion of the flow feature over the underlying features.
1.2. Opacity modulation
Illustrators often used blurred, desaturated images to depict
older time steps with brighter, more detailed images representing newer time steps. In visualization, the same effect
can be obtained by using opacity modulation techniques.
For this technique, an illustration feature is identified and

opacity-modulated snapshots of each timestep are merged
into one visualization. Older timesteps are represented by
translucent, blurred representations while newer timesteps
are more crisp and brightly displayed. This provides insight
into the origin of the feature and its path through multiple
timesteps.
This technique was applied to synthetic data as well as
real-world data. Figure 3 shows a visualization where the
older time step is shown by a translucent, faded representation, whereas the newer time step is crisp and brighter. This
visualization conveys the upward leftward motion of the feature.

2. Hypothesis
Our testable hypothesis is that illustration-inspired techniques can lead to improved visual tracking of features as
they move over time. By improved visual tracking, we mean
that the techniques will facilitate faster and more accurate
visual tracking than standard snapshot-based or animationbased visualization of time-varying data.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Alark Joshi & Penny Rheingans / Evaluation of illustration-inspired techniques for time-varying data visualization

1001

Figure 4: A screenshot of a sample screen that is shown to the subjects. The subjects were shown snapshots and were asked to
indicate the direction of motion of a particular feature moving over time. They were also requested to specify a confidence level
in their answer.

3. Independent variable

4.2. Datasets

The independent variable for the user study is the visualization technique being used to visualize the time-varying data:

Both synthetic and real-world data were presented in all four
representations. The synthetic datasets that we used consisted of either a single feature tracing a simple path (linear
or circular), multiple features tracing simple paths (linear,
circular, spiral) and multiple features tracing complex paths.

• A panorama of snapshots (such as the one shown in Figure
1).
• A single snapshot of the current timestep augmented with
one of the illustration-inspired techniques. Figure 2 shows
an example image of the same.
• An animation depicting the motion of the feature over
time.
• An animation augmented with one of the illustrationinspired techniques.

The real world data that we used is the turbulent vortex
dataset from Rutgers University [FS98]. The dataset is a
pseudospectral simulation of coherent turbulent vortex structures with a 128×128×128 resolution (100 time steps). The
variable being visualized is vorticity magnitude. The dataset
has numerous features that change position over time.
4.3. Procedure

4. User study details
Before we began the formal evaluation process, we ran a pilot experiment. The pilot study was not timed or scored for
user accuracy. The pilot study was conducted with three subjects whose answers were not considered in the final evaluation of the techniques.

4.1. Subjects
We tested the illustration-inspired techniques with 24 subjects (15 males and 9 females aged 22 to 30) who had basic
familiarity with using computers. We performed full factorial, within-subjects testing to evaluate the techniques. In order to balance ordering effects, we tested the subjects with
all possible combinations of orderings of trials.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

During the course of conducting the user study, we first explained the study procedure to the subject. On obtaining consent from the subject for the study, we conducted the user
study. At the end of the user study, we requested the subjects
to fill out a usability questionnaire to get subjective feedback
from them.
The user study was conducted using a web browser. Since
we had to show videos to the subjects, we used Riva Free
FLV encoder to encode AVI files into flash files that can be
shown to the viewer in the browser setting.
Figure 4 shows a screenshot of the snapshot-based visualization that we showed the subjects. Figure 5 shows a screenshot of the augmented snapshots technique that was shown
to the subjects. We first asked the user a question and depending on the kind of data (snapshots or animation), the

1002

Alark Joshi & Penny Rheingans / Evaluation of illustration-inspired techniques for time-varying data visualization

Figure 6: These images show a subset of the kinds of motion
that we asked the subjects to choose. This enabled us to test
more complex motions than just simple leftwards, rightwards
kinds of motion.

1. Were the questions asked for each evaluation straightforward?
2. Overall, did you think the speedlines techniques helped
convey direction better than standard visualization techniques?
3. Overall, did you think the opacity-based techniques
helped convey direction better than standard visualization
techniques?
4. Could you perform simple tasks such as tracking a single feature using standard snapshots or animation-based
techniques?
5. Could you perform simple tasks such as tracking a single
feature using illustration-based techniques?
6. Could you perform hard tasks such as tracking multiple features using standard snapshots or animation-based
techniques?
7. Could you perform hard tasks such as tracking multiple
features using illustration-based techniques?
5. Tasks

Figure 5: This is a screenshot showing an augmented snapshot based visualization to the subjects. The users were
asked to indicate the direction of motion as well as their confidence in their answers.

user observed it and provided an answer. We asked the user
to specify the direction in which a particular feature was
moving. The user picked one of the given choices and indicated a confidence level in their answer. We used a Likert scale to measure the confidence that the subjects had in
their answers. The user was asked to select a confidence level
from one of: Not at all confident, Slightly confident, Confident, Highly Confident, and Completely confident.

4.4. Questionnaire
Subjects were requested to fill out a questionnaire evaluating the effectiveness of the various techniques. Their answers were obtained on a Likert scale of 1 (easy/agree) to
9 (hard/disagree). The questions asked in the questionnaire
were as follows:

We asked users to track features as they were moving over
time. Such tasks are representative of what researchers need
to do on a regular basis as they track vortex tubes in feature data, as they track hurricane features over time, as they
track the energy of jets entering a region, and so on. Our
tasks were simple enough to test the effectiveness of the
illustration-inspired techniques with subjects who are not
necessarily application-domain experts; nevertheless, they
represent tasks that scientists need to perform on a regular
basis. The task-based question that we asked the user was
Which of these paths seems to best represent the observed
direction of motion of the feature?
The subject was presented with four choices of paths and
was asked to select one of them according to the perceived
motion. This enabled us to test complex motion paths instead
of just simple linear motion of features. Figure 6 shows some
of the images that we showed our subjects. They would indicate the perceived direction of motion of the feature by
selecting one such glyph.
6. Dependent variables
We measured the accuracy of the subjects in performing the
task in addition to the time required to complete the task.
The user performance time is the time required by the user

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1003

Alark Joshi & Penny Rheingans / Evaluation of illustration-inspired techniques for time-varying data visualization

to read the question, look at the snapshots or animation and
specify the answer. Additionally, we measured the confidence of the user in their answer. We also obtained feedback
in the form of subjective satisfaction where we asked subjects to rate their experience on a scale of 1-9 (Likert scale).

7. Results
We analyzed the results of the user study using statistical techniques. To compare the four different visualization types, we used the statistical test Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) as well as Tukey’s post-hoc pairwise comparison
test . These tests allowed us to compare the accuracy, timings, and confidence obtained from the four groups (snapshots, augmented snapshots, animations, and augmented animations). The test began with a null hypothesis that the
use of illustration-inspired techniques provided no speedup
in completing tasks, no improvement in accuracy, and that
the users felt equally confident in their answers for all techniques. The statistical measure of significance p evaluates
the probability of the result agreeing with the null hypothesis. For values of p < 0.05, the null hypothesis is rejected, implying that the use of illustration-inspired techniques makes a difference.
The first metric that we used to evaluate the techniques
was user accuracy, defined as the number of correct answers
per user per technique. The mean and standard deviation
for each technique are listed in Table 1. Figure 7 shows
a graph of the same data. A comparison of the snapshots
technique with the snapshots technique augmented with the
illustration-inspired techniques shows that the subjects got
more answers correct using the augmented snapshots. Similarly, in the case of animations compared to augmented animations, the subjects were more accurate when using augmented animations, as can be seen in Figure 7. The temporal context that the illustration-inspired techniques provide seem to help users complete the task more accurately.
Amongst all the four techniques, the augmented animations
techniques seems to provide users with the most useful information to correctly complete the task.
Analyzing the accuracy results using the ANOVA test
yields the results shown in Table 2. The variation between
the four different visualization techniques is high. The probability p of this result assuming the null hypothesis is less
than 0.0001. This implies that the result is extremely significant and that the null hypothesis is rejected. This proves that
the use of illustration-inspired techniques increases the user
accuracy for visual tracking of features.
To identify pairwise significance, the minimum pairwise
difference was calculated using the Tukey test. The computed minimum pairwise difference was Dmin = 4.706 with
Qt = 3.9. For all values of difference of means larger than
Dmin the pairwise comparisons are significant (p < 0.05).
As can be seen from Table 3, the results are significant when
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Type of visualization
Snapshots
Augmented Snapshots
Animations
Augmented Animations

Mean
76.851
91.67
91.67
97.22

Std. Dev.
10.288
11.7284
11.111
5.144

Table 1: This table shows the mean and standard deviation
of the accuracy of the users. Users completed tasks with the
most accuracy in the case of augmented animations.

Figure 7: This graph shows accuracy results grouped according to the categories of questions asked. The categories,
from left to right, are Snapshots, Augmented Snapshots, Animations, and Augmented Animations. The user accuracy for
Augmented Snapshots is better than Snapshots, similarly the
accuracy is better for Augmented Animations as compared
to Animations.

comparing augmented snapshots (M2) with snapshots (M1).
Similarly, the results is significant when comparing augmented animations (M4) with plain animations (M3).
The second metric we used to evaluate the techniques was
the time required by the subject to complete each task per
visualization technique. Table 4 shows the mean and standard deviation for the four visualization techniques. Figure
8 shows a graphical representation of the timing results. The
subjects required more time when viewing snapshots than
in the other three cases. Augmented animations helped subjects answer questions faster than just animations. Overall,
even though loading an animation took more time, anima-

Source
of variation
between
error
total

Sum of
squares
6181.0
17804.0
24004.0

DOF
3
104
107

Mean
squares
2060.0
171.4

F
12.02

Table 2: This table shows the result of performing the analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the accuracy per user. The probability of these results, assuming the null hypothesis, is less
than 0.0001.

1004

M1
M2
M3
M4

Alark Joshi & Penny Rheingans / Evaluation of illustration-inspired techniques for time-varying data visualization

76.851
91.67
91.67
97.22

M1
76.851
-

M2
91.67
14.819
-

M3
91.67
14.819
0
-

M4
97.22
20.369
5.55
5.55
-

Table 3: The table shows the minimum pairwise difference
for accuracy means computed for the Tukey test. Accuracy
means are denoted by M1 - snapshots, M2 - augmented snapshots, M3 - animation and M4 - augmented animations.
Type of vis.
Snapshots
Augmented
Snapshots
Animations
Augmented
Animations

Mean
54.822
22.696

95% conf.interval
47.85-61.80
15.72-29.67

Std. Dev.
2.92
2.449

33.411
26.248

26.44-40.38
19.27-33.22

3.107
2.539

Table 4: This table shows the mean, 95% confidence intervals around the mean and standard deviation for the timing
results shown in seconds.

tions seemed to give the user a better understanding of the
time-varying nature of the data.
The time required to complete a task in each of the four
cases was analyzed using ANOVA. Table 5 shows the result
of the ANOVA test on the timing data. The value of p computed using ANOVA was less than 0.0001 which implied
that the null hypothesis was rejected. The value of p implies that the result is extremely significant according to the

Figure 8: This graph shows the amount of time required by
the subjects to complete the task using the four techniques.
Users took more time to complete a task using snapshots as
compared to all the other techniques. Users also took more
time to answer questions using animations as compared to
animations augmented with illustration-inspired techniques.

Source
of variation
between
error
total

Sum of
squares
16779.0
34724.0
51503.0

DOF
3
104
107

Mean
squares
5593.0
333.9

F
16.75

Table 5: This table shows the result of performing the analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the time required by the users
to complete a task using all the techniques. The probability
of these results, assuming the null hypothesis, is less than
0.0001.

M2
M4
M3
M1

22.696
26.248
33.411
54.822

M2
22.696
-

M4
26.248
3.552
-

M3
33.411
10.715
7.163
-

M1
54.822
32.126
28.574
21.411
-

Table 6: The table shows the minimum pairwise difference
for timing means computed for the Tukey test. Timing means
are denoted by M1 - snapshots, M2 - augmented snapshots,
M3 - animation and M4 - augmented animations.

ANOVA test and implies that the use of illustration-inspired
techniques clearly helped users complete tasks faster than
with just snapshots or animations.
To identify pairwise significance between the timing results, the minimum pairwise difference was calculated using
the Tukey test. The computed minimum pairwise difference
was Dmin = 6.626 with Qt = 3.9. For all values of difference
of means larger than Dmin the pairwise comparisons are considered significant (p < 0.05). As can be seen from Table 6,
the results are significant when comparing augmented snapshots (M2) with plain snapshots (M1) as well as when compared with animations (M3). When comparing augmented
animations (M4) with animations (M3) the results are significant. A comparison of the augmented animations (M4)
and snapshots (M1) too is significant.
The third metric that was used to evaluate the techniques
was the user confidence. The subjects were requested to
specify a confidence level for each question. Table 7 shows
the mean and standard deviation of the confidence obtained
for each technique. The confidence was higher for both augmented snapshots and augmented animations, as can be seen
in Figure 9. The subjects had the least confidence in their
answers for the plain snapshots and low confidence for the
plain animations.
Table 8 shows the results of performing the analysis of
variance (ANOVA) on user confidence per question. Analyzing the confidence that the subjects had in their results, we
found that subjects were more confident in the correctness
of their answers when using illustration-inspired techniques.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Alark Joshi & Penny Rheingans / Evaluation of illustration-inspired techniques for time-varying data visualization

Type of vis.
Snapshots
Augmented
snapshots
Animations
Augmented
animations

Mean
3.6389
4.0278

95% conf. interval
3.418-3.860
3.807-4.249

Std. Dev.
0.088
0.078

3.7407
4.4907

3.520-3.962
4.270-4.712

0.103
0.094

Table 7: This table shows the mean, 95% confidence intervals around the mean as well as standard deviation for the
confidence results.
Source
of variation
between
error
total

Sum of
squares
40.23
988.5
1029.0

DOF
3
104
107

Mean
squares
13.41
2.310

M1
M3
M2
M4

3.6389
3.7407
4.0278
4.4907

M1
3.6389
-

M3
3.7407
0.1018
-

M2
4.0278
0.3889
0.2871
-

1005
M4
4.4907
0.8518
0.75
0.4629
-

Table 9: The table shows the minimum pairwise difference
for confidence means computed for the Tukey test. Confidence means are denoted by M1 - snapshots, M2 - augmented snapshots, M3 - animation and M4 - augmented animations.

F
5.806

Table 8: This table shows the result of performing the analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the confidence per user. The
probability of this results, assuming the null hypothesis, is
less than 0.0007.

The value of p from the ANOVA test obtained was p <
0.0007 which according to the ANOVA test is an extremely
significant result and rejects the null hypothesis that the users
feel equally confident with and without illustration-inspired
techniques. The illustration-inspired techniques clearly instill more confidence in the users in both the augmented
snapshots and augmented animations.
To identify pairwise significance between the user confidence, the minimum pairwise difference was calculated us-

Figure 9: The users were asked to specify their confidence
in their answers. This graph shows a representation of the
overall confidence that the users had in their answers. As
can be seen, users were more confident about their answers
for the augmented snapshots and animated animations as
compared to plain snapshots or animations.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

ing the Tukey test. The computed minimum pairwise difference was Dmin = 0.688 with Qt = 3.9. For all values of difference of means larger than Dmin the pairwise comparisons
are considered significant (p < 0.05). As can be seen from
Table 9, the results are significant when comparing snapshots (M1) and augmented animations (M4). The confidence
between augmented animations (M4) and animations (M3)
was significant. The pairwise comparison between confidence for augmented snapshots (M2) and snapshots (M1)
was not as significant. It means that even though the subjects were more faster and more accurate, they were not as
confident using the augmented techniques.
8. Discussion
Based on the analysis of the user study, we can say that the
illustration-inspired techniques help users track features in
three-dimensional time-varying data faster and with more
accuracy. The illustrative cues when added to standard visualization techniques such as snapshots or animations provided temporal context.
For synthetic datasets, the users were fast and accurate
for all four representations. In the case of real-world data,
users were more accurate with the illustration-inspired techniques as can be seen in Figure 10. In particular, for the turbulent vortex data visualized using snapshots, the user accuracy was as low as 30%. Similarly, when visualizing features
in the turbulent vortex data using animations, the user accuracy was 66.67%. Overall, the users seem to have struggled
with completing the task accurately using standard visualization techniques for real world data. This may be due to the
fact that the real world data contains more complex feature
movements that the subjects were not able to understand using standard visualization techniques. We observed that the
user accuracy using snapshots and animations was lower for
complex synthetic datasets containing multiple features and
for real-world CFD datasets.
The illustration-inspired techniques when applied to realworld datasets clearly aided the user in accurately identifying the direction of motion of the features. For real-world
data, when visualized using augmented snapshots, the user

1006

Alark Joshi & Penny Rheingans / Evaluation of illustration-inspired techniques for time-varying data visualization

9. Conclusion

Figure 10: In this graph, the accuracy of the users for synthetic data versus real world data is compared. As can be
seen, the accuracy for synthetic data is high for both with
and without illustration-inspired techniques. The accuracy
for real world data without illustration-inspired techniques
is very low whereas the use of illustration-inspired techniques when applied to real world data has boosted the accuracy of the users.

We evaluated previously introduced illustration-inspired
techniques by conducting a user study. Analyzing the results of the user study led to the fact that users were able to
perform tasks of visually tracking features more accurately
and faster using the illustration-inspired techniques than using plain snapshots or animations. Subjects were much more
confident of their answers when they used the illustrationinspired techniques. Users performed better at completing
tasks with the augmented animations technique as compared
to static visualizations. Subjects performed much better on
real-world data when using the illustration-inspired techniques as compared to synthetic data, where they were able
to perform the task equally well with all the four techniques.
Further evaluation studies in the interactions of multiple
such illustration-inspired techniques in a single visualization will provide more guidelines to application domain experts. Occlusions of illustration-inspired techniques by features ahead of them can be further examined to improve the
effectiveness of their techniques.
10. Acknowledgements

accuracy is much higher at 82%. Subjects performed best
(user accuracy = 92.66%) with the real world data when visualized using augmented animations. The temporal context
and illustrative cues provided using the illustration-inspired
techniques seemed to have had a significant impact on the
visual tracking abilities of the subjects.
Among the four techniques, the subjects preferred the animations with illustration-inspired techniques the most. This
could have been due to the fact that the illustration-inspired
techniques augmented animations without distracting the
viewer from the main aim of viewing the time-varying phenomenon. The illustrative cues provide important cues to
the viewer in a non-invasive manner and clearly help users
to complete tasks faster and more accurately than the other
techniques. The ability to complete tasks correctly with the
use of illustration-inspired techniques seems to have given
the users confidence regarding the correctness of their answers.
Our subjective evaluation gave us feedback regarding
the users’ preferences for the various techniques. Almost
all the users (92%) thought that both the speedlines and
the opacity-based techniques helped convey direction better than only snapshots or only animations. Of the two techniques, the users indicated through their answers that they
preferred the speedlines technique (70.8%) to the opacitybased techniques (29.2%). From discussions with domain
experts, we think this might be due to misinterpretation of
older timesteps actually being data for the current timestep.
The amount of opacity variation from one timestep to another needs to be investigated further to avoid such confusion.

We would like to thank Dr. Deborah Silver and Kristina Bennett for providing the Vortex dataset. We would like to thank
all our subjects for participating in the study. We would like
to thank the anonymous reviewers for their excellent feedback. This work has been funded by NSF grant numbers
0121288 and 0081581.
References
[FS98] F ERNANDEZ V., S ILVER D.:
Computational fluid dynamics - turbulent vortex dataset:
http://www.caip.rutgers.edu/ xswang/feature/index.html,
1998.
[JR05] J OSHI A., R HEINGANS P.: Illustration-inspired
techniques for visualizing time-varying data. In Proceedings IEEE Visualization 2005 (2005), pp. 679–686.
[Kit06] K ITWARE I.: Volview: A volume visualization
system, 2006.
[Pyl03] P YLYSHYN Z. W.: Seeing and Visualizing: Its not
what you think (Life and Mind). Bradford Book, 2003.
[SJEG05] S VAKHINE N., JANG Y., E BERT D., G AITHER
K.: Illustration and photography inspired visualization of
flows and volumes. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization
2005 (2005), pp. 687–694.
[WS03] W OODRING J., S HEN H.-W.: Chronovolumes:
a direct rendering technique for visualizing time-varying
data. In Proceedings of the 2003 Eurographics/IEEE
TVCG Workshop on Volume graphics (2003), ACM Press,
pp. 27–34.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

