Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2008
A. Vilanova, A. Telea, G. Scheuermann, and T. Möller
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 3

Exploratory Visualization of Animal Kinematics Using
Instantaneous Helical Axes
D. F. Keefe1 , T. M. O’Brien1 , D. B. Baier2 , S. M. Gatesy2 , E. L. Brainerd2 , D. H. Laidlaw1
1 Brown
2 Brown

University Department of Computer Science
University Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology

Abstract
We present novel visual and interactive techniques for exploratory visualization of animal kinematics using instantaneous helical axes (IHAs). The helical axis has been used in orthopedics, biomechanics, and structural
mechanics as a construct for describing rigid body motion. Within biomechanics, recent imaging advances have
made possible accurate high-speed measurements of individual bone positions and orientations during experiments. From this high-speed data, instantaneous helical axes of motion may be calculated. We address questions
of effective interactive, exploratory visualization of this high-speed 3D motion data. A 3D glyph that encodes all
parameters of the IHA in visual form is presented. Interactive controls are used to examine the change in the IHA
over time and relate the IHA to anatomical features of interest selected by a user. The techniques developed are
applied to a stereoscopic, interactive visualization of the mechanics of pig mastication and assessed by a team
of evolutionary biologists who found interactive IHA-based analysis a useful addition to more traditional motion
analysis techniques.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional
Graphics and Realism – Animation I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional Graphics and Realism – Virtual reality

1. Introduction
Analysis of 3D motion plays an important role in many scientific processes. In biomechanics, analysis of the rigid body
motion of bones is integral in the treatment of disease and
injury [Win90] and in the study of animal behavior and evolution [Bie03]. Visual analysis tools have a long history of
use in these fields, dating back to the pioneering work of
Maray, Muybridge, and their contemporaries [Bra94]. Imaging capabilities have improved considerably, and scientists
now benefit from a new ability to collect accurate high-speed
motion data of internal anatomical structures, such as bones,
during motion experiments [YSAT01]. In this paper, we examine novel visual and interactive techniques for analysis of
this 3D kinematic data.
As a rigid body, such as a bone, moves through space, it
undergoes both translation and rotation. This movement may
be represented mathematically by several alternative strategies, including a 4x4 transformation matrix, a combination
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

of rotation angles and translation vectors, or the parameters
of a “screw” motion (a translation along and rotation about
an axis in space). In this paper, we explore interactive visualization and analysis techniques using screw axes, known
more commonly within the biomechanics community as helical axes.
Helical axis representations exhibit several properties that
make them advantageous for the study of motion. First, they
permit a description of rigid body motion without requiring
an arbitrarily chosen reference frame. In contrast, alternative
strategies, such as rotation angles (Euler or Cardan) combined with X,Y, Z translation values, require reporting data
relative to a locally defined reference frame. In experimental contexts, care must be taken to define this frame consistently across subjects and in a way that facilitates analysis
of the most important components of the data. To ease this
burden, several conventions have been defined, for example,
Denavit-Hartenberg (DH) notation [Ang02], and the joint ro-

864

D. F. Keefe et al. / Exploratory Vis. of Animal Kinematics Using IHAs

Figure 1: Visualization of the motion of a pig’s mandible while chewing. Left and middle: View from behind the pig’s head
during the opening phase (left) and food grinding phase (middle). The IHA displayed describes the mandible’s motion at each
instant shown. Right: The visualization environment including a stereoscopic display on the left, linked 2D data plots on the
right, and controlled via a combination of the mouse, keyboard, and a 6-DOF SpaceNavigator.

Table 1: Parameters of the IHA.
uˆ
ω
s
p

Figure 2: Instantaneous helical axis (IHA) for a moving,
rigid body.

tation convention (JRC) [Zat98]. Both of these work well in
specific applications. DH notation is useful for describing
motion of complex, multi-link mechanisms in robotics. Useful in biomechanical analysis, the JRC system defines spatial reference axes with respect to proximal and distal body
segments, making analysis more direct for some joints, the
knee for example. Our intent is not to replace these useful
strategies, but rather to explore more thoroughly the cases
where alternative representations may compliment existing
approaches, for example, in analysis of bones with multiple
complex articulations, such as the mandible.
Another advantageous property of helical axes is the direct visual interpretation that viewing the axis together with
an anatomical reference sometimes provides. For example,
in Figure 1 (left), a helical axis for one time-step during the
opening phase of a pig’s chewing motion is displayed together with correctly posed 3D bone geometries. Notice the
horizontal positioning of the helical axis, indicating immediately that the rotational component of the motion at this point
functions to open the jaw. Also, notice the intersection of the
axis with the geometry of the mandible. Rather than passing through the temporomandibular joint (TMJ) itself, as we
would expect of a simple hinge joint (rotation only), the axis

=
=
=
=

unit direction of IHA
magnitude of angular velocity
magnitude of sliding velocity along IHA
a point coincident with IHA

intersects the mandible at a lower point, providing an immediate indication to the viewer of the “sliding” that happens
within the TMJ as the mandible protrudes forward when the
jaw opens. The utility of direct visual interpretations of this
nature, evident even within a still image, have motivated our
investigation of animated, interactive, and stereoscopic visualizations using helical axes.
Our contributions are in three areas. First, we present an
exploration of the design space of visual elements that may
be used to display all parameters of the IHA within an animated virtual reality presentation. Second, we present interactive strategies for relating IHA parameters to the anatomy,
with output in linked 3D and 2D data displays. Third, we
present details and feedback from an application in visualization of mastication in pigs. We begin with a discussion of
related work before presenting our approach and the resulting application.
2. Related Work
The helical axis has application in many fields, from structural mechanics [Som92] to 3D modeling in computer
graphics [LKG∗ 03]. Most closely related to our work are applications in biomechanics, which have included study of the
human carpus [CCM∗ 05], finger [VCR98], arm [LMM00],
neck [WLOF94], and jaw [GAAP97, GFP00]. Use of visualization in these contexts is limited to relatively simple
views of the axis and the ruled surface that is swept out as
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. F. Keefe et al. / Exploratory Vis. of Animal Kinematics Using IHAs

it advances through space during a motion sequence. This
is sometimes coupled with statistical analysis of helical axis
parameters aimed to address specific hypotheses.
Our work builds upon previous contextualized 3D visualizations of helical axes [VCR98] by adding more timelapsed views, visual encodings for IHA parameters, and interactivity. We also extend previous helical-axis-based approaches by utilizing high-speed motion data (collected at
250 Hz). Our new ability to collect data at this speed allows
for robust estimation of instantaneous helical axes (IHAs).
Calculation of instantaneous rather than finite helical axes
is governed largely by limitations and availability of appropriate motion sensing technologies. Most previous work has
calculated helical axis parameters from finitely-separated
poses of bones, either sampled at much slower rates than
possible today, or sampled coarsely via placing the body in
predetermined poses during an experiment as controlled by a
jig. Woltring and colleagues explore the use of optical tracking technology with a capture rate of up to 5 Hz for diagnosis
of whiplash based on neck kinematics [WLOF94]. We visualize data from a new biplane fluoroscopy system, similar to
that used for analysis of skeletal kinematics in the human
knee [YSAT01]. With this system, six degree-of-freedom
motion tracking information may be obtained for individual bones at more than 250 Hz. As these new technologies
become more prevalent, data appropriate for robust calculation of IHAs will become increasingly available. Thus, we
expect interactive strategies for exploring this data to be of
great utility in the future.
For clinical application and functional descriptions of
joints, it is often important to characterize the helical axis
parameters via statistical measures that may be related to
the anatomy. Several examples exist within the literature.
Common procedures include projecting the axis direction
onto planes defined by anatomical landmarks, upon which
2D angle measurements may be made [CCM∗ 05,GAAP97].
Distance measurements can also be useful. For example, the
distance from a joint center to the closest point along the
helical axis may be examined over the course of a motion
sequence [GAAP97, GFP00]. These connections to anatomical structure are critical for addressing many scientific hypotheses. Our work makes it possible to interactively query
the relationship between axis parameters and user-selected
features within the surrounding anatomical context and view
results in coordinated 2D and 3D displays.

865

The motion data driving the visualization come from a biplane fluoroscopy system similar to that described by You et
al. [YSAT01]. High-speed (250 Hz) X-Ray movies are captured from two near-orthogonal angles. 3D reconstruction
software is used to derive 3D positional information from the
X-Ray imagery for radio-dense markers implanted within
the bones of interest. When registered with CT scans, the
3D marker data may be used to drive animations of 3D bone
geometries extracted from the CT scan. This is the source of
the anatomical data in our examples. Helical axis parameters
are computed from the 3D marker coordinates as described
below.

4. Exploratory IHA Visualization
This section describes interactive and visual tools for IHA
visualization within the stereoscopic desktop viewing environment pictured in Figure 1 (right). We begin by reviewing
the method for calculating IHA parameters from motion data
that we have adopted for our work.

4.1. Calculating IHAs from Marker-Based Motion Data
To compute the IHA parameters given in Table 1, we follow the framework given in [SB90, Som92]. For any point
x on a rigid-body in motion, its total velocity v can be defined as a rotation about and translation along a single axis,
the IHA. More specifically, given a point p coincident with
the IHA and the unit length IHA direction vector u,
ˆ v may
be defined as the sum of the cross product of the angular velocity vector, ω = ωu,
ˆ with the location of x relative to p,
plus a sliding velocity component, s = su.
ˆ This relationship
is captured in Equation 1, based in a right-handed Cartesian
coordinate system.
v = s + ω × (x - p)

(1)

Three IHA parameters are unknown in Equation 1. Following the approach presented in [SB90, Som92], we solve for
these in a least-squares sense given the m marker positions
recorded at each frame of the data. This procedure involves
minimizing the sum of squares of velocity residuals, as given
in Equation 2, with respect to the three IHA parameters.
R=

1 m
(vi − s − ω × (xi − p))T (vi − s − ω × (xi − p)) (2)
m∑
1

3. Introduction to Application to Pig Mastication

A Lagrange multiplier technique is applied to enforce rigid
body constraints. For more complete details, see [SB90,
Som92].

In collaboration with a research group of evolutionary biologists, we have been examining kinematic data from several animal species. Examples used to describe our methods
come from one project from this collaboration, exploration
of the mechanics of pig mastication. A brief description of
this data follows.

In our application, the marker positions are sampled at
250 Hz. A low-pass filter is applied to the resulting time series data for each marker to attenuate high-frequency noise.
A finite differencing approach using a sliding window of
±0.05 seconds about each frame is used to compute marker
velocities for use within the IHA computations.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

866

D. F. Keefe et al. / Exploratory Vis. of Animal Kinematics Using IHAs

Figure 3: Visual encodings for IHA parameters. Left: angular velocity. Right: sliding velocity.

4.2. Visualizing IHA Parameters
The parameters of the IHAs calculated from motion data are
mapped to visual form as described in the following sections.
These mappings can be viewed in isolation in individual inspection modes, or in combination as described in Section
4.4.1.
4.2.1. Position and Orientation
The IHA is displayed as an oriented line segment drawn relative to the anatomical data (bones) using a gray cylinder as
seen in Figures 1 and 3. The cylinder is oriented to align with
the direction uˆ of the IHA. The gray cylinder is made long
enough to intersect the bone geometries. These intersection
points are clearly seen during stereo viewing and provide
visual cues for understanding the orientation of the axis relative to the anatomy.
4.2.2. Angular Velocity
The angular velocity ω is represented as seen in Figure 3
(left). A half blue, half orange cylinder is drawn on top of
the gray one. The length varies linearly with ω. A gain factor for this mapping is adjustable by the user and set interactively to tune the display to the particular question under investigation. The direction of rotation is doubly coded on the
axis. The blue and orange colors mark sides of the axis. For
cyclic animations, this coding scheme makes direction reversals immediately obvious. For example, during jaw opening
and closing observed from a posterior view, we see blue on
the right for the opening phase and blue on the left for the
closing phase.

One benefit of the method used to calculate IHA parameters
described in section 4.1 is that the point coincident with the
axis, p, has a geometric meaning with respect to the data.
(This is not true of all methods for calculating IHA parameters, as by definition, p is only required to be coincident
with the axis.) In our implementation, p lies along the shortest path from the axis to the centroid of the markers used
to calculate the IHA, making it a good “center point” for
the axis for most situations where marker-based tracking is
used. The orange and blue cylinders are drawn to each extend outward from this center point so that the data display
remains centered with respect to the reference established by
the anatomical context.
4.2.3. Sliding Velocity
The sliding velocity s along the IHA is represented similarly,
as seen in Figure 3 (right). A black mark denotes the center
point of the axis. A green cylinder of length proportional to
s is drawn from the center point in the direction of sliding.
At times when the direction of sliding reverses, the green
mark can be seen flipping to the other side of the fixed black
mark, calling attention to the reversal. Alternative designs
might ease the task of magnitude comparisons by avoiding
this flip. Our goal was to highlight direction reversals and
facilitate investigation of trends in the data, leaving precise
magnitude comparisons to complimentary 2D visualizations
and/or post-hoc statistical analysis.
4.2.4. Adjusting the Saliency of Directional Cues
One interesting property of IHAs calculated from experimental data is that the estimation of uˆ is generally less robust
when ω is small. In fact, uˆ is undefined when ω = 0. This is
an important consideration for the design of animated displays. If a strong visual depiction for the axis is displayed
during times of low angular velocity, the result is a visually
dominating, fast moving axis, which has the effect of visually highlighting this noisy portion of the data. To avoid this
scenario, the orange/blue cylinder decreases length as described above with low values of ω and the gray extension
of the axis fades to a transparent value to be less apparent in
the visual field during periods of low ω.
This encoding is similar in spirit to several other continuous geometric representations used in visualization. The
varying-length cylinder in our visualization can be thought
of as an approximation of an ellipsoid that morphs between a spherical and cigar shape depending upon the magnitude of angular velocity. In this sense, the visual construct is quite similar to strategies based upon morphing
geometric representations used for tensor field visualization [EKR∗ 05, LAd∗ 98].

An arrow texture applied to the cylinder also encodes
this directional information. The texture functions in several
ways. First, during static viewing the arrows on the texture
are useful to indicate the direction of rotation. Second, the
visual cue provided by the texture is likely to aid perception
of shape and orientation when displayed in a virtual environment [IFP97]. Third, the texture pattern repeats at a fixed
spatial interval. Thus, the magnitude of angular velocity may
be compared across frames by counting the number of arrows displayed.

4.3. Visualizing Variation over Time

Of final note in the design of the angular velocity display
is the positioning of the orange/blue cylinder along the axis.

Animated views of the IHA and surrounding bones may be
produced with the rate of playback and time window of interc 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. F. Keefe et al. / Exploratory Vis. of Animal Kinematics Using IHAs

Figure 4: View of the IHA extended forward and backward in time. The location of the IHA moves up toward the
condyles and angular velocity increases during this closing
phase of chewing.

est controlled via on-screen sliders. Additionally, variation
in the axis over time may be explored by displaying previous and future axes for each frame of the animation, as seen
in Figure 4 and 5. The number to display in each direction
is set interactively by the user, allowing for close inspection
while stepping through frames of the animation. The effect
produces the sense of a 3D ruled surface, as seen in Figures 4
and 5.
While arbitrary length judgments in virtual scenes tend to
be error prone [NTPT96], the dense arrangement of axes in
the time-lapsed view shown in Figure 4 attempts to facilitate relative 3D length judgments of neighboring axes. Interactive controls, using the SpaceNavigator device, allow for
reorienting the geometries in space during inspection. Motion and stereo cues from these manipulations are likely to
aid in perception of axis orientation and the form swept out
by the axes [WF96]. These interactive features are important since perception of 3D form and oriented line segments
can, in general, be quite challenging [LBF03,TCN90]. When
animated, the time-lapsed display acts as a motion blurring
effect operating over the time window specified by the user.
Similar motion-blurring and flow-direction highlighting effects have been employed to advantage in fluid flow visualizations [SFL∗ 04, LKJ∗ 05].
4.4. Relating to Anatomical Contexts
In many applications, there is a need to relate the helical axis
to an anatomical context. We explore methods of establishing a connection to the underlying anatomy using interaction.
4.4.1. Comparing Sliding and Rotation
When working with IHA data, it is important to understand
the relative contributions of the two types of motion dec 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

867

Figure 5: After selecting a point of interest on the bone
(marked with a small cyan sphere), the relative effect of IHA
sliding and rotation parameters with respect to this point is
visualized on the axes.

scribed, rotation captured by the angular velocity ω (typical
units are radians per second) and translation along the axis
captured by the sliding velocity s (typical units are cm per
second). While the helical axis describes the motion of each
point on the rigid body as a whole, the relative contributions
of rotation and translation vary at each point based on the
distance to the axis. Although the two quantities are measured in different units, their relative effects on the movement of a user-specified region of interest may be compared
on a common scale.
In the comparison mode of our software, the user selects,
via a mouse-controlled ray casting technique, an anatomical
feature (point q) on the surface of the bone. Given a time
window ∆t, the translation due to sliding of this point is
d1 = s∆t,

(3)

while the effective translation of q as a result of the rotation
around the IHA is
d2 = |Rq − q|,

(4)

where R is the matrix that rotates q about the IHA by the angle ω∆t. By visualizing the values d1 and d2 , we are able to
compare the contributions of the rotation and sliding components of the IHA to the movement of an anatomical region of
interest. An example visual result is seen in Figure 5. In this
case, a point of interest, marked with a small cyan sphere,
was selected on the mandible. As before, the length of the
cylinders surrounding the axis are mapped to sliding and rotation values, but now the two values are in the same units
and magnitude comparisons may be made by judging relative lengths and using the scale provided by the arrow texture. Here, d1 is mapped to the length of the green cylinder
and d2 is mapped to the length of the orange/blue cylinder.
We see that the angular velocity described by the IHA con-

868

D. F. Keefe et al. / Exploratory Vis. of Animal Kinematics Using IHAs

Figure 6: The mandibular foramen and condyle on both the left and right sides are selected to produce plots of distance to the
IHA during one jaw closing motion. This analysis is relevant to the hypothesis described in section 5.2.

tributes to the motion of the point of interest far more than
does the sliding velocity.
4.4.2. Anatomical Context and Axis Position
Points of interest interactively selected by the user may be
used to examine the position of the axis in space relative
to the anatomy. Figure 6 presents an example in which axis
proximity to points at the mandibular foramen and condyles
is compared.
4.4.3. Anatomical Context and Axis Orientation
A similar mode shown in Figure 7 plots the dot product of
the IHA direction vector uˆ with a vector specified by selecting anatomical features in the display. A reference vector
has been created between the two condyles. In the resulting
plot, a chewing cycle can be clearly seen. The dot product
is close to minus one when the jaw is opening, close to one
when closing, and undergoes a transition during a grinding
phase.
5. User Evaluation
Three evolutionary biologists from our research team participated in a qualitative evaluation of the IHA-based visualizations as applied to the pig mastication data. The lead
researcher had previous experience with the visualization,
having used a prototype of the system on her desktop for
several weeks prior to the session. The other researchers had
participated in discussion shaping the development of the visualization tool and were familiar, through these discussions
and knowledge of related work in biomechanics, with the
notion of helical axes of motion.
5.1. Hypotheses and Discussion
The session began by asking the scientists to review hypotheses they have regarding the study of pig mastication.
Our intent was to begin to evaluate which of these candidate hypotheses might lend themselves to evaluation via helical axis techniques and which might not. A few specific

hypotheses were mentioned during this discussion, but the
dominant theme expressed by our collaborators was the desire to broadly explore the collected motion data. One researcher explained his data analysis process as starting with
a mental image of the mechanics of a joint, likely formed
by years of observation and study of similar mechanisms.
In examining experimental data, he is looking to see if the
data captured match or differ from his mental model. More
specific hypotheses are often formed during this broad, exploratory phase.
Initial discussion also focused on the mechanics of the
IHA. It was pointed out that the use of helical axes requires
a shift in the mindset of many researchers. Joints are typically thought of as being capable of both rotation and translation, but rotation and translation are usually described relative to a reference frame centered in the joint. The helical
axis describes rotation and translation in a different manner.
In many cases, the helical axis calculated for a motion will
not pass directly through a joint. A rotation around such an
axis produces a sliding effect in the joint. In most traditional
models, this would be characterized as a “translation” relative to a joint-centric coordinate frame. With helical axes
this “translation” may actually be described via the rotation
parameter of an IHA located outside the joint. Adjusting to
analysis in this style requires some thought, but also holds
promise. In some cases, for example describing the protrusion of the jaw during chewing, helical axes seem to offer a
more direct interpretation of the observed motion.
5.2. Specific Findings
The participants commented specifically on the utility of
stereoscopic viewing. The extension of the axis forward and
backward in time as seen in Figures 4 and 5 was also singled
out as particularly useful for understanding the progression
of the motion, as was the comparison of the relative contributions of rotation and sliding to the movement of points
of interest on the anatomy. The high temporal resolution of
the data with respect to the speed of the motion observed
allowed for unique analysis. It was observed that the tranc 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. F. Keefe et al. / Exploratory Vis. of Animal Kinematics Using IHAs

869

Figure 7: The dot product of IHA direction uˆ with a user-selected reference axis. Frame 10: The dot product is near minus one,
as the jaw rotates open. Frame 30: The motion has reversed, the dot product is near one, the jaw is closing. Frame 50: The IHA
is nearly perpendicular to the reference axis while the mandible undergoes lateral movement to grind the food.

sition from jaw opening to closing was much quicker than
from closing to opening. The difference was visible by stepping through frames by hand and counting the time-steps required to transition from one phase to the next as described
by the orientation of the IHA. Coarser approximations for
the IHA may have missed describing these fast transitioning
motions.
A specific hypothesis was investigated using the distanceto-axis tool described in Section 4.4.2 and 2D outputs similar to those reproduced in Figure 6. In humans, it has been
proposed that the mandibular axis of rotation may be centered about the mandibular foramen, where the inferior alveolar nerve and artery enter the lower jaw and the vein exits [Mos60]. (For a more contemporary discussion of this
hypothesis, see [Che98].) The mandibular foramen can be
identified on the mandible model extracted from CT data. It
was selected interactively along with points on the condyles,
as in Figure 6, to query distances from the points to the IHA
during different phases of the motion. Analysis suggests that
for some phases of the motion, notably at the beginning of
closing phase, the IHA is indeed closer to the mandibular
foramen than to the condyles. Later, in preparation for food
grinding the IHA tilts and moves closer to the condyles, often passing nearly through one of them as grinding motion
moves the teeth away from that condyle in the direction of
the other.
5.3. Future Directions
Several suggestions were made regarding future additions to
the tool that may be useful for biomechanical analysis. One
is to trace the intersection of the IHA on the bone models.
The suggestion was also made to use IHA-based analysis
to segment motions into phases, as in Figure 7, and determine axes of rotation during these phases. If we can then describe the location of average axes of rotation for each phase
with reference to the anatomy, we may be able to use these
data-derived axes to define more meaningful local reference
frames for use in reporting standard measures of motion such
as rotation angles.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Several hypotheses presented by the group require comparison of multiple motion sequences. For example, the rate
of transition from one phase of chewing to the next may
change based on the amount of food in the mouth. Tools
facilitating comparison of IHA parameters across multiple
motion sequences are likely to be of great value in future
analyses of experimental data in biomechanics.
6. Conclusions
High-speed 3D motion data from biomechanical experiments capture complex spatial and motion relationships.
Stereoscopic views and the ability to step slowly through
motion datasets while viewing time-lapsed displays of the
IHA are important for capturing this complexity. Also critical for biomechanical analysis using IHAs is relating the axis
parameters to the surrounding anatomical context. Three interactive techniques (comparison of sliding and rotation IHA
parameters given a feature of interest, plots of distance from
the IHA to selected features, and plots of IHA orientation
relative to selected features) were useful in this regard and
helped with investigating specific hypotheses during the user
evaluation.
Analysis using IHAs requires, in some cases, a shift in
thinking from traditional approaches to biomechanical analysis. However, IHAs show great potential for forming understandings and providing descriptive accounts of complex
motion patterns. The workings of the mandible and temporomandibular joint (TMJ) in pigs provides a case study of a
complex motion that is challenging to describe using more
traditional rotation and translation parameters. We anticipate
the visual and interactive tools presented to be applicable in
many other instances as well.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported in part by the US National Science
Foundation (CNS-0427374, DBI-0552051, IOS-0723392,
CCR-0086065), and by a grant from the W. M. Keck Foundation.

D. F. Keefe et al. / Exploratory Vis. of Animal Kinematics Using IHAs

870
References

[Ang02] A NGELES J.: Fundamentals of Robotic Mechanical Systems. Springer-Verlag, 2002.
[Bie03] B IEWENER A. A.: Animal Locomotion. Oxford
University Press, 2003.
[Bra94] B RAUN M.: Picturing Time: The Work of EtienneJules Marey. University of Chicago Press, 1994.
[CCM∗ 05] C RISCO J. J., C OBURN J. C., M OORE D. C.,
A KELMAN E., W EISS A.-P. C., W OLFE S. W.: In vivo
radiocarpal kinematics and the dart thrower’s motion. The
Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery 87 (2005), 2729–2740.
[Che98] C HEN X.: The instantaneous center of rotation
during human jaw opening and its significance in interpreting the functional meaning of condylar translation.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 106 (1998),
35–46.
[EKR∗ 05] E NNIS D. B., K INDLMAN G., RODRIGUEZ I.,
H ELM P. A., M C V EIGH E. R.: Visualization of tensor
fields using superquadric glyphs. Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine 53, 1 (2005), 169–176.
[GAAP97] G ALLO L. M., A IROLDI G. B., A IROLDI
R. L., PALLA S.: Description of mandibular finite helical axis pathways in asymptomatic subjects. Journal of
Dental Research 72, 2 (1997), 704–713.

arbitrary arm movements. Facta Universitatis - Series:
Physical Education 1, 7 (2000), 31–37.
[Mos60] M OSS M.: Disorders of the Temporomandibular
Joint. W.B. Saunders, 1960, ch. Functional Anatomy of
the Temporomandibular Joint, pp. 73–88.
[NTPT96] N ORMAN J. F., T ODD J. T., P EROTTI V. J.,
T ITTLE J. S.: The visual perception of three-dimensional
length. Journal of Experimental Psychology 22, 1 (1996),
173–186.
[SB90] S OMMER H. J., B UCZECK F. L.: Experimental
determination of the instant screw axis and angular acceleration axis. In Proceedings of the 1990 Sixteenth Annual
Northeast Bioengineering Conference (1990), pp. 141–
142.
[SFL∗ 04] S OBEL J. S., F ORSBERG A. S., L AIDLAW
D. H., Z ELEZNIK R. C., K EEFE D. F., P IVKIN I., K AR NIADAKIS G. E., R ICHARDSON P., S WARTZ S.: Particle
flurries: Synoptic 3D pulsatile flow visualization. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications 24, 2 (March/April
2004), 76–85.
[Som92] S OMMER III H. J.: Determination of first and
second order instant screw parameters from landmark trajectories. Journal of Mechanical Design 114 (1992), 274–
282.

[GFP00] G ALLO L. M., F USHIMA K., PALLA S.:
Mandibular helical axis pathways during mastication.
Journal of Dental Research 79, 8 (2000), 1566–1572.

[TCN90] T ODD J. T., C HEN L., N ORMAN J. F.: On the
relative salience of euclidean, affine and topological structure for 3d form discrimination. Perception 27 (1990),
273–282.

[IFP97] I NTERRANTE V., F UCHS H., P IZER S.: Conveying the 3D shape of smoothly curving transparent surfaces
via texture. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 3, 2 (1997), 98–117.

[VCR98] VAN S INT JAN S. L., C LAPWORTHY G. J.,
ROOZE M.: Visualization of combined motions in human joints. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications
18, 6 (1998), 10–14.

[LAd∗ 98] L AIDLAW D. H., A HRENS E. T., DAVIDKRE MERS , AVALOS M. J., R EADHEAD C., JACOBS R. E.:
Visualizing diffusion tensor images of the mouse spinal
cord. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 1998 (1998),
pp. 127–134.
[LBF03] L IND M., B INGHAM G. P., F ORSELL C.: Metric 3d structure in visualizations. In Proceedings of Information Visualization 2003 (2003), pp. 51–57.
[LKG 03] L LAMAS I., K IM B., G ARGUS J.,
Twister: a spaceROSSIGNAC J., S HAW C. D.:
warp operator for the two-handed editing of 3D shapes.
ACM Transactions on Graphics 22, 3 (2003), 663–668.
∗

[LKJ∗ 05] L AIDLAW D. H., K IRBY M., JACKSON C.,
DAVIDSON J. S., M ILLER T., DA S ILVA M., WARREN
W., TARR M.: Comparing 2d vector field visualization
methods: A user study. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11, 1 (2005), 59–70.
[LMM00] L ÁSZLÓ K., M. K. R., M IHÁLY J.: Determination and representation of the helical axis to investigate

[WF96] WARE C., F RANCK G.: Evaluating stereo and
motion cues for visualizing information nets in three dimensions. ACM Transactions on Graphics 15, 2 (1996),
121–139.
[Win90] W INTER D. A.: Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Movement. John Wiley and Sons Inc.,
1990.
[WLOF94] W OLTRING H. J., L ONG K., O STERBAUER
P. J., F UHR A. W.: Instantaneous helical axis estimation
from 3-D video data in neck kinematics for whiplash diagnostics. Journal of Biomechanics 27, 12 (1994), 1415–
1432.
[YSAT01] YOU B., S IY P., A NDERST W., TASHMAN S.:
In vivo measurement of 3-D skeletal kinematics from sequences of biplane radiographs: Application to knee kinematics. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 20, 6
(2001), 514–525.
[Zat98] Z ATSIORSKY V.: Kinematics of Human Motion.
Human Kinetics Publishers, 1998.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

