DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2008.01195.x

COMPUTER GRAPHICS

forum

Volume 27 (2008), number 8 pp. 2188–2196

Cultural Heritage As a Vehicle for Basic Research in
Computing Science: Pasteur’s Quadrant and a Use-Inspired
Basic Research Agenda
David Arnold
Faculty of Management and Information Sciences, University of Brighton, UK

Abstract
Donald Stokes argued [Sto97] that for 50 years from the end of the Second World War to the end of the 20th century,
there was an unhealthy taxonomy of research types which was formulated on a linear scale from pure to applied.
The argument goes that the best research is only possible in environments which are free from contemplation of
the potential uses to which results might be applied. In this paper, current research challenges in the application
of ICTs to cultural heritage information are reviewed in order to consider where these applications-linked needs
require solutions that will advance the understanding of computational principles and help to develop new basic
understanding in computer science, including shape manipulation and other aspects of importance in computer
graphics and virtual environments. The paper draws extensively on the recently published EPOCH research
agenda [AG07] for illustrations of the types of research which are required for the Cultural Heritage sector and
the relationship between these and basic research challenges in Computing Science.
Keywords: digital heritage, research policy, Pasteur’s Quadrant, use-inspired basic research
ACM CCS: I.3.7 [Three-Dimensional Graphics and Realism]: Virtual Reality

1. Introduction
Research in interdisciplinary fields such as ICTs for Cultural Heritage can be viewed from a variety of perspectives.
In some areas, basic new Computing Science results must
be developed specifically to address challenges which are
unique to cultural heritage. In other areas, the best of generic
Computing Science research must be applied to cultural heritage situations, potentially creating novel working methods
for Cultural Heritage professionals. This may constitute basic research from the perspective of the Cultural Heritage
professional – enabling new ways of undertaking their own
research. Similarly basic Computing Science first developed
in the context of solving cultural heritage problems may later
be discovered to have applications in other fields of endeavour. Such a range of situations can be understood neither as
purely basic research in ICTs nor as purely applied research
in Cultural Heritage Informatics.

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and
Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Published by Blackwell Publishing,
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main
Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

EPOCH promotes inter-disciplinary use-inspired basic research both to increase the understanding of basic research
issues in ICTs and to develop improved technology to meet
specific needs of Cultural Heritage. Use-inspired basic research is often promoted nowadays as a means of ensuring
that publicly funded research is firmly based on providing solutions that have exploitation potential, yet it remains tainted
in the way that national and international organizations assess the worth of scientific advance. Donald Stokes’s book
‘Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation’ [Sto97] provides a framework to set the different
types of research in context. Stokes analyses the relationships between differently motivated types of research and
his evaluation merits more detailed discussion in the computer science community.
According to Stokes [Sto97], in the United States, the
notion of ‘Basic Research’, whose purity was guaranteed by a

This paper was selected from the Cultural Heritage Stream of
Eurographics 2007.
2188

D. Arnold / CH as a Vehicle for Basic Research in Computing Science

2189

researchers who conduct such research do not lose
sight of the goal of advancing scientific understanding.
The paradigmatic example here is the work of Louis
Pasteur.

Figure 1: Stokes’ Quadrant Model (after [Sto97], p. 73).
separation from conceivable applications, was promoted by
the influential federal report ‘Sciences, the Endless Frontier’
released in July 1945 by Vannevar Bush in his role as President Roosevelt’s Director of the Office of Scientific Research
and Development. ‘Applied Research’ was considered to be
at the other end of the spectrum and somehow inevitably
close to market and inevitably distorted by the need to address market forces. Of course, the perceived proximity to
market also meant that public funds were inappropriate to
fund research which should be funded by the ‘direct’ beneficiaries of the resulting products’ inevitable profits. Bush
argued that basic research should receive most public funding
because the marketplace would not fund it adequately.
Stokes argued that scientific research should not be conceptualized as a linear progress, but rather that ‘considerations of use’ and ‘quest for fundamental understanding’
represent different measures against which any proposed research project could be rated. As a result, Stokes introduced
four quadrants of research (Figure 1):
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

In a first quadrant he placed ‘Pure Basic Research’
which is inspired by the quest for knowledge but not
by potential use. A paradigmatic example of this is
the work of the physicist Niels Bohr on the structure
of the atom.
In contrast, the quadrant labelled ‘Pure Applied Research’ contains research developing practical solutions and marketable products. Stokes cites Thomas
Edison for work on electric lighting, sound recording
and other marketable practical innovations.
A third quadrant contains scientific work that is neither
overtly theoretical nor directed at products. This work
concentrates on the exploration of particular phenomena or the development of a taxonomy or other classificatory work. Rather than advance scientific knowledge or develop market-orientated solutions, the focus
is more on already well understood research problems
or formalising existing knowledge or academic practices (e.g. handbooks or guidelines). We will return to
consideration of this quadrant later.
The final fourth quadrant is reserved for use-inspired
basic science. This has potential practical utility, but

Stokes suggested that ‘Pasteur’s Quadrant’ should receive
most of the interest in national research policies and public
funding, providing a combination of advancing knowledge
and potential exploitation and return on investment. The notion of use-inspired research has significant implications for
how scholars conceive of research which may face some
tensions with current academic research cultures. In fact, if
researchers concentrate on basic research, they will usually
do so within the confines of specific ‘pure’ scientific disciplines that have their list of research priorities and established
review and reward mechanisms. These priorities and rewards
may not be defined to address practical, societal and policyrelated considerations explicitly.
Typically, research which can be located in Bohr’s quadrant has received the highest prestige in peer assessment of
the quality of research. This might be considered an odd
result, given that such exercises often purport to be based
on assessment of novelty, rigour and impact, and results with
demonstrable application and equal novelty and rigour might
be expected to have more obvious impact. There is little
doubt however that attitudes which value ‘purely basic’ research have had a material impact on communal research
priorities and hence on the behaviour and careers of professional researchers. In this context, attempts to become more
‘use-inspired’ may be considered to be misguided, despite
the obvious link between research in Pasteur’s Quadrant and
some degree of intended usefulness of the results.
The United Kingdom’s university research assessment exercise (RAE) sets out to measure the quality of research
across the United Kingdom. One researcher has reported
that ‘it would be hard to place “intelligent heritage” in the
RAE and hard to persuade practitioners that they ought to
be associated with it. In simple terms, anyone caught doing
“intelligent heritage”, heritage policy or applied computing
is likely to be sidelined or dismissed in order to enhance an
institutional response to RAE.’ (William Kilbride reported
in [NGV06]). Hence, there is a need to consider more deeply
the values that could limit the perceived value of CH ICTs as
an interdisciplinary field.
Ironically, there is no doubt that both national and international policies on the public funding of research have moved
strongly towards support for use-inspired basic research.
Managed programmes of research, which in the United Kingdom Computing Science community certainly stretch back
to at least the Alvey programme in the 1980s, have become
the norm. Public funds are also allocated this way in the EU
Framework programmes. The frontispiece illustration in the
United Kingdom’s current science policy framework [HM07]
presents Pasteur’s Quadrant.

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2190

D. Arnold / CH as a Vehicle for Basic Research in Computing Science

In some ways, this thinking is beginning to permeate the
Computing Science research community. In both the United
Kingdom and North America, there has been a slow but significant development of the notion of ‘Grand Challenges’ –
usually expressed as some vision that cannot be addressed
with current technologies or systems and requires some significant results in basic Computing Science before the tools
that can meet the challenge can be developed. At present,
nine grand challenges have been identified within the United
Kingdom scheme [UK07]. In North America, the Grand
Challenges programme has been formulated around a series
of workshops on specific research themes [Com07].
However, although the notion of Grand Challenges appears to encourage a view that use-inspired basic research
will find a more central place in the research community,
in practice very few of the challenges so far formulated
are grounded in application domains. In addition, many of
the managed programmes of research struggle to encompass
inter-disciplinary viewpoints and the motivations of eventual applications can lead to unrealistic expectation of the
timescales for exploitation. The norm in European Union
Framework programmes has been for a report on ‘Dissemination and Exploitation Plans’ to be a deliverable within the
first 6 months of the funded period, when not only will the
basic research envisaged in a project remain to be completed,
but since the whole project is required to be pre-competitive
collaboration, there must of necessity be additional development after the project, before products will generate revenues.
This tension is in part grounded in the need to secure political support on the basis of predictions of direct economic
benefit.
A further example would be the UK e-science programme
which conceived of grid technologies to facilitate large scale
scientific experimentation with distributed resources, but produced a strong reaction in some Computing Science researchers who conceived the programme as a diversion of
funds away from basic, real Computing Science to make the
subject a mere servant of the natural sciences.
In fact, in any Grand Challenge – and the longer agenda
for e-science is undoubtedly one – there are serious computational aspects that current Computing Science cannot
deliver. These cover engineering solutions, both hardware
and software, and computational methods (data structures,
algorithms, underpinning mathematical formulations, etc).
There also are inevitably complex issues of deployment in
terms of impact on business processes of other professionals,
usability of tools, long-term sustainability, etc whose impact
on speed of technology adoption is normally underestimated
but ultimately determine the acceptability and success of solutions.
In the following sections, we review how different research
topics could be mapped to Stokes’ four quadrant model, by
considering elements of:

(i)
(ii)

The EPOCH research agenda for ICTs in support of
Cultural Heritage applications [AG07].
The UK Grand Challenge – ‘Bringing the Past to Life
for the Citizen’ [Arn06].

2. Analysis of the EPOCH Research Agenda
The EPOCH research agenda [AG07] is the result of extensive consultation between technologists and cultural heritage
professionals, based on user requirements in the cultural heritage sector. It also includes some natural extrapolation of the
direction of travel foreseen by cultural heritage professionals. Adoption of results will be heavily dependent on additional business process adaptation, which can be compared
to the 20–30 years it took from the early conceptualization of
CAAD systems until ICT based tools to solve architectural
design challenges were embedded in the profession. This paper considers only the technical research challenges arising
in the cultural heritage sector. In addition it is confined to the
challenges facing professionals working with the tangible
cultural heritage of monuments, sites and museums. After
considering five scenarios for future cultural heritage activity, the ICT research implied to make the scenarios possible,
was grouped into sub-areas, described below.

2.1. Novel data capture
A recent event, convened by the European Commission and
involving invited experts from digital libraries and the heritage sector, agreed that there were no types of artefact for
which digitization could be regarded as a solved problem.
A very wide range of challenges come under this heading,
magnified by concerns for accuracy, volumes of data, variety
of capture conditions and material types.
Even in the digitization of printed works to extract text
sources there were significant gaps (e.g. OCR of pre-1840
Gothic typefaces – which covers a very large percentage of
Germanic literature). Digitization of materials such as glass,
fur, jewels or historic fabrics are still challenging in any
form (although progress continues [MBK05]) and largely
unsolved for effective techniques to capture digital representations that will sustain a range of desirable analyses.
Interactions between materials and with the complex and
detailed geometry of many cultural artefacts present further
challenges [MVSL05]. For example, the intricate geometry
of an ornate and decorative piece might interact with the
material properties of antique filigree gold, natural crystal,
carved ivory or jade.
Apart from materials issues, there are unsolved problems
due to environmental challenges. For example, the digitization of masonry fragments on an archaeological site would
require measurement techniques operating in situ (i.e. without lifting fragments).

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. Arnold / CH as a Vehicle for Basic Research in Computing Science

2.2. Semantically-based representations
This area includes the need to access multi-lingual sources,
which may no longer be spoken and the challenges of
co-referencing – referencing items (e.g. events or people)
from multiple sources, usually with incomplete information, synonyms or alternate spellings. Knowledge discovery in these circumstances might be thought of as experts
‘digging around’ in archives manually. The challenge is to
see if ‘digging around in the digital world’ is possible and
useful.
Another distinctive heritage need is to represent the development of knowledge over time. Knowledge of the past
is often lost and then rediscovered. Rediscovery may be an
extended process with many interim hypotheses (e.g. what a
building was like or used for), refined as more evidence is
uncovered. Although other disciplines share some of these
characteristics (e.g. medical diagnosis or scientific discovery,
itself often considered part of our heritage) cultural heritage
imposes additional challenges. Most obvious amongst these
are that:
(i)
(ii)

where information is factual, the facts were available
at some time in the past even if they are now lost and
facts are often overlaid with differing multi-cultural
interpretations based on political convictions or belief
systems.

As the themes of surviving tangible cultural heritage often involve either commemoration of war or celebration of
religious beliefs, it is unsurprising that the same artefact or
environment may embody completely different meanings for
different people. Again elements of similar issues may arise
in other applications – for example, virtual environments
may need to represent and highlight different aspects for different users. For example, members of the emergency and
security services would be trained to look for and act on
different features at a reconstructed incident than the general public would notice, but the cultural heritage sphere is
probably the most intense example of this application-driven
requirement.

2.3. Multipurpose information visualization
and communication
Having captured the information base and organized our
knowledge of it in ways which allow the extraction of information, there is the inevitable demand to be able to visualize information and create experiences or presentations for
many purposes. There are many applications requiring effective communication with widely differing groups and few
of the challenges can be realistically described as ‘unique
to cultural heritage’. An example of challenges which apply
to many domains would be authoring tools which gener-

2191

ate engaging, multi-modal experiences tailored for particular
groups of users.
However, there are specific needs which arise from both the
sector itself and the nature of the data to be presented – most
obviously how the uncertainty underpinning hypotheses and
the multiple perspectives on the significance are presented to
an audience. These challenges are exacerbated when the audience may have unknown background, interests, beliefs and
motivations – for example as Internet users – again in common with many applications over the Internet, but probably
of particular significance in cultural heritage.
From the perspective of the graphics community one area
which it may be surprising to find listed as part of ‘visualization and communication’ in the EPOCH research agenda
is ‘reconstruction’ – which in graphics might often be considered part of data capture (i.e. modelling to create digital
artefacts) but, for most cultural heritage professionals, visualization is the creation of interpretations from the basic
evidence and hence an analysis and ‘output process’ from
the primary evidence to inform the cultural heritage professional. Part of visualization is in fact to test hypothesis to see
whether the evidence that exists can be put together in ways
which fit both the hypothesis and the constraints inherent in
the evidence.
This difference of perspective is another concern from the
application domain – that, since ‘anything can be modelled’
and visualized, the technology actually enhances presentations that are pure fantasy or, worse still, based on scant evidence, and produces believable but unsupported conjecture.
For these reasons, an important part of creating reconstructions and other derived forms is to record the provenance,
including cross-reference to the evidence base and reconstruction methods used, to document the background to a
reconstruction. The London Charter [Kin06], which appears
to be attracting interest and support, proves some principles
in this area, using the term paradata. Part of this challenge
includes a desire to be able to display reconstructions in ways
which reflect the degree of uncertainty inherent in the resulting model. As yet there are no generally accepted paradigms
for this but the use of non-photorealistic rendering techniques
appears an attractive option.
Identification and provenance history also needs to be
maintained during repeated manipulations in the creation
of derived and collected works. This must work across the
typical image processing, graphics and CAD manipulations
with data structures involving hierarchy, instancing, etc. and
data manipulations (mesh decimation, stitching, surface extraction, compression, feature extraction, etc).
At the interfacing level the domain shares all the challenges of other interactive applications, plus additional, and
as yet unsolved, issues in the area of multi-cultural and multilingual interfaces. The issues shared with other application
domains would include design of interactive systems which

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2192

D. Arnold / CH as a Vehicle for Basic Research in Computing Science

engage and entertain the public (cf. games), and how to measure effective engagement so as to enable better interface
design. Finally the design of interfaces to tools to support
research methods is an area in common with other areas of
the humanities.
The EPOCH research agenda concludes with two other
areas where the research issues are not particularly reliant on
specific application area:
(i)
(ii)

Mobile, distributed and networked systems and
Long-term availability (preservation, data migration,
etc. including standards for data, business processes
and legal frameworks, digital rights management, intellectual property, copyright, collected and derived
works, etc)

2.4. Mapping the research to Stokes’ Quadrants
In this research agenda, there are aspects which can be considered as lying in each of the quadrants of Stokes’ diagram.
In ICT, research undertaken with a view to generating fundamental understanding could be targeted at underlying theory
or indeed, in Stokes’s classifications, research where the understanding of representation and computational process can
be applied to solutions which are independent of specific
applications. Generic technologies, as mentioned in various
places above, fit this definition of Bohr’s Quadrant.
However, the axis of ‘application consideration’ is not a
binary choice – any subset of computational methods will
address classes of problems and these classes may tend to
occur more in particular application domains. For the graphics area, any computation addressing geometric data targets
applications where shape or spatial organization is fundamental. The more specific the shape considerations are the
more application-specific the research might be. Many basic
ICT research topics might therefore fit in Pasteur’s Quadrant,
including all of the research targeted at intelligent tools. The
argument in favour of the value of conducting research in this
quadrant is that different basic research is undertaken where
there are specific application domains in mind.
There are also serious motivations for research in Edison’s
Quadrant. Often this may be targeted at applying pure basic
research results (Bohr’s Quadrant) or indeed more generic
research from Pasteur’s Quadrant at applications in Cultural
Heritage. Of particular significance is the need to prove that
the generic results work effectively with the data arising in
significant practical situations, which would typically exhibit
special cases and data volumes which often may not have
been tested in the original basic research. In the same way
that the degree of application consideration is not a binary division neither is the ‘fundamental understanding’ axis, which
in some ways is used as an inverse of ‘closeness to market’.
However, the amount of additional research that may need

to be undertaken to convert ‘fundamental understanding’,
even if application specific, into deployable products is often
considerable and frequently underestimated. This is further
complicated because other disciplines, with a direct interest
in the application, will be engaged in inter-disciplinary research which relies on having the application in mind, but
are also likely to add more value as the results become closer
to deployment. If basic research is genuinely ‘use-inspired’
and takes account of full inter-disciplinary understanding,
then the gap between basic results and effective deployment
should be minimized.
Stokes states that the fourth quadrant should not be thought
of as ‘empty’ just because it is not labelled, but in his view
it includes research that ‘systematically explores particular
phenomena without having in view either general explanatory objectives or any applied use to which the result may be
put’. Stokes particularly mentions research into taxonomies,
which fits into the background work on the semantics of cultural heritage. There are other areas where systematic classification and analysis are needed to convert prototypes into
fully functioning tools.
For example, historically there has been research into
procedural and grammar-based procedural modelling of architectural forms and design styles [Arn78, Sha07, Sti76,
Sti77, Yes75]. Recently research taking similar approaches
has demonstrated the potential for highly efficient representation incorporating dynamic constraints and using grammar
representations [MWH∗ 06]. However, the demonstrations to
date have been limited in terms of the historic period, architectural styles and range of buildings modelled. Similar procedural models of architectural styles have been developed
using the Graphics Modelling Language (GML) [GBHF05,
HF04].
A systematic analysis of design styles is required as background to support the widespread adoption of grammar-based
or other procedural modelling. These may not extend the
basic computational principles (except when additional special cases are found) but they turn a prototype application
(grounded on basic research) to a viable tool, extending our
understanding of architectural form and possibly of the semantics of shape. Research to achieve coverage of an application domain from a computational perspective can be
considered within the unnamed quadrant. Addressing the
commonalities of different requirements in order to define
best practice and standards also fits into this quadrant as
standards are intended to be useful in many different applications contexts.
There are many data capture and representational formats
which have been applied to cultural heritage artefacts and
environments. Some of these allow capture of fine detail,
for example in the use of scanning technologies. Others
are designed to include encodings of different levels of detail, often built in explicitly via the modelling of each level

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. Arnold / CH as a Vehicle for Basic Research in Computing Science

2193

Figure 2: Progression from basic research results to deployed solutions. The arrows indicate the extended time to adoption
(after [AG07]).

and the selection and blending of individual levels within
a visualization tailored to a particular view of the environment. Some approaches assist the efficiency of displaying
a visualization by using segmentation of the environment
into manageable pieces. Finally, some representations allow
for adaptive run-time generation of resolutions, which may
use (for example) progressive meshes to generate additional
detail according to knowledge of the underlying ‘perfect’ geometry. This last approach (where it exploits knowledge of
the underlying geometry) and occasionally the basis for segmentation of environments (e.g. the use of instances) may be
seen to use knowledge of the elements of the environment to
‘work smarter’ on the overall problem, but such techniques
are barely scratching the surface of the potential, and indeed the need, to develop and use representations that are
more fully grounded in our knowledge and understanding
of the environments being represented. This paper discusses
the problem, demonstrates the need and our extremely limited approaches to date in meeting these objectives, and sets
directions for achieving integrated solutions to the research
issues raised.

3. Inspiration for Future ‘Use-Inspired Basic Research’
The previous discussion has outlined many areas in which
there are unsolved technical challenges. In this section, a
few cases grounded in examples drawn from heritage sites
are used to illustrate the challenges and hopefully inspire
others to take them up. For example, a brief consideration
of the issues involved in digitally recording a major site in
a useful way immediately exposes the limitations of current

techniques. Consider for example the challenge of recording
the current state and visualizing the previous glory of a site
such as the Temples at Karnak. Figure 3 shows the current
entrance to the site.
The site covers many hectares and, although much is standing, still more has been ruined. The current state includes
individual features of interest on a very small scale (fractions
of a centimetre for some purposes), but the needs of many
visitors would probably be satisfied with much less individual detail but sophisticated reconstructions of the overall
building mass, structure and decoration. At various times in
the past, elements of the temples have been remodelled and
masonry from one state of the Temples has been reused in
later states. In addition, decorative detail, in particular representations of people from one regime, has been deliberately
destroyed by elements from later regimes.
Such a site incorporates many of the challenges listed
above:
(i) Handling the requirements for accuracy and the data
volume over the range of digitization required.
(ii) Digitizing in the absence of access and portability of
the material.
(iii) Representing the information content of the artefacts
and environment that cultural heritage professionals
would need to preserve and on which research about
the site could be effectively based.
(iv) Representing multiple inter-related. For example, the
temples are covered in hieroglyphics which have information content of their own as well as well as surface

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2194

D. Arnold / CH as a Vehicle for Basic Research in Computing Science

Figure 3: The public at Karnak.
shape in carving, material properties relevant to visualization, etc. In addition, the inter-relationship between
the carvings is significant and of course the carved masonry itself is structurally significant to the architecture.
Finally, the current state of the appearance is only one
instance and the materials and their decoration have
undergone numerous changes over the last 4000 or so
years.
(v) Preserving in the long term and managing assets
Figure 3 shows the main tourist entrance to the site – an
avenue lined with 36 statues. A sequence of pictures of the
most accessible of these statues taken with a 5 Mpixel camera
was processed using the EPOCH 3D web service [EPO07] to
produce a 3D model. The data for the sequence and resulting
3D model was about 100 MB. Whilst the fact that such a
service exists and can produce reasonable results with current
technologies is remarkable, if an application required that all
of the statues of this type on the site were recorded similarly,
then perhaps 10 GB of data would be needed.
There are however (inevitable) limitations to this type of
model and hence the uses to which it can be put. The images
involve a sample rate of the statue surface of around 3-mm
spacing. Clearly features smaller than 3 mm are therefore
hard to pick out, which limits potential analyses and might
be critical for some applications. Increasing the accuracy of
digitization would add to the data volume and these statues
are only a small part of the material at the site.
For example, if the application envisaged is to be able to
illustrate a multimedia CD-ROM, then the model may well
fulfil the requirements. If on the other hand, the objective is
to be able to use a time series of models to monitor environmental damage over time, then 3-mm accuracy may well
represent a significant limitation. Equally the use of such
models as part of an extended scene in a real-time interactive
virtual environment would not be possible currently. Much

Figure 4: Carved wall apparently showing a ‘spreadsheet’.

more efficient representations are required for real-time visualization and these may or may not be derivable from the
model’s mesh.
Representing the single statue may in itself be interesting
but is unlikely to address a complete application. Analysis
of environmental damage would probably be intended to assist the site management as a whole – not just a single statue.
The visualization with an interactive walkthrough would normally also call for a model of an extended area of the site
(if not a complete representation of one period of the site’s
development).
The challenge of representing multiple perspectives about
an object to support analysis is really significant. Professional knowledge and understanding are used to inform
the way artefacts and contexts are described and documented so that the information required to support research is
available. However, knowledge of the semantics of the domain is needed in order to design suitable representations of
the scene.
Consider the example in Figure 4, which shows information at a remarkable number of levels, carved into the wall.
As a technologist the surface design has all the appearance of
a spreadsheet, with cells containing hieroglyphics and apparently numeric data. However, the information is incomplete
at the level of the apparent original data and at the level of
the individual elements of broken stone, where the breaks in
some cases leave partial ‘cells’. In the wider context of digitizing the site appropriate representation of such situations
should assist in making associations as other fragments are
documented.
Figure 5 shows a different style of decorative carving in
which the elements of story are told in a progression within
the carving design. There is clearly additional information
represented in the carving and the relationship between the

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. Arnold / CH as a Vehicle for Basic Research in Computing Science

2195

Similar perceptions, or misperceptions, have been expressed about the way in which research related to applications is received in the selection of material for conference
programmes. Again, historically there has been some truth
in that. It is hoped that the discussion in this paper will help
those working in these areas and those who assess their work
to differentiate among the quality of the underpinning work,
the suitability for funding decisions and the determination of
the relationship between underpinning concepts and application content. In some contexts, the application content may
be more valuable than the development of concepts, but this
is more probable (e.g.) for an event where the focus is itself
on application content.

Figure 5: Part of an extended decorated wall.

various carvings and photo only shows a small part of the
entire wall which extends much further. This single wall
would represent a huge challenge of representation in its
own right even though it is relatively accessible from the
point of view of digitization.

4. In Conclusion
In this paper, the author has sought to draw attention to the
range of fundamental Computing Science challenges with
origins very specifically embedded in the requirements of
cultural heritage, in order to dispel some of the prejudices
which have dogged the reception of the worth of use-inspired
basic research.
Whilst ‘Applied Research’ may be widely perceived in the
United Kingdom’s Research Assessment Exercise as having
been held in low regard historically, there is no doubt that
‘use-inspired basic research’ embedded in Cultural Heritage
applications present significant, fundamental research challenges in Computing Science. A uniformly poor reception of
research in this area would certainly reflect shortcomings of
the exercise rather than the rigour, novelty or impact of the research. The academic argument favouring Bohr’s Quadrant is
that the basic research is not sullied by perceived or potential
distortion from commercial pressures to reach particular conclusions. In addition, political social or economic, rather than
purely scientific, considerations could (and perhaps should)
have an impact on resourcing particular lines of research. As
priorities would not have been drawn solely from scientific
considerations, it might be felt that this is also a potential
distortion of quality, but the assessment of relative quality of
results and decisions on priority topics to be resourced from
limited public funds are essentially independent. They will
come together when deciding which researchers and what
methods are to be applied to publicly funded projects, given
that there are limits on available resources for research.

In the mean time there are currently many sources of inspiration for those seeking interesting challenges on which to
base their future research projects. Some of these have been
drawn together in efforts to define the new EPOCH Research
Agenda and will continue to be addressed as the UK Grand
Challenge of Bringing the Past to Life for the Citizen is taken
forward in the long term.
Acknowledgements
This work has been conducted as part of the EPOCH network of excellence (IST-2002-507382) within the Information Society Technologies (IST) section of the Sixth Framework Programme of the European Commission. Many fine
researchers contributed to the EPOCH Research Agenda debate, too many to name them all. The contributions of Guntram Geser of Saltzberg Research for drawing my attention
to Stokes’ work, discussions around the EPOCH Research
Agenda and the production of Figure 2 are especially appreciated. My thanks too to Karina Rodriguez Echavarria for
help with the production.
References
[AG07] ARNOLD D., GESER G.: Research Agenda for the
Applications of ICT to Cultural Heritage. EPOCH Publications. ISBN 978-963-8046-80-2, 2007.
[Arn78] ARNOLD D.: A Computer Model of Housing Layout. PhD dissertation, University of Cambridge, 1978.
[Arn06] ARNOLD D., CHALMERS A., DAY A., DUCE D., WILLIS
P.: Bringing the past to life for the citizen, grand challenge
9. Available at http://www.cmis.brighton.ac.uk/gc9/,
2006.
[Com07] Computing Research Association: Grand challenges. Available at http://www.cra.org/grand.challenges/,
2007.
[EPO07] EPOCH: Epoch 3D web service. Available at
http://homes.esat.kuleuven.be/∼isit3d/webservice/html,
2007.

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2196

D. Arnold / CH as a Vehicle for Basic Research in Computing Science

[GBHF05] GERTH B., BERNDT R., HAVEMANN S., FELLNER
D.: 3D modelling for the non-expert users with the castle
construction kit v0.5. In Proceedings of VAST2005: 6th
International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology
and Intelligent Cultural Heritage (2005), pp. 49–58.
[HF04] HAVEMANN S., FELLNER D.: Generative parametric design of gothic window tracer. In Proceedings of
VAST2004: 5th International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural Heritage (2004),
pp. 193–202.

[MWH∗ 06] MUELLER P., WONKA P., HAEGLER S., ULMER
A., VAN-GOOL L.: Procedural modeling of buildings. In
ACM Transactions on Graphics: Proceedings of ACM
SIGGRAPH 2006 (2006).
[NGV06] KILBRIDE W.: United Kingdom. In Digital Applications for Tangible Cultural Heritage: Report on the
State of the Union: Policies, Practices and Developments in Europe, Niccolucci F., Geser G., Varricchio T.
(Eds.). EPOCH Publication. ISBN 963-8046-68-6, 2006,
pp. 153–160.

[HM07] HM Treasury: HM Department for Trade and
Industry, HM Department for Education and Skills: Science and Innovation Investment Framework 2004–2014.
Avaliable at http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/spending_
review/spend-_sr04/associated_documents/spending_
sr04_science.cfm, 2007.

[Sha07] Shape Grammar Organisation: Bringing the past
to life for the citizen, grand challenge 9. Available at
http://www.shapegrammar.org/biblio.html, 2007.

[Kin06] Kings College London: The London Charter.
Available at http://www.londoncharter.org, 2006.

[Sti77] STINY G.: Ice ray: A note on the generation of
chinese lattice patterns. Environment and Planning B 4
(1977).

[MBK05] MULLER G., BENDELS G. H., KLEIN R.: Rapid synchronous acquisition of geometry and appearance of cultural heritage artefacts. In Proceedings of VAST2005: 6th
International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology
and Intelligent Cultural Heritage. 2005, pp. 13–20.
[MVSL05] MUDGE M., VOUTAZ J., SCHROER C., LUM M.:
Reflection transformation imaging and virtual representations of coins from the hospice of the grand St. Bernard. In
Proceedings of VAST2005: 6th International Symposium
on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Intelligent Cultural
Heritage (2005), pp. 29–41.

[Sti76] STINY G.: Two exercises in formal composition. Environment and Planning B 3 (1976), 187–210.

[Sto97] STOKES D.: Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science
and Technological Innovation. The Brookings Institution,
Washington, 1997, 180 pp.
[UK07] UK Computing Research Committee: Grand challenges in computing research. Available at http://www.
ukcrc.org.uk/grand_challenges/index.cfm, 2007.
[Yes75] YESSIOS C.: Formal languages for site planning.
In Spatial Synthesis in Computer-Aided Building Design,
Eastman C. (Ed.). Applied Science Publishers, London,
1975, pp. 147–183.

c 2008 The Author
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

