Pacific Graphics 2008
T. Igarashi, N. Max, and F. Sillion
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 7

Part-type Segmentation of Articulated Voxel-Shapes using the
Junction Rule
Dennie Reniers1 and Alexandru Telea2
1 Department

of Mathematics and Computing Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands
of Mathematics and Computing Science, University of Groningen, The Netherlands

2 Institute

Abstract
We present a part-type segmentation method for articulated voxel-shapes based on curve skeletons. Shapes are
considered to consist of several simpler, intersecting shapes. Our method is based on the junction rule: the observation that two intersecting shapes generate an additional junction in their joined curve-skeleton near the place
of intersection. For each curve-skeleton point, we construct a piecewise-geodesic loop on the shape surface. Starting from the junctions, we search along the curve skeleton for points whose associated loops make for suitable
part cuts. The segmentations are robust to noise and discretization artifacts, because the curve skeletonization
incorporates a single user-parameter to filter spurious curve-skeleton branches. Furthermore, segment borders
are smooth and minimally twisting by construction. We demonstrate our method on several real-world examples
and compare it to existing part-type segmentation methods.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.5 [Computer Graphics]: Geometric algorithms,
languages, and systems

1. Introduction
Part-type segmentation is the task of decomposing a 3D
shape into its meaningful components, which can be informally defined as those that one would intuitively perceive
as the distinct, logical parts of the shape. Such segmentations are most suitable for shapes consisting of clearly articulated parts, such as animals, humans, and other natural
shapes. Segmentation applications include shape analysis,
shape matching, medical imaging, collision detection, and
other geometric processing methods employing divide-andconquer strategies.
In what identifies the logical parts of a shape, several directions can be taken. One is to consider a shape as the union
of several simpler shapes, or parts. To detect these parts,
some methods use the minima rule [HS97], which says that
when two separate shapes interpenetrate, they do so in a concave contour of discontinuity of their surface tangent-planes.
Methods can put the minima rule to use by placing part cuts
at these curvature minima [LLS∗ 05] for example, or by clustering surface elements based on curvature [KT03]. Another
category of methods uses the curve skeleton to identify parts.
The curve skeleton of a 3D shape is a 1D connected struc-

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

ture that is centered within the shape and efficiently captures
the topology and articulation of the shape. It has been observed that the shape part-structure can be inferred from the
curve-skeleton structure, that is, the curve skeleton allows
for component-wise differentiation [CSYB05]. In this work,
we refine this intuition: when two shapes interpenetrate, their
respective curve skeletons join, resulting in a new junction in
the curve skeleton located near the intersection. We call this
the junction rule, in analogy with the minima rule.
In this paper, we present a new method for segmenting
articulated voxel-shapes based on the junction rule. The particular curve-skeleton definition we use [DS06] associates
with each curve-skeleton point a simple closed curve, i.e.,
a Jordan curve, on the shape surface. Each Jordan curve
divides the surface into two parts and thus is a candidate
part-cut. For each curve-skeleton junction, which signals the
interpenetration of parts, we determine the number of part
cuts that should be generated and their most suitable locations. We determine the suitability of a part cut using a
new measure, called the the “geodesicness" of the part cut.
This ensures that the part-cuts are smooth, which is a desirable property. The saliency of the parts is guaranteed by

1846

D. Reniers & A. Telea / Part-type Segmentation of Articulated Voxel-Shapes using the Junction Rule

the curve-skeletonization stage, in which the curve skeleton
is simplified using an intuitive scale-parameter, so that only
significant curve-skeleton parts are retained. This makes our
method robust to boundary noise. Our method is implemented for binary voxel-shapes, in which the shape is sampled on a regular grid, but in principle the same ideas are
applicable to other shape representations (e.g. polyhedral).
The outline of this paper is as follows. In the next section we discuss related work. In Section 3 we briefly discuss previous work that our method uses, namely, the curveskeleton definition [DS06] and its computation for voxelshapes [RT07]. In Section 4, we introduce the geodesicness
measure and based hereon, we place part-cuts that induce
a segmentation of the shape into its logical parts. Section 5
presents results and a discussion. We evaluate the method according to criteria identified in literature and we compare our
method to the relevant state-of-the-art methods. Section 6
concludes the paper.

2. Related Work
Segmentation methods can be classified by the type of output they produce, or by the type of information that they use.
In the first classification, one can distinguish between patchand part-type methods [Sha04]. Patch-type methods produce
segments that satisfy certain well-defined geometric properties, such as flatness, whereas part-type methods try to produce meaningful components, often using cognition principles. Our method belongs to the part-type methods, to which
we restrict our discussion.
Among the methods using boundary information, Katz
and Tal [KT03] produce a fuzzy clustering of the surfaceelements based on on geodesic and angular distances. After
clustering, the fuzzy part-cuts are refined. In [KLT05], feature points are first extracted to improve pose-invariance, and
each segment is made to represent at least one feature point.
Lee et. al. [LLS∗ 05] employ the minima rule to find partial feature-contours, which are then closed to form loops.
The most salient loops are chosen, and a snake-based approach moves the loops to more suitable locations, forming
part cuts. It is interesting to note that when closing the partial feature-contours, which were found using the minima
rule, the authors use a “centricity" measure to ensure that
the loops are perpendicular to the curve skeleton, something
that users are found to be interested in.
Methods can also consider the shape’s interior. Mortara
et al. [MPS∗ 04] partition a shape into generic body and
tubular parts, by sweeping spheres inside its volume. Attene et al. [AFS06] propose a segmentation based on fitting primitives, such as cylinders and spheres, inside the
volume. Another way to consider the shape’s interior is by
means of a skeletal structure, such as the curve skeleton.
Our approach belongs to this category. To obtain meaningful part-cuts, this category of methods needs to signal events

Figure 1: The curve skeleton C with rainbow color map encoding ρC , junctions j, k, m ∈ Jτ , a regular point p ∈ C, feature sets F( j) and F(p), and shortest-path sets Γ( j) and
Γ(p).
on the curve skeleton and map these events to the boundary in order to produce part cuts. Li et al. [LWTH01] use a
planar space-sweep along the skeleton and signal both geometric and topological events of the cross sections. Cornea
et al. [CSYB05] uses force-following of boundary particles inside the volume to compute the curve skeleton, and
project skeleton segments back to the boundary. Reniers
and Telea [RT07] detect curve-skeleton junctions, which
naturally divide the boundary into connected components
using Jordan curves that are associated with each curveskeleton point. Lien et at. [LKA05] observe that segmentation and skeletonization share similar properties and propose a method that does both simultaneously. Another skeletal structure is the Reeb graph [HSKK01], produced from
the iso-contours of a suitable mapping function on the surface. In [TVD07], the mapping function is defined as the
curvature-constrained geodesic-distance to the closest feature points, detected as the extrema of another geodesicbased function. A subset of the contours is selected based on
their topological and geometric evolution, and are used as
part cuts. A comparative study of five recent part-type methods can be found in [AKM∗ 06].
3. Preliminaries
We now briefly discuss the curve-skeleton computation,
which is necessary for a good understanding of the rest of
this paper.
The surface skeleton S of a 3D shape Ω with boundary ∂Ω
is a 2D structure consisting of curved sheets, and is defined
as those points in Ω having at least two boundary points at
minimum distance [PSS∗ 03]:
S(Ω) = p ∈ Ω |F(p)| ≥ 2 ,

(1)

where F is the feature transform, which assigns to a point p
the set of boundary points F(p) at minimum distance of p:
the feature points of p. Each sheet-point p ∈ S has exactly
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. Reniers & A. Telea / Part-type Segmentation of Articulated Voxel-Shapes using the Junction Rule

1847

two feature points. In limit cases, i.e., at sheet boundaries
or sheet intersection-curves, F(p) has a cardinality of three
or more. In the following, we assume the general case of a
surface-skeleton point having exactly two feature points, for
notation simplicity.
Let ρS : S → R+ be the length of the shortest geodesic
on the boundary between the two feature points F(p). Dey
and Sun [DS06] observe that the function ρS is low near the
periphery of the surface skeleton and increases toward the
center and define the curve skeleton C as the local maximum
ridge of ρS . They use an erosion step to erode ρS until a
1D connected structure remains. In [RVT08] a similar definition of C is presented that is more suitable for voxel shapes,
and has the additional advantage that it does not require an
erosion step. In this work we deal with voxel shapes, so we
compute curve skeletons using the latter approach.
Let F(p) be the extended feature transform [RVT08], defined as F = x,y,z∈{0,1} F(px + x, py + y, pz + z). Let Γ(p)
be the set of shortest paths on the shape boundary between
each two feature voxels in F(p):
γ(a, b) ,

Γ(p) =

(2)

a,b∈F(p)

where γ(a, b) is the shortest path between voxels a, b, as
discrete-space equivalent of the shortest geodesic. Shortest
paths are computed as 26-connected weighted voxel-chains
using Dijkstra’s algorithm on the boundary graph. The definition of the curve skeleton C is then defined as:
p ∈ C ⇔ Γ(p) contains a Jordan curve ,

(3)

where a Jordan curve is a simple closed curve on the shape
boundary ∂Ω. To detect whether Γ contains a Jordan curve
we slightly dilate Γ on ∂Ω to obtain Γ . If and only if Γ
has at least two boundaries, Γ(p) contains a Jordan curve.
For junctions we count n ≥ 3 boundaries, where n indicates
the number C-branches that meet in the junction. For more
details on this curve-skeletonization algorithm see [RT07].
With each curve-skeleton voxel p inside the volume a set
of components on the boundary is associated, as follows.
The Jordan curve theorem states that a Jordan curve divides a
genus 0 surface into exactly two connected components. Let
C : C → P(∂Ω) be the component set associated with each
point p ∈ C, obtained by taking the connected boundarycomponents induced by Γ(p). The component sets C can be
used to define another importance measure ρC : C → R+ on
the curve skeleton. Let the components in C be ordered by
their areas, or voxel counts: ∀1≤i<k |Ci | ≤ |Ci+1 |. The measure ρC for a point p is defined as the total area of the components excluding the largest-area component:
ρC (p) = ∂Ω \Ck (p)

(4)

In this manner, a simplified curve-skeleton Cτ can be computed by discarding all points whose ρC is smaller than a
user-parameter τ. Note that ρC is different from ρS , but similar in spirit. In [RVT08] the two measures ρS and ρC are
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 2: Schematic overview of the four junction types (ad) and their desirable part-cuts (magenta line-segments). An
n-junction (n = {0, 1, 2, 3}) generates n + 1 parts using n
part cuts. Curve skeletons are blue.
combined into a single monotonic measure ρ by taking their
maximum, whose thresholding produces simplified surfaceskeletons that are always connected.
Curve-skeleton junctions are needed in the following
stages of our pipeline, and are detected robustly as follows.
Each boundary b of Γ (p) bounds a component c ∈ C(p).
Note that some b’s may bound the same component. We discard boundaries that bound components smaller than τ. If
the number of remaining boundaries is at least three, voxel
p is detected as a robust junction. The robust set of junctions
is denoted Jτ . Figure 1 depicts F, C, ρC , Γ, and Jτ for an
example shape.
4. New Method
Section 3 explained how the simplified curve-skeleton Cτ
and its junctions Jτ can be robustly detected, and that with
each point p ∈ C a shortest-path set Γ(p) on the shape boundary is associated. Using the junction rule, namely that curveskeleton junctions indicate the interpenetration of parts, it
is straightforward to use the junctions directly as critical
points, that is, to use their path sets as part cuts that divide
the shape surface into disjoint segments.
In fact, this approach was taken in [RT07]. Although the
resulting segmentations are satisfying for a large amount of
shapes, it delivers non-intuitive results for some other ones
(see e.g. Fig. 3b later in this section). We next explain why
the junctions are suitable for indicating the interpenetration
of parts, but why they should not be used as cut-generating
points. For the sake of discussion, we assume the generic
case of junctions having exactly three emanating branches.
In non-generic cases, junctions may have more branches.
Our algorithm, presented in Section 4.2, can also handle four
or more branches.
First, by using junctions as critical points, three part cuts
per junction are generated, because three branches come together in a junction. However, on actual shapes we may perceive junctions either indicate the intersection of 4, 3, or
2 parts, or not indicate a part cut at all. Let an n-junction
be a junction for which n part cuts should be generated,
that is, it represents the intersection of n + 1 parts. Figure 2

1848

D. Reniers & A. Telea / Part-type Segmentation of Articulated Voxel-Shapes using the Junction Rule

the piecewise geodesic Jordan curves are used as part cuts,
the borders are smooth for the larger part, a desirable property for any segmentation method [AKM∗ 06]. However, this
property does not need to hold at the two feature points F(p)
where the two geodesics come together under an angle. We
next introduce the geodesicness measure σ : C → [0..1] on
the curve skeleton which measures the degree to which the
total Jordan curve Γ(p) is geodesic.
Figure 4: The geodesicness measure computed for a curveskeleton point p with feature points a, b and Γ(p) =
{γ1 (a, b), γ2 (a, b)}. High geodesicness (σ ≈ 1) (a). Medium
geodesicness (σ ≈ 0.5) (b).
schematically shows how one would intuitively place part
cuts for four different shapes. Each of the four shapes gives
rise to a different number of part cuts. We have observed
that 1-junctions (Fig. 2c) occur most frequently in real-world
shapes, whereas 3-junctions (Fig. 2a) are rare. Fig. 2d shows
a 0-junction: it does not represent any part-cut at all. The
junction results from the fact that the curve skeleton extends
into the two corners of the rectangle. Although the shape
could be interpreted as consisting of three interpenetrating
parts, namely as the two corners and the rectangle’s rump,
this is non-intuitive and no part cuts should be generated.
Considering that a continuous deformation exists between
each two of these shapes, it is clear that junction type is inherently subjective. For example, if the disc of Fig. 2a becomes smaller and smaller, the situation transforms into that
of Fig. 2b. Indeed, part-type shape segmentation can be considered a subjective task [AKM∗ 06]. To summarize, to segment using the junction rule, we should be able to differentiate between the different junction types.
The second issue with using junctions as critical points is
that the path sets of the junctions are ill-suited as part cuts as
they do not tightly split off the parts. Figure 3b illustrates this
using a chamfered box with three attached tubes. The path
set of junction j (Fig. 3a) does not split off the two tubes
accurately: each tube contains a large part of the box. The
desirable segmentation is shown in Fig. 3e.
We address the two issues raised above, as follows. For
each junction j, we search along each branch emanating
from j for the first suitable critical point, where suitability is
determined by our new geodesicness measure, introduced in
Section 4.1. We find at most three candidate critical-points:
the number of branches at j. Next, we select among the
candidate critical-points the final critical-points that split off
valid parts. This is detailed in Section 4.2.
4.1. Geodesicness measure
Recall from Section 3 that the Jordan curve Γ(p) that
is associated with each regular (non-junction) curveskeleton point p consists of two shortest geodesics Γ(p) =
{γ1 (a, b), γ2 (a, b)} between p’s feature points a, b. Because

A geodesic is defined as a curve on a surface whose
geodesic curvature is everywhere vanishing. Thus, our measure σ should be 1.0 iff the two geodesics meet at an angle of 180 degrees in both feature points. In that the case
the whole Jordan curve is a geodesic. Using differential geometry, we can project Γ(p) in a small neighborhood of a
onto the tangent plane at a, to determine the angle that the
two geodesics make. However, as we are working in voxelspace and shapes can be noisy, a relatively large neighborhood must be taken, but then the projection is not accurate.
We take a more robust approach instead. Let c be the midpoint of one geodesic γ1 (a, b), and d of the other γ2 (a, b)
(see Figure. 4a). We compute the shortest geodesic γ(c, d). If
γ(c, d) is a subset of Γ, it means that Γ is a shortest geodesic
between c, d, because a shortest geodesic between any two
points is unique. Furthermore, it can be seen that the more
γ(c, d) deviates from Γ, the more Γ deviates from a geodesic
at the feature points. This deviation can be measured by the
surface area spanned by the geodesic triangle acd, or, in
terms of difference in length · , which we choose because
it is more easily computed:
σ(p ∈ C) =

γ(c, d)
.
γ(c, a) + γ(a, d)

(5)

This is a dimensionless measure attaining values between 0
and 1, the latter indicating a geodesic Jordan curve. The case
of junctions, in which Γ consists of multiple Jordan curves, is
handled by computing the minimum σ among Jordan curves.
4.2. Placing Part Cuts
We use the junctions Jτ as computed in Sec. 3 to search
for critical points whose Jordan curves make for accurate
part cuts, based on the geodesicness measure σ as defined in
Sec. 4.1. Higher values of σ indicate a smooth Jordan curve
and thus a good candidate for critical point placement. Figure 3c depicts σ. Looking at the branches emanating from
the junctions into the tubes, we see that σ is low at the
junction itself and reaches a maximum inside the tubes. We
thus proceed as follows. Starting from a junction j ∈ Jτ , we
search along the C-branches emanating from j for the first
point q which has a sufficiently high value of σ. The search
for q on a branch stops when another junction or the end of
the branch is reached. In practice, σ does not reach the maximum of 1.0 inside each protrusion that can be considered
a part, so we tolerate lower values. Extensive experimental
study suggests that placing critical points at σ ≥ 0.8 gives
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. Reniers & A. Telea / Part-type Segmentation of Articulated Voxel-Shapes using the Junction Rule

1849

Figure 3: The curve skeleton of an artificial shape consisting of a box and three attached tubes. The curve skeleton has a 2junction j, a 1-junction k, and a 0-junction m (a). Undesirable segmentation using junctions (b). Candidate critical-points based
on σ (encoded by color map) (c). Final critical-points after filtering (d). Desirable segmentation using the final critical-points
(e).

Figure 5: Four junction types (a-d). The Jordan curves Γ(qi )
for the candidate critical-points qi are shown as magenta
line-segments. Retained part-cuts shown as thick magenta
lines, non-retained ones are stippled. Shortest-path sets of
the junctions are shown using stippled line-segments Γ( j).
good results. For some branches, the very first (regular) point
of the branch might have high enough σ to be marked a critical point. For other branches, we might find no such point:
no critical point makes for a suitable part cut.
To summarize, we obtain for each junction j a set of candidate critical-points Q j , whose cardinality is at most the
number of branches at j. For branches whose measure σ
stays low until the end we find no critical points, so that |Q j |
is lower than the number of branches. Figure 5 schematically shows the detected candidate critical-points qi that we
would detect in this manner for the four different junction
types (cf. Fig. 2). We observe that according to intuition, not
all critical points that were found make for valid part-cuts,
and some points should be removed from Q j . In Fig. 5a, all
critical points are valid: no points should be removed from
Q j . In Fig. 5b, point q2 should be removed, in Fig. 5c, points
q2 and q3 should be removed. In Fig. 5d the only candidate
critical-point q1 that was found should be removed.
In characterizing which candidate critical-points do not
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

make for valid part-cuts, we make the assumption that each
intersection involves one body part, which is the “largest" intersecting part, and several limb parts, which are the smaller
parts. In Fig. 5a for example, there is one disc-shaped body
and three limbs. In Fig. 5c, there is one body and one limb,
for which q1 is the part cut. We thus want to distinguish
the body part from the limb parts by their sizes. We can
express the size of a part in at least two ways: by means
of the part’s surface-area, or by means of it’s circumference
at the point of intersection. The problem with the former is
that it is a non-local property. For example, the limb due to
q2 in Fig. 5a can have smaller or larger surface-area than
the disc-like part depending on what the hidden part of the
shape looks like. A more local property is the circumference
of the limb at the intersection, which can be measured by
ρS , which has already been computed in the curve-skeleton
computation (see Sec. 3). We further note that the junction
is always located inside the body, and never in one of the
limbs. Hence, the idea is to compare the local circumference of the limb, given by ρS (qi ) of candidate critical-point
qi , with the circumference of the body, given by ρS ( j) of
the junction j. If the circumferences are similar enough, that
|ρ ( j)−ρ (q )|
is, 1.0 − S ρ ( j)S i ≥ 0.6, where 0.6 is an empirically
S
defined threshold, the candidate critical-point should be removed from Q j as it is considered to lie on the body. However, we should never remove more than two critical points,
as the body should not contain a bifurcation. Indeed, using
this criterion we would remove all three critical points in
Fig. 5b, because all three intersecting parts have a similar circumference. In case we cannot distinguish between body and
limbs using the local circumference, we apply the global criterion and remove the critical point representing the largest
surface area ρC , which is q2 in case of Fig. 5b.

We restricted our discussion to junctions having three
branches, our approach also works for higher-order junctions: the assumption of multiple limbs intersecting with a
single body is still valid. Fig. 6 shows for two shapes the
curve skeletons C, junctions Jτ , the geodesicness measure σ
encoded as color map on C, the candidate critical-points Q j ,
and the part cuts.

1850

D. Reniers & A. Telea / Part-type Segmentation of Articulated Voxel-Shapes using the Junction Rule

Figure 7: Segmentations of several shapes obtained using our method.
parameter τ [RVT08], which controls the simplification of
the curve skeleton. The user-parameter is intuitive as it
thresholds the importance measure ρC which has a geometric meaning: it assigns to a point the minimum surface-area
induced by the Jordan curve at the point. By further increasing τ high-level abstractions of the shape are obtained.
Figs. 6b,7 show that the noisy Dino is correctly segmented.
If desired, a hierarchical segmentation could be produced by
implementing the scheme proposed in [RT07].
Figure 6: Part cuts (red loops) for the Hand (a) and Noisy
Dino shape (b). Curve skeletons C with rainbow color-map
encoding σ (red=1, blue=0), junctions Jτ (black balls), candidate critical-points (colored balls).
5. Results and Discussion
Figure 7 shows several shapes segmented using our approach, with a minimum coloring scheme applied (smooth
iso-surfaces have been computed from the voxel output
for clearer display). Most segmentations can be colored
using only two colors, which reflects that most junctions
are 1-junctions. As can be seen, our method handles organic, geometric, and noisy shapes, and shapes with tunnels.
We next evaluate our method using the criteria proposed
in [AKM∗ 06].
Correctness of part-type segmentation is subjective and
application specific. We thus have to assess the correctness
of our method (and thereby the junction rule) visually. As
can be seen in Figs. 7,8, the segmentations agree with intuition and do not suffer from over-segmentation. Fine structures such as fingers and toes are captured well, provided the
grid resolution is high enough and the curve skeleton has not
been simplified too much by the user.
The method is multiscale through the use of the user-

The boundaries between segments are found directly as
the Jordan curves associated with the critical points. The part
cuts are closed by default (unlike e.g. [LLS∗ 05]), and no refinement of part cuts is necessary (unlike e.g. [KT03]), keeping the algorithm straightforward to implement and intuitive
to use. Furthermore, the boundaries are smooth by construction, as the Jordan curves are piecewise geodesic and critical
points are only placed at points with a high total geodesicness. The saliency of the part cuts is guaranteed because the
curve skeleton contains only significant branches, guaranteed by the scale parameter τ.
The segmentations are pose-invariant (see Fig. 8). That
is, the number and location of segments do not change under different poses of the same shape. The reason is that the
structure of the underlying curve skeleton does not change
significantly under deformations of the shape. Even if a junction is introduced by a deformation, it will not immediately
result in extra part cuts because the geodesicness measure
σ on this new C-branch has a low value. Only if the new
part really protrudes, σ reaches a high enough value. Methods using surface curvature might have problems here, as the
curvatures change considerably under deformations.
The asymptotic complexity of our method is dominated
by the curve-skeleton computation, which involves computing the shortest-path (using Dijkstra’s algorithm) between
each two feature voxels in F(p) (Sec. 3) for each object
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D. Reniers & A. Telea / Part-type Segmentation of Articulated Voxel-Shapes using the Junction Rule

1851

ciated Jordan curves is available for meshes [DS06]. However, because the implementation is non-trivial and not available to us, we have chosen for a voxel-based implementation. The other two steps, computing the geodesicness measure and placing the part cuts, are also not inherently voxelbased.
5.1. Comparison

Figure 8: Pose-invariance of the segmentations.
voxel p, which amounts to O(m(n log n)) where m = |Ω| and
n = |∂Ω|. Fortunately, on articulated shapes for which our
method is intended, to compute the shortest path between
two feature voxels only a relatively small part of the boundary needs to be visited. Our method, implemented in C++
takes up to 5 minutes on a Pentium IV 3 GHz for curveskeletonization and segmentation, for the shapes shown in
this paper, with resolutions up to 4003 voxels.
Only a single control parameter is needed: the curveskeleton simplification threshold τ. The critical-point placement has two internal parameters: one for the minimum
geodesicness of a critical point and the other for distinguishing between body and limbs. We have experimentally determined appropriate settings for these parameters and kept
these fixed for the shapes shown in this paper.
Finally, we discuss the limitations of our approach. By
using the curve skeleton and associated Jordan curves, each
presenting a potential part-cut, we have essentially reduced
the problem of segmentation from 2D to 1D. However, this
also causes some limitations. In case a part is strongly tapered, we may obtain a low σ all along the respective Cbranch, and we might not find a critical point. In practice, if a
part is indeed so strongly tapered that σ does not come above
our fixed threshold for the whole C-branch, then it must be
a small part, and failing to segment it is not a serious problem. A second limitation is that we have to choose part cuts
from a limited set such that they are smooth, but beyond that
we cannot enforce complete smoothness. In Fig. 8 for example, the Horse’s neck is tapered, and so its part-cut is not so
smooth as it could be when placed more freely (using e.g.
a snake-based approach such as in [LLS∗ 05]). Another limitation occurs when the curve skeletons of two intersecting
shapes do not generate a junction, which is the case when
the two curve skeletons are perfectly aligned. However, the
minima rule suffers from similar problems when two shape
intersect non-transversally. Although our method works on
voxel-shapes, we argue that it can be adapted to polyhedral
shapes as well. Computation of the curve skeleton and assoc 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

We now briefly compare the results of our method to seven
other state-of-the-art methods by visual inspection of the results. Figure 9 shows the Homer shape segmented using four
existing methods [KT03, KLT05, MPS∗ 04, AFS06] (images
from [AKM∗ 06]) and our own method in the rightmost column. We notice that our method captures fine features as the
fingers and the nose, whereas the other methods do not. Our
method segments only the largest toe, as the others are not
separated from each other by the outside volume. We further observe that our method, like [MPS∗ 04], does not label
the head as a separate segment. The reason for this is that
the neck does not have a (significantly) smaller radius than
the body. Hence, our method considers the body and head
belonging to the same part. Finally, our segment borders for
the legs are tight and smooth, whereas the other methods can
be seen to have some problems for these areas. We compare
segmentations for the Hand shape with another three stateof-the-art methods [LLS∗ 05, LWTH01, RT07] (images from
the respective papers), of which the last two are similar to
our method in that they also use the curve skeleton. We observe that our method tightly splits off the fingers and thumb,
whereas [LWTH01] and [RT07] do not. In [RT07] each finger contains a large part of the palm of the hand, caused by
the fact that this method uses the junctions directly as critical points (Sec. 4). Finally, all other three methods have a
segment border on the palm, whereas our method leaves the
palm intact.
6. Conclusion
We have presented a new method for creating part-type segmentations of articulated shapes using the junction rule.
A user-parameter is incorporated to filter the curve skeleton of spurious branches and ensure the saliency of parts.
Each curve-skeleton point has an associated Jordan curve
that presents a candidate part-cut. Suitable part-cuts are selected by measuring their smoothness, computed based on a
geodesic criterion, and considering the body/limb relationships of the intersecting parts. Our method is straightforward to implement, yields smooth segment boundaries by
construction, and is robust to boundary noise.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) under Grant No.
612.065.414. We used shapes from the AIM@SHAPE shape

1852

D. Reniers & A. Telea / Part-type Segmentation of Articulated Voxel-Shapes using the Junction Rule

Figure 9: Visual comparison of segmentations for the Homer and Hand shapes.
repository, McGill 3D Shape Benchmark, and the Princeton
Shape Benchmark. The Horse poses are from [SP04].
References
[AFS06] ATTENE M., FALCIDIENO B., S PAGNUOLO M.: Hierarchical mesh segmentation based on fitting primitives. The
Visual Computer 22, 3 (2006), 181–193.
[AKM∗ 06] ATTENE M., K ATZ S., M ORTARA M., PATANE G.,
S PAGNUOLO M., TAL A.: Mesh segmentation - a comparative
study. In IEEE Int. Conference on Shape Modeling and Applications (SMI) (2006), p. 7.
C ORNEA N. D., S ILVER D., Y UAN X., BALASUB R.: Computing hierarchical curve-skeletons of 3d
objects. The Visual Computer 21, 11 (2005), 945–955.

[CSYB05]

RAMANIAN

[DS06] D EY T. K., S UN J.: Defining and computing curveskeletons with medial geodesic function. In Proc. of Eurographics Symposium on Geometry Processing (2006), pp. 143–152.
[HS97] H OFFMAN D. D., S INGH M.: Salience of visual parts.
Cognition 63, 1 (1997), 29–78.
[HSKK01] H ILAGA M., S HINAGAWA Y., KOHMURA T., K UNII
T. L.: Topology matching for fully automatic similarity estimation of 3d shapes. In Proc. of SIGGRAPH’01 (2001), ACM,
pp. 203–212.
[KLT05] K ATZ S., L EIFMAN G., TAL A.: Mesh segmentation
using feature point and core extraction. The Visual Computer 21
(2005), 649–658.
[KT03] K ATZ S., TAL A.: Hierarchical mesh decomposition using fuzzy clustering and cuts. ACM Transactions on Graphics
22, 3 (2003), 954–961.

[LLS∗ 05] L EE Y., L EE S., S HAMIR A., C OHEN -O R D., S EI DEL H. P.: Mesh scissoring with minima rule and part salience.
Computer Aided Geometric Design 22 (2005), 444–465.
[LWTH01] L I X., W OON T. W., TAN T. S., H UANG Z.: Decomposing polygon meshes for interactive applications. In Proc. of
symposium on Interactive 3D graphics (2001), pp. 35–42.
[MPS∗ 04] M ORTARA M., PATANÈ G., S PAGNUOLO M., FALCI DIENO B., ROSSIGNAC J.: Plumber: a multiscale decomposition
of 3d shapes into tubular primitives and bodies. In Proc. of Solid
Modeling and Applications (2004), pp. 339–344.
[PSS∗ 03] P IZER S. M., S IDDIQI K., S ZÉKELY G., DAMON
J. N., Z UCKER S. W.: Multiscale medial loci and their properties. Int. Journal of Computer Vision 55, 2-3 (2003), 155–179.
[RT07] R ENIERS D., T ELEA A.: Skeleton-based hierarchical
shape segmentation. In Proc. of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Shape
Modeling and Applications (SMI) (2007), pp. 179–188.
[RVT08] R ENIERS D., VAN W IJK J. J., T ELEA A.: Computing
multiscale curve and surface skeletons of genus 0 shapes using a
global importance measure. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 14, 2 (2008), 355–368.
[Sha04] S HAMIR A.: A formulation of boundary mesh segmentation. In Proc. of the Second Int. Symp. on 3D Data Processing,
Visualization and Transmission (3DPVT’04) (2004), pp. 82–89.
[SP04] S UMNER R. W., P OPOVIC J.: Deformation transfer for
triangle meshes. ACM Transactions on Graphics 23, 3 (2004),
399–405.
[TVD07] T IERNY J., VANDEBORRE J.-P., DAOUDI M.: Topology driven 3d mesh hierarchical segmentation. In Proc. of the
IEEE Int. Conf. on Shape Modeling and Applications (SMI)
(2007), pp. 215–220.

[LKA05] L IEN J.-M., K EYSER J., A MATO N. M.: Simultaneous
shape decomposition and skeletonization. In Proc. of ACM Solid
and Physical Modeling Symposium (SPM) (2005), pp. 219–228.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

