Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2008
A. Vilanova, A. Telea, G. Scheuermann, and T. Möller
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 3

Automatic Detection and Visualization of
Distinctive Structures in 3D Unsteady Multi-fields
H. Jänicke1 , M. Böttinger2 , X. Tricoche3 , and G. Scheuermann1
1 Department

of Computer Science, Universität Leipzig, Germany
Climate Computing Center (DKRZ), Germany
3 Computer Science Department, Purdue University, USA
2 German

Abstract
Current unsteady multi-field simulation data-sets consist of millions of data-points. To efficiently reduce this enormous amount of information, local statistical complexity was recently introduced as a method that identifies distinctive structures using concepts from information theory. Due to high computational costs this method was so
far limited to 2D data. In this paper we propose a new strategy for the computation that is substantially faster and
allows for a more precise analysis. The bottleneck of the original method is the division of spatio-temporal configurations in the field (light-cones) into different classes of behavior. The new algorithm uses a density-driven Voronoi
tessellation for this task that more accurately captures the distribution of configurations in the sparsely sampled
high-dimensional space. The efficient computation is achieved using structures and algorithms from graph theory.
The ability of the method to detect distinctive regions in 3D is illustrated using flow and weather simulations.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.6.6 [Simulation and Modeling]: Simulation Output
Analysis J.2 [Physical Sciences and Engineering]: Mathematics and Statistics

1. Introduction
Due to the increase in computing power, computer simulations result in increasingly larger data sets. Often, the data is
3-dimensional, time dependent and multivariate. Visualization techniques can help reduce the giant amount of information provided by the data to the important facts. An example
for the importance of such techniques is aircraft design. To
reduce costs large parts of the development and testing of
an aircraft are performed using computer simulations. Thus,
flight quality and performance can be tested in many different scenarios. In order to analyze the behavior of the aircraft,
developers have to extract relevant features from the simulation and visualize them. Relevant structures are for example
the wake of an airplane or vortex breakdown. Understanding
the wake of an airplane is important to decide at which intervals airplanes can start and land. Planes that enter the wake
of a preceding flight might experience large turbulences that
can cause a crash. Similarly if the bend that a delta wing flies
is too sharp the vortex that keeps it in the air might break
down causing a crash. Finding such structures early in the
design process is an important task. In most application doc 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

mains, scientific data visualization is used to understand both
the mean features as well as unusual patterns in the data.
A standard technique to detect relevant structures is feature extraction. Post et al. [PVH∗ 03] provide a detailed examination of techniques that are available in the field of
flow visualization. The methods are divided into approaches
based on image processing, vector field topology, physical
characteristics and selective visualization. For a detailed explanation we refer the interested reader to this publication.
Opposed to feature extraction methods that extract single
formations, structure-based visualization focuses on a partitioning of the entire domain. Techniques can be classified
as cluster-based or integral-line based methods. Salzbrunn
et al. [SJWS07] provide a good overview over these approaches. Methods from both fields have in common that
they need a priori information about the structures that are
to be found. Moreover, most techniques were developed for
a special type of field, e.g., scalar or vector valued. Thus, a
precise definition of what is to be found is needed that cannot always be given. For example, there exists no general
definition of a vortex.

768

H. Jänicke, M. Böttinger, X. Tricoche & G. Scheuermann / Distinctive Structures in 3D Unsteady Multi-fields
v1

v0

(a) Finite differences

(b) Past light-cone configuration

(c) Configuration space

Figure 1: The configuration space: (a) Neighboring values (orange stripe) in the previous time-step are used to compute the
value at the current position (orange circle). (b-c) Cone-configurations are extracted from the field and stored in the configuration space.

2. Local Statistical Complexity
Local statistical complexity extracts those regions in an unsteady field, where a lot of information from the local past
is required to predict the dynamics in the local future. This
happens where the temporal evolution is very unusual compared to what happens in the rest of the field. In general,
users are interested in a subset of these distinctive regions,
as they know the basic structure of their data-set and want
to find regions that behave differently. Especially for large
intricate and little understood data-sets local statistical complexity is a helpful tool to guide the user to regions that might
be relevant to him or her.
As mentioned before, local statistical complexity focuses
on the local temporal evolution of the field. The local past
of position p in the field consists of all the points that might
influence p. As effects propagate at finite speed, the past has
the shape of a light-cone that is directed towards the past.
The apex is located at p. This concept is likewise used when
computing simulations using finite differences or finite elements. Here the value at position x in time-step t is computed
from the neighborhood of the point in the previous time-step
t − 1 (Fig. 1(a)). (An exception is pressure in incompressible
flow.) The future is given by a light-cone that is directed in
the opposite direction, i.e., the future. Each light-cone comprises a set of positions. The values at these positions together with the neighborhood information are called a configuration (Fig. 1(b)). A configuration can be thought of as
a pattern that extends in time, space and if appropriate over
multiple variables. By definition future configurations contain the value at the apex, past configurations do not.
For each past-cone configuration we would like to be able
to predict, what might happen in the future. The only value
that we can predict exactly, is the one at the future-cone
apex, as it results from the calculation rule of the simulation method (remember Fig. 1(a)). To predict the remaining values in the future-cone, we need statistics. We group

several similar past-configurations and compute a histogram
over the different futures that occur. This estimated distribution tells us which future configurations are likely for this
particular class of behavior in the past. This procedure is repeated for all different groups of past-configurations.
Analyzing the histograms we computed in the previous
step, we will observe that some of them are very similar.
This means that the differences we detected in the pastconfigurations have no significant influence on the dynamics in the future. Thus, we merge all those past groups that
have very similar histograms. The different groups that result after the merging are called causal states. A causal state
represents a cause-and-effect relationship between what was
observed in the past and what might happen in the future. So,
if we have a past configuration and can determine its causal
state, we can estimate the most probable future dynamics.
Now that we can predict the dynamics in the future given
the past configuration, we want to find a minimal lossless encoding for this information. The optimal code (shortest expected length) is given by a Huffman-code. A Huffman-code
assigns frequent symbols short codewords and rare symbols
longer ones. The entropy H[X] is a measure of the smallest codeword length that is theoretically possible for the
given alphabet X. For functions f (x) x ∈ X, mutual information I[ f (X), X] equals entropy H[ f (X)]. In order to find
an optimal encoding for the past-configurations, we have
to find a function f that minimizes the mutual information
I[ f (PastCon f ); PastCon f ]. Shalizi et al. [SHR∗ 06] showed
that the unique function that minimizes the mutual information is the mapping to the causal states. Thus, if we store at
each position the Huffman-code of the corresponding causal
state, we resolve the file with shortest expected length that
still gives us all informations about the dynamics in the local
future.
The encoded file can finally be used to detect distinctive regions. The Huffman-code assigns each causal state
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Jänicke, M. Böttinger, X. Tricoche & G. Scheuermann / Distinctive Structures in 3D Unsteady Multi-fields
v1

v1

v1

1
1

1 3 1
3 4
1
1

1

1 1
1
1
1
1
1
2
11 1
1 2
42 1
1
1
1
1
1 1
3 4
1
2 1 3
1 1
1
1

1

769

v1

1 X3 1
3 4
1
1

1 1
1
1
1
1
1
11 X
1
2
42 X
1 2
1
1
1
1
1 1
X1
3 4
1
2 1 3
1 1
1
1

v0

(a) Number of configurations
per cell

(b) Density driven clustering

v0

v0

v0

(c) Final partitioning

(d) Voronoi tessellation of the
configuration space

Figure 2: Density-driven Voronoi tessellation: (a) The configuration space is quantized first and the number of configurations in
each cell are counted. (b) Starting from the cells with most configurations, region growing is performed. (c) The final partitioning
captures regions of high density. (d) Voronoi tessellation of the configuration space.

a codeword whose length depends on the number of positions that are assigned to it. Causal states with a very long
codeword feature dynamics in the future that occur very
rarely in the field. Local statistical complexity measures for
a past-configuration the length of the codeword of the corresponding causal state, i.e., the amount of information that is
needed to predict the causal state/the dynamics in the future.
The longer the codeword, the more likely it is that something extraordinary is going to happen in the local future of
this position. More information on the theory and implementation of local statistical complexity and causal states can be
found in [SHR∗ 06, JWSK07].

The crucial part are the partitionings in Step 1 and 2. The
algorithm proposed by Jänicke et al. [JWSK07] is based on
the farthest points method. Their approach, however, has two
disadvantages: The computation is very expensive as coneconfigurations have to be read from the field very often.
Moreover, the farthest points are seeded randomly and thus
do not take the distribution of points in the configuration into
account. In doing so, clusters of similar configurations might
be split and are possibly not joined again by the χ2 -test as too
few samples are present to compute it correctly.
3.2. Density-driven Voronoi Tessellation

3. Computation of Causal States
3.1. Partitioning of the Configuration Space
As mentioned before, local statistical complexity requires a
partitioning of the past-configurations into causal states. For
this purpose we examine all configurations from all positions in all time-steps simultaneously in the configuration
space (Fig. 1(c)). Note that we treat past and future cones
separately. Each entry in the cone configuration is represented in a separate dimension. Hence each configuration is
represented as a point in the high-dimensional configuration
space. A causal state is a subset of the configuration space.
The set of all causal states gives a partitioning of the occupied regions of the configuration space. The partitioning
method proposed by Jänicke et al. [JWSK07] extends the
ideas of Shalizi et al. [SHR∗ 06] and consists of four steps:
1. Partition the configuration space of past-cones into regions l − by selecting n− farthest points.
2. Partition the configuration space of future-cones into regions l + by selecting n+ farthest points.
3. Estimate the conditional distributions P(L+ |L− = l − )
S
S
with L+ = l + and L− = l − .
4. Cluster those l − that have similar corresponding distributions P(L+ |L− = l − ) using a χ2 -test.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

With our new method we are able to overcome both problems at the same time. We propose a density-driven Voronoi
tessellation of the configuration space that takes clusters into
account and computes each light-cone only once. A graph
structure is used to accelerate computations.
Quantization of the Configuration Space: When analyzing 3D fields, we have to cope with millions of data points
in a (at least) 27-dimensional configuration space. (Cones
in 3D are increasing cubes, minimal size 3x3x3 = 27) As
the space is sparsely sampled, we first extract occupied regions. Using a close meshed quantization of the configuration space, we can precisely locate relevant cells (Fig. 2(a)).
In order to compute the number of configurations in each
cell, we sweep through the whole data-set once, compute the
cone-configuration at each point in each time-step, discretize
this configuration and store it in a tree. Each level in the tree
represents a dimension of the configuration space and a path
from the root to a leaf gives a single configuration. The number of occurrences of individual configurations in the whole
data-set are stored in the leaves.
Region Growing: As explained earlier this simple quantization results in a deficient local statistical complexity. To
overcome this problem we compute equally sized Voronoi
cells that deemphasize the quantization boundaries. First we

770

H. Jänicke, M. Böttinger, X. Tricoche & G. Scheuermann / Distinctive Structures in 3D Unsteady Multi-fields

t
3
2
1
0

more cells in the list. Blocked cells that are not assigned to
a cluster at the end of the process are assigned to the closest
cluster, whose ID is stored in the cell.

Causal states:

past

space

t
3
2
1
0

= 10.6

= 4.8

= 11.7

= 3.1

= 5.2

= 11.5

= 11.2

= 7.0
LSC

t
3
2
1
0

future

space

(a) Configurations of past and
future light-cones

space

(b) Local Statistical Complexity

Figure 3: The Voronoi tessellation of the past configuration
space (Fig. 2(d)) tells in which class each past-cone configuration in the field is (b-top). The same computation is
performed for the future configurations (b-bottom). (c) Afterwards local statistical complexity is computed for each
causal state (top) and positions in the past field are marked
respectively (bottom).

sort the occupied cells Ci according to their number of samples and store them in a list NbSamplesList. We start the
region growing at the cell with most samples (Fig. 2(b) red
cells). If several cells with the same value exist, we complete them in random order. The distance between two cells
is given by:
dist C0 ,C1 = |C0 −C1 |2 =

coneSize

∑

|v0k − v1k |2

(1)

k=0

with coneSize being the number of entries vk in a cone-configuration (compare Fig. 1(b)). Using the tree structure, we
can find all cells C j ( j = i) within distance ∆d from Ci (Fig.
2(b) orange cells). Ci and its neighboring cells C j form a
new cluster.
To ensure that the Voronoi cells have approximately the
same size, we require the centers of the region growing to
have mutually minimal distance 2∆d. To clarify this requirement think of a Gaussian distribution in configuration space.
The first cell would be centered at the peak and successive
cells at its boundary. The boundary cells would capture only
half as much space as the central one, and thus have usually fewer hits, which makes them more distinct using local statistical complexity as a measure. To circumvent this
problem, cells Ck with distance ∆d < dist(Ck ,Ci ) < 2∆d are
blocked (Fig. 2(b) red crosses). Blocked cells cannot be used
as a center for region growing. For each blocked cell we
store the closest center cell Ci and the corresponding distance dist(Ck ,Ci ). If in the process of the region growing
blocked cells fall into the neighborhood of a new center,
they are added to this cell’s cluster. The process continues
with the next cell in the sorted list NbSamplesList. Cells that
are already clustered or blocked cannot be used for region
growing and the algorithm directly continues with the next
cell. The initial region growing is finished when there are no

Search in High-dimensional Space: The expensive part
of the region growing is the detection of neighboring cells
in the high-dimensional configuration space. Extensive research has been carried out in this field. The algorithms can
be divided in three classes: tree-like index structures, approximate similarity search and indexing by clustering. Li
et al. [LCGMW02] give a good overview over the different techniques. We chose a tree-like index structure, as we
need exact neighbors and want to find the blocked cells at the
same time. Most proposed tree structures like the R∗ -, SSor RS-tree (see [LCGMW02] for references) are based on a
hierarchical subdivision of the space to reduce the amount
of distance computations. These methods are optimized for
large databases where the goal is to minimize the number of
database accesses. In our case we do not use a database to
store the cone-configurations, but have to recompute them
from the loaded fields. As this might involve many different time-steps, we would need plenty of swapping to load
the required time-steps. Therefore, we choose a different
approach, using a standard tree. Each level in the tree represents a dimension of the configuration space and a path
from the root to a leaf gives a single configuration. Neighbors and blocked cells can be determined at the same time.
The search time can be decreased by storing a label for each
node. Nodes that only lead to leaves that are already assigned
to a cluster are labeled FINISHED and are no longer considered in following neighborhood requests.

3.3. Causal States and Local Statistical Complexity
After the partitioning of the past and future configuration
spaces (Fig. 3(a)), the causal states can be determined. For
each Voronoi cell l − in the past configuration space we
estimate the conditional probability P(L+ |L− = l − ) with
S
S
L+ = l + and L− = l − . Those cells li− that have very
similar distributions P(L+ |L− = li− ) are clustered using a
χ2 -test. Each cell in the merged configuration space forms
a causal state causalState ∈ CausalStates (Fig. 3(b) top).
CausalStates is the set of all causal states that were observed
in the data-set. The local statistical complexity of each causal
state is given by:
LSC (causalState) = − log (P (CausalStates = causalState))
(2)
The complexity field is determined by the local statistical
complexity of the causal state corresponding to the pastcone at each position (Fig. 3(b) bottom). More details on
the theory and implementation of this last step can be found
in [JWSK07] and [SHR∗ 06].
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Jänicke, M. Böttinger, X. Tricoche & G. Scheuermann / Distinctive Structures in 3D Unsteady Multi-fields

(a) Streamlines

(b) λ2 Criterion

(c) LSC of Pressure

771

(d) LSC of Velocity

Figure 4: Flow around a cuboid: (a) Streamlines illustrating the data-set. (b) An isosurface of λ2 = 0. (c,d) Volumerendering
of LSC values in the upper third of the range.

Table 1: Timings: Timings for the weather data-set are used
to compare the performance of the new algorithm to the one
proposed in Jänicke et al. [JWSK07]. The timings for the local statistical complexity of the pressure field of the cuboid
and delta-wing data-set provide timings for larger data. The
following abbreviations are used: Fields - number of scalar
fields; pD - past depth; fD - future depth; nT - number of
time steps; Delta - delta wing. All timings are given in minutes:seconds.
Dataset
Weather (Vis07)
Weather (new)
Weather (new)
Weather (new)
Cuboid
Cuboid
Delta (pressure)
Delta (vel norm)

Fields
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1

pD
3
3
1
1
1
1
1
1

fD
3
3
1
1
2
2
2
2

nT
1
1
1
29
1
10
1
1

Time
14:00
0:32
0:01
0:55
0:56
10:01
2:16
2:37

4. Results and Discussion
First we want to compare the performance of the new algorithm to the one proposed in [JWSK07]. Timings are given in
Table 1. The evaluation of the weather data-set used to take
14 minutes, which could be reduced to 32 seconds. Thus, the
new method clearly outperforms the previous algorithm. In
the following three examples we want to analyze the ability
of local statistical complexity to detect relevant regions when
applied to more challenging 3D data-sets. We use examples
from flow simulation and a simulation of a hurricane. The
first two data-sets are well understood examples from flow
visualization that we chose, as we first want to illustrate that
local statistical complexity is able to detect those regions that
are rated as relevant by experts. The hurricane example is far
more complicated and less understood. This data-set is used
to explore the capabilities of local statistical complexity.
4.1. Cuboid
The flow around an obstacle is a standard test-case in CFD
simulations. In our example, the flow passes a cuboid and
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

evolves into intricate turbulent structures (Fig. 4(a)). In
the wake of the cuboid many small vortices interact and
form a complex flow pattern. The dataset is simulated on a
100x100x100 rectilinear grid and consists of a velocity and
a pressure field.
The local statistical complexity fields of pressure and velocity are very similar (Fig. 4(c), 4(d)). Both pictures show
all positions that are assigned a complexity value in the upper third. The resulting structure stretches from the cuboid
to the end of the dataset and covers the region of turbulent
flow. Different vortices can be identified that leave the main
structure and enter again. The coarse resolution is due to
the small amount of positions in the data-set, which limit
the number of different classes that can be extracted. The
complexity field was computed for a single time-step in less
than a minute. Integrating additional steps in the analysis did
not improve the results significantly, as the dynamics in the
flow change very rapidly and similar patterns hardly ever occur again in later time-steps. As vortices are the dominating
structures in the data-set, an image showing the vortices is
given in Figure 4(b), which displays the λ2 -criterion [JH95],
a standard technique for vortex detection. The individual
vortices are much better captured by λ2 , but essentially we
get the same structures. This means that the vortices are the
major cause of irregularities in the data-set and that a lot of
information is needed to predict the temporal evolution of
the elements in a vortex. As explained earlier, a more precise analysis of the vortices could be achieved with more
data. Using a finer resolution, we would get more samples
and could analyze the data-set at a finer level of detail and
extract more subtle structures.

4.2. Delta Wing
The EDELTA dataset represents the airflow around a delta
wing at low speeds with an increasing angle of attack. Multiple vortex structures form on the wing due to the rollingup of the viscous shear layers that separate from the upper
surface. These formations of three vortices can be observed
on either side of the wing (Fig. 5(a)). With increasing angle of attack the intensity of the primary vortices (purple)

772

H. Jänicke, M. Böttinger, X. Tricoche & G. Scheuermann / Distinctive Structures in 3D Unsteady Multi-fields

(a) Streamlines

(b) Sujudi-Haimes

(c) λ2 Criterion

(d) Vorticity Magnitude

(e) LSC of Pressure

(f) LSC of Density

(g) LSC of |Velocity| > 10

(h) LSC of |Velocity| > 14

Figure 5: Delta Wing: (a) The interesting structures in the delta wing are three vortices on either side of the wing illustrated
using streamlines in different colors. Recirculating bubbles can be observed at the ends of the primary vortices. (b) SujudiHaimes of the vector field. (c) λ2 -criterion applied to the Jacobian of the velocity field. (d) Isosurface of the vorticity magnitude.
(e-h) Local statistical complexity applied to different fields.

increases until in time-step 700 a vortex breakdown occurs.
This phenomenon is characterized by rapid deceleration of
both the axial and tangential mean velocity components inside the vortex. During breakdown, the axial mean velocity component vanishes and becomes negative on the axis
of the vortex, corresponding to appearance in the flow structure of a stagnation point followed by a recirculation bubble.
The analysis of vortex breakdown is highly interesting, as it
is one of the limiting factors of extreme flight maneuvers.
The extraction and visualization of the individual structures,
however, is still a challenging task as the different structures
are nested and interact with each other. The unstructured grid
was resampled on a 292x224x75 grid (∼ 4.1 Million positions) and consists of more than 1000 time-steps. The images
in Figure 5 depict time-step 700.
The upper row of Figure 5 gives an overview over standard vortex detection techniques. The algorithm by Sujudi
and Haimes [SH95] (Fig. 5(b)) is a technique that detects
vortex core-lines. Applied to the delta wing, this method perfectly extracts the core-line of the major vortices. However,
we only get a vague indication of the core-lines close to the
surface, whose vortices are less dominant and interact with
each other. The same observation holds for the λ2 -criterion,
which extracts a “hull” of the vortex, where the two smaller
vortices are combined in a single structure. The best separation was achieved by an isosurface of the magnitude of the
vorticity.
Figures 5 (d–f) show the local statistical complexity of
different quantities. While the major vortices are well ex-

tracted by the complexity field of the pressure (Fig. 5(e)),
the smaller vortices and the recirculation bubbles are barely
visible. This means that the local temporal evolution of the
pressure in these regions is very similar to ordinary pressure
dynamics in the field. A more distinguished representation
is provided by the complexity field of the density (Fig. 5(f)).
Although all interesting structures feature distinct behavior
with respect to the density, the three vortices cannot be separated very well. The most extraordinary dynamics could
be observed in the field of the norm of the velocity. Figure
5(g) shows all positions that are assigned a complexity value
greater than 10 (maximum: 14.7). The visualized structures
do not only comprise the vortices and the recirculation bubble, but also the regions at the outer corners of the wing,
where the flow from the smaller vortices and the flow from
underneath the wing interact and form a swirling motion that
is classified by the other regions as vortex. Increasing the
complexity value further (Fig. 5(h)), we see that the individual vortices are well separated. The major vortices are no
longer visible as their complexity value is smaller than those
of the small vortices. This observation means, that the local
temporal evolution of the norm of the velocity is very distinct
for vortices and for the recirculating bubble. The exceptional
behavior of the norm of the velocity is a typical characteristic for recirculating bubbles, as was explained earlier. With
our method we can extract these distinctive formations automatically without defining a definite pattern beforehand.
This feature is an important characteristic of our method, as
it is capable of identifying structures that exhibit an extraordinary formation without precisely describing its pattern.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Jänicke, M. Böttinger, X. Tricoche & G. Scheuermann / Distinctive Structures in 3D Unsteady Multi-fields

(a) Temporal Mean of the Temperature

(b) Temperature Anomaly

(c) LSC of Temperature

(d) Isosurface at −8◦ C

(e) Temperature Anomaly

(f) LSC of Temperature

773

Figure 6: Time-step 60 of the Hurricane Data-set

4.3. Hurricane
In [JWSK07], 2D-LSC has been applied to simulation results from different application domains. The potential ability of the method to detect and enhance exceptional features
in multivariate time dependent flow fields was demonstrated
using different physical quantities. LSC highlighted specific
regions, but especially for the weather data example, the results may have to be further analyzed in order to identify
ideal use cases for the method.
In this work we examine the ability of the method to
automatically detect the three dimensional structures of regions with anomalous behavior in data where the signal is
hidden behind a strong background pattern. For this purpose we selected an atmospheric data set from a warming
simulation with a regional climate model. Analyzing results of an ensemble of regional climate models, Gaertner
et al. [GJG∗ 07] found a general increase of cyclone intensity over the Mediterranean Sea under a climate change scenario. At least one of the high resolution atmospheric models, REMO, showed even cyclone activity with the characteristic features of tropical cyclones. These are strong and very
large low pressure systems which persist for several days.
Although strong cyclones can easily be visually detected in
some quantities (e.g. sea level pressure), some of the aspects
of the cyclone dynamics cannot directly be visualized because of dominating natural patterns - a good test for our
method.
If we examine a 3D atmospheric temperature field, we
observe a strong vertical temperature gradient ranging from
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

less than −60◦ C to more than 40◦ C. Depending on the geographical extent of the data set, the horizontal temperature
variations within a horizontal slice can span more than 50
degrees. Figure 6(a) shows a 3 weeks temporal mean of
the temperature for late summer using the REMO climate
change data. Evidently, the near surface air temperature is
higher over land compared to the ocean. Also not surprisingly, the southern regions are generally warmer than the
northern countries.
In the time dependent case, pronounced yearly and daily
cycles are superimposed to the mean state. Further variations
are related to the natural variability of the system, which is
dominated by weather patterns.
Outstanding examples of weather induced 3Dtemperature anomalies are the patterns connected to
cyclone activities: In low pressure systems, warm air
rises because of their lower density compared with the
surrounding air. The condensation of water vapor releases
more energy at higher levels, enhancing the updraft process.
Due to this strong convection near the center of cyclones,
typical positive temperature anomalies can be observed at
higher altitudes.
This time dependent 3D temperature anomaly cannot
be visualized directly without applying further processing
steps. In order to derive the temperature anomaly pattern, for
each grid point a time mean has to be built over an appropriate number of time steps. In our case, we have computed a
time mean over a 3 week period in order to reduce the influence of the daily cycle and of single weather events.

774

H. Jänicke, M. Böttinger, X. Tricoche & G. Scheuermann / Distinctive Structures in 3D Unsteady Multi-fields

The original REMO data set has a horizontal resolution of
approximately 50 km, defined on a rotated rectilinear grid.
The original hybrid vertical model levels (terrain following
at the bottom, pressure levels at the top of the atmosphere)
have been interpolated onto 30 unevenly distributed height
levels, allowing for a higher resolution near the surface. For
our purposes, the data was interpolated onto a horizontally
regular grid, using a higher resolution of 0.25 degrees in order to maintain the most important structures. The grid finally used for the LSC analysis has a size of 180x134x30
for a total of 76 time steps, resulting in a field of 723600
positions for each scalar value.
Figure 6 shows different representations of the temperature field for time step 60. On the left panels (a) and (d),
the temperature isosurface at 265 Kelvin (−8◦ C) is shown
in purple. Due to the strong vertical temperature gradient,
the positive anomaly at the location of the cyclone can only
be suspected in the area above the bump, but the 3D structure is not visible. The isosurface of the positive temperature
anomaly (+4◦ C) is shown in (b) and (e). Clearly, the location of the large cloud of exceptional warm air is correlated
with the cyclonic activity.
In 6 (c) and (f) the results of the 3D LSC method are
shown. In contrast to the offline computation of the temperature anomaly, where specific knowledge about the general
structure of the data and about the dynamical processes hints
us to apply methods like the one described above, LSC automatically gives us information about locations of extraordinary temporal changes in the temperature field. Due to the
pronounced daily cycle in the near surface temperatures and
the sparse temporal resolution of the data (6 hourly), LSC
produces small scale structures near the surface in addition
to the large scale structure at higher altitudes. The near surface structures distract the perception of the signal related to
the cyclone dynamics, but even though, especially in the top
view the general shape of the LSC isosurface is in good correlation with both the cyclone position and the temperature
anomaly pattern. The perspective view shows differences in
the upper part of the structure. Here we find the highest LSC
values near the center of the storm, in contrast to the broader
shape of the temperature anomaly.
5. Conclusion
In this paper we proposed a new technique for the computation of local statistical complexity that is faster and more
robust as it takes the underlying distribution in configuration space into account. We showed that the new technique
is capable of revealing relevant structures in 3d. Problems
still occur when too little data is available to properly estimate the distributions. Here a study of the influence of the
density in configuration space and of noise might help to further improve the computation. Another aspect that needs further research is the choice of an appropriate isovalue for the
discrimation between relevant and irrelevant structures. So

far we used volume rendering, where we could easily slide
through different isovalues. Statistical approaches might reveal a good initial guess. Summarizing we can say that local
statistical complexity revealed those structures that the user
would consider relevant in our examples and that further improvements are possible to capture the full potential of this
method.
6. Acknowledgments
The hurricane data has been provided through the PRUDENCE data archive, funded by the EU through contract
EVK2-CT2001-00132; special thanks go to D. Jacob and
her group at the Max-Planck-Institute for Meteorology. H.J.
would like to thank Cosma Shalizi, Jim Crutchfield, and Karl
Yound for helpful remarks and discussions. The visits were
supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG).
References
[GJG∗ 07] G AERTNER M. A., JACOB D., G IL V.,
D OMÍNGUEZ M., PADORNO E., S ÁNCHEZ E., C ASTRO
M.: Tropical cyclones over the mediterranean sea in climate change simulations. Geophys. Res. Lett. 34, L14711
(2007).
[JH95] J EONG J., H USSAIN F.: On the identification of a
vortex. J. Fluid Mech. 285 (1995), 69–94.
[JWSK07] JÄNICKE H., W IEBEL A., S CHEUERMANN
G., KOLLMANN W.: Multifield visualization using local
statistical complexity. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 13, 6 (2007), 1384–1391.
[LCGMW02] L I C., C HANG E., G ARCIA -M OLINA H.,
W IEDERHOLD G.: Clustering for approximate similarity
search in high-dimensional spaces. IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering 14, 4 (2002), 792–808.
[PVH∗ 03] P OST F. H., V ROLIJK B., H AUSER H.,
L ARAMEE R. S., D OLEISCH H.: The state of the art in
flow visualization: Feature extraction and tracking. Computer Graphics Forum 22, 4 (2003), 775–792.
[SH95] S UJUDI D., H AIMES R.: Identification of swirling
flow in 3d vector fields. AIAA 95-1715 (1995).
[SHR∗ 06] S HALIZI C. R., H ASLINGER R., ROUQUIER
J.-B., K LINKNER K. L., M OORE C.: Automatic filters
for the detection of coherent structures in spatiotemporal
systems. Physical Review E 73 (2006).
[SJWS07] S ALZBRUNN T., JÄNICKE H., W ISCHGOLL
T., S CHEUERMANN G.: The State of the Art in Flow
Visualization: Structure Based Techniques. In Proc. Simulation and Visualization (SimVis) (2007), pp. 75–92.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

