Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2008
A. Vilanova, A. Telea, G. Scheuermann, and T. Möller
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 3

Animating Causal Overlays
Lyn Bartram and Miao Yao
Abstract
Most approaches to representing causality, such as the common causal graph, require a separate and static view,
but in many cases it is useful to add the dimension of causality to the context of an existing visualization. Building on research from perceptual psychology that shows the perception of causality is a low-level visual event derived from certain types of motion, we are investigating how to add animated causal representations, called
visual causal vectors, onto other visualizations. We refer to these as causal overlays. Our initial experimental results show this approach has great potential but that extra cues are needed to elicit the perception of causality
when the motions are overlaid on other graphical objects. In this paper we describe the approach and report on a
study that examined two issues of this technique: how to accurately convey the causal flow and how to represent
the strength of the causal effect.
Categories and Subject Descriptors I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Animation, perception, causality, visualization

1. Introduction
The notion of cause and effect is pervasive in human thinking. Causality is associated with the idea of something (the
cause) producing or bringing about something else (its
effect). Identifying causal relationships in a complex system is the first step towards understanding the underlying
mechanisms of the system. However, the effective visualisation of causality presents difficult challenges to the designer. Chen identifies the efficient communication of
causality as one of the top ten unsolved problems of information visualization [Che05]. In particular, visualizing
causality in context – that is, seeing causal relations within
existing data visualizations as an inherent part of the information landscape – has not been well addressed. In
many cases it is useful to add the dimension of causality to
an existing visualization to support visual search and pattern detection. Current approaches to causal visualization
present two problems for these kinds of causal detection
and recognition tasks: first, they require a dedicated, separate view and second, they are typically designed for indepth analysis, and thus are complex and intricate with a
special set of coding conventions that must be learned. For
example, in one of our current projects, we would like to
quickly detect and monitor changing causal influences
between the capacities of emergency operations centres in
BC’s Lower Mainland using a standard geospatial view
such as the map in Figure 1. Simply adding a standard
causal graph on top of our geospatial view introduces too
much complexity.
Our research is concerned with perceptually lightweight
representations of causality that can be integrated with
existing information visualizations. We term this approach
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

causal overlay. Much like brushing [BC87, BW02], causal
overlay should serve as an aid to detecting and highlighting
patterns in data without imposing the complex structure
required for in-depth analysis.

Figure 1: Maps are good candidates for causal overlay
This introduces new questions of what it means to overlay (or embed) new representation schema onto already
crowded and densely coded information displays. We
cannot simply continually add lines, shapes and colours to
visualization where these coding resources are already
used, so we need to investigate new dimensions to encode
this information. One promising candidate is motion. Motion has been shown to be effective in showing simple
associations between data elements and there is substantial
evidence from psychological research that motion-based
interactions elicit automatic perceptions of causality with-

Lyn Bartram & Miao Yao / Animating Causal Overlays
752
light (the “launcher”) touched another (the “target”) with
out training or conscious interpretation. When we see a
the target subsequently moving away. He concluded that
billiard ball strike another and set it in motion we perceive
the perception of causality can be as direct and immediate
a causal event. Recent work [KIL07,NSK06] comparing
as the perception of simple form, but that precise timing is
animated causal graphs to standard, arrow-based causal
needed to achieve perceived causality: the target needed to
graphs demonstrated that the motion-based representations
move within 70-160 ms of contact for the perception of
were substantially better in both memory and accurate
causality. After about 160 milliseconds there was no longer
interpretation of the causal paths. However, there has been
an impression of causal effect; instead, subjects reported
little work in understanding how these visual events can be
perceptions of unconnected movements of the two objects.
effectively overlaid on other data views. We are investigatMore recent work [LK87] has shown that infants can pering how to design such animated causal representations,
ceive causal relations such as launching. At the same time,
called visual causal vectors [WNB99] (VCV). Our initial
some researchers have noted there are some individual
experimental results show this approach has great potential
differences affecting causal perception [SA93]. While there
and provide guidelines how certain animated cues can be
is an active debate among researchers in the perception of
applied to elicit the perception of causality and relative
causality what perceptual processes contribute to the atcausal strength when the motions are overlaid on other
tribution of cause and effect [Che05, ET04, Hub04,CC01],
graphical objects.
extensive study on causal perception clearly confirms the
1.1. Problem
effect is highly reliable under good presentation conditions
[CS06, GT03, HF03, SA93, SRMD06, SN02, YRB05]. Of
Our goal in causal overlay is to both exploit perceptual
particular interest to our research is Michotte’s “tool”
efficiency and reduce attentional cost, so that it can be
paradigm in which contact did not take place directly bequickly added to an existing view to add additional meantween the launcher and the target but rather through an
ing and insight about causally related elements in the conintermediary object. Recent work suggests that causality
text of that view. Traditional perceptual research examines
can be conveyed using such an object because the percepcausal effects by animating simple shapes on a blank
tion is that the launcher imparts the impetus of its motion to
screen. However, the canonical causal event of a ball hitthe target through the static intermediary [HF03, Hub04].
ting another ball and causing it to move does not translate
directly to a data display where the involved objects cannot
Both spatial (proximity) and temporal (delay) characterarbitrarily move away. The global question that motivated
istics have been shown to be critical in perceiving causality
the studies reported in this paper study is whether and how
from moving objects [CC01]. While we have investigated
we may overlay causal motion attributes (drawn from
aspects of both in previous studies [YAO07], we based this
previous research) onto existing, fixed objects to support
study on the temporal continuity characterisation articucausal detection. We are interested in two related queslated by [CS06], in which they point out that the launching
tions: how to reliably elicit causal recognition and how to
effect involves two distinct objects but a single spatiotemconvey the strength of the causal effect.
porally continuous motion.

While there is an extensive body of basic perceptual research about causality, empirical validation at the applied
level is only recently emerging [KIL07]. An issue in carrying out this kind of applied investigation is how to ensure
the study is both perceptually robust and ecologically valid.
The immediate goal of the work reported in this paper was
to bridge the sparse motion cues investigated in perception
experiments (the “billiard ball” effects) to potential applications in visualization design where objects’ positions are
relatively fixed. Thus we began by investigating which
attributes might support accurate detection and interpretation of relative effect in a field of scattered, fixed graphical
objects, where only a few of the arbitrarily distributed
objects might be causally related, and where the static (i.e.,
“main”) representation of the graphical objects had nothing
to do with any causal view. This work extends the scope of
the relevant perceptual research and applies previous findings from visualization studies [KIL07,NSK06,WBN99] in
the more general context of causal overlay.
2. The perception of causality
The foundational work in causality perception was carried
out by Michotte [Mic63]. He carried out careful studies of
the perception of interactions when one moving patch of

3. Related work
Although the effect of this kind of stimulus reliably elicits
causal impression, few studies have investigated how to
make use of it in a practical complex diagram.
The most common representations of causal relations are
still directed arrows [Bau01, NS01] and node-link diagrams [War04]. Causal maps – directed acyclic graphs –
are a traditional way to represent a set of causal relationships within a system. A causal map [Bau01] is a directed
diagram in which ideas and actions are causally linked with
one another through the use of arrows. The diagram contains two basic elements: causal concepts that are the nodes
in the network, and causal relationships are represented by
the arrows between the nodes. The plus or minus signs on
the arrows imply the type of the causal relationships. Causal mapping is well established and causal maps are used in
practice. However, causal maps focus solely on describing
static representations of cause-effect relationships, and do
not provide the expressive representations of dynamical
changes in causal relationships over time. Bayesian causal
maps that combine causal maps and Bayesian network
techniques are novel techniques that add new features to
causal maps [Bau01, NS01]. Bayesian causal maps not
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

753
ceeded only in showing that animation helps in remembering path.

Lyn Bartram & Miao Yao / Animating Causal Overlays

only clarify the cause - effect relations depicted in the
causal maps, but add the ability to model uncertainty and
dynamic change. However, they are complex to visualize
[MMHT05]. Other common examples of causaldependency visualizations include tabular dependency
matrices.
Elmqvist [ET04] introduced a novel causal visualization
technique using animated growing polygons to show both
causal relations and information flow in a system of interacting processes. Animation helped the users track dynamic changes in the system. The authors claim this technique is more effective at supporting information flow
analysis than traditional causal diagrams.
All of these approaches are specialised visualizations requiring dedicated display, and as such require the user to
learn the coding conventions used and to integrate the
information with other associated data views in their visual
environment.
3.1. Motion-based visualization techniques
Ware et al. [WNB99] introduced a graphical device called
a visual causal vector (VCV) that uses animation to produce the perceptual impression of a causal relation between
two graphically represented entities. In their prototype, a
VCV conveys the sense that a change in one entity has
caused a change in another entity by animating both a
launching object that hits a target object and the subsequent
response of the target. They suggested three possible
metaphors for the launching object: a pinball, a prod and a
wave. In the pinball metaphor a ball moves from one node
to another causing the second node to “swing”, or oscillate.
In the prod metaphor a rod extends from one entity to prod
a second entity similarly causing it to oscillate. The wave
metaphor is based on a wave-like function that is animated
along an arc and has a circular component on the target
node that “floats” as the wave arrives. A pilot experiment
investigated causal impressions using the pinball construct.
Subjects reported a direct causal effect only if the node
started oscillating less than 500 ms after the ball “hit” it.
However, there was another effect reported when the timing took longer, a kind of “delayed effect” that was not
described as causal but definitely linked the two animations.
In related work, Neufeld et al. [NSK06] explored some of
these metaphors as a device for implementing node-link
diagrams ultimately intended to abstract cause-effect relationships. They found significant variance in what people
saw as causal timing. Their experiments looked at two
kinds of VCV: the wave and a second animation of small
lights, or “comets”, that momentarily illuminated the nodes
on contact. They compared these in both causal and noncausal timings against a classic directed-arrow static representation to see if causal representations would improve the
memory of paths in a graph. Results were inconclusive and
showed no inherent advantage of the causal representations,
although animation overall proved more effective than the
static view. While this work sought to establish the effectiveness of motion for representing causal graphs, it suc-

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Most recently, Kadaba et al. [KIL07] demonstrated how
animations improve the memory and interpretation of
causal semantics compared to textual and static descriptions. In two linked studies, they compared how accurately
people remembered and interpreted three types of causal
representations: textual, directed graph and directed graph
with animation. They then investigated how adding animation to a static directed causal graph conveyed both the
path and the magnitude of the causal effect. While they
were successful in establishing the superiority of animated
vs. static representations, they found that the cues they used
were insufficient to accurately convey the causal strength.
It is important to note that both the Neufeld and Kadaba
studies used memory metrics to compare how effective
animated representations were against static representations, but did not investigate whether certain types of animations were perceived as more causal than others.
Researchers have also investigated what types of motion
attributes are generally effective for information visualization. Bartram [BW02] and Ware [WBCK92] have established that motion type, phase and direction are important
attributes for recognition and grouping. Huber and Healey
[HH05] showed that direction, flicker, and velocity can
efficiently encode multiple data values.
4. Issues in designing visual causal vectors
A visual causal vector is essentially an application of Michotte’s tool effect [Mic63, HF03, Hub04] where the intermediary object is stationary and impetus is transferred
from the launching object’s motion via the intermediary to
the target that then moves away. While the VCV approach
offers great potential, the design space for causal representations based on the parameters identified by perceptual
research is very large. The question we then face is which
parameters are most useful under which conditions for
causal overlay. In a series of studies we are attempting to
explore some of these parameters with the goal of developing a design framework for in-context causality [YAO07].
Fundamental aspects of this emerging framework include
temporal and spatial inter-event constraints [CC01] and the
salient properties of both node and vector animation.
While our previous experiments have confirmed and established baselines for temporal and spatial constraints
[YAO07], there has been little work to date on examining
the relative applicability of node and vector animation.
We define vector animation as the representation of
movement from one data object to another, including both
the motion and the properties of the moving object (i.e., the
pinball). Node animation, on the other hand, involves
manipulation of the graphic properties of the actual data
object. We hypothesised that these two types might be
better suited to convey different information related to
causality.

Lyn Bartram & Miao Yao / Animating Causal Overlays
754
viously established timing limits, but that short persistence
Causal flow is concerned with the path of causal influof both the launching and the launched vector across the
ence from source to target(s) and involves issues of direcgap of the static node greatly enhances the effect. We also
tion and propagation (i.e., sequences and splits). A visualifound that node animations seemed more effective than
zation technique for causal flow must elicit an immediate
solely vector animations for conveying causal strength.
perception of causal relation and highly accurate identificaRelative velocity was the only vector attribute that contrition of all involved objects along the causal path. To date,
buted to an impression of relative causal strength, but it is
there has been little work in how motion-based causal
insufficient on its own. It did however contribute to the
perception is affected by direction, although Michotte’s
dominant effects of node animation [YAO07]. We selected
contention was that causality was most strongly perceived
the most promising combinations of these effects from
only in the horizontal direction [Mic63]. This would clearly
these studies for this experiment.
be a limitation for an overlay technique where the positions
of source and targets cannot be guaranteed to remain on a
The purpose of this study was twofold. First, we wished to
horizontal line! Our questions around causal flow were
evaluate how this effect would hold when applied to differconcerned with both direction and path configuration. We
ent paths and directions in a crowded visual field of nodes,
investigated sequential (an effect travels down a chain of
closer to a real application. Second, we wanted to explore
objects in a one-one-one path) and branching, or split,
how effectively we might represent causal strength using
paths (a one-many propagation). We did not investigate
node animation. We conjectured that we could influence
many-to-one paths in this study to simplify the test for
the perception of causal strength by manipulating both
relative causal strength (see below).
node and vector animation. We did not include a baseline
“no animation” condition for two reasons. We consider that
Causal strength means the degree of causal influence
the work in [NSK06,KIL07] provided sufficient foundation
one event has on another. For example, the warm current of
for the usefulness of the animated VCV. Based on that, we
the Pacific Ocean strongly affects the climate of Vancouare interested in determining the relevant properties of
ver, but has little influence on the climate of Calgary. Thus,
motion for VCVs such that they can be used in situations
we would say that the causal relation of the warm current
where overlaying the classic static view is not feasible.
and Vancouver’s climate is stronger than that of the relation between the current and Calgary’s climate. Previous
A visualization designer is concerned with how accustudies have shown the challenge in identifying the magnirately
a representation can convey information. Our study
tude of causal effects [KIL07]. We cast the question in a
considered two major measures of accuracy, corresponding
slightly different light given the overall goal of the causal
to two tasks in the experiment. Because we situated the
overlay. Because we want to support a lightweight, imstudy in a more distracting context than the standard permediate recognition of a linked path of causal relations
ception experiments (that is, in a field of many disparate
rather than a rich, in-depth analysis, we investigated
objects), we first needed to assure that the causal relations
whether we can efficiently convey relative causal strength:
could be accurately identified from VCVs. In other words,
that is, the degree to which the effect on one object is
could the participants discover causal relations and their
greater or smaller than the effect on another in the same
entities within a larger visual context? Therefore, we used
causal flow.
three metrics. The first two were concerned with accurate
identification of the related nodes on the causal path, comOur intuition is that we can use vector effects to percepprising the specific measures of Source Identification
tually “set” the relations, link the path and establish the
(SourceId) and Target Identification (TargetId). The third
causal flow and node effects to convey the causal strength.
represented our primary interest, which was to test if the
We empirically examined these effects in two studies.
relative strength of causal effect could be accurately
While there are other intriguing VCV representations that
judged, resulting in the measure of Strength Identification
have been suggested, notably the prod and the wave
[WNB99], we chose the pinball because its effect most
(StrengthId).
closely resembles the billiard-ball-like disc used in much
5.1. Description
current psychological research on causality. In addition,
initial pilot tests with the prod and the wave VCVs were
Stimuli were shown on a 19-inch LCD colour monitor. The
judged “obtrusive”, clearly undesirable effects in an overbackground of the stimulus display was 34.8° (37.6 cm)
lay.
wide × 19° (20.6 cm) high. Depending on the motion parameters of the objects contained in the frames, the entire
5. Study: Animating Causal Flow and Causal Strength
duration of each animation varied from 1 to 3 seconds.
Our previous experiments have focused on how we can
Each animation involved 30 nodes and 2 vectors (they were
elicit a robust causal impression using VCVs. In those
not visible at the initial frame) on a white background
studies, we investigated a variety of temporal and spatial
(Figure 2). The nodes were black squares (0.54° × 0.54°,
factors in both vector and node animation [YAO07]. These
5.9mm × 5.9mm) and the vectors were black discs (the
included delays and spatial gaps in vector-node interaction
radius was 0.22°, 2.6mm). Thirty nodes were randomly laid
[CC01,CS06], vector speed and size, and various node
out in the display. To avoid undistinguished nodes, there
animations from [WBN99].
Our results indicated that
was a minimum distance of 1.63° (17.6 mm) between any
causal perception can be reliably achieved within the pretwo of the nodes. The nearby density (Density) of a node
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

755

Lyn Bartram & Miao Yao / Animating Causal Overlays

was the average number of nodes around a node in a particular radius (3.26°, 35mm). It was not an independent
variable because it was randomly generated and was not
controlled, although it was logged.
As the stimulus unfolded a vector V1 appeared in motion,
moving away from one node S towards another node T1 at
a constant velocity of 11°/s. At the start of V1’s animation,
the other vector V2 appeared near T1 and sat stationary.
Upon impact with T1, V1 started fading out in 300ms; T1
started changing in size; and V2 began to move away from
T1 to the third node T2 at the velocity of 11°/s. Similarly,
at the moment that V2 contacted T2, V2 immediately ceased
and started fading; T2 started changing in size concurrently.

where t is in seconds and the displacement (from the centre
of the node to the centre of the original position of the
node) is in pixels. The motion was rapidly damped so that
after 1 second the amplitude was reduced by 80%. In the
Swing condition, the amplitude of the oscillation was used
to represent the causal strength.
Based on previous studies, we combined relative velocity
of the vector with each of the two above node animations.
Path was specified as either sequential (a chain of S-T1-T2)
or split (S-T1 and S-T2 simultaneously.)
Shape was defined by the relative angular directions of
each path segment resulting in a particular shape (Error!
Reference source not found.). Each of these shapes was
assigned a random orientation and position per trial. Thus
while there were 6 different path shapes, there were many
more variants of position and direction. The Shape factor
addressed issues of both angular spread and the direction
Sequential path

Split path
Figure 2: Sample trial display. Positions were randomly
generated each trial.
At the end of the animation, all objects went back to the
original situation. We used a contact event that has been
shown to yield high rates of causal perception in previous
experiments [YAO07]. When V1 started moving, V2 became visible. When V1 came into contact with T1, it gradually faded out over 300 ms, while V2 immediately started.
5.2. Design
We investigated three factors in this experiment: VCV
animation (henceforth VCV), path type and path direction,
under two conditions of relative causal strength.
VCV: We adapted two node animations from previous
work: Expansion and Swing [WBN99]. The Expansion condition is similar to that used in previous studies [KIL07].
Upon vector contact, the node instantly expands and then
contracts back to the original size. In our experiment, the
cycle of expansion and contraction occurred only once. The
cycle contained 40 frames (520 ms)—10 frames (130ms) to
expand and 30 frames (390ms) to contract back to the
original size. The size of the expansion represented the
strength. The Swing condition was adapted from [WBN99].
After impact, the node oscillated around its original position. The variation of the sine function used to vibrate the
node was
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

D1

D2

D3

Figure 3. Path, shape configurations. Position and
orientation were randomly generated
of the motion path.
Strength had two levels: equal (1:1) and different (a ratio of
1:3).
This combination of 2(Path) × 3(Shape) × 2(VCV) ×2
(Strength) factors resulted in 24 conditions. We used a
repeated measures within-subjects design with four blocks
for each participant, each containing 48 trials, resulting in a
total of 192 trials. Every trial showed one of the 24 conditions. Thus each participant performed each condition 8
times. Randomized orderings to minimize carryover effects were generated.
The three dependent measures were, as previously described, the accuracy of node identification (SourceID,
TargetID) and the accuracy of judging whether the causal
effects on the two targets were the same or different
(StrengthID). Response time was not used, as we consider

Lyn Bartram & Miao Yao / Animating Causal Overlays
756
Although 20 participants took part in the present experithat accuracy is a more interesting metric for a visualizament, we included only 18 for analysis. One of the particition designer.
pants was eliminated because he failed to finish all the
5.3. Procedure
blocks. The other one had trouble understanding the task
(perhaps due to language issues) and had a problem using
The participants were tested individually in one session of
the mouse, so her data was not reliable. Data was analyzed
about one hour in duration. They sat approximately 60cm
as a four-way repeated measures ANOVA: 2 Path × 3
away from the display shown in Figure 2. They started the
Direction × 2 Animation × 2 Strength for each of the three
animation at their own pace, and could replay it up to twice
dependent measures. We discuss each in turn.
at any time (although it cleared their answers and restarted
the trial on replay). We logged how many times (repeats)
5.6.1. Node identification
participants replayed a condition.

Participants had two tasks to complete in each trial. The
first was to identify the source (S) and target nodes (T1,
T2). The participants were instructed to identify the source
by left-clicking on the node and identify the targets by
right-clicking on the node. They could not identify the
nodes before the end of the animation. As they identified
each, a label would appear: “S” for source, “T<n>” for
each target. After identification, the participant selected
from 3 options describing the causal effect as: a) equal on
both targets; b) greater on T1 than T2; or c) greater on T2
than T1.
Participants were given unlimited practice time before the
session and were allowed to ask questions at any time
during the training session. All of the practice trials were
drawn randomly from 48 experimental trials. The data of
practice trials were not recorded. Training was not limited:
participants could practice until they felt comfortable with
the task.

Twenty SFU students were paid to participate in the experiment. All had normal or corrected-to-normal acuity and
normal colour vision. None had participated in previous
experiments in this area. All were naïve to the purpose and
hypotheses motivating the study.
F
4.580
4.353
11.694
18.305
12.270
10.167
Figure 4. Significant effects

p
0.047
0.052
0.003
0.001
0.003
0.005

5.5. Hypotheses
We had several hypotheses. First, we believed that animation could be used to reliably convey both causal flow
and relative causal strength. Second, we anticipated that
Swing would be more effective than Expansion for showing
relative causal strength because it simulates a physical
effect. Finally, our intuition from previous studies led us to
believe that the VCV approach could achieve good accuracy regardless of direction and path.
5.6. Results

We noticed a small effect of density on both SourceId and
TargetID. Average density for correct identifications was
between 1.18 and 1.23 nodes, while the average density for
incorrect identifications was between 1.6 and 1.76 nodes.
We removed all trials with incorrect node identification
from analysis of the causal strength judgment.
5.6.2. Causal Strength Identification

5.4. Participants

Path (1,16)
Animation (1,16)
Path × VCV (3,60)
Path × Strength (3,60)
VCV× Strength (3,60)
Path × VCV × Strength

Source and target identification showed extremely high
rates of accuracy ((SourceId: Mean=97.4%, Std. Error=
0.005; TargetId: Mean=98.2%, Std. Error=0.005). There
were no significant effects for SourceID, although there was
a significant main effect of Strength [F(1,16) = 5.060, p =
0.038], a two-way interaction between Path and Shape [F(2,
34) = 3.522, p = 0.041] and a three-way interaction of Path
× Shape × Animation [ F(2, 34) = 4.482, p = 0.019] on TargetID. Despite these effects, the high accuracy and the small
magnitude of the difference suggested that all the effects
were ignorable.

Out of 1728 trials, there were 592 errors in StrengthID:
300 in judging equal strength and 292 for different
strength. For the different strength conditions, 66% of
errors (193/292) were because the participants thought the
strengths were the same, and only 34% of errors (99/292)
were due to choice of incorrect target (they chose the target
with weaker effect). In summary, the pattern is that the
predominant error relates to an inability to distinguish
whether the two target node animations were equal or
different. While there was substantial variation in the data
depending on the factors, we note that the lower bound of
mean accuracy was around 60%. We set a threshold of
80% as a “reasonable accuracy” benchmark, and the majority of conditions exceeded this threshold.
Figures 4 and 5 show the overall results of causal strength
accuracy by significant factor. Shape had no significant
impact and therefore all further analyses were performed
on the data after collapsing across the factor of Shape,
resulting in 3 factors. The four-way repeated measures
ANOVA to test causal strength identification (StrengthId)
revealed significant main effects of Path and VCV, and
significant interactions between all 3 factors. These effects
are listed in Figure 4 and shown in Figure 5.
One pattern of the result is immediately clear from the
graph: for both animations, when the strength was equal,
the Split path produced higher accuracy than the Sequential
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

757
80%) in each condition of judging causal strength. As
indicated above, path configuration interacts significantly
with animation type. The Expansion animation was good at
representing causal strength in sequential paths, regardless
of whether the relative strength was equal or not (both >
80%). However, it was moderately less accurate than
Swing in at least one of the different strength/split path
conditions. Expansion also needed more repeats to see the
effect, indicating that Swing was better at “fixing” an effect
for the participant. The Swing animation, on the other hand,
performed poorly in representing equal causal strengths in
the sequential path condition, although it was effective in
the other conditions. Therefore, our hypothesis that the
Swing VCV would be more effective than the Expansion
VCV is not substantiated. In fact, Expansion overall seems
more effective, with the caveat that Swing may be better in
certain split path conditions. The Swing animation seemed
generally strong in all cases of the split path. This may
have to do with phase: it is easy to see if simultaneous
motions are in or out of phase. Similar phase for the equal–
strength conditions arose from the fact that our path lengths
were kept equal – ensuring that animations at the target
nodes of a split path started and stopped at the same time.
Moreover, the Swing animation lasted longer on the display. From a perceptual standpoint this partially biased the
outcome, but from a visualization designer’s perspective
this is simply an artefact of the type of animation and thus
reasonable to consider as a difference between techniques.
The weakness of the Swing animation becomes evident
when equal strengths are animated in sequence. In this
case, it seemed that participants had relatively poor “motion memory” of the two animations and tended to identify
them as different. Finally, our results on direction differ
strongly from previously reported research: Shape had
almost no significant impact in our experiment. Thus our
hypothesis of the effect of direction was supported: in fact,
it appears that the VCV representations we used are equally
effective in all angular directions, a very encouraging
result.

Lyn Bartram & Miao Yao / Animating Causal Overlays

path; when the strength was unequal, the pattern was reversed. The impression was verified through interaction of
Path and Strength in the 2 three-way (Path × Shape ×
Strength) ANOVAs. However, this is largely due to the
interaction between Path and VCV discussed below.
The Swing animation is poorer when representing equal
strength. This interaction was further analyzed by separate
two-way within-subjects ANOVAs with the factors Path
and Strength. Path showed a significant main effect only
under the 1:1 strength condition [Expansion: F(1,16) =
4.499, p = 0.049; Swing: F(1,16) = 27.081, p <0.001]. It
was clear that the significant main effect of Path was
mainly caused by the difference under the Swing-1:1 condition. This could easily be seen in Figure , the biggest difference between Sequential path and Split paths being in
the Swing-1:1 condition. There was a significant interaction (VCV× Strength); we also checked the main effect of
Strength in the three-way (Path × Shape × Strength)
ANOVAs split by VCV. In the Expansion condition, the
accuracy was higher at 1:1 strength; in the Swing condition,
the accuracy was higher at 1:3 strength. However, there
was no significant main effect of Strength in both ANOVAs
[Expansion, F(1,16) = 2.233, p = 0.153; Swing: F(1,16) =
1.316, p = 0.267].

6. Conclusions and Future Work

Figure 5. Path/animation interactions in causal strength
accuracy. Note the scale begins at 50%.
Finally, participants generally required less repeats when
using the Swing animation and this was significant (F (1,
17) = 36.461, p<0.001).
5.7. Discussion
We can draw several conclusions from this experiment.
First, the high accuracy of source and target identification
in all conditions validates the use of animation for causal
flow. Second, although it is clear that care must be taken in
choosing the appropriate animation, at least one of the two
animations achieved acceptable accuracy rates (above
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Our key contribution is that the VCV technique can reliably elicit both accurate identification of causal flow and
judgment of relative causal strength. Both node and vector
animation are required to show causal strength. Differences
in path configuration determine which of the two node
animation types we tested is more effective. In most cases,
using a combination of node expansion and vector velocity
produces good accuracy in the judgment of relative causal
strength. In certain cases of split paths, node oscillation
(Swing) increases accuracy.
A second important finding in these studies is that direction seems to play little part in the identification of causal
path and relative causal strength, indicating the viability of
the technique for overlaying on existing representations
where the relative positions of the causally related entities
cannot be manipulated.

Lyn Bartram & Miao Yao / Animating Causal Overlays
758
Day 2004. Portugal: International Society for PsychoWe note that the differences in node and vector animaphysics. (2004), 116–121.
tion we tested were relatively small, and that more exaggerated differences may elicit a stronger effect. Our cur[KIL07] KADABA N., IRANI P., LEBOE J.: Visualizing causal
rent studies examine how many degrees of difference we
semantics using animations. Visualization and Computer
can represent between causal effects by increasing animaGraphics. 13, 6 (2007), 1254–1261.
tion velocity and amplitude. In addition, we are currently
developing a study to examine how these techniques might
[KM02] KEMMERER B., MISHRA S.: Bayesian causal maps
be used for many-1 causal relations, where several sources
as decision aids in venture capital decision making:
influence a single target, following the rich causal semanMethods and applications. In Proceedings of the Acadtics described in [KIL07]. In both cases we are incorporatemy of Management Conferenc Eur. J. Oper. Res.
ing these VCV techniques in our larger project of visualiz(2002).
ing causal dependencies between critical infrastructures in
[LK87] LESLIE A. M., KEEBLE S.: Do six-month-old infants
emergency management scenarios.
perceive causality? Cognition 25 (1987), 265–288.
7. Acknowledgements
[MMHT05] MARRIOTT K., MOULDER P., HOPE L., TWARDY
C.: Layout of Bayesian Networks. In The 28th AustralThis work was supported by grants from Public Safety
ian Computer Science Conference (2005).
Canada and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada.
[Mic63] MICHOTTE A.: The Perception of Causality. New
York: Basic Book (1963).
References
[NS01] NADKARNI S., SHENOY P. P.: A Bayesian network
[Bau01] BAUMGARTNER E.: Causal Mapping. (Nov 2001).
approach to making inferences in causal maps. Eur. J.
http://cilt.berkeley.edu/synergy/
Oper. Res. 128, 02 (2001), 479–498.
causalmap/
[NSK06] NEUFELD E., SOLHEIM J., KRISTTORN S.: Experi[BC87] BECKER R. A., CLEVELAND W. S.: Brushing scatments in the Perception of Causality. In Proceedings of
terplots. Technometrics 29,2 (1987), 127–142.
SMARTGraphics (2006).

[BW02] BARTRAM L., WARE C.: Filtering and Brushing
with Motion. Information Visualization 1, 1 (2002), 66–
79.

[SA93] SCHLOTTMANN A., ANDERSON N. H.: An information integration approach to phenomenal causality. Mem.
Cognit 21 (1993), 785–801.

[Che05] CHEN C.: Top 10 Unsolved Information Visualization Problems. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 25, 4 (2005), 12–16.

[SRMD06] SCHLOTTMANN A., RAY E. D., MITCHELL A.,
DEMETRIOU N.: Perceived physical and social causality
in animated motions: spontaneous reports and ratings.
Acta Psychol. 123 (2006), 112–143.

[CC01] CHAPUT, H., COHEN, L C.: A Model of Infant
Causal Perception and its Development. Proceedings of
the Twenth-Third Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, (2001), 182-187.

[SN02] SCHOLL B. J., NAKAYAMA K.: Causal capture:
contextual effects on the perception of collision events.
Psychol. Sci. 13 (2002), 493–498.

[CS06] CHOI H., SCHOLL B. J.: Connections to representational momentum? Acta Psychol 123 (September 2002),
91–111.

[SN04] SCHOLL B. J., NAKAYAMA K.: Illusory Causal
Crescents: Misperceived spatial relations due to perceived causality. Perception 33 (2004), 455–469.

[ET04] ELMQVIST N., TSIGAS P.: Animated visualization of
causal relations through growing 2D geometry. Information Visualization 3 (2004), 154–172.

[War04] WARE C.: Information Visualization: Perception
for Design. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc (2004).

[GT03] GUSKI R., TROJE N. F.: Audiovisual phenomenal
causality. Percept Psychophys 65 (2003), 789–800.
[HH05] HUBER D. E., HEALEY C. G.: Visualizing Data with
Motion. In Proceedings IEEE Visualization 2005 (2005),
527–534.

[WNB99] WARE C., NEUFELD E., BARTRAM L.: Visualizing
causal relations. In Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization (1999).
[WBCK92] WARE C., BONNER J., CATER R., KNIGHT W.:
Simple Animation as a Human Interrupt. International
Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 4, 4 (1992),
341–348.

[HF03] HUBBARD T., FAVETTO A.: Naïve impetus and
Michotte’s “tool effect”: evidence from representational
momentum. Psychological Research 67 (2003), 134–
152.

[YAO07] YAO M.: Visualizing Causality in Context with
Animation. M.Sc. Thesis, SIAT, Simon Fraser University
(2007).

[Hub04] HUBBARD T.: The Perception of Causality: Insights from Michotte’s Launching Effect, Naïve Impetus
Theory, and Representational Momentum. In Fechner

[YRB05] YOUNG M. E., ROGERS E. T., BECHMANN J. S.:
Causal impressions: Predicting when, not just whether.
Memory and Cognition 33 (2005), 320–331.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

