Eurographics Symposium on Geometry Processing 2008
Pierre Alliez and Szymon Rusinkiewicz
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 5

Provably Good 2D Shape Reconstruction
from Unorganized Cross-Sections
Pooran Memari

Jean-Daniel Boissonnat

INRIA Sophia Antipolis - Méditerranée, France

Abstract
This paper deals with the reconstruction of 2-dimensional geometric shapes from unorganized 1-dimensional
cross-sections. We study the problem in its full generality following the approach of Boissonnat and
Memari [BM07] for the analogous 3D problem. We propose a new variant of this method and provide sampling
conditions to guarantee that the output of the algorithm has the same topology as the original object and is close
to it (for the Hausdorff distance).
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.5 [Computer Graphics]: Computational Geometry
and Object Modeling

Introduction
The problem of reconstructing a good approximation of
a 3-dimensional object from a finite set of cross-sections
is of utmost importance in many fields and has been extensively studied for many years [B88]. However, most of
previous work is restricted to the case of parallel crosssections and it is only very recently that the case of unorganized cross-sections has been considered [SBG06], [BM07]
and [LBal08]. Moreover, even in the case of parallel crosssections, no formal analysis and guarantees have been obtained, which contrasts with the problem of reconstructing a
shape from unorganized point sets, which is now well understood both theoretically and practically.
This paper is a first step to provide solid foundations
and theoretical guarantees for the problem of reconstructing a shape from a finite set of unorganized cross-sections.
We restrict our attention to the 2D variant of the problem
but most of our ideas can be extended to higher dimensional spaces. We first revisit the 3D method of BoissonnatMemari [BM07] that we adapt to the 2D case and present in a
somehow different way. The algorithm works in full generality, with no assumption about the location of the cutting lines
or the shape of the object to be reconstructed. In a second
part, we suggest some natural sampling conditions to guarantee that the output of the algorithm has the same topology
as the original object and is close to it (for the Hausdorff
distance).
Prior work: Apart from the work by Boissonnat and
Memari mentioned above, the problem has been studied recently by Liu et al in [LBal08]. Their method first constructs
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

(a) Reconstruction proposed in [LBal08] (before the smoothing
step).

(b) Our Delaunay based reconstruction.

Figure 1: Comparison of the method presented in [LBal08]
(a), and our Delaunay-based method (b). On the right side,
we have two sections and their cutting lines and, on the left
side, we have two additional cutting lines that miss the object. The associated reconstructed objects are very different
when using the method of [LBal08].

the arrangement of the cutting lines and solves the problem
in each cell independently. To reconstruct the portion of the
object that lies in a given cell of the arrangement, they make
use of the medial axis of the cell. Two sections are connected
in the reconstruction if their lift on the medial axis of the cell
intersect, see Fig 1a. Our approach uses a similar strategy
but we use the Voronoi diagram of the sections rather than

1404

P. Memari, J-D Boissonnat / Provably Good 2D Shape Reconstruction from Unorganized Cross-Sections

the medial axis of the cells of the arrangement of the cutting
lines. This makes our method less dependent on the position
of the cutting lines and amenable to a theoretical analysis.
The difference between the two approaches is illustrated in
Fig 1. Another advantage of our method is that we do not
need to compute the arrangement of the cutting lines.
To the best of our knowledge, there exists only one work
by Sidlesky, Barequet and Gotsman [SBG06], that studies
the topological properties of the possible solutions of the
2D reconstruction problem from cross-sections. In [SBG06],
the authors consider the arrangement of the cutting lines and
enumerate all possible reconstructions that conform to the
given sections.
1. Statement of the Problem
Let O be a compact 2-manifold of R2 and L a set of lines,
called the cutting lines, that intersect O. The intersection of
any line l ∈ L with O consists of a finite number of line segments called the sections of l. Write A for the union of the
sections of all the cutting lines. Note that the sections are not
necessarily disjoint. The sections may intersect when the intersection point of the two supporting cutting lines lies inside
the object. The problem is to reconstruct an approximation
R of O from the given sections A that satisfies the following
three properties :

Vor(s). Vor(A) consists of (relatively open) curved edges
(1-faces) attached at vertices (0-faces). The faces of Vor(A)
are called medial faces. Assuming that the sections are in
general position, which is no real loss of generality, each vertex of Vor(A) is incident to exactly three edges. As is well
known, the total number of edges and vertices of Vor(A) is
O(n), if n denotes the number of the sections. Vor(A) can
be computed in O(n log n) time and there exists robust and
efficient codes for computing the Voronoi diagram of line
segments [CGAL, VRONI].
Delaunay Circles: A point m in Vor(A) is called a medial
point, and the set of points of A that are closest to m is
denoted by π(m). A medial point belonging to an edge of
Vor(A) has two closest points in A and, under the general
position assumption, a vertex of Vor(A) has three closest
points in A.
To each medial point m, we associate the so-called Delaunay circle σ(m) centered at m that passes through the points
of π(m). Since σ(m) ∩ A = π(m), the points of π(m) are
called the contact points of σ(m).

2. Preliminaries on Voronoi-Delaunay Duality

We now introduce the tangent Delaunay circles of A
which play a central role in our approach. For a section s
of a cutting line l, lift(s) is defined as the portion of Vor(s)
that projects onto s orthogonally to l, see Fig 3. For any
m ∈ lift(s), the corresponding Delaunay circle σ(m) is tangent to the supporting cutting line of s. Conversely, the center
of any Delaunay circle tangent to the supporting cutting line
of s, is on the lift of s. There are two tangent Delaunay circles
passing through a point p ∈ s, one on each side of l. Writing
l + and l − for the two half-planes defined by l, we denote by
T DS+ (p) and T DS− (p) the corresponding tangent Delaunay circles. In the sequel, when there is no ambiguity on the
half plane, we may omit the signs + and −.

Figure 2: Voronoi diagram and Delaunay complex of the
sections.

Figure 3: Definitions: lift of a section, φ and T DS of a point.

Our method is based on the Voronoi diagram of the sections and R will be a subset of a dual construction named
the Delaunay complex (see Fig. 2). The Delaunay complex
has been introduced by Chew and Kedem [CK89]. We denote by Vor(A) the 1-skeleton of the Voronoi diagram or,
equivalently, the locus of the points in R2 that have at least
two distinct closest points in A. The subset of the points
of Vor(A) with a closest point on s ∈ A is denoted by

Branching Points: The set of contact points of T DS+ (p)
with A that are distinct from p is denoted by φ+ (p). We define φ− (p) symmetrically. For almost all p, both φ+ (p) and
φ− (p) consist of a single point. A point p where φ+ (p) or
φ− (p) is not uniquely defined, is called a branching point.
There are finitely many branching points that can be characterized as follows. Let p be a branching point on a section

i) Conformity Property: R ∩ L = A.
ii) Solidity Property: R is a 2-dimensional manifold with
boundary.
iii) Approximation Property: R is topologically equivalent
and close to O.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

P. Memari, J-D Boissonnat / Provably Good 2D Shape Reconstruction from Unorganized Cross-Sections

(a) Voronoi diagram of the
sections

(b) Tsp

(c) Tss

(d) Tpp

1405

(e) Tppp

Figure 4: Types of Delaunay cells.

s, l the corresponding cutting line. Then p is the orthogonal
projection onto l of a vertex v of Vor(s) (see Fig 3).
Delaunay Cells: If m belongs to an edge e of Vor(A), the
segment joining the two contact points is called the Delaunay fiber m∗ of m. The closure of the union of all the Delaunay fibers m∗ , m ∈ e, is called the Delaunay cell of e, noted
e∗ . If v is a vertex of Vor(A), the triangle which is the convex hull of π(v) is called the Delaunay cell of v. Note that
the Delaunay cells are in bijection with the faces (edges and
vertices), of Vor(A). A Delaunay cell and its corresponding
face in Vor(A) are called dual. As Fig 2 shows, there are
three cases for the intersection of two Delaunay cells. Two
Delaunay cells either share a portion of a section, a Delaunay fiber, or a single point which is either a branching point
or the endpoint of a section.
Two Delaunay cells are said to be adjacent if they have
a Delaunay fiber in common. The adjacency graph of the
Delaunay cells is isomorphic to the adjacency graph of the
faces of Vor(A). The Delaunay cells together with their adjacency relations form the Delaunay complex of A, denoted
by Del(A).
We distinguish four types of Delaunay cells, namely Tss ,
Tsp , Tpp and Tppp , according to the dimension (0 or 1)
of their intersections with the corresponding sections. See
Fig 4. A cell of type Tss is a quadrilateral that has 1dimensional intersections with two sections. The cells of
type Tsp are triangles that have a one-dimensional intersection with a section, and a point (zero-dimensional) intersection with another section. The Delaunay cells of type Tppp
are triangles dual to the vertices of Vor(A). The cells of type
Tpp are line segments that intersect the sections at their two
endpoints. These cells are dual to the linear edges of Vor(A).

launay cells labeled inside. Initially Delc (A) = Del(A).
After termination, R = Delc (A). The set of faces of Vor(A)
that are dual to the Delaunay cells of Delc (A) is denoted by
Vorc (A).
Bundles: We call bundle a maximal connected component
of cells in Delc (A).
A bundle B is called anchored if, for any section s, B ∩ s is
either empty or a line segment. Equivalently, B is anchored
if the subset of faces of Vor(A) that are dual to the Delaunay
cells in B intersects lift(s) for all section s incident to B.
Reconstructed Shape: We now describe the two main steps
of our algorithm. The resulting reconstructed object, R, is a
subset of Del(A) in which every bundle is anchored.
Step 1. Removal of Non-Conforming Delaunay Cells. We
label outside all the Delaunay cells that intersect L \ A,
i.e. the cells that intersect a cutting line outside its sections.
This step can be easily performed in O(k n log n) time if k is
the number of cutting lines and n the number of sections. The
time complexity of this step can be improved to O(n log n).
More precisely, let B = L \ A. We store the segments of
B in a data structure that allows to decide in O(log n) time
whether a given line segment intersects a segment of B. We
query the data structure with the O(n) Delaunay edges.
Step 2. Removal of Delaunay Cells of type Tppp . Let e be
a linear edge of Vor(A), and e∗ be its dual Delaunay cell (of
type Tpp ). If e has finite length, e∗ is shared by two Delaunay
cells of type Tppp , see Fig 5.
In the second step of the algorithm, we label outside
the (conforming) Delaunay cells of type Tppp that share a
Tpp Delaunay cell. See Fig 5 for an illustration.

3. The Reconstruction Algorithm
We follow the approach of Boissonnat and Memari [BM07]
and define the reconstructed shape R as a subset of Delaunay cells that satisfies the conformity and solidity properties.
Initially, all the Delaunay cells are labeled inside. Then,
the algorithm will label some Delaunay cells as outside
in a greedy way. We write Delc (A) for the current set of Dec 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Step 3. Removal of Non Anchored Bundles. As Fig 6
shows the resulting Delc (A) of step 2 may contain non anchored bundles. The goal of this step is to remove all such
bundles. As a result, the reconstructed object will be a 2manifold without singular points.
We use a recursive procedure that prunes the adja-

1406

P. Memari, J-D Boissonnat / Provably Good 2D Shape Reconstruction from Unorganized Cross-Sections

ject O. Moreover, we show that R is close to O for the Hausdorff distance. In the sequel, ∂O and ∂R denote the boundary of O and R respectively.

Figure 5: In Step 2, we label outside the Tppp Delaunay
cells in red that share a Tpp segment.

cency graph of Delc (A). Since this graph is isomorphic to
Vorc (A), we will describe the pruning procedure in the dual
setting. We assume that a Delaunay cell and its dual face in
Vor(A) have the same labels.
Let f be a cell of Delc (A) labeled outside and f ∗ its
dual face in Vorc (A). For any section s incident to f , we
walk on Vor(s) starting at f ∗ . Each traversed edge of Vor(s)
receives an orientation corresponding to the sense it is traversed. The walk ends whenever we reach the lift of s, we
reach a face of Vor(A) already labeled outside, or we
reach a face of Vorc (A) with the same orientation as the
current traversal. All edges that get two opposite orientations
during the walk are labeled outside. We repeat this procedure until the algorithm stops labeling new faces outside.

Inner/Outer Zones: Let us consider the cells of the arrangement of the cutting lines. A cell C is said to be in the
outer zone if the intersection of O with the boundary of C is
a connected set, otherwise C is in the so-called inner zone,
see Fig 7. Oin and Oout are defined as the intersection of the
object with the inner and outer zones respectively.
Let C be a cell of the outer zone and let OC = C ∩ O. Assuming that all the connected components of the boundary
of ∂O are intersected by a cutting line, OC is a topological
disk. We therefore focus first on the more interesting case of
the inner zone.
To simplify the notation, Oin is simply denoted by O.

Figure 7: The inner zone is colored in red.

Reach: The reach of O is defined as the minimum distance
of ∂O to the medial axis of ∂O. As is well-known, reach(O)
is positive when ∂O is of class C 1,1 .
Figure 6: Removal of non anchored bundles: the bundle is
reduced to a single Delaunay triangle in this simple case. We
remove any cell of Delc (A) that gets two opposite orientations with the same labels.

Cut size: We call cut size of A the maximal distance between a point of a section and its lift on Vor(A). Equivalently, the cut size of A is the biggest radius of the tangent
Delaunay disks.

Since the number of bundles is O(n), the pruning can be
performed in O(n) time. Indeed, an edge of Vor(A) can receive at most two (opposite) orientations before being labeled outside.

ε-cut-sample: For a positive ε, we say that the cutting lines
form an ε-cut-sample of O if the cut size of A is at most
ε reach(O).

Fig 14, on the last page of this paper, shows the result of
the algorithm for a shape, cut by 14 cutting lines.

Intersection Lemma: If L is an ε-cut-sample for ε ≤ 1, then
the interior of any tangent Delaunay disk of A intersects ∂O
along a connected arc.

4. Sampling Conditions

Proof
Let D be a Delaunay disk tangent at a point a ∈ A and assume for a contradiction that its intersection with ∂O is not
connected, Fig 8. We claim that D contains a point of the

In this section, we give sampling conditions that guarantee
that the reconstructed shape R is homeomorphic to the ob-

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

P. Memari, J-D Boissonnat / Provably Good 2D Shape Reconstruction from Unorganized Cross-Sections

1407

Figure 8: For the proof of the intersection lemma

medial axis of O. Consider the pencil of disks tangent to ∂D
at a. Let D1 be the smallest disk in the pencil whose intersection with ∂O is not connected. D1 is tangent to ∂O at a
point a = a.
We now consider the pencil of disks tangent to ∂O at a .
Let D2 be the maximal empty disk in this pencil. This disk is
tangent to ∂O in two points a and a , and therefore its center
lies on the medial axis of ∂O. Since it is included in D, the
radius of D is greater than reach(O), which contradicts the
hypothesis of the lemma.
We assume that the following conditions hold for O and
L:
Condition 1 reach(O) is positive.

Figure 9: s is a flat zone.

Proof Let T be a Delaunay cell of type Tsp or Tss . By definition, T is the closure of a union of Delaunay fibers that have
an endpoint in the interior of a section. Such a fiber is of the
form [pφ(p)]. If T contains a fiber [pφ(p)] such that p and
φ(p) are in the relative interior of the sections s and s respectively. Then the tangent Delaunay circle of p is tangent
to s and s , and its center is in li f t(s) ∩ li f t(s ). Hence, the
intersection of T with both sections is a segment of positive
length, and T is in the reconstructed object R.

Condition 2 No cutting line is tangent to ∂O and, therefore,
the sections have positive length.
Condition 3 Any connected component of ∂O is cut by at
least one cutting line.
Theorem 1 If L is an ε-cut-sample for ε ≤ 1, under conditions 1 to 3, we have:

Figure 10: For the proof of Part (i).

i. All the Delaunay cells of types Tsp and Tss are in R. As
a result, R ∩ L = A.
ii. ∂R is covered by the tangent Delaunay disks of A.
iii. ∂O is covered by the tangent Delaunay disks of A.
iv. R is homeomorphic to O.
v. The Hausdorff distance between ∂R and ∂O is at most
2ε reach(O).

If T does not contain such a fiber, then it contains at least
an endpoint p of a section. Hence, it is sufficient to show
that the Delaunay fibers [pφ+ (p)] and [pφ− (p)] are in R.
Write s for the section that contains p and let φ(p) denote either φ+ (p) or φ− (p). We denote by s the section containing
φ(p). We distinguish three cases.

As a consequence of the theorem, the three properties of
Section 1 are satisfied. In particular, R conforms to the sections and the reconstructed shape does not contain flat zones.
A flat zone occurs when two Delaunay cells that intersect
along a portion of a section s, are labeled outside. See
Fig 9.

5. Proof of the theorem
(i). Delaunay Cells of types Tsp and Tss : Any Delaunay cell
of type Tsp or Tss is in R.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1. If φ(p) belongs to the relative interior of its section s , then
the tangent Delaunay circle of p is tangent to the two sections s and s , and [pφ(p)] is in a Delaunay cell whose intersection with both sections is a segment of positive length. As
a consequence the tangent Delaunay fiber [pφ(p)] belongs to
the reconstructed object R.
Assume now that φ(p) is an endpoint of a section and that
[pφ(p)] does not belong to R. There are two cases:
2. If [pφ(p)] is removed from the reconstruction during the
first step of the algorithm, [pφ(p)] intersects a cutting line
outside its section, see Fig 10-left. According to the Intersection Lemma, T DS(p) ∩ ∂O is an arc γ that must contain

1408

P. Memari, J-D Boissonnat / Provably Good 2D Shape Reconstruction from Unorganized Cross-Sections

p and φ(p). If a cutting line, l, intersects the relative interior
of [pφ(p)], then l intersects γ. Let x ∈ l ∩ γ ⊂ A. The disk
bounded by T DS(p) contains x ∈ A, which contradicts the
fact that T DS(p) is a Delaunay circle of A.
3. Otherwise, the removal of [pφ(p)] from the reconstruction can only happen during the third step of the algorithm.
We show that this cannot happen. Let [pφ(p)] be a tangent fiber which is removed from the reconstruction during
the third step of the algorithm. Hence [pφ(p)] belongs to a
non-anchored bundle of Delc (A). Equivalently, the center of
T DS(p) is not connected to the lift of φ(p) in Vorc (A).
Let l be the cutting line containing s , H be the half-plane
bounded by l that contains p, and S be the Delaunay circle
tangent to s at φ(p) that is contained in H . q = φ(φ(p)) is
distinct from p since otherwise [pφ(p)] would be perpendicular to s and s and would belong to R, Fig 10-right.
According to the Intersection Lemma, ∂O ∩ S is an arc joining φ(p) to q; on the other hand, ∂O ∩ T DS(p) is an arc of
joining φ(p) to p. These two arcs belong to H . This contradicts Condition 2 and the general position of the cutting
lines.
(ii). Covering of ∂R by tangent Delaunay disks: We
showed that all Delaunay cells of types Tsp and Tss are in
R. We now show that any Delaunay cell of type Tppp in R
is circumscribed by a tangent Delaunay circle.

Figure 11: For the proof of the covering of ∂R by tangent
Delaunay disks.

and Tss , and all Delaunay cells of type Tppp that are circumscribed by a tangent Delaunay circle. It follows that the
boundary of R is contained in the union of the tangent Delaunay disks. We now show that ∂O is covered by tangent
Delaunay disks as well. As the restriction of ∂O and ∂R
to any tangent Delaunay disk is an arc by the intersection
lemma, we will get that the boundaries of O and R are
homeomorphic.
(iii). Covering of ∂O by tangent Delaunay disks: let p and
q be two points of A that are consecutive along the boundary
of O and let γ pq be the (uniquely defined) arc of ∂O that joins
p to q. Then there exists a tangent Delaunay circle S such that
p,q ∈ S, and γ pq is contained in the disk bounded by S.

Proof Let T be a Delaunay cell of type Tppp in R, with p, q
and r as vertices. If one of these vertices lies in the interior
of a section, then the corresponding Delaunay circle is tangent to this section. We can thus suppose that p, q and r are
endpoints of sections and that the corresponding Delaunay
circle is not tangent to any incident cutting lines. We will
reach a contradiction.
We claim that T cannot have two adjacent Delaunay cells of
type Tppp . Suppose that T shares two edges (say [pq] and
[pr]) with two Delaunay cells, T1 and T2 , of type Tppp , see
Fig 11-left. According to the second step of the algorithm,
T1 and T2 cannot be in R. But in this case, T is not anchored
to the section of p (see Fig 11-left). This contradicts the fact
that T is in R.
Consequently, we can suppose that T shares at least two
edges (say [pq] and [pr]) with Delaunay cells of type Tsp or
Tss . Therefore, these two edges are each circumscribed by a
tangent Delaunay circle. In this case, according to the Intersection Lemma, p lies between r and q along the boundary
of O, Fig 11-right. Moreover, as T conforms to the sections,
r and q lie on the same side of the cutting line that contains
p. This contradicts Condition 2 and the general position of
the cutting lines.
The above discussion characterizes the reconstructed
shape: R is the union of all Delaunay cells of types Tsp

Figure 12: For the proof of the covering of ∂O by tangent
Delaunay disks.
Proof Let s be the section containing p, l its supporting cutting line, and let s be the section containing the point φ(p)
which is on the same side of l as q. Consider first the case
where φ(p) is an endpoint of s .
Take for S the Delaunay circle tangent to l at p and passing
through φ(p). By the Intersection Lemma, the disk bounded
by S intersects ∂O along an arc γ that joins p to φ(p). Since
the relative interior of γ cannot contain q since it does not
contain any point of A, we necessarily have φ(p) = q. The
claim is proved.
Suppose now that φ(p) belongs to the relative interior of s .
Write Vor(s, s ) for the Voronoi edge consisting of the points
at equal distance from s and s .
The tangent Delaunay circle passing through p is tangent
to both of s and s . Hence the center of this circle, li f t(p),
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

P. Memari, J-D Boissonnat / Provably Good 2D Shape Reconstruction from Unorganized Cross-Sections

belongs to li f t(s) ∩ li f t(s ) ⊂ Vor(s, s ). As φ(p) is in the
relative interior of s , li f t(p) lies in the relative interior of
li f t(s ), and li f t(s )\li f t(s) is not empty, see Fig 12-left.
Two cases can be considered.
1. Assume first that li f t(s )\li f t(s) is entirely contained in
Vor(s, s ) and let r be the endpoint of s that belongs to
li f t(s )\li f t(s). Then φ(r) belongs to s and, since p is
the point in s closest to r, φ(r) = p. The Delaunay circle
S tangent to s at r thus contains an arc of ∂O joining r
and p. By the Intersection Lemma, necessarily r = q.
2. If li f t(s )\li f t(s) is not contained entirely in Vor(s, s ),
then li f t(s )\li f t(s) contains a Voronoi vertex whose
dual is a triangle pp q where p is a point of the relative interior of s and q is an endpoint of a third section,
see Fig 12-right. In this case, the tangent Delaunay circle
S passing through p contains an arc of ∂O joining p and
q . By the Intersection Lemma, we have q = q.
Hence, in all cases, we have exhibited a tangent Delaunay
circle S passing through the two consecutive points p and q.

1409

between a point and its image is at most twice the radius of
D, which is less than 2ε reach(O).
What happens outside the inner zone?
By the definition of the inner zone, O in is homeomorphic to
O. If d is the maximum distance of ∂O from the inner zone,
then the Hausdorff distance between ∂R and ∂O is at most
max(2ε reach(Oin ) , d). See Fig 14.
Conclusion
We have presented an efficient algorithm that can reconstruct
a 2-dimensional shape R from any finite set of cutting lines
and their associated sections. We have shown that, under
some sampling conditions, R is good approximation of O.
We intend to extend this work in two directions. First, the
method can be applied to curved cutting lines. Second, we
plan to extend our algorithm and the sampling conditions to
the 3-dimensional version of the problem. Results will be
reported in a companion paper.
Acknowledgments

Figure 13: Homeomorphism: Two contour points p and q
are consecutive along the boundary of R if and only if they
are consecutive points of A along ∂O.
(iv). Homeomorphism: Let p and q be two consecutive
points of ∂O in A, and D be their bounding tangent Delaunay disk. According to the last proof, either D is the tangent
Delaunay disk passing through p or q, or it is tangent to a
section at an interior point p , see Fig 13.
In the first case, the Delaunay fiber [pq] is on the boundary
of the reconstruction.
In the second case, ∂R contains two Delaunay fibers [pp ]
and [qp ]. We showed that in both of these cases, ∂O ∩ D
is an elementary arc that joins p to q. Therefore, we have
a bijection between the elementary arc of ∂O and the Delaunay fibers of D. Consider now all the tangent Delaunay
disks that form the covering of ∂O. Since the corresponding elementary arcs have the same endpoints, we obtain a
homeomorphism between ∂O and the boundary of R by concatenating the elementary homeomorphisms between the elementary arcs and their associated edges on the boundary of
R.
(v). Hausdorff Distance: An elementary arc γpq and its associated edge(s) of R are contained in D. Hence, the distance
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

We thank the anonymous referees for their insightful comments. This work has been partially supported by the High
Council for Scientific and Technological Cooperation between Israel and France (research networks program in medical and biological imaging).
References
[B88] J.-D. Boissonnat. Shape reconstruction from planar cross sections, Computer Vision, Graphics and Image
Processing, 44, 1-29, (1988).
[BM07] J.-D. Boissonnat, P. Memari. Shape reconstruction from unorganized cross sections, Symposium on Geometry Processing (SGP), 89-98, (2007).
[CGAL] The Computational Geometry Algorithms Library (CGAL), http://www.cgal.org/ .
[CK89] L. P. Chew, K. Kedem. Placing the Largest Similar Copy of a Convex Polygon Among Polygonal, Symposium on Computational Geometry, 167-173, (1989).
[LBal08] L. Liu, C. Bajaj, J.O. Deasy, D.A. Low, T. Ju.
Surface Reconstruction from non-parallel curve networks,
Computer Graphics Forum, 27, 155-163, (2008).
[SBG06] A. Sidlesky, G. Barequet, C. Gotsman. Polygon
Reconstruction from Line Cross-Sections, Canadian Conference on Computational Geometry, (2006).
[VRONI] M. Held. VRONI: an engineering approach to the
reliable and efficient computation of voronoi diagrams of
points and line segments. Computational Geometry: Theory and Applications, 18, 95-123, (2001).

1410

P. Memari, J-D Boissonnat / Provably Good 2D Shape Reconstruction from Unorganized Cross-Sections

Figure 14: Reconstruction Example: (a) The original contours (obtained by a segmentation step) are cut by a set of (14) cutting
lines, (b) The steps of the algorithm using the Medial axis of the sections: 1. The dual Delaunay cells computation, 2. The
conforming Delaunay cells and removal of Tppp Delaunay cells, 3. Singular Delaunay cells in red, 4. Removal of non anchored
bundles, 5. The reconstructed shape, 6. The inner zone in red (c) The reconstructed shape compared with the original one.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

