Keynote Address
Designer Information – Why Visualization and Analytics
Technologies Should Help Us Focus Our Minds and Not Our Senses
Joseph Kielman

Science and Technology Dictorate
U.S. Department of Homeland Security

Abstract

Bio

The current metaphors used to justify visualization
research involve the specters of massive information flows
and analyst overload and such demands as “connecting
the dots” and searching for “nuggets”. Knowledge discovery becomes the challenge, and presenting the greatest
amount of information to the bewildered user, or viewer
in this case, the goal. Throughout history, however, visual
metaphors have first and foremost helped humans organize and digest information. Irrelevant information or conceptions have been ignored or discarded. Customized or
tailored interpretations have been put forward. What do I
need to know? has been more crucial than What do I need
to see? Designer information, just like “designer drugs” or
designer “genes”, is the watchword for visualization and
analytics in this 21st Century. And one of its most rigorous
applications is homeland security

Joseph Kielman serves as Science Advisor in the Office
of the Under Secretary for Science and Technology for
the Department of Homeland Security. He currently
manages the Threat Awareness Portfolio for the Science
and Technology Directorate. Prior to joining DHS, Dr.
Kielman worked for 20 years at the FBI, where he was successively Chief of the Advanced Technology Group in the
Engineering Section, Chief of Research and Development
for the Technical Services Division, and Chief Scientist at
the Information Resources Division. Work for the American
Society for Testing and Materials, MCI Communications,
and the Department of Health and Human Services preceded his tenure at the FBI. He currently serves as the Chair
of the Advisory Boards for the Homeland Security and the
Environmental Biomarkers Initiatives for the Department
of Energy’s Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and
as Co-Chair for the White House National Science and
Technology Council’s Subcommittee on Social, Behavioral,
and Economic Sciences. Dr. Kielman has an undergraduate
degree in Physics and graduate degrees in Biophysics and
did his postdoctoral research in genetics.

ix

