Visual Analytics of Paleoceanographic Conditions
Roberto Theron∗
Departamento de Inform´atica y Autom´atica
Universidad de Salamanca

A BSTRACT
Decade scale oceanic phenomena like El Ni˜no are correlated with
weather anomalies all over the globe. Only by understanding the
events that produced the climatic conditions in the past will it be
possible to forecast abrupt climate changes and prevent disastrous
consequences for human beings and their environment. Paleoceanography research is a collaborative effort that requires the analysis of paleo time-series, which are obtained from a number of independent techniques and instruments and produced by a variety of
different researchers and/or laboratories. The complexity of these
fenomena that consist of massive, dynamic and often conflicting
data can only be faced by means of analytical reasoning supported
by a highly interactive visual interface. This paper presents an interactive visual analysis environment for paleoceanography that permits to gain insight into the paleodata and allow the control and
steering of the analitycal methods involved in the reconstruction of
the climatic conditions of the past.
Keywords: Infovis, parallel coordinates, multiple linked views,
exploratory analysis.
Index Terms: H.1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human information processing—Visual Analytics; J.2 [Physical Sciences and Engineering]: Earth and atmospheric sciences—Applications
1

I NTRODUCTION

In the last few years, the world has suffered from some of the most
catastrophic natural disasters in recent history. While some of them
are of geologic origin, such as the Sumatra-Andaman earthquake
(2004), which triggered the single worst tsunami in history, most
of them are related to the weather. Examples of the latter case are
Hurricane Katrina (2005), one of the costliest and deadliest hurricanes in American history; or the big El Ni˜no (El Ni˜no-Southern
Oscillation, ENSO) in 1997-98, which cost hundreds of lives and
caused 34 bn in damage worldwide, partly through flooding to
Chile, Ecuador and Bolivia and partly through failed harvests in
Australia, the Philippines and Indonesia. A more recent, milder
one in 2002-03 caused the worst Australian drought in a century.
Other phenomena, less understood than ENSO, include the Arctic Oscillation (AO), the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO), and the
North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO). Oceanic features like sea surface
temperature (SST) variations associated with these phenomena can
significantly impact local, regional, and global climate conditions.
Furthermore, fossil evidence has demonstrated that the Earth’s climate can change within a decade, and those newly-established patterns can persist for decades or centuries.
While the need to foresee abrupt climatic changes is an urgent
challenge for the society, paleoceanographic/paleoclimate research
has shown that the causes and effects of these changes are very
different, with extremely rapid variations even on a one-year basis. Computers have played a key role in our understanding of cli∗ e-mail:

theron@usal.es

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2006
October 31 - November 2, Baltimore, MD, USA
1-4244-0592-0/06/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE

matic dynamics. Nowadays, improved data acquisition methods
offer us the opportunity to gain the needed depth of information
to diagnose and prevent natural disasters. By means of an analysis of such data, paleoceanographers are expected to assess (understand the past) and forecast (estimate the future). Although massive
amounts of data are available, the development of new tools and
new methodologies is necessary to help the expert extract the relevant information. This is the approach of Visual Analytics [21]], a
science of analytical reasoning supported by highly interactive visual interfaces.
If very high precision physical or chemical measurements are
necessary to reconstruct paleoenvironments, they often need to be
accompanied by sophisticated statistical analysis methods ([23],
[22]). But, in order to be useful, these mathematical or software
tools must not remain only in the hands of specialists in statistics,
but must also be made available and put to use by the larger community of paleoclimatologists. It is therefore necessary to foster
an optimal use of these mathematical tools by establishing methodological choices among the most relevant and most recent statistical
methods, and to conceive a user interface adapted to the specificities
of their use in paleoclimatology.
The data registered over the course of thousands of years (mainly
in ice and sediment cores) is an impressive source of information that, for instance, help us to model earth and ocean dynamics [18]. This raw data is the first step in making climatic predictions, and when looking for historic climatic data with durations exceeding decades, the largest and oldest record is found in
the oceans. Palaeoceanographers need to manipulate, integrate and
analyse time-series that are obtained from a number of independent
techniques (such as ocean drilling, ocean tracers, AMC 14C datings, astronomic curves, etc.), and are also produced by a number
of different researchers and/or laboratories. This work is done with
the aid of proper tools such as PaleoPlot [19] and AnalySeries [12].
Some of these data needed to understand paleoclimate are timeseries of specific attributes related to the oceans. Thus, one problem
scientists must face is how to ascertain environmental parameters,
such as sea surface temperature (SST), at each given past moment.
For the reconstruction of these features, two types of paleo climactic techniques have been used: on the one hand, isotope measurements (δ 18 O) or biomarkers (Uk37 index), and on the other, quantitative reconstruction of environmental conditions of the past, the
Modern Analog Technique (MAT, actually a nearest neighbor prediction) [5].
Although software tools for MAT have been developed [15], and
some improvements have arisen such as SIMMAX [13], RAM [22]
and artificial neural networks [10], all of which have one main
drawback: once developed they are like black boxes which paleoclimatologists can use but from which no knowledge acquisition is
involved. Paleoclimatologists trust in the reconstructions obtained,
as they cannot know if the data used is valid from a geologic point
of view. To complicate matters further, the classic MAT method inherently produces reconstructions whose precision is very difficult
to estimate [11].
Visualization, which provides insight through images, can be
considered a collection of specific mapping applications which take
data from the problem domain and transform them into a visual

19

techniques that take advantage of the human eye’s broad bandwidth
pathway to the mind, allow experts to see, explore, and understand
large amounts of information at a single glance [21]. Thus, this paper presents an interactive visual analysis environment that, through
the combination of techniques from statistics, information theory,
information visualization and visual data mining, enables paleoceanographers to discover unexpected relationships and that supports the reconstruction of climatic conditions of the past.
The remainder of this text is organised as follows: the second
section explains how raw sediment core data is transformed into
modern analogs (MAT), which are more appropriate for the analytical tasks which paleoclimatogists must conduct. Section 3 is devoted to explaining how visual representations and interaction technologies enable knowledge discovery and provide a means of analysis of spatial and temporal data, the way to facilitate expert-driven
accurate reconstructions. The final section of this paper includes
the main conclusions and proposals for future work.
Figure 2: Reconstruction of past conditions using the MAT technique
(k-nearest neighbor prediction): steps 1 to 5; the computed values of
dissimilarity are mapped to a color gradient that can be used in visual
representations: step 6.

Figure 1: Automated data transformation with the taxa association
wizard: the different taxa used for current data and for past data
(probably because they are from different sources) force a data recomputation in order to obtain comparable sets.

2 M ODERN A NALOGS : DATA T RANSFORMATION
The National Visualization and Analytics Center, through its Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics [21], highlighted the key aspect of data representation and transformation as
a way of supporting visualization and analysis.
This section describes how PaleoAnalogs, a Java-based program,
makes use of the modern analog technique (MAT) [5] in order to
provide faster and more accurate reconstructions of climatic conditions of the past. Initially, PaleoAnalogs used this k-nearest neighbor prediction as a stable machine learning classification method
[2], which provided an automated tool for reconstruction of paleoenvironmental features such as sea surface temperatures (SST).
Since MAT is a black-box method, where paleoclimatologists just
collected the results of a mathematical algorithm that sometimes
were not valid from a geologic point of view, a timid advance was
introduced [20]: namely, a better means of understanding the reconstruction process via interactive visual analysis (colored scatter
plots) of the analogs (neighbors) found by the algorithm.
This was accomplished by means of a combination of new visual
representations and interaction techniques, though spatial and temporal dimensions were not considered in the interactive analysis,

20

both of which will be explained in section 3. Before that, however,
the mechanism behind this transformation will be explained.
In k-nearest neighbor prediction, a database is used to predict the
value of a variable of interest for each member of a target data set
(SST, for instance) with respect to a number of additional predictor variables (e.g., microfossil species abundances). The k-nearest
neighbor algorithm can be summarized as follows: a) for each case
in the target data set, locate the k closest members (the k nearest
neighbors) of the database and use a distance measurement to calculate how close each member of the training set is to the target row
that is being examined; b) estimate the unknown variable of interest
for that particular case as the average of the variables of interest for
its k nearest neighbors.
At this point, in paleoclimatology a problem arises: the data from
different sources prevent automated transformation and subsequent
analysis. It is assumed that the user has faunal census estimates of
one or more fossil samples, the core file; and one or more sets of
faunal data from modern samples with the related environmental
features, the database file. Furthermore, the user must understand
the taxonomic categories represented in the data sets, and be able
to recognize taxa that are or may be considered equivalent in the
analysis.
With PaleoAnalogs, the process begins after the selection of the
core and database files; in general, these files will contain different
taxa (Figure 1.a and Figure 1.b ), both because different taxa are
prevalent in different regions and because data providers use varying taxonomic categories (species and subspecies), names, and abbreviations. For example, in Figure 1, (a) has environmental information (february, august) and different species (ORBU, ...), while
(b) has a sample label (PROF) and other different species names
(ORBU, conglobatus, ...). MAT requires that corresponding variables in different data sets be recognizable as such, otherwise it
would be impossible to calculate the distance measures. With the
help of the taxa association wizard (Figure 1.c) this problem is easily worked out, allowing the user to determine which taxa from both
the modern and fossil data files are compared (in (c) it can be seen
that the subspecies RUBR and RUBA of the database will be added
to be compared with the species RUBT of the core and the latter will
be used as the taxa), calculate proportions if needed, and identify
the environmental features to be reconstructed. Thus, the database

same number and equivalent taxa (thus, Figure 1.d and Figure 1.e
contain exactly the same names for species; note that ORBU was
present in both (a) and (b); instead of conglobatus (b), CONG is
used; and the species RUBT is used instead of the subspecies).
Figure 2 show the different steps followed in MAT. The goal of
the technique is to reconstruct (predict) the environmental values
that are missing in the core. Note that the database (Figure 2.1)
contains data for the current environmental features of different locations in the ocean. The core (Figure 2.2) only has information
about species abundances, i.e., we want to fill in the dotted rectangle. Once the database and the core have the same number and
order of columns, each sample in the core is compared with each
sample in the database using a dissimilarity coefficient. Thus, with
this distance measure selected by the user, a dissimilarity matrix is
built (Figure 2.3). For each core sample N dissimilarity values are
given, with N being the number of samples in the modern database;
these values are ordered increasingly so that each row of the matrix contains, left-to-right, the list of the N best analogs, that is, the
database samples ordered by their alikeness to that particular core
pattern.
The final step in MAT is to reconstruct the environmental conditions of each core sample based on the environmental data of
a number of best analogs (generally ten, although any number of
analogs can be used). This can be done by calculating the average
value of the paleovariable to be reconstructed or by weighting the
analogs (the closer an analog is the more similar the reconstructed
value should be to it, Figure 2.4). So after this computation is performed for each sample in the core, we have reconstructed the original missing values (Figure 2.5).
The problem at this point is that all we have is a black-box numerical method, so no matter how much information about time or
location or other geological issues is available, the past conditions
are reconstructed without the expert getting involved in the process.
But the experts have much to say and that is the reason why an interactive analysis can be a powerful aid. The first approach is to map
the information about dissimilarity to a color gradient (Figure 2.6).
For each sample in the core, we now have an ordered list of samples in the database that are color coded (from blue to red, or from
similar to dissimilar). This can be extremely useful for advanced
visual representations.
3

V ISUAL A NALYTICS : V ISUAL R EPRESENTATIONS AND I N TERACTION

This section explains how the use of proper interactive visual representations foster an analytical discourse (a dialogue between the
analysts and the information) [21]. Using the original and the transformed data, it is possible to automatically find patterns in information, and represent such information in ways that are meant to be
revealing to the analyst. On the other hand, by interacting with
these representations, using their expert knowledge, it is possible to
refine and organize the information more appropriately. This way,
it is possible, not only to reconstruct paleoenvironmental features,
such as SST or salinity, but to visualize what information is being used to estimate these variables, and help paleoclimatologists
to decide upon using particular data or not, according to their field
experience.
In the following subsection, a collection of visual representations
and interaction techniques that enable analytical reasoning in paleoceanography are described.
3.1 Improving Reconstructions with Visual Insight
As explained above, the classical MAT reconstructed the environmental conditions of each core sample based on the environmental
data of a number of best analogs (generally ten). This could be done

Figure 3: Reconstruction tuning: the most dissimilar analogs within
the best ones might be inappropriate for the reconstruction of a given
core sample. If the paleoclimatologist has gelogical evidence that
suggests not to use these analogs, the reconstruction is computed
again using only the selected analogs.

by calculating the average value or by weighting the analogs. However, this is somehow very strict, because some of the used analogs
could not be valid from a geologic point of view and should be
eliminated.
It must be noted that the classical MAT technique only permitted
users to select the number K of analogs (neighbors), normally 10,
that are used to calculate the averaged variables. But consider the
case where only 3 of these 10 modern analogs were actually similar
to the sample being reconstructed, while the 7 remainders were only
the following most similar; therefore, from a geological point of
view, it would be a mistake to use them for reconstruction.
Figure 3 shows the PaleoAnalogs interactive reconstruction tool.
Here one can see which sites were the closest analogs (neighbors)
for each sample in the core. For the example in the figure, centimeter 593.0 of the core (which is a particular year in the past,
depending on its sedimentation rate) is being studied. In this case
the user has considered that the difference between the dissimilarity
values of the seventh and eighth analogs is not acceptable; interactively, by clicking on each point of the plot, the analog is deselected
(red circles) and the average recalculated using only the remaining
selected analogs. On the other hand, the information of each analog
is exposed, e.g. the seventh analog is site V27-021, so the paleoclimatologist may decide to reject a particular analog using geological
criteria that recommend against using the data from that site. Note
that after the recalculation, the temperatures of February and August have changed from 2.809 and 7.618, respectively (blue highlighted row in the Reconstruction of environmental features window), when the 10 best analogs were used, to 3.2057 (February)
and 7.0029 (August), using only 7 analogs. Also, standard devia-

21

Figure 4: QUIN Species as an indicator of analog dissimilarity: absence (or very low abundance) of QUIN in a sample of the database
will produce a high value of dissimilarity with sample 600.

Another very valuable example of knowledge discovery for paleoclimatology (Figure 4) would be that a particular species (QUIN,
for instance) is valid as an analog indicator, since the dissimilarity
for the sample is very high when the proportion of this species is
close to zero (all analogs along the y-axis are red and have a high
dissimilarity value, while the rest of analogs along the x-axis turn
bluer and bluer, which means they are increasingly similar as the
proportion of the species grows). This kind of analysis can be done
for any pair of variables, such as fossil species or environmental
variables (latitude, longitude, and so forth). The dissimilarity is always present in these scatter plots as a third, color coded dimension.
3.2 Space and Time Reasoning
Since going down in the core means going backwards in time, another important step that has been added is to provide a way to
leverage the ability of paleoclimatogists for reasoning about time.
On the other hand, all the analysis is done for geospatial information. Thus, both space and time are considered in the visual representations, in order to gain insight into the core at hand.
Actually, time is a variable that can be considered in the previous examples. Both the interactive reconstruction tool and the
scatter plots can be animated. This way, the experts can analyse
the whole history of the core. In the first case, it is possible to go
further down into the core, and visualize the dissimilarity plots of
the analogs used for the reconstruction of each sample (depth/age)
of the core. This way, visually, a different dissimilarity pattern can
be easily discovered. In the second case, the relationship between
QUIN species, for instance, and dissimilarity through time can be
inspected, and paleoclimatogists can learn if this species behaves
in the same way throughout the geological history of that particular
site.
Although the MAT method is very useful for paleoclimatic reconstruction there is much more information that can be provided
than a mere neighbor distance calculation. Thus, before proceeding
with the algorithmic reconstruction further knowledge can be easily
discovered from the calculated set of analogs.
As stated in the previous sections, the problem is that paleontologists can obtain reconstructions as outputs using techniques such as
nearest neighbor prediction, but these techniques provide no way
for acquiring new knowledge. However, in the particular case of

22

Figure 5: Analogs geographic distribution: it can be seen that for
sample 20 of this core (see cyan label) all the similar analogs are
located within a range of latitudes, while the dissimilar ones are
grouped in warmer or colder zones. This means that sample 20 of
the analysed site, t kiloyears ago, had colder temperatures than the
current temperatures at the Mediterranean sea.

paleoclimatology, ad hoc visualization tools that do provide insight
into these forests of numeric data may be developed.
Trained in geographic visualization, geologists basically face a
problem of evolution through time, so we can design an interactive
visual interface that takes advantage of both location and time.
Let’s consider the following situation (Figure 5): a paleoclimatologist is studying the data obtained from a particular point in the
Mediterranean Sea (the cyan label CORE in the Figure shows that
point) and the modern data comes from the North Atlantic Ocean.
Instead of just calculating temperature reconstruction, he/she can
analyse first how the analogs for a given sample (depth/age) are
distributed geographically. This can be seen in Figure 5, which is
the three dimensional (longitude(x-axis), latitude(y-axis) and dissimilarity(color)) representation for the sample at 20 cm1 . Thus,
the expert would easily discover that the studied site t kiloyears ago
had temperatures much more similar to those of cold sites of today
(blue zone of analogs in the picture) than those in warm or polar
latitudes (red zone of analogs).
Furthermore, this representation can be done for a selected number of analogs (whether only the number of analogs that will be
used for the reconstruction, for instance, or also those with dissimilarity values smaller than a particular cutoff value). Analogs can
be labeled with the associated database sample name so the expert
might decide that a particular analog is not valid for reconstruction
due to geological reasons.
A combination of visualization approaches may unearth a wealth
of information: choosing to show only 5 analogs, labeling each
analog, zooming in, and animating the evolution of the whole core,
i.e., visualizing the analog evolution through time, we may arrive at
some interesting conclusions. Thus, in Figure 6 we could start with
the deepest sample in the core, i.e., t kiloyears ago; since at that age
the planet was covered with ice, we can see that the best 5 analogs
are distributed across a wide range of latitudes. As the animation
shows the evolution, we can see that the best analogs are grouped,
reflecting the typical distribution we should expect. The snapshot
on the bottom-left shows a particularly interesting situation: four of
1 Depending on the particular age model this depth will be a number of
kiloyears in the past.

den in the previous approach. For instance, it can be observed that
the most similar sites for sample 20 are clustered in the low temperatures (note that in this example, all environmental features are
seasonal sea surface temperatures (SST)), which means that sample
20 corresponds to a cold period or a cold site.
However, several interaction techniques [17][8] have been integrated with this PCP to allow brushing [1], linking, animation,
focus + context, etc., for exploratory analysis and knowledge discovery purposes.
3.3.1 Focus+context

Figure 6: Best analogs over time: the animation will show that at one
moment, 1 of the most 5 similar analogs for a given sample fall very
far from the rest of the group. Using this analog for reconstructions
would lead to inaccurate results.

the five analogs are grouped up north (note the blue color), while the
fifth one is located at a much warmer latitude (note the red color).
This analog distribution should warn the paleoclimatologist that in
all probability the outsider is only the fifth closest neighbor, but
not a real neighbor, so that particular site should not be taken into
consideration in the reconstruction for that sample.
3.3 A Novel Method for Paleoenvironmental Reconstructions: Interactive Parallel Coordinates Plots
Scatter plots, maps and animations are common methods for geovisualization that have a long history in cartography and information
visualization (Figure 7 shows an environment for visual analytics
in paleooeanography that makes use of these techniques). Parallel
Coordinates Plots (PCP) [6] which is used for the representation of
multidimensional data, is also a common method of information visualization and is an emerging practice in geovisualization [9][14].
In the PaleoAnalogs framework, the use of PCP (see Figure 8) as
part of the interactive visual analysis of multidimensional data can
lead to paleoclimatic knowledge discovery.
PaleoAnalogs presents a unique use of interactive PCP; instead
of just using it as another way of visualizing the data, it is used as a
highly interactive tool that allows scientists both to gain insight into
the paleodata and also visually reconstruct the paleoenvironmental
features.
The data transformations (MAT) described above provide a
mechanism for extracting patterns from raw data. The output of
this process is depicted using interactive PCP to facilitate the exploration of relationships among attributes (see Figure 8): i.e., each
site of the database is drawn as a polyline passing through parallel
axes, which represent the species, and the environmental variables
that we want to reconstruct (last four axes on the right, in Figure 8).
The polyline corresponding to a particular sample (20 cm of depth
in this example) in the core is represented as a yellow polyline.
Note that, since the core only have the species data and we want
to reconstruct the environmental variable for each sample, there are
no yellow segments in the environmental axes. Each polyline of
the database is color-coded and the MAT technique is used for that
purpose (mapping the dissimilarity values to a color gradient, as explained above), i.e., the redder the polyline is, the more dissimilar
it is with respect to that particular sample of the core.

In the Figure 8, a focus + context [17] technique can be seen for the
labels of each site in the database. On the left side, each polyline
is connected outside the axes with its label, allowing easy identification of each site. The labels are ordered top down, depending
on different criteria chosen by the user, whether alphabetically, by
dissimilarity index, according to latitude or no-crossing (the labels
are arrahnged in order to prevent lines connecting with the values
on the first axis from crossing over them). This way the expert can
easily select the polyline of a particular site, which is highlighted
in black and the values for each axis are shown. Since the context
is maintained, the expert can access the label faster, depending on
the ordering criterium chosen and the position of the current focus.
Since there is a shortage of space for so many labels, a fisheye approach [4], a powerful technique for organizing the suppresion of
irrelevant data, was developed.
3.3.2 Filtering and Axis Interaction
Another powerful feature in PaleoAnalogs is dynamic filtering. PaleoAnalogs provides a dynamic query on the PCP in the form of
axis filtering [3][16]. The range of an attribute can be specified
by moving the handles at the top and bottom of a range slider (see
Figure 8). The range sliders are embedded within the PCP.
To prevent users from losing global context during dynamic filtering, all the polylines are maintained on the background so that
users can see the position of each one, and labels are also maintained on the background. Figure 9 shows a reconstruction already
computed. After filtering the sites (the current ranges are shown
in the handles) that were too dissimilar (maintained in dark gray
on the background), the expert decided to reconstruct the SSTs for
sample 20. Note that now the yellow segments of the polyline for
that sample also occupy the environmental axes. As expected, the
values are an average of the values of the blue polylines. On the
left hand side, only the interesting site labels are highlighted. In the
snapshot, the expert is comparing a site (orange polyline) with the
reconstructed core sample.
Also note that in Figure 9, all axes have the same scale (a percentage) in order to compare the relative abundances of the species,
and help discover relationships between species and climatic features.
Another feature that helps in interactive visual analysis is that
any axis can be dragged and dropped, so the order of the axis is
changed. This way the shape of the polyline also changes, helping
to reveal hidden patterns and making analysis easier. In Figure 10,
the axis order has been altered slightly so the PCP is uncluttered.
The elimination of selected variables (axes) can also be helpful.
3.3.3 Animation
Contrary to other approaches [14], time is not represented on an
axis. As in the previous cases, time is one of the most relevant variables in the analysis. PaleoAnalogs, which can show an animation
of the PCP, enable paleoclimatologists to visualize the evolution of
different species over the course of geological time, and study their
relationships, both among themselves and between some species
and SST, for instance.

23

Figure 7: The PaleoAnalogs Visual Analytics Environment

Figure 8: Reconstruction visually driven by Parallel Coordinates: the yellow polyline show a pattern for the anlysed sample, the color of the rest
polylines show how different species or environmental variables are related to that particular sample. By different means of interactions, those
analogs that best fit the expert reasoning will be used to reconstruct the variables for that sample (the yellow segments will continue the polyline
in the environmental features area).

3.3.4 Brushing and Multiple Linked Views

24

• selecting: this mode is used to mark objects that are of shortterm interest in order to further examine or perform operations on them (e.g see the values on every axis of a selected
polyline). Clicking on an object selects it and marks it. If a
selected object is filtered, then it becomes deselected.

Geolocation plays a key role in paleoceanography analysis. One
possibility is to represent the latitude and/or longitude values for
each database site. This can be useful in order to highlight how
temperature varies over time for the same latitude, for example.
In previous sections the benefits of using interactive maps in PaleoAnalogs have been described. A common coordination technique is brushing and linking [1], where users can select objects in
one view and the corresponding objects in all the other views are
also automatically selected. This technique is the most logical approach for the problem at hand, as all the benefits explained above
can be put together in order to provide paleoceanographers with the
best interactive visual tool for discovering knowledge and supporting decisions about climatic reconstructions.
In Figure 11 the brushing and multiple linked views approach
of PaleoAnalogs can be seen. As in [3], there are three modes
of brushing and linking that can be coordinated in all the multiple
views described in the previous sections:

This way, a complete analysis that takes advantage of all the discused features can be performed. Paleontologists can have an animation going down the core, observing how the analogs distribution
changes with time, latitude and longitude (map and/or axes). The
evolution of the species patterns can also be seen. Thus, all the information with geological meaning can be used by the expert, who
decide, by means of the different interactions, how each sample is
reconstructed.

• probing: this mode is used to view more details about an
object (e.g. site labels and dissimilarity values) and to gain
an understanding of the relationships between the different
views. Probing is a transient operation conducted by moving the mouse pointer over an object, highlighting the object
(e.g, a polyline) and as the mouse pointer is moved away, the
highlighting disappears.

3.4 Presentation and Dissemination
As part of a future effort on providing a way for paleoceanographers to capture their analytic assessments, it is possible to work
with two different sets of colors, one for visual interaction and one
for printing and image exportation (see Figure 8). Also, a paleoceanographer’s analysis can be saved in a project, and the different
stages can be independently saved and recovered. Also summaries,

• painting: this mode is used to mark objects that are of longterm interest, in order to use them as references for comparisons (e.g compare two polylines for two sites in the database).
Objects remain painted until they are reset explicitly.

Figure 9: Analytical reasoning and reconstruction by means of interaction: the expert has decided to filter the analogs based on the similarity of
SSTs, so the handles of environmental axes select only the blue polylines; the shape of the area covered by them is very similar to the sample
pattern (yellow line). All the species axes now have the same scale, showing the relative importance among species.

such as the associations used for one particular study, are automatically produced.
4

C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

In conclusion, the interactive analysis features introduced to PaleoAnalogs for understanding and visualizing complex dynamics
in the fields of paleoclimatology and paleoceanography have produced promising and encouraging results. Together with the expert judgment of paleoceanographers, the provided visual analytics
techniques foster a deeper understanding of the process of reconstruction of paleoenvironmental conditions. By introducing userdriven reconstructions the curse of black-box analytical methods
can be broken and the domain implications can be assesed by the
experts; as a result, more accurate models of the past oceanographic
and climatic conditions can be produced. We have demonstrated the
potential of an integrative approach to the visualization and analysis of the evolution of a given geographic location. In particular, we
have focused on various practical issues concerning detecting relationships between species and environmental features in one oceaninc site expanding thousands of years.
As for future work, one major challenge has been identified:
other classical analytical methods, which are currently used in the
paleocenography field (such as principal components analysis or
spectral analysis), are highly related to the MAT technique. The design and development of appropiate visualization tools, linked with
the current ones, would provide an excellent environment for the
analysts in which they could perform quantitative and qualitative
studies, driving all the reconstruction process with their expertise.
Finally, we can add that the encouraging results indicate that this
is a promising line of research with potential benefits to users from
others disciplines that traditionally face similar prediction problems
by means of machine learning methods.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the MCyT of Spain under project
TIN2006-06313 and Integrated Action (Spain-France) HF20040277, and by the Junta de Castilla y Le´on under project SA042/02.
The author would like to acknowledge Ana Mayordomo Garc´ıa for
her assistance in the implementation of this work.

R EFERENCES
[1] Richard A. Becker and William S. Cleveland. Brushing scatterplots.
Technometrics, 29(2):127–142, 1987.
[2] Leo Breiman. Bagging predictors. Machine Learning, 24(2):123–140,
1996.
[3] D. Brodbeck and L. Girardin. Design study: using multiple coordinated views to analyze geo-referenced high-dimensional datasets.
In Proceedings. of the International Conference on Coordinated and
Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization, pages 104–111, 2003.
[4] George W. Furnas. Generalized fisheye views. In Human Factors in
Computing Systems CHI ’86 Conference Proceedings, pages 16–23,
1986.
[5] W. H. Hutson. The agulhas current during the late pleistocene: Analysis of modern faunal analogs. Science, 207:64–66, 1980.
[6] Alfred Inselberg. The plane with parallel coordinates. The Visual
Computer, 1:69–91, 1985.
[7] Alfred Inselberg. Conflict detection and planar resolution for air traffic
control. In Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2001.
[8] Daniel A. Keim. Information visualization and visual data mining.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1):1–
8, 2002.
[9] E.L. Koua and M.-J. Kraak. A usability framework for the design and
evaluation of an exploratory geovisualization environment. In Proceedings. Eighth International Conference on Information Visualisation, pages 153–158, 2004.
[10] B. A. Malmgren, M. Kucera, J. Nyber, and C. Waelbroeck. Comparison of statistical and artificial neural network techniques for estimating past sea surface temperatures from planktonic foraminifer census
data. Paleoceanography, 16(5):520–530, 2001.
[11] H. Mannila, H. Toivonen, A. Korhola, and H. Olander. Learning, mining or modeling? a case study from paleoecology. In Discovery Science, pages 12–24, 1998.
[12] D. Paillard, L. Labeyrie, and P. Yiou. Macintosh program performs time-series analysis. Eos, Transactions, American Geophysical
Union, 77:379, 1996.
[13] U. Pflaumann, J. Duprat, C. Pujol, and L. Labeyrie. Simmax: A modern analog technique to deduce atlantic sea surface temperatures from
planktonic foraminifera in deep-sea sediments. Paleoceanography,
11:15–35, 1996.
[14] A. C. Robinson, J. Chen, E. J. Meyer, and A. M. MacEachren.
Combining usability techniques to design geovisualization tools for
epidemiology. Cartography and Geographic Information Science,,

25

Figure 10: Uncluttering Parallel Coordinates by changing the axis order

Figure 11: Multiple linked views in PaleoAnalogs

32:243–255, 2005.
[15] P. N. Schweitzer. Analog: A program for estimating paleoclimate
parameters using the method of modern analogs. Technical Report
94-645, U. S. Geological Survey Open-File, 1994.
[16] Jinwook Seo and Ben Shneiderman. Interactively exploring hierarchical clustering results. IEEE Computer, 35(7):80–86, 2002.
[17] Robert Spence. Information Visualization. Addison-Wesley, 1 edition,
2001.
[18] R. Theron, J. A. Flores, F. J. Sierro, C. Pelejero, J. Grimalt, and M. Vaquero. Using data mining and visualization techniques for the reconstruction of ocean paleodynamics. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, volume IV,
pages 2382–2384, 2002.
[19] R. Theron, J. A. Flores, F. J. Sierro, M. Vaquero, and F. Barbero.
Paleoplot: A tool for the analysis, integration and manipulation of
time-series paleorecords. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, volume VI, pages 3528–
3530, 2002.
[20] R. Theron, D. Paillard, E. Cortijo, J. A. Flores, M. Vaquero, F. J.
Sierro, and C. Waelbroeck. Rapid reconstruction of paleoenvironmen-

26

tal features using a new multiplatform program. Micropaleontology,
50:391–395, 2004.
[21] National Visualization and Analytics Center. Illuminating the Path:
The Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics, , 2005.
IEEE Press, 2005.
[22] C. Waelbroeck, L. Labeyrie, J.C. Deplessy, J. Guoit, M. Labracherie,
H. Leclaire, and J. Duprat. Improving past sea surface temperature
estimates based on planktonic faunas. Paleoceanography, 13:272–
283, 1998.
[23] P. Yiou, E. Baert, and M. F. Loutre. Spectral analysis of climate data.
Surveys of Geophysics, 17(6):619–663, 1996.

