Visual Analytics Education
James Foley

Georgia Tech
(Chair & Author)

Stu Card
PARC

David Ebert
Purdue

ABSTRACT
Visual Analytics is a newly evolving field that spans across
several more established disciplines. This panel will discuss how
VA system developers and researchers are best educated at the
MS and PhD levels. This paper describes several ways in which
VA can be characterized – with the goal of using these
characterizations to identify knowledge domains that can be used
to define VA curricula. Also, a digital library of VA educational
resources is described

A. MacEachren
Penn State

address: Is there a set of core VA knowledge, and if so, what is it?

Analytical
Reasoning

CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.5 Information
Interfaces and Presentation; K.3.2 [Computers and Education]:
Computer and Information Science Education.

INTRODUCTION

The purpose of this panel is to begin a community dialogue on
graduate education in the emerging and broadly interdisciplinary
field of Visual Analytics (VA). Where does VA fit into the
broader set of academic disciplines on which it draws? What is at
its intellectual core? How should MS and PhD students be
educated to become productive VA developers and researchers?
We begin with an overview of several ways one might
conceptualize the body of knowledge that is Visual Analytics,
drawing on Illuminating the Path [1] and an initial taxonomy
developed by the UNC-C and GT Regional Visual Analytics
Center.
Next, we pose some of the questions that the panel is expected
to address. But, we note that as with any fledgling discipline, the
answers to these questions will be, at best, tentative. Only time
and experience and experimentation will provide us with some
confidence as to the adequacy of these tentative answers.
Finally, we describe the Visual Analytics Digital Library, being
developed by the Southeastern RVAC, designed to help educators
teach and students learn Visual Analytics.
2

WAYS OF THINKING ABOUT VISUAL ANALYTICS

2.1
Illuminating the Path
Perhaps the most straightforward way to think about the
intellectual content of VA is by using the structure developed in
Illuminating the Path [1], a report representing the thinking of a
group of nearly 30 researchers. Figure 1, adapted from [1],
depicts the four major report chapters as four quadrants. I have
added the “?” to “Core” to reflect one question our panel will
foley@cc.gatech.edu, card@parc.com,
ebertd@ecn.purdue.edu, maceachren@psu.edu,
ribarsky@uncc.edu
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2006
October 31 - November 2, Baltimore, MD, USA
1-4244-0592-0/06/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE

Visual
Representations
and Interaction
Technologies
Core?

Keywords: Visual Analytics Education, Visual Analytics
Curricula
1

Bill Ribarsky

UNC-Charlotte

Data
Representations
and Transformations

Presentation,
Production and
Dissemination

Figure 1. The ‘body of knowledge” of Visual Analytics, based on
the titles of chapters 2 to 5 of Illuminating the Path [1].

2.2
A Starting Taxonomy of Visual Analytics
Education is one emphasis of the Southeastern RVAC at UNCCharlotte and Georgia Tech. In the process of developing our VA
Digital Library (Section 4), we developed a VA taxonomy in a
two-step process. The first step used the research agenda of
Iluminating the Path as a starting point, restructuring some of the
material to take more of a pedagogical approach. This ultimately
led to the seven top-level categories in the taxonomy (Figure 2).
At the same time, we developed a list of about 300 keywords
drawn from Illuminating the Path and from a VAST Symposium
keyword list developed by the program committee. We went
through a card-sorting exercise to cluster those keywords into
meaningful chunks that became the second-level and third-level
categories in the taxonomy.
1 Overview/Courses
Introductory/General
Uses of Visual Analytics
Courses
2 Analytical Reasoning & Processes
Introduction/General
Models of Analytical Reasoning Processes
Decision Sciences
Uncertainty management
Collaborative reasoning
3 Cognition, Perception & Social Processes
Introductory/General
Knowledge Representation & Ontologies
Perception

209

Social Processes
4 Data & Knowledge
Introductory/General
Data Representations
Databases
Data Transformations
Knowledge Discovery, Representation &
Management
Introductory/General
Fundamentals
Specific Types of Data/Application
Systems
Test & Sample Databases
5 Visualizing Data, Information & Knowledge
Introductory/General
Design Principles
Methods & Techniques
Interacting with Visual Representations
Introductory/General
Taxonomies of Interaction Techniques
Uses & Methods of Interaction
Visualization Types
Introductory/General
Taxonomies of Types of Visualizations
Geospatial (Mapping)
Graphs & Networks
Sequenced & Time Series Data
Statistical (Multidimensional) Data
Visualization Domains
Introductory/General
Text & Documents
Financial Data
Networks
Reasoning, Argumentation & Knowledge
Automatic & Semi-automatic Generation of
Visualizations
6 Production, Presentation & Dissemination
Introductory/General
Data/evidence collection
Analytical sandbox
Developing a story within audience context
Production technologies & management
Dissemination contexts & dynamics
7 Human Concerns in Use of Technology for Visual
Analytics
Introductory/General
Integration within analytic work methods
Collaboration
Evaluation of Effectiveness
Privacy, Security & Legal Issues
8 Software & Hardware for Visual Analytics Systems
Introductory/General
Architectures & Systems
Interaction Devices
Display Technologies
Figure 2. A Visual Analytics Taxonomy

Cognition, Perception
Knowledge Representation & Ontologies
Social Processes
Human Concerns in the use of Technology for
Visual Analytics
Computers
Data and Knowledge
Visualizing Data, Information and Knowledge
Software & Hardware for Visual Analytics
Systems
Figure 3. Structure of Visual Analytics based on an HCI-oriented
decomposition

3

•

•
•
•
•

4

Leveraging HCI

A common Mantra in Human-Computer Interaction is “People
perform Tasks using Computers.” The pedagogical implication is
that HCI developers and researchers need to know about people,
the tasks the people perform, and the computer technologies used
to provide a User Interface through which users can perform their
tasks. Visual Analytics, to my mind, is a specialized HCI domain,
implying that the same Mantra might be applied here. This would
lead to a structure along the lines of Figure 3.
Task
Analytical Processes
Applications of Visual Analytics
People

210

Why is / is not VA a field ready for its own MS degree,
distinct from a “standard” degree in one of its
supporting disciplines, such as computing, HCI, or
geography?
Can a VA M.S. student gain appropriate preparation by
appropriate specialization in one of these or some other
discipline?
Is there a core of knowledge that every VA M.S.
students should know? Ph.D. student?
What courses might a VA minor or certificate or
specialization at the MS or PhD level include?
Defining the intellectual content of VA is hard because
it draws on so many disciplines. What are some simple
criteria to help decide what topics should be explicitly
considered as part of a VA curriculum, as opposed to
being pre-requisite to VA studies?

VA DIGITAL LIBRARY

The Southeastern RVAC has started a Digital Library of
educational material to help teachers develop courses that are
relevant to VA, and to help students learn about VA. The library
can be accessed at vadl.cc.gatech.edu. It is patterned
after, and uses the same software infrastructure, as the HumanCentered Computing Education Digital Library at
hcc.cc.gatech.edu. The library contains course syllabi,
videos, PowerPoint lectures, lectures created with Microsoft
Producer [2], exams, assignments and some reference material.
Content is organized according to the taxonomy of Section 2.3;
a content item can be placed under several categories in the
taxonomy. The user can browse through the taxonomy to get the
“big picture” of what types of information are present, or can use
a standard text content search to obtain a ranked (be relevance)
list of items, Google-style. Submissions to the library are
encouraged; the home page links to an easy-to-use submission
interface. Submissions are encouraged!
5

2.3

TYPICAL QUESTIONS THE PANEL WILL ADDRESS

PANEL PARTICIPANTS

Jim Foley is a professor in the College of Computing at Georgia
Tech, and holds the Fleming Chair in Telecommunications. While
on Georgia Tech leave from 1996-99, he was CEO and Chairman
of MERL – Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs where he was
responsible for corporate R&D in North America. He joined
Georgia Tech in 1991 as the founding director of the Graphics,
Visualization and Usability Center in the College of Computing.
Foley is co-author of three computer graphics texts and is a
Fellow of AAAS, ACM and IEEE. He received SIGGRAPH's biannual Steven Coons award for contributions to computer
graphics, and is one of seven inaugural members of the SIGCHI
Academy for contributions to Computer-Human Interaction. He
was chairman (2001-2005) of the Computing Research
Association.

David Ebert is a Professor in the School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering at Purdue University and directs the
Purdue University Regional Visualization and Analytics Center.
His research interests include volume rendering, information
visualization, perceptually based visualization, illustrative
visualization, and procedural abstraction of complex, massive
data. Ebert has been very active in the visualization community,
teaching courses, presenting papers, co-chairing many conference
program committees, serving on the ACM SIGGRAPH Executive
Committee, serving as Editor in Chief of IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, and serving on the
National Visualization and Analytics Center's National Research
Agenda Panel.
Stuart Card is a Senior Research Fellow and the manager of
the User Interface Research group at the Palo Alto Research
Center. His study of input devices led to the Fitts's Law
characterization of the mouse and was a major factor leading to
the mouse's commercial introduction by Xerox. His group has
developed theoretical characterizations of human-machine
interaction, including the Model Human Processor, the GOMS
theory of user interaction, information foraging theory, and
statistical descriptions of Internet use. These theories have been
put to use in new paradigms of human-machine interaction
including the Rooms workspace manager, papertronic systems,
and the Information Visualizer. Card is co-author of T h e
Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction, co-editor of Human
Performance Models for Computer-Aided Engineering and of
Readings in Information Visualization. He has served on many
editorial boards, government panels, and university review boards.
He has been an adjunct faculty member at Stanford University. He
is currently developing a supporting science of humaninformation interaction and visual-semantic prototypes to aid
sensemaking. Card is a Fellow of the ACM, the first recipient of
the ACM CHI Lifetime Achievement Award, and the first
member of the ACM CHI Academy.
Alan MacEachren is 2004-2007 E. Willard and Ruby S. Miller
Professor of Geography and Director of the GeoVISTA Center at
Pennsylvania State University. He also directs the new NorthEast Regional Visualization & Analytics Center. MacEachren’s
research foci include geovisualization, geocollaboration,
interfaces to geospatial information technologies, human spatial
cognition as it relates to use of those technologies, humancentered systems and user-centered design. He served as chair of
the International Cartographic Association Commission on
Visualization and Virtual Environments (1999-2005) and was
named honorary fellow of that organization in 2005. He has been
a member of the National Research Council Computer Science
and Telecommunications Board Committee on the Intersections
Between Geospatial Information and Information Technology
(2001-2002) and of the National Visualization and Analytics
Center R&D Agenda panel (2004-2005). MacEachren is author
of How Maps Work: Representation, Visualization and Design,
and Some Truth with Maps, and is co-editor of several additional
books (including Exploring Geovisualization) and journal special
issues (including a recent issue of IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications on Geovisualization, and a forthcoming special issue
of the International Journal of Geographical Information Science
on Visual analytics & spatial decision support).
William Ribarsky is the Bank of America Endowed Chair in
Information Technology at UNC Charlotte, is founding director of
the Charlotte Visualization Center, and director of the
Southeastern Regional Visualization & Analytics Center. His
research interests include visual analytics, 3D multimodal
interaction, bioinformatics visualization, virtual environments,
visual reasoning, and interactive visualization of large-scale
information spaces. Formerly, he was the Associate Director for

External Relations of the Georgia Tech GVU Center. Dr.
Ribarsky is the former Chair and a current Director of the IEEE
Visualization and Graphics Technical Committee, and chairs the
Steering Committees for the IEEE Visualization Conference and
the IEEE Virtual Reality Conference. He is an Associate Editor of
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics. Dr.
Ribarsky co-founded the Eurographics/IEEE visualization
conference series (now called EG/IEEE EuroVis) and led the
effort to establish the Virtual Reality Conference series. For the
above efforts on behalf of IEEE, Dr. Ribarsky won the IEEE
Meritorious Service Award in 2004.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

James Thomas and Kristen Cook, eds. Illuminating the Path: The
Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. IEEE
Computer Society, 2005.
Microsoft Producer, http://www.microsoft.com/office/powerpoint/
producer/prodinfo/default.mspx

211

