A Visual Analytics Process for Maritime
Resource Allocation and Risk Assessment
Abish Malik ∗
∗ Purdue

Ross Maciejewski∗ , Member, IEEE

University Visualization and Analytics Center (PURVAC)

A BSTRACT
In this paper, we present our collaborative work with the U.S. Coast
Guard’s Ninth District and Atlantic Area Commands where we developed a visual analytics system to analyze historic response operations and assess the potential risks in the maritime environment associated with the hypothetical allocation of Coast Guard resources.
The system includes linked views and interactive displays that enable the analysis of trends, patterns and anomalies among the U.S.
Coast Guard search and rescue (SAR) operations and their associated sorties. Our system allows users to determine the potential
change in risks associated with closing certain stations in terms of
response time, potential lives and property lost and provides optimal direction as to the nearest available station. We provide maritime risk assessment tools that allow analysts to explore Coast
Guard coverage for SAR operations and identify regions of high
risk. The system also enables a thorough assessment of all SAR operations conducted by each Coast Guard station in the Great Lakes
region. Our system demonstrates the effectiveness of visual analytics in analyzing risk within the maritime domain and is currently
being used by analysts at the Coast Guard Atlantic Area.
Keywords: Visual analytics, risk assessment, Coast Guard
1

Ben Maule†

I NTRODUCTION

As modern datasets increase in size and complexity, it becomes increasingly difficult for analysts and decision makers to extract actionable information for making effective decisions. In order to better facilitate the exploration of such datasets, tool sets are required
that allow users to interact with their data and assist them in their
analysis. Furthermore, such datasets can be utilized to explore the
consequences and risks associated with making decisions, thereby
providing insights to analysts and aiding them in making informed
decisions.
Besides the sheer volume and complexity of such datasets, analysts must also deal with data quality issues, including uncertain,
incomplete and contradictory data. Moreover, analysts are often
faced with different decisions and are required to weigh all possible consequences of these decisions using such datasets in order
to arrive at a solution that minimizes the associated risks within a
given time constraint. Using traditional methods of sifting through
sheets of data to explore potential risks can be highly inefficient and
difficult due to the nature and size of these datasets. Therefore, advanced tools are required that enable a more timely exploration and
analysis. Our work focuses on the use of visual analytics [17, 31]
in the realm of risk assessment and analysis and demonstrates the
effectiveness of visual analytics in this domain. The work described
in this paper is based on the application of visual analytics to analyze historic response operations and assess the potential risks in
∗ e-mail:

{amalik|rmacieje|ebertd}@purdue.edu
† email: Ben.J.Maule@uscg.mil

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

David S. Ebert∗ , Fellow, IEEE
† United

States Coast Guard

the maritime environment based on notational station closures. Our
work was done in collaboration with the U.S. Coast Guard’s Ninth
District and Atlantic Area Commands that are responsible for all
Coast Guard operations in the five U.S. Great Lakes. In particular,
we focused on the Auxiliary stations that are staffed by Coast Guard
volunteers and civilians. These Auxiliary stations assist their parent
stations in their operations and usually operate on a seasonal basis
using a small fleet of boats for conducting their operations. However, the number of Auxiliary personnel that volunteer their time
at these stations has decreased over recent years. This has required
Coast Guard analysts to develop possible courses of action and analyze the risks and benefits with each option. Several options include
seasonal or weekend only staffing of these units, or at worst, closure. Closure, however, may involve increased risks to the boating
public and a complete analysis of the risks associated with closing
an Auxiliary station needs to be evaluated. The results of this type
of analysis would assist the decision makers in determining the optimal course of action.
In particular, the analysts are interested in determining the spatial and temporal distribution of response cases and their associated
sorties (a boat or an aircraft deployed to respond to an incident)
for all SAR operations conducted in the Great Lakes and how closing certain Auxiliary stations affects the workload of the stations
that absorb these cases. Coast Guard policy mandates the launch
of a sortie within 30 minutes and have an asset (boat or aircraft)
on scene within two hours of receiving a distress call [32]. Closing these stations implies a potential for longer response times that
could potentially translate into the loss of lives and property.
To address these challenges, we developed a visual analytics system that supports decision making and risk assessment and allows
an interactive analysis of trends, patterns and anomalies among the
U.S. Coast Guard’s Ninth District operations and their associated
sorties. Our system, shown in Figure 1, allows enhanced exploration of multivariate spatiotemporal datasets. We have incorporated enhanced tools that enable maritime risk assessment and analysis. Our system includes linked spatiotemporal views for multivariate data exploration and analysis and allows users to determine
the potential increase or decrease in risks associated with closing
one or more Coast Guard stations. The system enables a thorough
assessment of all operations conducted by each station. In addition, the system provides analysts with the tools to determine which
Coast Guard stations are more optimally suited to assume control
of the operations of the closed station(s) by comparing the distances
from available stations to all SAR cases previously handled by the
closed station(s). Our system features include the following:
• Risk profile visualizations and interactive risk assessment
tools for exploring the impact of closing Coast Guard stations
• Optimization algorithms that assist with the interactive exploration of case load distribution in resource allocation
• Linked filters combined with spatial and temporal views for
interactive risk analysis/exploration
Our work focuses on providing analysts with interactive visual
analytics tools that equip them to deal with risk assessment scenar-

221

Figure 1: A screenshot of our risk assessment visual analytics system. Here, the user is visualizing all search and rescue (SAR) operations
conducted by the U.S. Coast Guard in the Great Lakes region in July 2008. The main viewing area (a) shows the map view with the circles
showing the locations of SAR incidents in the Great Lakes. The right-most window (b) shows an interactive menu showing all distress types with
SAR cases selected in blue. The top window (c) shows the time-series and the left window (d) shows the calendar views of the SAR incident
report data. The bottom-left window (e) shows the time slider with radio buttons that allow different temporal aggregation levels. A legend for all
District Nine maritime zones is shown in the upper right (f).

ios associated with closing Coast Guard stations. We emphasize
that although our risk assessment toolkit and the examples given
in this paper have been based in the maritime domain, these techniques apply equally as well to other domains (e.g., criminal offense
analysis, syndromic surveillance).
2

R ELATED W ORK

In recent years, there has been a rapid growth in the development of
new visual analytics tools and techniques for advanced data analysis and exploration (e.g., [30, 34]). From traditional scatterplots
[8] and parallel coordinate plots [16] to tools like Theme River [15]
and spiral graphs [7], these systems incorporate different forms of
visualizations to provide enhanced analytical tools to users. Although these tools allow users to explore their data and assist them
in their decision making process, researchers have only recently
started to employ visual analytics techniques for risk-assessment
and decision-making domain that allow users to perform a thorough
analysis of risks associated with different decisions.
Migut and Worring [21] propose an interactive approach to risk
assessment where they demonstrate a risk assessment framework
that integrates interactive visual exploration with machine learning
techniques to support the risk assessment and decision making process. They use a series of 2D visualizations including scatterplots
and mosaic plots to visualize numerical and ordinal attributes of the
datasets. While the authors demonstrate the effectiveness of using

222

visual analytics in the field of risk assessment, their work is mainly
focused on building classification models that users may interactively use to classify their data entities and visualize the effects on
their classification. Gandhi and Lee [13] also apply visual analytics techniques to the realm of requirements-driven risk assessment.
Specifically, they use cohesive bar and arc graphs to illustrate the
risks due to the cascading effects of non-compliance with Certification and Accreditation requirements for the U.S. Department of
Defense. Sanusi and Mustafa [25] introduce a framework to develop a visualization tool that may be used for risk assessment in
the software development domain. Their proposed framework allow users to identify the components of the software system that
are likely to have a high fault rate. Direct visualizations of risk
use tools like bar graphs and confidence interval charts to visualize
measures of risk and are usually constructed using spreadsheet programs like Microsoft Excel [12, 13]. Although widely used, these
techniques fail to work for our purposes primarily due to the nature
of the risk analysis that is required. The Coast Guard SAR dataset
is spatiotemporal in nature and the exploration of risk requires domain knowledge that is difficult to incorporate algorithmically.
With respect to the temporal nature of risk assessment, researchers have also developed different visualization systems that
allow users to explore risks associated with financial decisions related with investments and mutual funds, among other financial
planning scenarios. Rudolph et al. [24] propose a personal finance

decision making visual analytics tool that allows users to analyze
both short-term and long-term risks associated with making investment decisions. Savikhin et al. [26] also demonstrate the benefits
of applying visual analytics techniques to aid users in their economic decision making and, by extension, to general decision making tasks. Both of the previous examples only explore temporal
datasets. In this work, we apply visual analytics techniques to explore risks using multivariate spatio-temporal datasets that guide
analysts in making complex decisions.
As is the case with most multivariate datasets, data tends to be inherently unreliable, incomplete and contradictory. In order to reach
to correct conclusions, analysts must take these into account in their
analysis. In this regard, Correa et. al. [9] describe a framework that
supports uncertainty and reliability issues in the different stages of
the visual analytics process. They argue that with an explicit representation of uncertainty, analysts can make informed decisions
based on the levels of confidence of the data. Our system factors
data reliability issues in the risk assessment process and provides
confidence levels at all stages of risk assessment that, in turn, enable analysts to better understand the underlying nature of the data
and guides them in making effective decisions.
There also exist many geospatial and temporal analytical systems
that provide users with the ability to explore their spatiotemporal
datasets in order to find patterns and provide an overview of the data
in a visual analytics platform (e.g., [1, 2, 3, 14]). As the needs of our
end users are unique, this warrants developing a stand alone system
to address the challenges faced by the Coast Guard analysts. We
plan on further examining these robust geo-temporal analysis tools
and the degree to which they can be extended to meet the Coast
Guard requirements that have been identified in this paper.
There has also been much work done in visualizing large datasets
using interactive cross-filtered and linked views that allow users to
explore their datasets. Stasko et. al. [30] use multiple coordinated views of documents to reveal connections between entities
across different documents. Eick and Johnson [10] utilize multiple linked views to visualize abstract, non-geometric datasets in
order to reduce visual clutter and provide users with insights into
their datasets. Eick and Wills [11] also demonstrate the effectiveness of linking and interaction techniques in the visualization of
large networks. Our system utilizes these practices and allows users
to interactively explore their multi-dimensional and multi-attribute
datasets using a series of multi-coordinated linked views.
Researchers have also explored different methods to address
the challenges posed to maritime security and safety. Willems
et. al. [34] introduce a novel geographic visualization that supports coastal surveillance systems and decision making analysts
in gaining insights into vessel movements. They utilize density
estimated heatmaps to reveal finer details and anomalies in vessel movements. Scheepens et. al. [27] also present methods to
explore multivariate trajectories with density maps and allow the
exploration of anomalously behaving vessels. Lane et. al. [18]
present techniques that allow analysts to discover potential risks
and threats to maritime safety by analyzing the behavior of vessel
movements and determining the probability that they are anomalous. Some other models for anomaly detection in sea traffic can
be found in [19, 22]. Researchers have also proposed several approaches to maritime domain awareness. For example, Roy and
Davenport [23] present a knowledge based categorization of maritime anomalies built on a taxonomy of maritime situational facts
involved in maritime anomaly detection. We observe that these
methods and models may help in risk analysis and understanding
the impact of weather and varying speeds of Coast Guard vessels in
the Great Lakes to identify high risk regions.
There has also been much work done to assess and mitigate risks
to critical infrastructure and transportation in the maritime domain.
Adler and Fuller [5] provide dynamic scenario- and simulation-

based risk management models to assess risks to critical maritime
infrastructure and strategies implemented for mitigating these risks.
Mansouri et. al. [20] also propose a risk management-based decision analysis framework that enables decision makers to identify,
analyze, and prioritize risks involved in maritime infrastructure and
transportation systems. Their framework is based on risk analysis and management methodologies that allows understanding uncertainty and enables analysts to devise strategies to identify the
vulnerabilities of the system. Furthermore, work has been done to
quantify risks in the maritime transportation domain, a summary of
which can be found in [29]. While these methods facilitate maritime infrastructure risk analysis, our work is focused on assessing
maritime risks from multivariate spatiotemporal SAR data sets. In
this paper, we present a visual analytics approach to maritime risk
assessment and provide examples that demonstrate the advantages
of applying visual analytics in this domain.
3

V ISUAL A NALYTICS R ISK A SSESSMENT E NVIRONMENT

Our visual analytics system provides enhanced risk assessment and
analytical tools to analysts and has been built to operate for SAR
incident report data. Our system has been implemented in a custom
Windows-based geographical information system that allows drawing on an OpenStreetMap map [4], using Visual C++, MySQL and
OpenGL. The system displays geo-referenced data on a map and
allows users to temporally scroll through their data. We provide
linked windows that facilitate user interaction between the spatial
and temporal domains of the data. We also provide advanced filtering techniques that allow users to interactively explore through
data. In addition, we have adapted the calendar view presented by
vanWijk and Selow [33] and extended it to explore seasonal and
cyclical trends of SAR operations and also as means to filter data to
support advanced analysis.
Figure 1 presents a screenshot of our system. The main viewing window (Figure 1 (a)) shows the map view where the user can
explore the spatial distribution of all cases handled by the Coast
Guard. We utilize density estimated heatmaps (Section 3.2) to
quickly identify hotspots. Users may draw a bounding box over
incident points on the map that generates a summary of all incidents enclosed by the box. We also provide tape measure tools that
allow users to measure the distance between two points on a map.
The top-most window (Figure 1 (c)) shows the time-series view of
the data where multiple lines graphs can be overlaid for comparison
and analysis. Users may visualize time-series plots by department,
distress type and Coast Guard Captain of the Port (COTP) zone to
explore summer cyclical patterns. The left-most window (Figure
1 (d)) shows the calendar view of the selected Coast Guard cases.
The total number of columns on the calendar may be changed as
desired to reveal seasonal trends and patterns. The bottom window
(Figure 1 (e)) shows the time-slider widget that is used to temporally scroll through the data while dynamically updating all other
linked windows. The radio buttons beneath the time slider provide several temporal aggregation methods for the data. The rightmost window (Figure 1 (b)) shows the distress type menu where
all SAR cases (highlighted in blue) have been selected for visualization. Users may select multiple distress types using this menu,
dynamically updating all linked views. We use similar menus to
filter cases by other data fields. Users may also interactively search
the menu using the search box provided on top of the menu. Finally,
the top-right window (Figure 1 (f)) shows an interactive legend of
the different Coast Guard District Nine maritime zones. This legend allows users to click on any of the zones that highlights all cases
falling in the zone by filling the circles on the map with a solid color
and dimming out the other cases being displayed on the map.
A key feature of our system is the interactive distress, station
and COTP zone filtering component. Users interactively generate
combinations of filters that are applied to the data being visualized

223

through the use of menus (like the one shown in Figure 1 (b)) and
edit controls. The choices of filters applied affects both the geospatial viewing region and all temporal plots.
3.1

Coast Guard SAR data

The SAR data is collected by all U.S. Coast Guard stations and
stored in a central repository. When the Coast Guard is called into
action, a response case is generated, usually by the maritime zone
that has authority in that region that receives the distress call (referred to by the Coast Guard as the Search Mission Coordinator
or SMC). Upon receiving the call, this authority will determine if
resources will be applied, including which unit will provide the resource, the resource type and number. Therefore, a response case
may generate zero, one, or many sorties to respond to an incident.
While analyzing risks associated with the various mitigation options, including station closure, analysts are interested in analyzing
the spatiotemporal distribution of both the response cases and their
associated sorties.
The SAR data consists of two main components: (1) response
cases and (2) response sorties. Each entry in the response case and
sortie dataset contains information that provides details of the incidents (e.g., number of lives saved, lost, assisted) and contains the
geographic location of the distress.
Uncertainty in decision making
As is the case with most large datasets, anomalies and missing data
introduce errors and uncertainty. The SAR data is no exception. We
find that many SAR cases do not have an associated geographic location, or have a wrong geographic location associated with them.
These inherent errors in data affect the spatial probability estimates
and introduce a certain amount of uncertainty in the decisions that
must be considered for an effective risk analysis and assessment. As
noted in [17], visual analytics methods help people make informed
decisions only if they are made aware of data quality problems. In
this regard, we incorporate uncertainty and confidence levels associated with the SAR dataset in our visualizations by displaying the
accuracy of the results at each step of the risk assessment process.
This is shown as a percentage that shows the total cases with reliable data that can be used in the decision making process (Figure
2). This percentage is calculated by using the following formula:
Accuracy =

N −G
× 100
N

(1)

Here, N is the total number of cases and G is the number of
cases with unreliable values (e.g., unknown geographic coordinates, swapped negative signs). When such errors are not obvious,
the data is assumed to be correct and is displayed to the analyst
on the map. The analyst can further report errors in the data and
contribute to the data cleaning process.
3.2

Geospatial displays

Our system provides analysts with the ability to plot incidents as
points on the map and as density estimated heatmaps (Figure 1 (a)).
In addition, we provide users with the option of coloring each incident circle with a color on a sequential color scale [6] that represents its data value. For example, users may choose to visualize the
average response time to respond to an incident for all SAR cases
on the map and identify cases with higher response times. Furthermore, to explore the spatial distribution of the SAR cases and
quickly identify hotspots, we employ a modified variable kernel
density estimation technique (Equation 2) that scales the parameter
of estimation by allowing the kernel scale to vary based upon the
distance from the point Xi to the kth nearest neighbor x in the set
comprising of N [28].

224

1
fˆ(x) =
N

N

1

∑ min(h,d

i=1

K
i,k )

x − Xi
min(h,di,k )

(2)

Here, N is the total number of samples, di,k is the distance from
the i-th sample to the k-th nearest neighbor and h is the maximum
allowed kernel width. We choose the maximum kernel width based
on asset speed and travel time. Furthermore, we use the Epanechnikov kernel [28] (equation 3) to reduce calculation time:
3
K(u) = (1 − u2 )1(||u||≤1)
4

(3)

where the function 1(||u||≤1) evaluates to 1 if the inequality is true
and to zero otherwise.
3.3

Time series displays

Along with the graphical interface, our system provides a variety of
visualization features for both spatial and temporal views. For temporal views, we provide line and stacked bar graphs and calendar
views to visualize time series SAR incident report data.
The line graph visualization allow users to overlay multiple
graphs for easy comparison and to visualize trends. Both line graph
and stacked bar graph visualizations are supported and can be interchanged using the radio buttons provided. Users may choose to visualize SAR cases handled by individual stations or maritime zones,
or visualize them by distress types. The data is plotted based on a
temporal aggregation level that the user selects on the time-slider
widget (Figure 1 (e)). In Figure 1 (c), we show the line graph display of all SAR cases aggregated by month. We can easily observe
peaks in the number of SAR cases in the summer months for all
maritime zones in the Great Lakes region.
The calendar view visualization was first developed by van Wijk
and Selow [33]. This visualization provides a means to allow the
visualization of data over time, laid in the format of a calendar. In
our implementation (Figure 1 (d)), we shade each date entry based
on the overall yearly trend. Users may interactively change the total number of columns of the calendar thereby changing the cycle
length of the calendar view, enabling users to explore both seasonal
and cyclical trends of their datasets. The system also draws histograms for each row and column. This allows analysts to visualize
weekday and weekly trends of SAR incidents and further assists
them in determining an effective resource allocation scheme. Furthermore, we have modified our calendar view to support an interactive database querying method for easily acquiring summary
statistics from the SAR database.
4

R ISK A SSESSMENT

PROCESS

In this section, we describe the different methods and techniques
that we apply in the Coast Guard risk assessment process.
4.1

Problem description

To bound the problem, the Coast Guard analysts provided a series
of questions for use in their analysis. These questions are briefly
summarized below.
1. Assuming a maximum transit speed of 15 nautical miles per
hour, how many cases occur per year in which a parent station
could not have a surface asset on scene within two hours?
2. For each Auxiliary station, what are the types (by percentage)
of SAR response cases occurring per year?
3. For each Auxiliary station, what is the temporal (by hour,
month and day of week) distribution of the response case
load?

Figure 2: Average response time risk assessment when Auxiliary station Y is closed. The system automatically chooses the stations (shown
in the upper-left window) that are optimally suited to respond to cases previously handled by station Y, along with a count of cases that each
station absorbs. The station Y cases (black circles) to be handled by stations D and E are circled in red. The top graph shows the average
response time distribution of these stations to respond to station Y’s cases. We find that only 93% of the cases responded to by station Y have
an associated geographic location.

4. What is the average annual case load that would be absorbed
by each parent station in the absence of the Auxiliary station
and what percentage increase would this represent to the parent station’s annual case load?
5. Based on the historical data for all cases (SAR and others),
what is the expected annual response case demand broken
down by response type (i.e., Person in Water, Vessel Flooding, etc.)?
6. Assess the potential risks associated with closing certain Auxiliary stations in terms of additional case load absorbed, lives
potentially lost, and other available factors.
Our visual analytics system was developed to assist the Coast
Guard analysts in answering these questions and to model the potential risks of closing one or more Auxiliary stations. Furthermore,
we allow analysts to explore the effects of closing multiple stations
and provide a summary of stations that are most optimal to absorb
the work load of the closed stations. Analysts may restrict the stations that absorb the work load of the closed stations to determine
the stations that prove most effective, thereby informing optimal
operational execution for the station that is nearest to respond to
the distress case.

We perform our analysis under the assumption that the path between a station and a distress location is a straight line. While this
assumption presents a best-case scenario to the analyst, discussions
with our Coast Guard partners indicated this was an acceptable approximation as using channel and waterway information would result in a large computational overhead. With this assumption in
place, if a station absorbing an Auxiliary station’s cases increases
the maritime risks in the region (e.g., if the average response time
exceeds the two hour time limit for most SAR incidents), then closing the Auxiliary station could prove to be dangerous for the maritime and public safety of the region. This straight line approximation provides details on the best case scenario.
4.2

Average response time for SAR incidents

As stated before, a Coast Guard policy mandates the rescue resource to be on scene within two hours of a distress (e.g., disabled
vessel, person in water). Given the cold water temperatures in the
Great Lakes, even in the summer, increase in response time can potentially impact the success of a case. Therefore, given the option
of closing a station, the analysts desire to know the nearest available
resource to respond and calculate the time to respond to the scene.
A typical Coast Guard vessel travels at a speed of 15 nautical miles

225

Figure 3: Risk profile. (Left) A heatmap showing the time taken (in minutes) by the Coast Guard stations to deploy an asset to the Great Lakes
to respond to a SAR incident, assuming a speed of 15 nautical miles per hour. (Right) A heatmap showing the Coast Guard SAR coverage (i.e.,
the number of stations that respond to a particular region) in the Great Lakes. The squares along the coast show the locations of the stations.

per hour. After an Auxiliary station is closed, the parent station
should still be able to reach most of the cases handled by the Auxiliary station within the two hour limit. In this section, we describe
how our system can be used to determine the average response time
for cases if a parent station (or any combination of stations) absorbs
an Auxiliary station’s cases.
In order to generate the average response time for the station(s)
that absorb the work load of the closed station, we sift through all
the incidents that the closed station handled and find the closest station (excluding the closed station) for each incident by comparing
the distance between all stations and the incident. This distance
between the closest station and incidents may also be visualized
separately to reveal more details. Once the closest station is found,
we obtain the time for an asset to reach the incident location using the distance formula Time = Distance/Speed. Users may also
change the speed of the asset, changing the results dynamically.
We provide users with several filtering options while performing average response-time analysis. Users may choose to analyze
the average response-time temporal distribution of incidents by applying any possible filters on distress type, department or maritime
zone. Users may also analyze the distribution of only the non-SAR
cases. Moreover, users may choose to close several stations all at
once and model the resulting effects. They may also specify which
stations absorb the cases of the closed stations and thus determine
the stations best suited for closing and the optimal methods for reallocating available resources. We also note that our system can
be easily modified to incorporate other risk metrics including, for
example, normalizing SAR cases by the underlying population density, correlating SAR incidents with other parameters, etc.
Figure 2 shows the output generated when the analyst opts to
close Auxiliary station Y. In this example, we examine all cases
responded to by station Y between January 2004 and September
2010. The system automatically suggests the stations that should
absorb Auxiliary station Y’s cases along with the total number of
cases that each station absorbs. We find that stations C (the parent
station of Y), D and E absorb Auxiliary station Y’s cases, with each
absorbing 84, 2 and 1 cases, respectively. The analyst may instead
select a specific station to absorb station Y’s cases and analyze the
results generated. In Figure 2, the map view shows all cases that
each of the four stations responds to during this time period (shown
as circles, with each case color coded by its station). We have also

226

highlighted the two cases that station D and the one case that station E responds to in Figure 2. It may be noted that the one case
absorbed by station E appears to be out of place (possibly due to a
human error in entering the geographic coordinates for that particular case). The top-right bar graph shows the count of all SAR cases
handled by station Y during this time period versus the average response time (in minutes) taken by the resulting stations to reach
these cases, assuming a transit speed of 15 nautical miles per hour.
From this time-series plot, we observe that all cases responded to
by the Auxiliary station would fall well within the tolerance level of
120 minutes when the suggested stations take over. The system also
determines the accuracy of the results dynamically by determining
the number of cases that have no associated geographic coordinates.
We find that 93% of the cases responded to by station Y in the time
range January 2004 and September 2010 have an associated geographic coordinate (as seen from the accuracy percentage in Figure
2-top-right). Data integrity is a necessary parameter to report to the
analysts and decision makers. Thus, the user is made aware of these
uncertainties at every step of the risk assessment process.
4.3 Temporal distribution of response case load
One important aspect of risk assessment is analyzing the work load
and distribution of response cases of the stations being analyzed
over different temporal ranges. This becomes necessary to determine the feasibility of a station to be closed and to determine how
the available resources may be reallocated (e.g., what times of day
and what months would the stations need to have more personnel
deployed). Analysts also use their domain experience and expertise
to determine whether a particular station can absorb a closing station’s cases. In particular, the Coast Guard officials were interested
in understanding the hourly, daily and monthly trends of SAR cases
occurring in the Great Lakes.
Using traditional methods of sifting through SAR datasets turns
out to be highly inefficient for determining the temporal distribution of the SAR cases and, as such, advanced database querying
tools are necessary to facilitate this process. To this end, we adapt
the calendar view for querying the SAR database. We provide three
different interaction methods within the calendar view widget (Figure 1 (d)) to obtain a detailed summary of response cases occurring
over the selected date-range. Users can select date ranges by simply
clicking on the start and end dates that selects all the dates between
the two clicked dates. Users may also select one or more columns

Figure 4: Risk assessment using linked views. Here, the analyst has chosen to close Auxiliary station X and is analyzing the risks associated
with this decision. Each circle on the map represents a SAR case and has been color coded by its owner station. The system shows that stations
A and B are best suited to absorb station X’s cases, with station B absorbing 144 cases and station A absorbing 15 cases.

of the calendar to generate the summary statistics. This allows them
to query the database and acquire the summary of events occurring,
for example, only on a particular week day. Finally, users may select any combination of individual dates and obtain the summary of
all selected response cases on those dates. These querying methods
allow analysts to easily determine the temporal patterns of response
cases over any date range. The system provides summary statistics
of SAR incidents for all stations and includes the total number of
lives saved, assisted, affected, total property damaged and saved
and the count of all cases occurring over the selected date range.
Users may select any date, row, column, or combinations thereof in
the calendar view using the mouse to access the summary statistics.
Furthermore, the system also allows users to visualize the hourly
and monthly distribution of cases for any time period after all filters
are applied.
4.4

Risk profile

Our system also provides users with the ability to interactively generate risk profiles that can be used to identify regions with little
SAR coverage by the Coast Guard stations in the Great Lakes. Figure 3 illustrates the risk profile heatmaps that present an overview
of the Coast Guard SAR coverage in the Great Lakes. Selected
filter settings affect the visual output, and in this case, we are looking exclusively at small boat station coverage. When areas of low
coverage exist, resources with additional capability (e.g., aircraft)
are often provided to ensure coverage of all areas. Figure 3 (Left)
shows the time (in minutes) that the Coast Guard stations would

take to respond to a SAR incident in the Great Lakes, assuming a
transit speed of 15 nautical miles per hour. This profile is generated
assuming that the station closest to a location responds to an incident in the Great Lakes. The regions in the Great Lakes that take
the longest time for the Coast Guard to respond to a SAR case can
be clearly seen in this figure. Users may interactively close stations,
filter on a different resource type (e.g., boat, aircraft), or change the
asset speed, updating the risk profile interactively. This further enables the analysts to visualize the increase or decrease in risk when
a station is closed. Moreover, analysts can set the lower threshold
of the color scale to 120 minutes (or any arbitrary time), thereby
allowing them to easily identify regions that may take more than
120 minutes to respond. We plan on incorporating contour lines
into our system to demarcate the regions that may take more than
the set threshold response time.
Figure 3 (Right) provides another risk profile visualization that
allows officials to identify regions with low Coast Guard coverage
for SAR operations in the Great Lakes. Regions with high SAR
coverage by the Coast Guard stations are shown by darker colors.
This further allows analysts to identify stations where resources
may be reallocated without increasing maritime risk.
5

E XPLORING
VIEWS

RISK

USING

SPATIOTEMPORAL

LINKED

While examining which Auxiliary stations are most suitable to
close, analysts need to weigh all options and analyze the potential
increase or decrease in associated risks. They must also consider

227

Figure 5: The average response time distribution for the additional cases when parent station A absorbs station X (Left) and when station B
absorbs station X (Right). We see a left shift in the median time indicating that station B may be a better candidate to absorb station X’s cases.

Figure 6: The change in average response time risk profile when Auxiliary station X is closed. (Left) Risk profile when station X is operational.
(Right) Risk profile when station X is closed. We see an increase in risk in station X’s area of operation when the station is closed.

the increase in workload of the stations that absorb the closed station’s cases to effectively determine the optimal response of available resources. In this section, we describe a typical scenario where
an analyst is trying to determine the risks associated with closing
an Auxiliary station in one of the sectors in the Great Lakes and the
stations that absorb the work load of this closed station.
Suppose the analyst chooses to close Auxiliary station X whose
parent station is A. Since the parent station of X is station A, the
analysts’ first inclination may be to assign all cases to station A after
station X is closed. The analyst first uses the system’s calendar view
and finds that the maximum number of cases that station X responds
to in one day is 7 in the peak boating season. He also visualizes the
hourly distribution of cases for station X and determines that the
incidents are spread out during the day. Next, the analyst uses our
risk assessment system to perform an average response time risk
analysis over a time range of January 2006 to September 2010 and
selects Auxiliary station X to be closed. Once station X is closed,
the system automatically generates the result seen in Figure 4. As
seen in the figure, the system determines stations A and B to be
the optimal stations to respond to the cases handled by Auxiliary
station X. In this figure, we see the spatial distribution of all SAR
cases that the three stations responded to during this time range
(seen as circles that are color coded by station). We observe that
station B absorbs 144 additional SAR cases as opposed to parent
station A which only absorbs 15 cases. Moreover, with this case
load distribution, we find that 154 out of the total 159 cases are
responded to within the 120 minute limit (as seen from the time
series plot in Figure 4-top-right). These results suggest that station
B is better suited to absorb most of the cases of Auxiliary station X.
In order to get a better picture, the analyst now restricts the stations that respond to the cases handled by station X to first, its
parent station A, and then to station B and analyzes the average
response time distribution of cases for each of the two stations separately. The results of this step are shown in Figure 5, with the
left graph showing the average response time taken by station A,
and the right graph corresponding to station B. As the analyst compares the two graphs, he realizes that if only station B is allowed
to absorb station X, there are 14 cases that take more than 2 hours

228

for the Coast Guard to arrive on scene. On the other hand, if station A is allowed to absorb station X, 16 cases take longer than 2
hours. However, as we can clearly see from Figure 5, station A
takes a longer time to respond to most cases than station B, with
the median time of station A being 110 minutes, and that of station B being 92 minutes. The analyst also notes that station B takes
between 264-271 minutes to respond to about nine cases, whereas
station A takes 275 minutes to respond to one case. To get a better
understanding of why this may be happening, the analyst explores
the spatial distribution of station X’s cases on the map and discovers
that some cases of station X get mapped to an inland lake (which
requires trailering the boat to the scene). In order to confirm that
these cases do not occur as a result of errors in the database, he
draws a bounding box over these incidents on the map and obtains
a summary of these incidents. The summary confirms that these
incidents do indeed occur in that particular lake. As station A is
closer to these cases, the analyst concludes that station A would be
a better candidate to absorb these cases as opposed to station B.
But for the rest of the cases, the results clearly suggest that station
B would be a better candidate to absorb station X’s cases, and that
station A would increase the maritime risks if allowed to absorb
station X’s cases alone. Thus, this analysis confirms that a combination of these two stations yields the best results. With these
results at hand, the analyst may also recommend using an aircraft
to respond to cases that take more than 120 minutes. Or, as our
preceding analysis showed, stations A and B may absorb the work
load of station X together, with station B receiving a higher share of
resources than station A. We also note that in the future, our system
could be modified to perform a real time analysis of SAR cases and
could then be used to assign each case to the correct station in real
time.
The analyst now uses the risk profile tools to observe the increase
in risks when station X is closed. This is shown in Figure 6, with
the left figure showing the average response time risk profile when
Auxiliary station X is functional whereas the right figure shows the
risk profile when station X is closed. The analyst explores the new
average response time on the map when station X is closed and determines the potential increase in maritime risks in the region. The

Figure 7: The monthly (left) and hourly (right) distributions of SAR incidents handled by Auxiliary station X between Jan. 2006 and Sept. 2010.

analyst thus identifies the regions in station X’s area of operation
that take a greater time to respond.
The analyst also visualizes the monthly and hourly distributions
of all SAR cases responded to by the closed Auxiliary station X
between January 2006 and September 2010 (shown in Figure 7,
where the left graph shows the monthly distribution and the right
graph shows the hourly distribution). We see that all activity occurs
in the summer months with a peak occurring in July and the station
responds to most cases mainly during evening hours. The analyst
also visualizes the temporal activity of stations A and B, and determines the potential work load increase for both stations. This helps
the analyst determine how the available resources must be reallocated if Auxiliary station X is to be closed. Furthermore, the analyst chooses to visualize the case distribution of Auxiliary station
X between January 2006 and September 2010 using the interactive
calendar view widget. This generates a summary dialog box that
provides the details of the SAR cases responded to by station X and
includes details including the total number of lives assisted, saved
and lost. This further helps the analyst understand the risks associated with closing this station by providing an overview of the cases
occurring in this region. With all these results at hand, the analyst
uses his domain knowledge to make an informed decision.
6

D OMAIN

EXPERT FEEDBACK

Our system was assessed by an analyst at the U.S. Coast Guard’s
Ninth District who is currently using the system to determine the
potential risks in the maritime domain associated with the hypothetical allocation of Coast Guard resources. The analyst emphasized
the need of such systems in the maritime domain that allow users to
quickly and easily process large datasets in order to derive actionable results. The analyst noted that processing the desired queries
took him a fraction of the time when using our system as compared
to using other software (e.g., Microsoft Excel) that he had been previously using in his analysis. He was impressed by the fact that the
system is intuitive to use and requires little user training. He observed that the system’s ability to process large datasets allows him
to quickly filter the data into manageable subsets while providing
interactive spatiotemporal displays that further aid him (and ultimately the senior level decision makers) in making a decision using
the best information available.
7

C ONCLUSIONS

AND

F UTURE W ORK

Our current work demonstrates the benefits of visual analytics in
analyzing risk and historic resource allocation in the maritime domain. Our visual analytics system provides analysts with a suite
of tools for analyzing risks and consequences of taking major decisions that translate into important measures including potential
lives and property lost. Our results show how our system can be
used as an effective risk assessment tool when examining various
mitigation strategies to a known or emergent problem.
Before this system was developed, Coast Guard officials explored possible mitigation strategies, including the implementation
of seasonal or weekend only Auxiliary duty stations, but the sheer
volume of data and information inhibited the efficient processing

of the data. However, using our system, the decision makers were
quickly made aware that most response cases happened on Mondays/Tuesdays at some of the units. This further asserts the benefits
of the use of visual analytics in the maritime domain.
In addition to performing risk analysis on the Coast Guard SAR
cases, our system can also be used to conduct a thorough review of
the operations (i.e. non-distress cases) conducted by different Coast
Guard stations. Users may choose to visualize different datasets
and analyze how each station performs in terms of factors including
average response times, average distance to target, lives saved, lives
assisted, lives affected, etc. Hence, the officials may analyze the
efficiency of each Coast Guard station and identify problem areas
that may require further attention.
Future work includes deploying our system to assist in the analysis and optimization of all operations conducted by the U.S. Coast
Guard Ninth District and expanding the use of our system to other
Coast Guard districts. We plan on implementing algorithms that
factor the geography of the coast line in the risk assessment process
in order to get accurate response times by the Coast Guard assets.
We also plan on employing prediction algorithms in the temporal
domain as well as spatiotemporal correlation algorithms that correlate different datasets (e.g., weather, water temperature) with the
response dataset to provide insights into the operation of the Coast
Guard stations. Furthermore, we plan on incorporating additional
risk metrics to provide insights into different risk scenarios.
8 A PPENDIX
In this section, we briefly provide some domain specific terms and
definitions:
Coast Guard Auxiliary: Volunteers that support the Coast Guard.
Coast Guard Ninth District: The area of Coast Guard operations
that encompasses the Great Lakes.
Atlantic Area Command: The area of Coast Guard operations
East of the Rocky Mountains.
Captain of the Port (COTP) Zone: Further division of Coast
Guard operations within a Coast Guard District.
Unit or Station: The operational execution arm of the Coast
Guard. For example, the small boat station provides the boat and
personnel to execute the assigned mission.
Coast Guard asset: A boat or an aircraft reserved to perform
Coast Guard operations.
Coast Guard sortie: An asset that responds to an incident.
9 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Capt. Eric Vogelbacher, Steffen
Koch and Zichang Liu for their feedback. This work is supported
by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s VACCINE Center
under Award Number 2009-ST-061-CI0002.
10 D ISCLAIMER
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security or the U.S. Coast Guard.

229

R EFERENCES
[1] Command Post Of The Future (CPOF). Internet: http://www.
gdc4s.com/documents/cpof_datasheet_web.pdf, [June
20, 2011].
[2] ESRI, ArcView. Internet: http://www.esri.com/software/
arcgis/arcview/index.html, [June 9, 2011].
[3] Oculus, GeoTime. Internet: http://www.oculusinfo.com/
SoftwareProducts/GeoTime.html, [June 25, 2011].
[4] OpenStreetMap. Internet: http://www.openstreetmap.org,
[June 15, 2011].
[5] R. Adler and J. Fuller. An integrated framework for assessing and mitigating risks to maritime critical infrastructure. In IEEE Conference
on Technologies for Homeland Security, pages 252 –257, May 2007.
[6] C. A. Brewer. Designing Better Maps: A Guide for GIS users. ESRI
Press, 2005.
[7] J. V. Carlis and J. A. Konstan. Interactive visualization of serial periodic data. In Proceedings of the Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pages 29–38, 1998.
[8] W. S. Cleveland and M. E. McGill, editors. Dynamic Graphics for
Statistics. Wadsworth and Brooks/Cole, 1988.
[9] C. Correa, Y.-H. Chan, and K.-L. Ma. A framework for uncertaintyaware visual analytics. In IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pages 51 –58, Oct. 2009.
[10] S. G. Eick and B. S. Johnson. Interactive data visualization at AT&T
Bell laboratories. In Conference companion on human factors in computing systems, pages 17–18, New York, NY, USA, 1995.
[11] S. G. Eick and G. J. Wills. Navigating large networks with hierarchies.
In Proceedings of the 4th conference on visualization, Visualization
1993, pages 204–209, Washington, DC, USA, 1993. IEEE Computer
Society.
[12] M. Feather, S. Cornford, J. Kiper, and T. Menzies. Experiences using visualization techniques to present requirements, risks to them,
and options for risk mitigation. In First International Workshop on
Requirements Engineering Visualization, Sept. 2006.
[13] R. A. Gandhi and S.-W. Lee. Visual analytics for requirements-driven
risk assessment. In Second International Workshop on Requirements
Engineering Visualization, October 2007.
[14] F. Hardisty and A. C. Robinson. The geoviz toolkit: using componentoriented coordination methods for geographic visualization and analysis. International Journal Geographical Information Science, 25:191–
210, February 2011.
[15] S. Havre, E. Hetzler, P. Whitney, and L. Nowell. Themeriver: Visualizing thematic changes in large document collections. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1):9–20, 2002.
[16] A. Inselberg. Parallel Coordinates: Visual Multidimensional Geometry and Its Applications. Springer, September 2009.
[17] D. Keim, J. Kohlhammer, G. Ellis, and F. Mansmann, editors. Mastering the information age: Solving problems with Visual Analytics.
EuroGraphics, 2010.
[18] R. Lane, D. Nevell, S. Hayward, and T. Beaney. Maritime anomaly
detection and threat assessment. In 13th Conference on Information
Fusion, pages 1 –8, July 2010.
[19] R. Laxhammar. Anomaly detection for sea surveillance. In 11th International Conference on Information Fusion, pages 1 –8, July 2008.
[20] M. Mansouri, R. Nilchiani, and A. Mostashari. A risk managementbased decision analysis framework for resilience in maritime infrastructure and transportation systems. In 3rd Annual IEEE Systems Conference, pages 35 –41, March 2009.
[21] M. Migut and M. Worring. Visual exploration of classification models
for risk assessment. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Visual
Analytics Science and Technology, pages 11–18, October 2010.
[22] B. Ristic, B. La Scala, M. Morelande, and N. Gordon. Statistical analysis of motion patterns in AIS data: Anomaly detection and motion
prediction. In 11th International Conference on Information Fusion,
pages 1 –7, July 2008.
[23] J. Roy and M. Davenport. Categorization of maritime anomalies for
notification and alerting purpose. NATO Workshop on Data Fusion
and Anomaly Detection for Maritime Situational Awareness, pages
15–17, September 2009.
[24] S. Rudolph, A. Savikhin, and D. Ebert. Finvis: Applied visual ana-

230

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]
[29]

[30]

[31]
[32]

[33]

[34]

lytics for personal financial planning. In IEEE Symposium on Visual
Analytics Science and Technology, pages 195 –202, Oct. 2009.
N. M. Sanusi and N. Mustafa. A visualization tool for risk assessment
in software development. In International Symposium on Information
Technology, pages 1–4, August 2008.
A. Savikhin, R. Maciejewski, and D. Ebert. Applied visual analytics for economic decision-making. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pages 107–114,
October 2008.
R. Scheepens, N. Willems, H. van de Watering, and J. J. van Wijk.
Interactive visualization of multivariate trajectory data with density
maps. In Proceedings of the Pacific Visualization 2011, pages 147–
154, March 2011.
B. W. Silverman. Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis.
Chapman & Hall/CRC, 1986.
C. G. Soares and A. P. Teixeira. Risk assessment in maritime transportation. Reliability Engineering and System Safety, 74(3):299 – 309,
2001.
J. Stasko, C. Gorg, Z. Liu, and K. Singal. Jigsaw: Supporting investigative analysis through interactive visualization. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology,
pages 131–138, 2007.
J. J. Thomas and K. A. Cook, editors. Illuminating the Path: The R&D
Agenda for Visual Analytics. IEEE Press, 2005.
U. S. C. G. U.S. Department of Homeland Security. U.S. Coast Guard
Addendum to the United States National Search and Rescue Supplement (NSS) to the International Aeronautical and Maritime Search
and Rescue Manual (IAMSAR). September 2009.
J. J. V. Wijk and E. R. V. Selow. Cluster and calendar based visualization of time series data. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, pages 4–9, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999.
IEEE Computer Society.
N. Willems, H. van de Wetering, and J. J. van Wijk. Visualization of
vessel movements. Computer Graphics Forum, 28(3):959–966, 2009.

