3D Visualization
of Temporal Changes in Bloggers’ Activities and Interests
Masahiko ITOH

Naoki YOSHINAGA

Masashi TOYODA

Masaru KITSUREGAWA

Institute of Industrial Science, University of Tokyo

A BSTRACT
This paper presents a novel system for analyzing temporal changes
in bloggers’ activities and interests on a topic through a 3D visualization of dependency structures related to the topic. Having a dependency database built from a blog archive, our 3D visualization
framework helps users to interactively exploring temporal changes
in bloggers’ activities and interests related to the topic.
1

I NTRODUCTION

Social media such as blog and twitter enables users to easily and
rapidly publish personal activities and interests. Now that they have
been considered as an important diachronic data for marketing, linguistic, and sociology, which implies a growing demand to support
their analysis via visualization [3].
The current systems for analyzing the blogosphere [1] focus on
the topic detection in the blogosphere, and provide a little information that explains why (in what contexts) the topic becomes popular. Although some systems supplementarily provide a set of words
(e.g., Hatoyama) related to the given topic (e.g., ’Obama’), they are
insufficient; the users are forced to read the individual posts on the
topic to understand the contexts between the related words.
This paper proposes a system for visualizing temporal changes
in bloggers’ activities and interest through dependency analysis
of contents in a blog archive. Our system could directly relate a
given topic with other related words via the events themselves (e.g.,
“Obama meets Hatoyama”). We can thereby gain a deeper insight
into what is actually happening on the given topic. The intended
users of our system include not only professional analysts who have
a prior knowledge about the topic for marketing and/or social problems but also casual social media users who may find out their interesting topics using the other analysis systems to explore the detail
of the topic.
2

month. The dependency database allows us to search events that involve a given topic (noun). We preclude the details of the database
due to space limitations.
To summarize events for the topic, we categorize each event
based on a thematic role (e.g., agent, experiencer, theme and location) of the noun for the verb. In Japanese, we can exploit case
particles (e.g., ‘-ga’, ‘-wo’, ‘-ni’, ‘-to’, and ‘-de’) attached to the
nouns to guess their thematic roles.
3

3D V ISUALIZATION

3.1 Visualizing Events on a TimeSlice
We visualize retrieved set of events that are represented as a tree
structure on a TimeSlice [2]. When a user inputs a topic noun, the
system retrieves events from the dependency database. Each event
is represented as a triplet (a noun, a case particle, and a verb) and
a path between constituents of the triplet on a TimeSlice. A set of
events are visualized as a tree. TimeSlice displays only top-n frequent events related to each case particle belonging to a selected
month. TimeSlice changes the size of nodes representing verbs according to the frequency of events in the selected month.
In Figure 1 (a), the system visualizes events about ‘swine flu’
such as “catch swine flu (shingata-influenza-ni kansen-suru)”. In
this case, the topical noun ‘swine flu’ is centered, and case particles
‘-de’, ‘-ni’, and ‘-ga’ are around the noun ‘swine flu’. Verbs such
as ‘catch’ are arranged around the topic noun with case a particles.
TimeSlice
‘high school student’

‘-ga
‘-ni’ (case parƟcle)
‘swine ﬂu’ (noun)

D EPENDENCY A NALYSIS AND DATABASE

We construct a dependency database that consists of events, each
of which is defined as a set of dependency relations on a particular verb, from the blog archive. Hereafter, we regard a set of dependency relations between a verb and its dependents (nouns) as a
target event. The verb represents an action or a state of being (in
which the bloggers may have an interest) and the nouns modifying the verb further characterizes the action/state. We can therefore
grasp details of a particular event anchored by a verb, by collecting
a set of dependency relations between the verb and its dependents.
We have collected Japanese blog feeds since Feb. 2006; currently the archive consists of over 2 million blogs with in total over
350 million posts. We first analyze the sentences in the blog archive
by using a dependency parser1 to collect dependency relations that
represent events. We next build a dependency database for each

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
1 http://www.tkl.iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp/˜ynaga/jdepp/
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00
©2011 IEEE

‘catch’ (verb)
‘-de
‘Kobe’

(a) Visualizing events related to “swine ﬂu”

(b) Expanding nodes to show detail of
the event “catch swine ﬂu”

Figure 1: Visualization of events and detailed information about a
selected event

3.2 Interface for Event Exploration
We provide an interface for drilling down detailed information after
visualizing events about the particular topic on the TimeSlice.
In Figure 1, we select the event ‘catch swine flu’ by selecting the
verb ‘catch’. Then, the system shows more specific events such
as “high school student catches swine flu” and “catch swine flu
at Kobe”, and then visualizes them as child nodes of the selected
event.

283

3.3 Comparison of Multiple Topics
To compare events retrieved from different topics, we utilize a split
view proposed by [2] to visualize two sets of events in different
TimeSlices (the upper and lower part of Figure 2). The positions of
the different TimeSlices along the timeline are synchronized with
one another. The users can also add sets of TimeSlices having different time stamps to the timeline.
In the split view, the system treats the positions of the central
noun, the same case particles, and the same verbs on different
TimeSlices as the same nodes respectively, and arranges them at
the same position on the different TimeSlices. Moreover, when we
select nodes on one TimeSlice, the system automatically selects and
highlights the same nodes on the different TimeSlices.

For example, TimeFluxes in the upper part of Figure 3 show that
events related to ‘catch swine flu’ explosively increase after May.
2009. On the other hand, TimeFluxes in the lower part of Figure
3 show that events related to ‘catch seasonal flu’ increase and decrease in an annual manner.

‘swine flu’

TimeSlices for different months
SelecƟng and expanding

2009/05
᪂ၟရ䠝

‘seasonal flu’

TimeSlices for different topics

New Product A’

announce

New Product A

release

new charge plan

change

Telco A

Telco A

‘catch’

Figure 3: Comparison of temporal changes in frequency among
events about different topics by using multiple TimeFluxes

Telco B

TimeFluxes

Telco B

Figure 2: Multiple TimeSlices for comparing events in different
months and for comparing events on different topics

3.4 Visualizing Temporal Changes in Event Tree Structure
A TimeSlice displays only events in a specified month, and can be
dragged along the timeline to change visualized events. In addition,
our system allows us to interactively add new TimeSlices in different positions along the timeline, and to compare multiple TimeSlices in the 3D environment (Figure 2). This enables us to compare
events in different months.
The same events belonging to different timings, which are visualized in different TimeSlices, have the same position to easily understand the similarity and differences among the different months.
3.5 Visualizing Temporal Changes in Event Frequency
A TimeFlux is a line of spheres for visualizing the changes in the
amount of information such as the number of events within a given
period of time (Figure 2). They enable us to intuitively observe
when a selected event attracted attention such as a bursting point,
and periodicity of its trends.

284

4 C ASE S TUDIES
Figure 2 shows the visualization for a comparison of marketing
effect about two telephone companies (Telco for short) in Japan.
The upper TimeSlice shows a topic about ‘Telco A’, and the lower
one shows a topic about ‘Telco B’2 . We can recognize many
events related to ‘change’ appear in TimeSlice about ‘Telco A’ than
‘Telco B’. When we show TimeFluxes about such events, we can
observe that there are some peaks in the events ‘change to Telco A’
on the TimeSlice for ‘Telco A’. In Figure 2, we put left TimeSlices to the position of the timing when the first peak came (Oct.
2006), right ones to the second peak (Jun. 2008). We can notice
that ‘Telco A’ announced or released something because the size
of nodes ‘announce’ and ‘release’ becomes large. Next, we expand these nodes to show the detail about announcement and released products, and then we find out that they announced a ‘new
charge plan’ at the first peak, and a ‘new product A’ at the second peak. On the other hand, although ‘Telco B’ announced new
products very well, there are a few peaks related to events ‘change’
about ‘Telco B’. These results show that the marketing activities
of ‘Telco A’ effectively give an impact to Japan than those of
‘Telco B’.
R EFERENCES
[1] BlogScope. http://www.blogscope.net/.
[2] M. Itoh, M. Toyoda, and M. Kitsuregawa. An Interactive Visualization
Framework for Time-Series of Web Graphs in a 3D Environment. In
Proc. IV 2010, pages 54–60, 2010.
[3] M. Kitsuregawa, T. Tamura, M. Toyoda, and N. Kaji. Socio-Sense:
A System for Analysing the Societal Behavior from Long Term Web
Archive. In Proc. APWeb 2008, pages 1–8, 2008.
2 Companies’

names are anonymized.

