Geovisual Analytics for Cyber Security: Adopting the GeoViz Toolkit
VAST 2011 Mini Challenge 2 Award: "Innovative Tool Adaptation"
Nicklaus A. Giacobe*

Sen Xu**

College of Information Sciences and Technology
The Pennsylvania State University

Department of Geography and GeoVISTA Center
The Pennsylvania State University

ABSTRACT

For the VAST 2011 Network Security Mini-Challenge, we
adopted geovisual analytic methods and applied them in the field
of network security. We used the GeoViz Toolkit [1] to represent
cyber security events, by fabricating a simple “geography” of
several sets of blocks (one for the workstations, one for the
servers, and one for the Internet) using ArcGIS 10 (by ESRI Environmental System Research Institute). Security data was
tabulated using Perl scripts to parse the logs in order to create
representations of event frequency and where they occurred on the
network. The tabulated security data was then added as attributes
of the geography. Exploration of the data and subsequent analysis
of the meaning and impact of the cyber security events was made
possible using the GeoViz Toolkit.
KEYWORDS: Coordinated and multiple views, geovisual analytics,
GeoViz Toolkit, cyber security, situation awareness

INDEX TERMS: C.2.3 Network Operations; H.1.2 User/Machine
Systems; H.5.2 User Interfaces
1

INTRODUCTION

The 2011 VAST Network Security Mini Challenge sought tools
and techniques to increase situation awareness for the computer
and network operations of a typical medium-sized business. To
increase network security without significantly increasing the
amount of IT staffing, visual analytic tools were requested to
interpret and display the network security data. We assumed that
for a company and network of this size that an IT staff would
include 4-5 employees, one of whom would most likely be dualtasked with the network security responsibilities.
A coordinated and multiple view environment serves the
purpose of exploratory data analysis, sense making and support of
informed decision making [2]. For example, the GeoViz toolkit,
which allows users to interactively build custom geo-visualization
applications, has been used for various spatial and temporal
analysis and explorations purposes [1, 3]. We adopted the GeoViz
toolkit to solve the 2011 VAST Mini Challenge 2 for its
coordinated views and visualization choices.
2

METHODS, TOOLS AND FEATURES

Three tools were employed to realize the desired effect. First, a
“geography” was fabricated and a two dimensional map with a
corresponding shape file was created using ArcMap. Next, Perl
scripts were created to parse through the log files and create
*e-mail: nxg13@ist.psu.edu
** e-mail: sux100@psu.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

entries in the shape file’s database. Finally, the GeoViz Toolkit
was used to open the shape file and to visually explore the data.
2.1
Spatialization with ArcMap
Geo-visualization tools require a geography as the basis for
visualizations. Because the security data do not explicitly imply a
geography, one was constructed. The network architecture of
AFC.com (the analysis target company) offered some leads on
how to spatialize the security data into a virtual geography that
may match the mental models held by the hypothetical AFC IT
staff. The resultant geography consisted of three regions:
Internetland, Serverland, and Workstationland. The Internetland
consisted of 256 blocks with each block represents one unique IP
address (10.200.150.*). Serverland (192.168.1.* plus 172.20.1.*)
consisted of larger blocks for the active servers because they may
contain data that is more important. The remaining unused IP
space was displayed as smaller blocks so that unexpected security
events can be recognized. Workstationland consisted of 256
blocks as well, each with a unique IP address (192.168.2.*). The
whole geography was manually created in ArcGIS 10 as a .shp
file with IP addresses used as unique IDs for each block.
2.2
Log File Parsing in Perl
The JDL Data Fusion Process Model [4] provided the basis for
treating the network security data as sensor output in a fusion
system [5]. First, we extracted entities, generally as computers by
IP address, and applied the alert or log entry as properties of those
entities to create Level 1 Fusion (entity-level refinement). Level 2
Fusion (situation refinement) was supported through assessment
of different types of the network security data for all of the entities
in the space and provided support for different levels of situation
awareness [6]. The visual analytic representation represents a
cognitive (Level 5) refinement in the JDL Model.
The log files’ raw formats (text, XML and CSV) were
processed using several Perl scripts to generate simple tabulations
of individual security occurrences. Features were added to each
entity (IP Address) as entries in the database. For this competition,
a one hour timeframe was chosen to support situation awareness
in a way that would not be cognitively burdensome. It was
presumed that the network analysts would modify and write their
own scripts to process the data, provide appropriate features that
meet their own needs and adapt the system to emerging threats.
2.3
GeoViz Toolkit
The GeoViz Toolkit [1] is a coordinated and multiple view tool
for geographic visualization and analysis. It takes .shp file as input
and automatically associates attribute data from corresponding
.dbf file. Once loaded, the user may choose from 20+
visualizations to represent the data. Here we used four
visualizations: GeoMap, Scatter Plot, Parallel Coordinate Plot and
Histogram (see Figure 1). One of the strongest features of the
toolkit is its coordinated views. Selection, brushing and
highlighting in one view is simultaneously represented in other
views to enable cross-visualization discovery. The power of
coordinated views is leveraged by displaying data in one or more

315

views (the PCP, for instance) and using another view (histogram
or GeoMap) for selection and highlighting. Discovery and insight
are supported through the interaction more than static
representation of data.

Figure 1: GeoViz Toolkit with (A) bivariate geomap, (B)
scatterplot, (C) parallel coordinate plot and (D) histogram
2.3.1
Univariate and Bivariate Geomaps
The Geomap can represent a single source of data or two distinct
variables simultaneously using a bivariate map. We first explored
the vulnerability scan data using a univariate map to easily
identify the several workstations identified by the NESSUS
scanner as having non-zero CVSS totals. This variable was
analyzed in conjunction with other variables on the assumption
that these hosts were more likely to be compromised in multiple
ways. For instance, we applied both vulnerability score and IDS
alert data in different colors on the same bivariate geomap. Where
values for both features exist, the colors blend, focusing attention
on vulnerable machines that also have intrusion information.
2.3.2
Parallel Coordinate Plots (PCPs)
Parallel coordinate plots were used in two different ways. The
first, a non-traditional use of the PCP, is as an approximation of a
timeline. The selection of the same type of variable for each
timeslice showed changes in that variable over time. For example,
we were able to compare the number of alerts generated by the
source IP address over each hour. Second, the PCP was
reconfigured to display each type of alert during a specific hour to
explore which alert type is implicated. If a particular alert type
was interesting over several time periods, a quick comparison
could be made using a PCP of that alert type for each interesting
timeslice.
2.3.3
Histograms
Frequency histograms have limited value in cyber security
because of the high number of individual hosts, log entries and
alerts. The relatively low signal-to-noise ratio that is inherent in
cyber security data makes finding low frequency data difficult.
However, we used the interactive histogram in the GeoViz Toolkit
as a selection tool to allow us to view data in other panels. In
figure 1, the red bounding box outlines a selection of low
frequency data. Once selected, the other panels highlight the
desired data and de-emphasize the rest. This interaction with the
tool is what provides the insight for the analyst and is best
observed in the video demonstration.1

3

DISCUSSION

Some, but not all of the network security events that were
imbedded in the data were identified using the GeoViz Toolkit.
We attribute this to the lack of coverage of all of the provided data
and not to the methods employed. Due to a variety of factors,
(including small team size), we focused on the intrusion detection
and vulnerability scan data, but did not fully evaluate the firewall
and server logs. Now that we have some experience with this
interaction method and cyber security data, we believe that these
methods show significant promise and are worthy of further
exploration.
As we speculate on the utility of these methods in the real
world, we consider that our fabricated geography will have to be
tested against the mental models of practicing analysts and will
have to scale to support enterprise networks. We anticipate that
these non-trivial constraints will have solutions in the
interdisciplinary regions between the fields of cyber security,
cognitive science, and geovisual analytics.
4

CONCLUSION

Geovisual analytic treatment shows promise as a novel method of
exploring cyber security data. Even though cyber security data
does not necessarily have a physical geography, it can be spatially
represented by IP address. Combining multiple different types of
data in the coordinated views of the GeoViz Toolkit can
effectively produce a multi-sensor data fusion system that
supports the analyst’s cognition and improves situation awareness
as they explore the data through several interactive visualizations.
5

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors are thankful to the Penn State GeoVISTA Center and
the developers of the GeoViz Toolkit, especially Frank Hardisty
and Anthony Robinson. We also thank the rest of the Penn State
VAST Challenge Team, and especially Alan MacEachren,
Prasenjit Mitra and David L. Hall for their expert advice and
leadership. This work was partially supported by U.S. Army
Research Office (ARO) MURI Grant “Computer Aided Human
Centric Cyber Situation Awareness” W911-NF-09-1-0525 and by
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security under Award #: 2009ST-061-CI0001.
REFERENCES

[1] F. Hardisty and A. Robinson, "The geoviz toolkit: using componentoriented coordination methods for geographic visualization and analysis,"
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, vol. 25, pp.
191-210, 2011.
[2] G. Andrienko and N. Andrienko, "Coordinated Multiple Views: a
Critical View," in Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory
Visualization, 2007. CMV '07. Fifth International Conference on, 2007,
pp. 72-74.
[3] F. Hardisty, et al., "Methods for ad-hoc delineation and analysis of
categories of spatio-temporal events," presented at the Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Computing for Geospatial Research
&amp; Applications, Washington, DC, 2011.
[4] D. Hall and S. McMullen, Mathematical techniques in multisensor
data fusion. Boston, MA: Artech House, 2004.
[5] N. A. Giacobe, "Application of the JDL Data Fusion Process Model
for Cyber Security," in Proc. SPIE, 2010, p. 77100R.
[6] M. Endsley, "Towards a theory of situation awareness in dynamic
systems," Human Factors, vol. 37, p. 32, 1995.

1

316

http://www.personal.psu.edu/nxg13/PSU-GeoVizToolkit-MC2/

