ScatterBlogs: Geo-Spatial Document Analysis
VAST 2011 Mini Challenge 1 Award: “Unique Integration of Tag Clouds in Geo-spatial Visualizations”

Harald Bosch∗

∗
¨
Dennis Thom∗
Michael Worner
Steffen Koch∗
†
¨
Dominik Jackle
Thomas Ertl∗

†
Edwin Puttmann
¨

¨ Stuttgart
Institute for Visualization and Interactive Systems, Universitat

Figure 1: The map of Vastopolis with overlays for message densities (gray colored areas with three bright hotspots), event labels of spatiotemporal
term anomalies (text colored by the relevant time interval), and the highlighted relevant areas of the truck event (orange).

Index Terms: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
User Interfaces—GUI; H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]:
Information Search and Retrieval—Search process
1

I NTRODUCTION

The VAST 2011 Mini-Challenge 1 (MC1) dataset featured roughly
one million georeferenced micro blog messages during a flu-like
epidemic outbreak in the fictitious city of Vastopolis. The challenge
task was to identify the outbreak’s ground zero location, means of
transmission, and the affected regions.
We propose ScatterBlogs, a system for interacting with the data
in a visual, direct, and scalable fashion, which offers diverse views
and data management components. Our system supports an analysis process allowing an iterative integration of qualitative as well as
quantitative findings and it provides sophisticated hypothesis validation mechanisms. With visualizations for showing terms with
space-time density anomalies, performing selective key term exploration, and managed clustering, it was possible to solve the mini
challenge correctly.
∗ {bosch,thom,woerner,kochsn,ertl}@vis.uni-stuttgart.de
† {puettmen,jaeckldk}@studi.informatik.uni-stuttgart.de

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

2

A NALYTICAL P ROCESS

Within the ScatterBlogs desktop analysts create and incrementally
reformulate data sets for free exploration or validation of hypotheses. During these activities the system supports the analysts in three
basic ways: Firstly, it features overviews that suggest interesting
artifacts in the dataset to be examined; Secondly, the currently examined sets of messages are shown in different views, thereby visualizing trends and patterns; And thirdly, it supports the quick creation of new sets, the reuse of existing sets for different purposes,
and the easy recombination of sets – all through direct interaction.
At any time the analysts are in full control over the analysis work
flow while the system keeps track of the different sets of data that
were created. For the VAST Challenge we distinguish two phases
of analysis.
Dataset Exploration In the first phase of the analytical process
an overview of the situation in Vastopolis is obtained by querying all messages containing any of the symptoms mentioned in the
challenge’s task description. Hereby, a small subset of the dataset
is extracted and established as context for the subsequent analysis
that can be performed using selection and highlighting techniques.
Nonetheless, the complete dataset is still accessible and can always
be included in the context by modifying the query. To explore a
context, the spatial density of messages can be shown on the city
map for any given time-frame using a hierarchical time-range slider
(cf. Fig. 2). For the given dataset this method instantly reveals that
symptom related messages concentrate mainly in two dense spa-

309

tiotemporal clusters (cf. Fig. 1) – the first one covering a wedgeshaped area over Downtown and Eastside and the second one covering the riverside of Plainville, Smogtown, and Westside. Also, it
can be noticed that at the end of the time period there are clusters
of increased symptom mentions at the city’s hospital locations.
To get a quick impression of what is posted in the clusters, we
developed a tool that shows the most frequent terms of the messages
captured by a movable lens. The terms are scaled according to their
local frequency and placed in a small tag cloud around the lens.
By moving the lens over the map, it can be observed that people
in the two wedge shaped clusters each talk about different kinds
of symptoms. The symptoms observed along the river seem to be
more gastrointestinal in nature and do not spread across other areas
of the map, while the ones over Downtown and Eastside are mostly
fever-related and can also be found throughout the city.
After having identified the affected regions, we look for possible causes for the epidemic outspread. For such tasks, we developed a tool supporting the fast retrieval of event-related key terms
by means of geolocated tag clouds. Based on the hypothesis that
local events result in high concentrations of similar term usage in
dense spatiotemporal areas, the dataset is searched for such anomalies. The relevance for each possible key term is determined by
the significance of its anomalies. Consequently, tags are placed on
the map near the location of the term’s most significant anomaly
and the size as well as the order of placement is determined by the
term’s relevance. If the optimal location is already occupied by a
more significant term, the tag is placed in the nearest vicinity using
an approach similar to Luboschick et al. [2]. Once generated, the
tag overlay allows an interactive exploration of events by hovering
over the tags to highlight the regions affected by related anomalies.
By selecting a term it can be added to the current query thereby
including all of its messages into the analysis context.
We use the key term overlay of the whole dataset to locate a
truck accident on a bridge right between the two affected regions.
Selecting the messages of this event with the lens and browsing the
message contents reveals that this accident involved fire and spilt
cargo. At this point the hypothesis can be formulated that the truck
accident resulted in a spread of infectious materials both airborne
over the downtown area and waterborne down the river.
Hypothesis Validation In the second phase of the analysis process, we validate this hypothesis by excluding other possible means
of infection and by checking the spatiotemporal correlation of the
truck accident and the illness. The spatiotemporal correlation of
the truck accident and the outbreak can be validated using a threedimensional representation of the messages over space and time as
depicted in Fig. 2. Here, it can be observed that the messages
concerning the truck accident are in close spatiotemporal proximity
to the messages mentioning flu-like and gastrointestinal symptoms
which supports the hypothesis that these events are somehow correlated. To rule out the possibility of person-to-person transmission,
we check whether all hospitalized persons, who reported symptoms, were exposed in the affected region. We adopted a selection
management component from PatViz [1] to formulate the complex
queries required. Here, one can interactively define and combine
selections using basic set operations. We create one set containing
all hospitalized users and another set of all exposed users through
textual and spatiotemporal selections. Intersecting them by user ids
shows that almost all hospitalized users were directly exposed in the
flu-symptom area. We consider this as an indication that there is no
person-to-person infection. Similarly, it can be noticed that none of
the persons infected in the gastrointestinal outbreak receives treatment in hospitals.
3

C ONCLUSION

We presented Scatterblogs, a system for microblog analysis that
seamlessly integrates search backend and visual frontend. It pro-

310

Figure 2: The ScatterBlogs analysis desktop comprises amongst others: textual quering, a time-range slider including a histogram and
weather information, blog scatterplots on the map and in a timespace cube, a map lens with a local tag cloud, a subset management component combining and tagging selections, and a table of
the messages. The current message set is manually tagged to emphasize the two affected areas (green and yellow) and the truck accident (blue).

vides powerful, automatic algorithms for detecting spatio-temporal
‘anomalies’ within blog entries as well as corresponding visual representations and interaction facilities for inspecting anomalies or
exploiting them in further analytic steps. Apart from that, we consider the system’s combinatoric facilities for building complex hypotheses from temporal, spatial, and content-related aspects an important feature. This was the key for creating a cross-checked analysis for MC1.
While our solution scales well for the VAST 2011 Challenge
MC1 data set, we will put the main focus of future research on
visual analysis of real-world microblog data, which greatly exceed the geographical, temporal, and quantitative dimensions we
are working with now. This requires changes in order to allow
for smooth interactive visual analysis on different geographical and
temporal scales. Additionally, we intend to create flexible and
adaptable event extraction techniques that are not only applicable
for post-analysis, but also for live data in monitoring scenarios.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the IEEE VAST Challenge 2011 team and
all reviewers. This work was partially funded by the the German
Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF), the German Science Foundation (DFG), and the European Commission as
part of the VASA project, the SPP 1335, the FP7-project PESCaDO
(FP7-248594), and the Graduate School of Excellence for advanced
Manufacturing Engineering (GSaME).
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Koch, H. Bosch, M. Giereth, and T. Ertl. Iterative Integration of
Visual Insights during Scalable Patent Search and Analysis . IEEE
Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 17(5):557–569, 2011.
[2] M. Luboschik, H. Schumann, and H. Cords. Particle-based labeling: Fast point-feature labeling without obscuring other visual features.
IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , 14(6):1237–1244, 2008.

