Analyst’s Workspace: Protecting Vastopolis
VAST 2011 Mini-Challenge 3 Award: “Novel Use of Large Screen Workspace to Support Analysis”
Christopher Andrews, M. Shahriar Hossain, Samah Gad, Naren Ramakrishnan, and Chris North
Virginia Tech

ABSTRACT
Analyst’s Workspace is a sensemaking environment designed
specifically for use of large, high-resolution displays. It employs a
spatial workspace to integrate foraging and synthesis activities
into a unified process. In this paper we describe how Analyst’s
Workspace solved the VAST 2011 mini-challenge #3 and discuss
some of the unique features of the environment.
KEYWORDS: Visual analytics, large, high-resolution displays,
intelligence analysis, space
INDEX TERMS: H.5.2 [Information Systems]: Information Interfaces and Presentation—User Interfaces
1

OVERVIEW

Analyst’s Workspace (AW) is a spatially oriented sensemaking
environment designed specifically for use on a large, highresolution display (Figure 1). The primary goal of AW is to
provide a spatial workspace in which foraging and synthesis
activities can be integrated into a single, fluid investigative
process.
The primary visual objects in AW are documents, in which, due
to the screen real estate provided by the large, high-resolution
display, the full text is visible. Using a combination of manual and
automatic layout, the analyst can arrange the documents spatially
to schematize and otherwise externalize aspects of his or her
synthesis of the information. Entities are another important aspect
of the environment, and automatic named entity extraction is
performed on the documents to generate the set of entities, which
is editable by the analyst. The identified entities appear in several
different guises within the interface (Figure 2).
Within documents, identified entities are underlined, colored by
type (person, location, etc). If an entity seems important, the
analyst clicks on it, and it opens into the workspace as a labeled
list of all of the documents containing it. The analyst can then
spider out from this point, opening these documents in turn. The
list can also be iconified, providing a more abstract representation
for the entity that can then be used to label document collections,
or to create entity level structures such as social networks.
While the freeform workspace allows the analyst to use spatial
relationships to encode arbitrary information, visual links are used
to show computationally based relationships. Clicking on an
entity, for example, shows links to every document that mentions
that entity. The links are multi-scale, and can link to objects
within documents, similar to the cross-application links described
by Waldner [1]. Thus a link from an entity links not just to the
document, but also to the actual mentions of the entity within. In
order to keep the workspace uncluttered, only the links from the
currently selected object are shown. Other facilities of the
environment are textual highlighting, colored “sticky” notes, and

Figure 1 Analyst’s Workspace running on our 10,240 x 3200
large, high-resolution display.

full text search.
In preparation for this challenge, we also incorporated some
data mining tools in AW. One of these tools was a heuristic based
storytelling algorithm that we described in [2] to find connections
between any pair of documents. Using tf-idf vector space
representations of documents, the tool uses constraints on
document similarities and neighborhoods to find a path between
documents identified by the analyst. The second tool provides
access to nearest neighbor documents through a cover tree data
structure [3]. A third tool (“similarity network exploration”)
allows the analyst to find connections between entities based on
co-occurrence, either at the sentence, or the document level.
2

ANALYSIS

In order to give a feel for working with AW, we will walk through
some particulars of our analysis of the data. One of the significant
challenges of a dataset of this size is identifying a place to start.
As AW does not provide any capabilities for getting an overview
of the dataset, we began by classifying the documents using the
AlchemyAPI [4], which categorizes documents into news
categories such as politics and sports. We then added a simple
browser to AW to allow us to filter the documents by these
categories.

{cpa, msh, samah, naren, north}@vt.edu
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

Figure 2 Three entity representations in AW: document underlines,
list of documents (expanded), and icon (collapsed).

323

Figure 3 The final state of the workspace at the end of the investigation. [zoom in for details if viewing electronically]

We began by looking through the documents that were
classified as “law and crime” or were considered “unclassifiable”,
which effectively reduced the initial 4,474 documents down to
122. Using the browser, which provides a quick preview of the
currently selected document, we rapidly paged through the
documents in these categories, yielding eleven potentially
interesting documents that we opened into the workspace for
further investigation as we encountered them.
The most interesting of these documents was a report on local
terrorist groups. We distributed the other documents to peripheral
locations around the space where they would remind us to follow
up on them later, as well as serving as seeds for new clusters if we
found something relevant before we returned to them.
Clicking on the entities for the terrorist groups to open them
into the workspace, we found that the only one we had any serious
reports on was the Paramurders of Chaos. We opened the two
associated reports, ordered them temporally in space, and labeled
the new cluster with the Paramurders of Chaos entity. These
documents offered no additional entities to follow, so we set the
cluster to one side for more in depth investigation after we
completed our initial trawl for suspicious events.
After collecting some more leads, we returned to this threat and
began looking for a threat to the food supply, uncovering
information about dying livestock and a warning about
bioterrorism, which led to information about a bioweapon expert’s
laboratory being robbed. Putting this into the timeline with the
Paramurders documents makes it plausible that this is the same
lab equipment found in the raid. Working on the theory that the
food supply may be contaminated, we scanned the documents
dated after the trespassing incident for any possible early
indicators of something wrong. This led to information about the
early flu season and dead fish in the Vast River. Opening the Vast
River entity, we find an accident involving a food truck preceding
the dying fish, forming another potential connection.
This process was repeated for each of the other events that we
identified. We expanded all of the entities, performed relevant
searches and used the neighborhood tool for further suggestions.
Each sequence of events was ordered in columns with a network
of the associated entities placed nearby. Events that shared an
entity would be placed closer in the space. Each set of events was
also labeled with current theories about the actual threat or
avenues of investigation that would need to be explored.
Once we were confident that we had exhausted all avenues of
investigation, the space was reordered again at the cluster level to
arrive at the state seen in Figure 3. This is ordered roughly by
threat level, with the primary bioterrorism threat on the right, with
the threat level decreasing to the left. In addition, all material
related to bombs have been separated out and are together at the

324

top of the workspace. In total, we spent about two and a half hours
identifying the primary plots and laying them out and another two
hours making sure there were no more leads to follow.
3

DISCUSSION

Interestingly, after the initial more than 30-fold pruning afforded
by the Alchemy classifer, most of AW’s key foraging tools were
of limited use for this dataset. While there were many entities in
the dataset (we identified approximately 55,000), the actual threat
documents contained very few, and involved minimal
connectivity. Further, any connections between documents were
easily ascertained using just the nearest neighbor tool, or were
determined to be non-existent.
However, the large expanse of space afforded by AW was quite
valuable in that it allowed us to marshal evidence for multiple
simultaneous investigations as fragments of information were
found. The presence of the full text served as external memory
that could be rapidly consulted for connections when new
evidence arose, and served as reminders of the unexplored
avenues of investigation.
Another key point to make here is that the size of the workspace
allows us to display all of our investigations – we did not close
any when they seemed to lead to a dead end or a resolution. This
served two key purposes. First, new evidence could be found that
invalidated the initial conclusion (as is the case with the dead
livestock). Second, the space now serves as a record of the
investigative process. We can record not just what we suspect, but
also what we found and rejected, which can play an important role
in reporting of analytic results.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported in part by US NSF grant CCF-0937133
and the Institute for Critical Technology and Applied Science
(ICTAS), Virginia Tech.
REFERENCES
[1]

Waldner, M., Puff, W., Lex, A., Streit, M., and Schmalstieg, D.:

Visual links across applications. In GI 2010, pp. 129-136, 2010.
[2]

Hossain, M.S., Andrews, C., Ramakrishnan, N., and North, C.:

Helping Intelligence Analysts Make Connections. In Proceedings of the
AAAI '11 Workshop on Scalable Integration of Analytics and
Visualization, 2011. [to appear]
[3]

Beygelzimer, A., Kakade, S., and Langford, J.: Cover Trees for

Nearest Neighbor. In ICML '06 pp. 97-104, 2006.
[4]

AlchemyAPI. URL http://www.alchemyapi.com

