How Locus of Control Influences Compatibility with Visualization Style
Caroline Ziemkiewicz∗

R. Jordan Crouser†

Brown University

Tufts University

Ashley Rye Yauilla ‡

Sara L. Su §

William Ribarsky ¶

Winthrop University

Tufts University

UNC Charlotte

Remco Chang
Tufts University

A BSTRACT
Existing research suggests that individual personality differences
are correlated with a user’s speed and accuracy in solving problems
with different types of complex visualization systems. In this paper, we extend this research by isolating factors in personality traits
as well as in the visualizations that could have contributed to the
observed correlation. We focus on a personality trait known as “locus of control,” which represents a person’s tendency to see themselves as controlled by or in control of external events. To isolate
variables of the visualization design, we control extraneous factors
such as color, interaction, and labeling, and specifically focus on
the overall layout style of the visualizations. We conduct a user
study with four visualizations that gradually shift from an indentation metaphor to a containment metaphor and compare the participants’ speed, accuracy, and preference with their locus of control. Our findings demonstrate that there is indeed a correlation
between the two: participants with an internal locus of control perform more poorly with visualizations that employ a containment
metaphor, while those with an external locus of control perform
well with such visualizations. We discuss a possible explanation
for this relationship based in cognitive psychology and propose that
these results can be used to better understand how people use visualizations and how to adapt visual analytics design to an individual
user’s needs.
Index Terms: H.5.m [Information Interfaces and Presentation
(HCI)]: Miscellaneous
1 I NTRODUCTION
Graphic designs, such as diagrams and maps, support a user’s efforts to process sensory data, reason about it, solve problems, and
identify patterns [23]. A well-designed visualization accounts for
both the complex preattentive and cognitive processes triggered
when a user views it. The balance of visual elements can dramatically affect the user’s comprehension of the information presented.
As a result of separable and integral feature relationships, using
several elements in conjunction can amplify or dampen a single element’s effect [13]. Understanding the relations among preattentive
processes, cognitive processes, and visual interfaces is a longstanding goal of the visual analytics community, but evaluating interfaces
in this context is difficult for many reasons. One such reason is the
problem of individual differences.
As visualizations are meant to support complex thinking, they
may be more sensitive to nuances of an individual user’s cognitive
style than other types of interfaces. This would explain findings that
∗ e-mail:

cziemki@cs.brown.edu
rcrous01@cs.tufts.edu
‡ e-mail:yauillaa2@mailbox.winthrop.edu
§ e-mail:sarasu@cs.tufts.edu
¶ e-mail: ribarsky@uncc.edu
e-mail: remco@tufts.edu
† e-mail:

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 23 - 28, Providence, RI, USA
978-1-4673-0014-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

show significant differences in visualization performance based on
personality. Earlier work has found an effect from the personality
dimension known as “locus of control” [10, 11]. This dimension
measures a person’s tendency to see herself as either shaped by or
in control of external events. While the effects of individual differences such as locus of control have been observed, an explanation
for why those differences arise remains elusive. Early work in this
area employed real-world data exploration systems that differed on
many dimensions, including the use of color, labeling, interaction,
and layout style. Any of these variables may contribute to the effect
of locus of control, making it difficult to directly apply the findings
to visualization design for different user groups.
We propose that layout style is the key variable that determines
the interaction between locus of control and compatibility with different system designs. Our definition of layout encompasses any
differences in the spatial arrangement and presentation of marks in
a visualization. This is to be distinguished from differences in the
visual encoding, that is, how individual data variables are mapped
to individual graphical variables, such as color or size1 .
Our hypothesis is that individual differences based on locus of
control are more affected by layout in this sense than by visual encoding or interaction style. This hypothesis is based on the idea that
locus of control can provide insight into a user’s tendency to rely
on the external representations that a visualization employs. The
overall arrangement of visual elements in a layout is more likely to
directly affect the nature of this external representation than surface
qualities such as color and shape, or more intangible qualities such
as interaction style.
1.1 Contributions
This paper makes a number of contributions to our understanding
of how personality factors affect how people use visualizations.
• First, we present experimental evidence showing that visual
layout is a key factor in previous findings in individual differences. Our findings expand on previous work by showing that
the effect of locus of control can still be found when restricting visualization differences to layout factors.
• Second, we use these findings to argue for a model of visualization use based on a user’s adoption of external representations. Our findings suggest that locus of control affects the use
of different visualization types by affecting a user’s willingness to adapt to a novel externalization of information. This
framework places these findings in the context of external representation as a model for visualization use.
We evaluate our hypothesis in a study with 240 online subjects who
varied in their locus of control. Participants are presented with four
variations of a hierarchy visualization showing phylogenetic data
(Figure 1). These designs include a view that employs a list-like
organizational structure (V1), a view that presents the hierarchy in
1 In cases where a variable is directly mapped to spatial position, as in a
scatterplot, that aspect of spatial arrangement is of course part of the encoding. No such mapping existed in the visualizations we study.

81

a strong containment metaphor (V4), and two designs that fall in
between these extremes (V2 and V3). We hypothesize that users
with a more external locus of control are more willing to adapt their
thinking to unfamiliar visual metaphors than those with an internal
locus of control. We show how locus of control can predict performance on inferential task questions using these interface designs.
Specifically, we test the hypothesis that an individual with a more
internal locus of control will show a performance decrease when using layouts with a strong containment metaphor, while those with a
more external locus of control will not show this decrease. Our findings provide evidence for the externalization model of visualization
use and can inform the design of visualization interfaces adapted to
an individual’s needs.
2

(a) GVis

R ELATED W ORK

There is a substantial history of research in how individual differences affect interface use in the broader human-computer interaction field, reviewed by Dillon and Watson [6]. A subset of this
research focuses specifically on individual differences in visualization, driven by the belief that a reliance on visual and spatial cognitive abilities makes individual differences a potentially greater factor in this field. We review findings on how cognitive differences
affect visualization use and discuss why locus of control is a potentially significant factor.
2.1

Individual Differences and Visualization

Much of the existing work in the visualization field on the impact
of individual differences has focused on the influence of perceptual
ability on visualization use. Conati and Maclaren [5] find that a
user’s perceptual speed predicts whether a star graph or heatmap
will be most effective. Similarly, Allen [1] finds a role for perceptual speed and spatial scanning ability in search performance.
However, he found that users do not tend to optimize their visualization use for greater search efficiency, and proposes the development of user models to automatically guide users toward optimal
strategies. This work shows that perceptual abilities can affect task
performance, but suggests that the connection between these abilities and a user’s cognitive strategies may be less direct.
Taking a more cognitive perspective, Chen [4] found no effect of
spatial ability on participants’ search performance in a visualization
of paper citation links. Cognitive factors did, however, play a role
in users’ subjective feedback; users with high associative memory
rated the interface higher on usefulness, and users with high spatial
ability rated the tasks higher on familiarity. Chen goes on to suggest
that users with varying cognitive abilities may be more or less likely
to impose certain kinds of mental models on data.
A related finding comes from Ziemkiewicz and Kosara [31], who
studied the role of personality and spatial ability in a user’s ease in
switching between incompatible visual metaphors in tree visualization use. They found that users with high spatial visualization ability and a high score on the Openness scale of the Big Five Personality Inventory [8] were more adept at answering questions despite a
verbal metaphor that conflicted with the visual metaphor of the visualization they were viewing. Both this work and Chen’s suggest
that users with different cognitive styles may be more or less comfortable with adapting their thinking to an external representation.
Tversky et al. [26, 27, 15] have studied how individual differences in ability impact the extraction of structure and function from
diagrams. They found that participants with high ability form mental models integrating structure and function, while those with low
ability form models dominated by structure. They suggest that
structural diagrams designed for the latter group can be annotated
with functional information for improved comprehension [28].
These findings have begun to build the case that some individual differences in visual analytics can be attributed to a complex
interaction between the mental model suggested by a visual layout

82

(b) NCBI Map Viewer
Figure 2: The two interfaces used in Green et al.’s study [10] of personality differences in visual analytics use.

and the user’s own cognitive style. However, most previous studies that show an effect of individual differences either examine a
single system or compare two or more systems with numerous differences. In order to apply knowledge of individual differences to
visualization design, it is necessary to make a clearer connection
between personality groups and exactly which factors lead them to
better performance with one visualization over another. An area in
which we argue that such a connection can be found is in locus of
control and visual analytics performance.
2.2

Locus of Control

Much of the direct background for this work comes from Green
et al.’s research [10, 11] on personality factors in visual analytics
use. Their work found effects on interface performance from three
psychometric measures: locus of control (LOC), neuroticism, and
extraversion. Locus of control [24] measures the degree to which
a person sees herself as in control of events (internal LOC) as opposed to seeing her fate as controlled by outside events (external
LOC).
Locus of control has been associated with a number of significant practical outcomes. People with a more internal LOC tend
to be more effective at work [17] and on many academic measures [7], and are more capable of coping with stress [2]. Locus
of control in an academic setting is also associated with different
learning styles. Cassidy and Eachus [3] found a positive correlation
between external LOC beliefs and a tendency to use “surface learning” approaches, where the student attempts to fit the demands of
an assignment instead of “deep learning,” which focuses on the underlying principles being taught. Likewise, internal LOC students
were more likely to use a deep learning approach. Such findings
suggest the possibility that locus of control is related to how a user
approaches problem-solving tasks in a novel setting, which may
explain why it influences use of a novel visualization technique.
Green et al.’s work studied the effect of locus of control and other
personality dimensions on both procedural and inferential learning
in a GVis, a visual analytics interface (Figure 2(a)) versus NCBI

(a) V1: Basic Tree View

(b) V2: Bordered Tree View

(c) V3: Indented Boxes View

(d) V4: Nested Boxes View

Figure 1: The four visualizations used in the study. Each view is showing the same portion of one of the phylogenetic tree datasets.

Map Viewer, a more traditional web interface (Figure 2(b)). The
procedural tasks they studied involved searching for a specific piece
of information in a genomic database, while inferential tasks were
those in which a user had to make a more open-ended comparison between two items. In both cases, the tasks were prompted by
questions of the kind found in a typical usability study. The findings
from both experiments suggested that the web table interface was
more conducive to answering procedural questions and the findings
from their first experiment suggest that the visual interface is more
conducive to answering inferential questions.
In the first experiment, they found that participants with an external locus of control completed inferential tasks more quickly than
those with an internal locus. This effect was more pronounced in
GVis. In the second experiment, they studied only procedural tasks
and found that, in contrast to inferential tasks, those with an internal
locus of control completed procedural tasks more quickly.
In these studies, there were differences not only between interface structures but also between their interaction techniques. For
example, GVis used a drilling-down zooming technique while Map
Viewer used a menu driven interaction technique. In our work, we
build upon these findings by seeking to isolate the factors of the interface structure that cause the different effects between those with
an internal or external locus of control.
The amount of data we have about how different user types react

to different interfaces is rapidly increasing. Our goal as visualization researchers must now be to make sense of this data within the
context of models of the user. In order to apply this knowledge to
improving design, we need to know not just what differences exist between users, but why. This work is an attempt to answer that
question in relation to Green et al.’s findings on personality and interface design.
3 H YPOTHESIS
Research by Green et al. [10, 11] suggests that locus of control
influences an individual’s use of a complex visualization system.
However, it seems counterintuitive that a personality trait with no
known connection to visual or spatial ability should have any consistent influence over such a complex relationship. We propose that
rather than an interaction between between locus of control and specific complex visualizations, the observed pattern may in fact be a
correlation between locus of control and visual layout.
For example, consider the nested circles used in the GVis system
from work by Green et al. [10, 11]; these structural elements are
visually dominant due to their unusual shape and large size with respect to the surrounding textual elements. In contrast, Map Viewer
uses a more subtle indentation-based structural expression which
is dominated by text. Apart from using different visual encodings
and interaction styles, these two designs represent significantly dif-

83

ferent visual layouts of the same underlying data. Exploring how
those layouts differ may help explain why locus of control interacts
significantly with them.
To more closely investigate this correlation, we conduct a comparable study in which the test visualizations are more tightly controlled. We restrict the variation between our four test interfaces
to visual layout style, holding interaction metaphor and visual encoding consistent across all interfaces. We hypothesize that, even
under this simplified setting, participants with a more internal LOC
will have difficulty with layouts that depend on a strong containment metaphor, while participants with a more external LOC will
show a greater willingness to adapt to a variety of visual layouts.
4

E XPERIMENT

To test this hypothesis, we performed a user study in which participants were asked to answer search and inferential questions about
data in four simple hierarchy visualizations (Figure 1). Like Green
et al., we measured personality traits of the participants beforehand
in order to test whether Locus of Control affects a participant’s ability to use these visualizations. The four views were designed to
express an increasingly visually explicit containment metaphor for
the hierarchy, ranging from a list-like view that only used indentation to show hierarchical structure to a view that used large nested
rectangles.
Green et al. [10] used two real-world systems in their work,
which has the benefit of providing a realistic testing environment.
However, this also makes it difficult to isolate exactly which aspects
of the two designs prompted the differing user behavior they found.
As the long-term goal of this work is to assist designers in choosing
how to display information for varying user types, knowing exactly
which elements of the design should be altered is vitally important.
Therefore, our intention in designing the visualizations used in our
study was, as much as possible, to isolate the factor of layout style
which we hypothesized to be the key to these differences.
Before viewing the data, each participant was given a personality
test, including the Locus of Control Inventory [24]. Each participant was then presented with a series of tasks to perform on each
visualization. The order in which the visualizations were presented
was randomized, and the user’s ability to successfully accomplish
tasks using each visualization was then recorded.
4.1

Participants

We recruited 240 participants over Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service. Altogether, it took approximately two days to collect data
from all participants. Mechanical Turk is an online job market in
which people can be recruited for brief tasks and paid for their efforts. This service has become increasingly popular for use in online experiments, as a large number of relatively diverse participants
can be processed very quickly [14]. Reservations remain about using Mechanical Turk among the human-computer interaction and
visualization communities. However, since Mechanical Turk helps
correct for a number of the traditional limitations of online studies,
such as the possibility of vote flooding and the lack of incentive
for completion [19], it is gradually becoming more accepted as a
user study platform. It can be particularly useful in studies such
as this, in which there is a ground truth by which to measure results [18] and the possibility of incentivizing accurate responses
through bonuses [19].
That said, some limitations remain with interpreting online studies in general. Chief among these is environmental control. In an
online study, it is impossible to know whether a participant’s environment is noisy or distracting, or whether the participant is doing
something else while performing the study. While these limitations
should be kept in mind, this is a study with a clear ground truth
and a task that should not be strongly affected by varying computing setups. In addition, our task questions were designed not to be

84

answerable using a search engine. Under these circumstances, we
argue that the advantages of using Mechanical Turk to obtain a high
number of users outweigh the potential issues.
Of the 240 participants, four did not report their age or gender.
Of the rest, there were 124 males and 112 females. Self-reported
age ranged from 18 to 62, with a mean of 26.7 (σ = 9.5). Our
participants reported an average Locus of Control score of 3.61
(σ = .59). This is slightly lower than scores reported in other publications that use this particular scale [12, 20]. For example, Lapierre
and Allen [20] find a mean Locus of Control of 4.03 (σ = .61) for a
participant pool of 205 employees in various professions. This difference may reflect the broader demographics of Mechanical Turk
workers versus participants in traditional psychological studies. Locus of control in particular is often studied in the context of work or
education, meaning the participants in these studies may have different educational or economic backgrounds than the general population. However, as we did not collect such demographics from our
participants, we can only speculate on this point.
4.2

Materials

Participants were initially given two questionnaires to measure the
aspects of their personality which are relevant to our hypotheses: a
scale to measure the Big Five personality dimensions of Extraversion and Neuroticism and a Locus of Control scale to measure the
degree to which they see themselves as in control of or controlled
by external events. Both scales were taken from the International
Personality Inventory Pool [9] and were combined to form a 40question survey. Neuroticism and Extraversion were included for
comparison with Green et al.’s results, but are not the focus of the
current analysis.
Green et al.’s study used two fully functional data exploration
systems with many differences between them. For our study, we
wish to isolate as much as possible the variable of layout style, and
and so we created a set of four very specific visualizations (Figure 1). The first of these, V1 (Figure 1(a)) displays a tree in a
simplified Windows Explorer style, using only indentation to indicate hierarchical relationships. This is representationally similar
to the webpage organization used by Map Viewer in Green et al.’s
work. The fourth view, V4 (Figure 1(d)) uses a nested boxes display
that relies heavily on the visual metaphor of hierarchy as containment [30]. Although it uses rectangles rather than circles and a very
different interaction style, this view is representationally similar to
the nested bubbles of the GVis visual analytics system.
Between these two extremes, we designed two intermediate
views. V2 (Figure 1(b)) is very similar to the indentation style of
V1, but adds borders around the tree nodes to suggest a containment
metaphor. V3 (Figure 1(c)) breaks the strictly vertical layout style
used in V1 in favor of a horizontal layout closer to that used in V4,
but still employs indentation to organize the levels of the hierarchy.
These views are intended to provide cases that interpolate between
the two layout styles used in Green et al.
Our use of such simplified views may raise the concern that our
results do not directly apply to more realistic visual analytics scenarios. However, since we are partially attempting to replicate results from a study that employed real-world analysis systems, we
feel this approach is complementary to previous work. If our results are similar to those found by Green et al, it would demonstrate
that this simplification still maintains the important differences between the systems used in their study.
Furthermore, if a trend can be found to increase from V1 to V4,
it would show that our intermediate views do indeed capture the
major differences between the two views. Since the intermediate
views primarily differ in the degree to which they express either a
list-like or containment metaphor, this could support our argument
that the finding is largely based on the different user groups’ willingness to adapt to one metaphor over the other. That said, layout

Table 1: The size of the four datasets used in the study.

Figure 3: Tooltip showing species-level data.

is a complex factor that by nature is made up of many dimensions.
While this study design is intended to keep these layout differences
as controlled as possible, there are like other aspects of the layout,
such as data-ink ratio or size of visual elements, which cannot be
entirely ruled out as factors. Nonetheless, this study design can at
least test whether layout factors in general can lead to a locus of
control effect without differences in visual encoding or interaction.
Apart from these specific design differences, we attempted as
much as possible to maintain consistency between the four views.
They all use the same font size and folder icons. Each visualization
also has the same interaction style, based on a collapsing folders
metaphor such as that seen in a standard desktop file system. This
may somewhat bias the results in favor of V1, which most closely
resembles the interfaces used in file systems. Nonetheless, we argue that maintaining interaction consistency is important enough
for isolating design factors that this is worth the tradeoff.
In addition, we implemented the restriction that only one subtree could be open at one time. If a user expanded one branch of
the hierarchy and then attempted to expand a node in an unconnected branch, the first branch would automatically collapse. This
was intended to keep the amount of potentially visible information
consistent across the four views. Having several subtrees open is
fairly easy in V1, which is purely vertical, but it would be difficult
or impossible to open an infinite number of subtrees in V4 without
making the lower-level nodes too small to display an entire label.
Finally, to see genome data about individual species, the participant hovered the mouse over the species name to bring up a tooltip
(Figure 3). Our goal with this simple if not necessarily intuitive interaction style was to keep the four views as consistent as possible
except in how they visually organize the space.
The datasets presented in these four visualizations were four subsets of the full taxonomic tree from the National Center for Biotechnology Information’s Genome database [22]. Each dataset consists
of a phylogenetic tree where the leaf nodes are individual species.
At the leaf level, there is some data on the genome mapping data
available for that species, such as the date the entry was updated and
the number of proteins and genes in the database. This is similar to
the data used in Green et al., but does not include all the information found in the Map Viewer subset of the same database. In our
case, we chose to show less data at the leaf level in order to present
more data overall and more complex trees. The four datasets had,
on average, 98.75 leaf nodes (i.e. individual species) and 114.75
non-leaf nodes in the phylogenetic tree. Details for each individual dataset are shown in Table 1. There was some variety in the
branching factors and overall structure of the trees, although this
was not carefully controlled for. However, since the datasets were
ultimately balanced with respect to the view types, these differences
should not affect our results substantially.
We considered the unfamiliarity of the datasets to be beneficial to

Dataset Name

Number of Species

Non-leaf Nodes

Amphibia

92

94

Aves

112

145

Eutheria

92

94

Lepidosauria

99

126

our study, since we could trust that participants would need to consult the views in order to answer the task questions we presented
them. Following Green et al. [11], these questions were divided
into search tasks and inferential tasks. In both cases, tasks took the
form of questions that participants were expected to consult the visualization to answer. This is similar to the methodology used in
most visualization evaluation studies. These two question types are
meant to represent simple data lookup and more complex analytical tasks, although they are simplified versions of the real-world
versions of these tasks. We expect to see more differences in the
inferential questions, since these are more likely to require understanding of the structure of a dataset rather than simple navigation
ability.
The search questions asked the participants to find a single
species within a classification that had a certain property. For example, “Within the classification ‘Batrachuperus,’ which species
was most recently updated?” The verbal metaphor for tree structure used in these questions was varied between a levels and containment metaphor, to avoid any potential confound of metaphor
compatibility [30]. Participants were asked to write the name of
the species they found within a text field. The inferential questions were more open-ended, asking the participant to find a certain
classification, then find another classification in another part of the
taxonomy that had something in common with the first. For example:
Under “Anura,” find the classification “Bufo” and note
the subclasses it contains. There is another classification under “Mesobatrachi” that has something notable
in common with “Bufo.” Find that classification.
This was usually a similar pattern of names or numbers of
species that fell under the classification. For example, the classification “Bufo” contained a classification also called “Bufo,” and
the correct answer was another classification that contained a child
node with the same name as itself. Since correctness may be harder
to judge in such a question with a free text response, participants
in this case chose their response from a list of four multiple choice
answers (as well as a “None of the Above” response). Each dataset
was associated with two task questions: one search question and
one inferential question. Participants therefore saw eight task questions altogether (Table 2).
4.3

Procedure

After selecting the study task from the Mechanical Turk website,
participants were first asked to fill out the 40-question personality
scale by rating each item in the scale from 1 (strongly disagree) to
5 (strongly agree). Once they were done, they read instructions on
the main portion of the experiment.
The main portion of the experiment consisted of four sessions,
one with each of the four views. The sequence in which participants
saw these views was counterbalanced to prevent ordering effects.
Each view was randomly associated with one of the four datasets.

85

Table 2: The eight task questions seen in the study.
Dataset

Question Type

Question

Amphibia

search
inferential

Within the classification “Batrachuperus,” which species was most recently updated?
Under “Anura,” find the classification “Bufo” and note the subclasses it contains. There is another classification
under “Mesobatrachia” that has something notable in common with “Bufo.” Find that classification.

Aves

search
inferential

Under the classification “Falco,” find the species with a “Length” value over 18000.
Looking in “Sphenisciformes,” find the classification “Eudyptula” and note the species under it. Now look in
“Threskiornithidae” for a classification that has something notable in common with “Eudyptula.”

Eutheria

search
inferential

Within the classification “Tarsius,” find the species which was most recently updated.
Under “Caniformia,” find the classification “Canis” and note the subclasses and species it contains. Now find another
classification under “Ursidae” that has something notable in common with “Canis.”

Lepidosauria

search
inferential

Under the classification “Bipes,” find the species with the lowest “Length” value.
Within “Scincomorpha,” find the classification “Lacerta” and note the species under it. Now look in “Crotalinae” for
a classification which has something in common with “Lacerta.”

Mechanical Turk site.
We measured the time a participant took in their initial training
period, the time taken in the interaction period, and the time taken to
record their response, as well as whether their response was correct
or incorrect. In addition, we calculated each participant’s Locus
of Control based on their personality scale responses, and averaged
their preference survey responses to generate a Preference Score for
each of the visualizations they used.

Figure 4: The basic study setup, showing a search task question.

Each participant saw all four datasets, but they appeared with equal
probability in all four views.
When they first saw the visualization, participants were asked to
familiarize themselves with it for as long as they wanted. When
they were done, they clicked on a button labeled “Start” and were
presented with the search question. They again had as long as they
needed to interact with the visualization and find the answer. When
they were satisfied with their answer, they clicked on a “Ready to
Answer” button and were presented with a text field to fill in their
answer. At this point, interaction with the visualization was locked.
The purpose of this was to separate response time into the actual
interaction time, without the time needed to type in the answer. A
screen capture of this study setup is shown in Figure 4.
After answering the search question, the participant was presented with the inferential question for the same dataset. We presented the questions in this order since the inferential questions are
naturally more difficult than the search tasks, and answering the
search question would presumably give the user time to learn the
basics of navigating the interface. The procedure for the inferential question was the same as for the search question, except that
participants were presented with a set of multiple choice responses
instead of a text field. These responses were presented in random
order and were not visible during the interaction period.
Once both questions were answered, participants were shown
a brief four-question preference survey on how much they liked
the visualization. This survey included statements such as, “The
system was easy to use,” and “I enjoyed using this system.” As in
the personality scales, participants rated how much they agreed with
each of these statements on a five-point scale. After completing all
four visualization sessions, participants were asked to provide their
age, gender, and any comments about the study in a form on the

86

5 R ESULTS
Our task questions proved to be quite difficult, with an overall accuracy of 68.6% correct responses on search tasks and 47.1% on
inferential tasks. This difficulty, and the large amount of time spent
interacting with the views, should be kept in mind when interpreting the following results. Across all participants and question
types, no view condition was more or less difficult in terms of accuracy (χ 2 (3, N = 1919) = 3.7, p = .29) or correct response time
(F(3, 1109) = .57, p = .63). As our primary interest is in how these
results varied with a participant’s personality scores, further analysis focuses on participants grouped by personality type. Generally,
we found support for our hypothesis that participants with a more
internal LOC would have more difficulty with views more similar
to V4. While we found that participants with a more external LOC
did perform very well with V4, we did not find a corresponding
trend in which they performed more poorly on views similar to V1.
5.1 Effects of Locus of Control
We initially divided participants into three groups based on their
score on the Locus of Control scale. Participants with a score lower
than one standard deviation from the mean (i.e. less than 3.01) were
classified as external LOC users. Those with a score greater than
one standard deviation from the mean (i.e. greater than 4.21) were
classified as internal LOC users. The rest were classified as average
LOC users.
The independent variables we analyzed to test our hypothesis
were Question Type (search task versus inferential task), View Condition (V1, V2, V3, or V4), and LOC Group (external, average,
or internal). Our overall model was therefore a 2x4x3 Univariate
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA). This overall model was significant
for the variable of Correct Response Time (F(23, 1109) = 10.67,
p < .01). Correct Response Time only included correct responses,
and represents only the time that a participant spent interacting with
the view, not the time spent writing or choosing her response.
In addition, there were significant main effects of question type
(F(1, 1109) = 158.86, p < .01) and Locus of Control (F(2, 1109) =
5.38, p < .01). Unsurprisingly, search questions were answered

Grouped LOC
external LOC
average LOC
internal LOC

300

200

100

Percent Correct Responses

Mean Correct Response Time
(seconds)

400

60%

40%

20%

0

0%

V1
V2
Basic tree Bordered
tree

V3
Indented
boxes

V4
Nested
boxes

Figure 5: Response time for correct answers only across the four
view conditions and three Locus of Control (LOC) groups. Participants with a highly internal LOC, who see themselves as in control of
external events, were much slower than other participants at answering question in V4, a visualization that uses a strong nested-boxes
visual metaphor. Participants with a highly external LOC, who see
themselves as controlled by outside events, are relatively more likely
to perform quickly on V4.

faster than the more difficult inferential questions. Overall, internal LOC participants were slower at answering questions correctly (M = 183.4 seconds, σ = 11.6) than external LOC participants (M = 147.9 seconds, σ = 10.3). There was also a
significant interaction between view condition and question type
(F(3, 1109) = 3.01, p < .05) and between question type and LOC
group (F(2, 1086) = 5.93, p < .01). The reason for the latter is that
internal LOC participants are much slower than the others on inferential tasks, but are the same speed when answering search tasks.
The source of the interaction between view and question type is
that, while inferential questions were answered more slowly than
search questions in all views, this difference was significantly larger
in V3. For inferential questions, V3 produced the slowest response
times of all views, while it produced the fastest for search tasks.
The results relevant to our main hypothesis are summarized in
Figure 5. We found that participants with an external LOC answer
questions in V4 (the nested boxes) faster than other participants, although they answer questions in V1 faster as well. Internal LOC
participants show a clear trend of slower performance from V1 to
V4, although there is no distinction for these participants between
V3 and V4. Average LOC participants show no response time difference between the four views.
In addition, we found that raw Locus of Control score correlates significantly with correct response time on nested boxes but
no other condition (r(104) = .23, p < .05). For search tasks, there
was no significant response time difference for any participants between the four views.
To test overall accuracy, we used a Pearson’s chi-square test on
correctness and grouped Locus of Control. Participants with an external LOC answered more questions correctly overall (χ 2 (2, N =
1919) = 7.7, p < .05), possibly due to their better performance on
conditions V3 and V4. These results are summarized in Figure 6.
5.2

View Condition
V1 (basic tree)
V2 (bordered tree)
V3 (indented boxes)
V4 (nested boxes)

80%

Other Findings

In addition to the personality variables that we measured, we analyzed our results based on the demographics and preference in-

external LOC

average LOC

internal LOC

Figure 6: Percentage of correct answers across the four view conditions for participants grouped by their Locus of Control score. Participants with a more external locus of control were more accurate
overall, while the other groups performed poorly with V4.

formation we collected from participants. According to a repeated
measures ANOVA on the preference scores for each visualization,
V1 and V2 were rated significantly more positively than V3 and V4
(F(3) = 15.09, p < .001). These preference ratings displayed no
significant correlation with accuracy or response time. There was
also no relationship between locus of control and preference ratings
for any of the four views.
Female participants answered more questions correctly than
male participants (t(231) = −2.31, p < .05). We found that the
age of participants correlated positively with overall response time
(r(1893) = .13, p < .001), so that older participants took more time
interacting with the interfaces. Age had no effect, however, on accuracy, and did not correlate with any of the personality measures.
In the following sections, we will discuss these implications of
these findings for our hypothesis and for visualization design in
general.
6

G ENERAL D ISCUSSION

In general, we replicated previously reported effects of locus of control in a simplified design that isolates the factor of overall layout
style. This supports our main hypothesis that the significant factor
of system design that interacts with locus of control is the way that
visual elements are spatially arranged and presented, rather than interaction or visual encoding. This clarifies the earlier findings and
points towards a potential explanation for this effect rooted in the
relationship between locus of control and use of external representations.
6.1

Replication and Expansion of Previous Findings

Our results replicated those of Green et al. [10, 11] in some cases
but not completely. Error rates across the two experimental designs
are not directly comparable, as in their case, participants were allowed to try as many times as needed to answer a question correctly,
with each mistake recorded as an error. However, in both our study
and theirs, we found that participants made more errors overall in
the containment-metaphor visualization than in the more list-like
view (V1 in our case, Map Viewer in theirs). More significantly,
in both our work and theirs, participants with an external LOC responded faster to inferential questions than did participants with an
internal LOC, particularly in a visualization with a containmentbased visual metaphor (V4 in our case, GVis in theirs).

87

Together, these two sets of findings provide evidence that the effect of locus of control on visualization use is a robust one. Users
with either an internal or external locus of control show performance differences in general on data exploration tasks, and additionally, each group performs better with different visualization
styles. This suggests that locus of control is a variable that merits
further study, and that personality differences are a valuable topic
of research in visualization.
In general, we did not replicate their findings on search question response times. They found that internal LOC participants responded faster to search questions in GVis. However, their completion times for these tasks included any incorrect responses and
subsequent guesses made by participants, so for these questions our
response times are not directly comparable. This was not the case
for the inferential questions, where they recorded only the time to
make a single response.
Since our search questions were relatively difficult, it is unlikely
that the lack of an effect in these questions is only a matter of performance differences not appearing in easier tasks. We speculate
that the inferential questions forced the users to think in terms of
the structure of the data to a greater degree. The search questions
may have simply measured a participant’s ability to navigate the interface quickly, while the inferential questions asked them to characterize parts of the data in an open-ended fashion. Participants
may have interpreted these questions in a variety of ways, allowing
the structural elements of the visualization design to play a greater
role in their thought process.
Although external LOC participants were faster than other participant groups at answering questions in V4, they were equally
fast in V1. This finding does not fit our original hypothesis that internal and external participants prefer different types of visual layouts. It may be that the very high familiarity of tree menus like V1
created a training effect that caused it to break the overall pattern.
However, given the evidence, we cannot conclude that external participants perform better with containment views than with list-like
views. Rather than a clear trend of group preference, a better interpretation of our results may be that external LOC participants are
generally better able to answer inferential types of questions using
unusual visualization layouts. An experiment that removes the potential confound of a highly familiar view would be needed to test
which interpretation is better supported.
Familiarity may also explain the higher preference scores across
all participants for V1 and V2, although it is interesting that there
was no correspondence between preference and performance. It is
also possible that this lack of a relationship may reflect the fact that
our participants were paid a bonus for correct responses, and therefore had an incentive to perform well despite disliking the interface.
In any case, people may have felt that V3 and V4 were especially
confusing due to their unusual appearance, but they were just as
capable of answering questions with these interfaces.
6.2

Locus of Control and External Representations

By isolating the variable of layout style in this study, we have shown
that simplified layout changes alone can produce locus of control
effects similar to those found in a more realistic user study. This
provides evidence that layout is a key factor in mediating this effect, independent of the effects of interaction style, visual encoding, and general differences between traditional interfaces and visual analytic systems. Although the current work does not directly
support a causal explanation, we can speculate on why the different
layouts we designed interacted with participant locus of control the
way they did. We argue that the explanation for the behavior we
observed is that participants with an external locus of control are
willing to adapt more readily to visualization styles that employ a
strong structural metaphor.
The four views in our study range from one (V1) which is dom-

88

inated by white space and uses subtle visual organization to one
(V4) which is dominated by screen elements expressing a visual
metaphor of nested boxes. We argue that these views essentially
represent a progression from visually implicit hierarchical structure
to structure made visually explicit through layout and the use of
lines and fills. V1 (Figure 1(a)) uses only a single dimension of
spatial organization (horizontal indentation) and makes little distinction between leaf nodes and parent nodes. These factors make
the hierarchical structure of the data less explicit. For example, two
sibling nodes (such as Rhinocerotidae and Equidae in Figure 1(a))
can be visually separated to the point that their relationship is not
immediately obvious. Because of this, we argue that V1 is the least
structurally dominant of the four views.
After V1, each visualization in the sequence adds at least one
visual element used to draw attention to the hierarchical structure of the data. The borders in V2 (Figure 1(b)) slightly emphasize the nesting of child nodes within parent nodes; for example, Rhinoceros and its two children are clearly grouped. V3
(Figure 1(c)) takes this further by highlighting the names of parent
nodes and arranging child nodes horizontally to emphasize a spatial
metaphor of containment. Finally, V4 (Figure 1(d)) gives the parent
node a strong visual emphasis with centering and a title bar and collects the child nodes together at the top of the parent to make sibling
relationships obvious. This is the least “list-like” of the four views
and uses the most “ink” and screen space to express hierarchical
relationships.
The connection between this use of explicit visual structure and
locus of control may be explained by the body of thought that views
visualization as an external mental representation. The field of distributed cognition [16] sees mental processes such as problem solving and memory as relying not only on knowledge stored in the
mind, but also on knowledge stored in a person’s environment, in
the form of physical objects, information artifacts, and other people. Applying this perspective to visualization, Liu et al. [21] have
argued that a primary benefit of visualization is the externalization
of information. Externalization makes problem-solving more efficient and accurate by substituting quicker perceptual processes
for cognitive processing of information. Furthermore, studies have
shown that the form of these representations can influence problemsolving strategies.
Users with an external locus of control are those who expect the
outside world to dominate their fate. Taking a distributed cognition approach, it is possible that these users also rely more heavily
on outside representations, rather than internal mental representations, when solving problems or making sense of information. Conversely, those with an internal locus of control may prefer to perform cognitive tasks more internally, relying less on external representations. In general, this makes people with an internal locus of
control more adept at problem-solving and learning, as the extensive literature on locus of control has shown. However, it is possible that this same tendency to rely on internal representations may
make it more difficult to use the complex external representations
found in a visual analytics system.
If this is indeed the case, a visualization with a highly explicit
and unfamiliar visual structure may be more jarring for an internal
LOC user. Someone with an external locus of control may be more
willing by nature to adapt her thinking to the external representation, while the user with an internal locus may be going through
a more difficult process of fitting the external representation to her
own ideas of what the data is like. Cassidy and Eachus’s work [3],
discussed in Section 2.2, implies that the “surface learning” approach taken by external LOC students is academically harmful,
and based on well-established findings in locus of control research,
this does seem to be the case in general. However, this very tendency to focus on surface structure may be beneficial in the context
of learning a new visualization system. Our external LOC partici-

pants were just as fast with a novel visualization as they were with
the kind of indented list they see on their computer desktop every
day. There may be other ways of interpreting these effects, and
for now, this is a hypothesis for future research, not a firm conclusion. Nevertheless, this potential ability to make an advantage out
of a personality style that is usually considered problematic suggests intriguing future directions in the application of visualization
to learning.
Taken together with previous work, these findings contribute to
the case for an externalization-based view of how people perform
complex tasks with a visualization. Furthermore, they imply that
this externalization process varies greatly between people and situations, which may be a significant factor in the difficulty of controlling and intepreting evaluations of visualization systems. We
discuss the implications of these findings for design and evaluation
in the following section.
7

D ESIGN I MPLICATIONS

This study and others like it provide mounting evidence that personality and design style can have a significant effect on whether
a user accepts a visualization design. It is possible that a user’s
personality can serve as shorthand for subtle cognitive style differences that are not easily measureable otherwise, but which gain
importance in the exploratory context of visualization use. When
we give users a novel visualization, we are essentially asking them
to give up some control over their thinking processes. Some users
will find this helpful, while others may find it a hindrance. We argue that a visualization designer should have a sense of how willing
a given user will be to take on an external representation, and know
how to design a visualization that makes it more or less difficult to
ignore the structural aspects of that representation.
Based on our findings, a useful guideline for adaptation would be
to increase the amount of explicit structure for users that might have
a more external locus of control. Users with a very internal LOC
will most likely perform best with a visualization style that uses
simple spatial organization and minimal borders, outlines, and other
grouping elements. In practice, this type of design may correspond
to the maximized “data-ink ratio” argued for by Tufte [25]. External
LOC users, on the other hand, may perform more efficiently with
a visualization style that violates this classic guideline by including
more non-functional elements such as borders, fills, and outlines to
call attention to a specific information structure. In addition, this
type of user may have an easier time working with visualizations
that use a two-dimensional spatial layout to organize information.
Although it would usually be impractical to directly measure a
user’s locus of control and adapt the visualization accordingly, it is
still possible to use this principle to guide design. Our perspective
sees locus of control as predicting the degree to which a user will,
by innate disposition, prefer her own internal mental models (internal LOC) versus being willing to adapt to an external representation
(external LOC). This general principle, then, may apply in other situations where users are likely to prefer a pre-existing mental model
or problem-solving process for reasons other than personality. Expert users, for example, may be more resistent to visualizations with
highly explicit structure. Likewise, a user group with a highly standardized analysis process should be given visualizations with a low
structural emphasis. A user group which is likely to approach a
problem in a more exploratory mode may find it easier to work
with a visualization that makes the structural organization of data
more explicit.
Visualization, especially in the context of more complex, openended problems, involves explorations that can require search, organizing and filtering, inference-building, and iteration in combinations that cannot be predicted beforehand. The results presented
in this paper and the design guidelines suggested will be important
in the construction of effective visualization tools and methods for

this open-ended cognitive process. In addition to telling us something about where adaptation to personality type can be significant,
the results tell us where adaptation is less so, permitting the freer
use of visual representations and interaction styles determined by
other factors. All this will help lead to the development of a model
of human reasoning in the presence of automated analysis, which is
of central importance to the emerging field of visual analytics.
8

F UTURE W ORK

AND

C ONCLUSION

In subsequent work, we hope to combine these findings with other
work in individual differences to pursue more complete models of
the visualization user. As Yi [29] has argued, major advances in understanding these individual differences must come from collecting
knowledge across studies. This work is one attempt at doing so, and
much more can be done to find commonalities among the measures
and findings on how users adapt to visualizations.
In this paper, we have contributed findings on how users with
different personality types react to varying layout styles used in a
hierarchy visualization. We found evidence that systematic differences in layout style can indeed influence a user’s response time
and accuracy with different types of visualizations that are informationally equivalent but differ in layout. These findings seem to
fit a pattern in which users with a more external locus of control are
more efficient at using a visualization which uses a highly explicit
visual metaphor than users with a more internal locus of control.
We hope that these findings can serve as a step towards better understanding of why subtle differences between users’ personality
styles can have a surprising influence on visualization use.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thank Tera M. Green and Brian Fisher for
their helpful discussions and collaboration. This material is based
in part upon work supported by the International Program of the
Department of Homeland Security under grant number 2009-ST108-000007. Any opinions, ndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reect the views of the Department of Homeland Security. This material is based in part upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No. CIF-B-195. Any
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
R EFERENCES
[1] B. Allen. Individual differences and the conundrums of user-centered
design: Two experiments. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 51(6):508–520, 2000.
[2] C. R. Anderson. Locus of control, coping behaviors, and performance
in a stress setting: A longitudinal study. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62(4):446–451, 1977.
[3] S. Cassidy and P. Eachus. Learning style, academic belief systems,
self-report student proficiency and academic achievement in higher
education. Educational Psychology, 20(3):307–320, 2000.
[4] C. Chen. Individual differences in a spatial-semantic virtual environment. Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
51(6):529–542, 2000.
[5] C. Conati and H. Maclaren. Exploring the role of individual differences in information visualization. In Advanced Visual Interfaces.
ACM Press, 2008.
[6] A. Dillon and C. Watson. User analysis in HCI: The historical lesson
from individual differences research. International Journal of HumanComputer Studies, 45:619–637, 1996.
[7] M. J. Findley and H. M. Cooper. Locus of control and academic
achievement: A literature review. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 44(2):419–427, 1983.

89

[8] L. R. Goldberg. An alternative “description of personality”: The bigfive factor structure. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
59(6):1216–1229, 1990.
[9] L. R. Goldberg, J. A. Johnson, H. W. Eber, R. Hogan, M. C. Ashton,
C. R. Cloninger, and H. C. Gough. The international personality item
pool and the future of public-domain personality measures. Journal
of Research in Personality, 40:84–96, 2006.
[10] T. M. Green and B. Fisher. Towards the personal equation of interaction: The impact of personality factors on visual analytics interface
interaction. In IEEE Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST),
2010.
[11] T. M. Green, D. H. Jeong, and B. Fisher. Using personality factors
to predict interface learning performance. In Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences 43, January 2010.
[12] S. Hamlyn-Wright, R. Draghi-Lorenz, and J. Ellis. Locus of control
fails to mediate between stress and anxiety and depression in parents
of children with a developmental disorder. Autism, 11(6):489–501,
2007.
[13] C. G. Healey. Perception in visualization. North Carolina State University, http://www.csc.ncsu.edu/faculty/healey/PP, Retrieved March
2011.
[14] J. Heer and M. Bostock. Crowdsourcing graphical perception: Using
Mechanical Turk to assess visualization design. In Proceedings CHI,
pages 203–212, 2010.
[15] J. Heiser and B. Tversky.
Mental models of complex systems:
Structure and function.
http://wwwpsych.stanford.edu/simwbt/diagrams/papers/mental models-heisertversky.pdf.
[16] J. Hollan, E. Hutchins, and D. Kirsh. Distributed cognition: Toward
a new foundation for human-computer interaction research. ACM
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 7(2):174–196, 2000.
[17] T. A. Judge and J. E. Bono. Relationship of core self-evaluations
traits—self-esteem, generalized self-efficacy, locus of control, and
emotional stability—with job satisfaction and job performance: A
meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(1):80–92, 2001.
[18] A. Kittur, E. H. Chi, and B. Suh. Crowdsourcing user studies with
Mechanical Turk. In Proceedings CHI, pages 453–456, 2008.
[19] R. Kosara and C. Ziemkiewicz. Do Mechanical Turks dream of square

90

pie charts? In BELIV Workshop, pages 373–382, 2010.
[20] L. M. Lapierre and T. D. Allen. Control at work, control at home, and
planning behavior: Implications for workfamily conflict. Published
online before print in Journal of Management, 2010.
[21] Z. Liu, N. Nersessian, and J. Stasko. Distributed cognition as a theoretical framework for information visualization. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 14(6):1173–1180, 2008.
[22] National Center for Biotechnology Information. NCBI genome
database.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/.
Accessed
11/18/2010.
[23] S. E. Palmer. Vision science: Photons to phenomenology, volume 1.
MIT Press., 1999.
[24] J. B. Rotter. Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs, 80(609), 1966.
[25] E. R. Tufte. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Graphics
Press, 1983.
[26] B. Tversky. Functional significance of visuospatial representations. In
P. Shah and A. Miyake, editors, Handbook of higher-level visuospatial
thinking, pages 1–34. Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[27] B. Tversky, M. Agrawala, J. Heiser, P. U. Lee, P. Hanrahan, D. Phan,
C. Stolte, and M.-P. Daniele. Cognitive design principles: From cognitive models to computer models. In L. Magnani, editor, Model-based
reasoning in science and engineering, pages 1–20. King’s College,
2007.
[28] B. Tversky, J. Zacks, P. U. Lee, and J. Heiser. Lines, blobs, crosses,
and arrows: Diagrammatic communication with schematic figures. In
M. Anderson, P. Cheng, and V. Haarslev, editors, Theory and application of diagrams, pages 221–230. Springer, 2000.
[29] J. S. Yi. Implications of individual differences on evaluating information visualization techniques. In Proceedings of the BELIV Workshop,
2010.
[30] C. Ziemkiewicz and R. Kosara. The shaping of information by visual metaphors. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 14(6):1269–1276, 2008.
[31] C. Ziemkiewicz and R. Kosara. Preconceptions and individual differences in understanding visual metaphors. Computer Graphics Forum,
28(3):911–918, 2009. Proceedings EuroVis.

