Keynote Address
Interactive Visualization - Beyond Standard Techniques for
Irrelevant Datasets
Thomas Ertl
Institut für Visualisierung und Interaktive Systeme und Visualisierungsinstitut der
Universität Stuttgart

Abstract

Bio

During the last 20 years visualization has developed into
a scientific discipline of its own right at the crossroads of
computer graphics, human-computer interaction, and data
analysis. Today, interactive visualization techniques play a
crucial role in the process of understanding the huge datasets resulting from simulations, sensor measurements, and
information systems. The talk will look at the current state
of the field which is characterized by the fact that by now
elaborate algorithms and efficient GPU implementations
exist for many classical visualization problems dealing with
3D scalar and vector data sets. Therefore, it has become
obvious that future visualization research cannot only concentrate on optimizing standard techniques for well-known
benchmark data sets. A closer cooperation with application domains very often leads to real-life problems whose
size and dimension require new approaches often combining
known techniques into innovative tools. In this context the
talk will present some of the current research results of the
visualization group at the University of Stuttgart in the areas
of visualization of video streams, molecular dynamics simulations, and patent databases.

Thomas Ertl received a masters degree in computer science
from the University of Colorado at Boulder and a PhD in
theoretical astrophysics from the University of Tuebingen.
Currently, Dr. Ertl is a full professor of computer science
at the University of Stuttgart, Germany and the head of the
Visualization and Interactive Systems Institute (VIS)and the
Visualization Research Center of the University of Stuttgart
(VISUS). Prior to that he was a professor of computer graphics and visualization at the University of Erlangen where he
lead the scientific visualization group. Besides that, he is a
cofounder and a member of the board of science+computing
ag, a Tuebingen based IT company. His research interests
include visualization, computer graphics and human computer interaction in general with a focus on volume rendering, flow visualization, multiresolution analysis, parallel and
hardware accelerated graphics, large datasets and interactive
steering. Dr. Ertl is coauthor of more than 250 scientific
publications and he served as a reviewer for most of the conferences and journals in the field. He has been a member of
many program committees (e.g. SIGGRAPH, Eurographics)
and a papers co-chair for several conferences (e.g. IEEE
Visualization, EG/IEEE EuroVIS, Volume Graphics). Since
2007 Dr. Ertl is Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Graphics and Vice President of the
Eurographics Association. He received the Outstanding
Technical Contribution Award of the Eurographics
Association and the Technical Achievement Award of the
IEEE Visualization and Graphics Technical Committee in
2006 and he was elected as a Member of the Heidelberg
Academy of Sciences and Humanities in 2007.



