Effects of Crossing Angles
Weidong Huang∗

Seok-Hee Hong†

Peter Eades‡

School of Information Technologies, University of Sydney, Australia

A BSTRACT
In visualizing graphs as node-link diagrams, it is commonly accepted and employed as a general rule that the number of link crossings should be minimized whenever possible. However, little attention has been paid to how to handle the remaining crossings in the
visualization. The study presented in this paper examines the effects of crossing angles on performance of path tracing tasks. It
was found that the effect varied with the size of crossing angles.
In particular, task response time decreased as the crossing angle
increased. However, the rate of the decrease tended to level off
when the angle was close to 90 degrees. One of the implications of
this study in graph visualization is that just minimizing the crossing
number is not sufficient to reduce the negative impact to the minimum. The angles of remaining crossings should be maximized as
well.
Keywords: Graph visualization, graph drawing, aesthetic criteria,
link crossing, crossing angle, evaluation.
Index Terms: H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine
Systems—Human Factors; H.5.0 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces—Evaluation/Methodology
1

I NTRODUCTION

Much of the information in the real world has a relational structure.
This type of structures can be modeled as graphs and visualized as
node-link diagrams, in which nodes represent entities in the original data and links represent the relationships between the entities.
Such diagrams have broad applications in many fields. In particular, these diagrams are used in law enforcement (for example, to
detect fraud and money laundering), in biotechnology (to understand metabolic pathways, for example) and web engineering (to
monitor usage).
The primary objective of graph visualization is to enable data
information to be more available by helping the viewer to effectively carry out various tasks. Simply providing a diagram does not
guarantee good performance; research has shown that layout significantly affects user preference and task performance [14, 15]. A
given graph data set can be visualized in many different ways by
changing the spatial positions of nodes. Which way is the best for
the viewer’s comprehension of the underlying data has long been a
concern in graph visualization in general and automatic graph drawing in particular.
Graph drawing research concerns the problem of constructing
geometric representations of abstract graphs. That is, given a set
of nodes and links, calculate the positions of the nodes to optimize predefined layout requirements. The layout requirements
can be modeled in terms of three fundamental parameters of graph
drawing methodologies: drawing conventions, aesthetics and constraints [4]. A drawing convention is a basic rule that a drawing
∗ e-mail:

whua5569@it.usyd.edu.au

† e-mail:shhong@it.usyd.edu.au
‡ e-mail:peter@it.usyd.edu.au

IEEE Pacific Visualisation Symposium 2008
4 - 7 March, Kyoto, Japan
978-1-4244-1966-1/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

must meet. For example, drawing graphs without link crossings
(planar drawing). An aesthetic is a layout property that is intended
to make the resulting drawing visually pleasant and easy to read and
understand. For example, display the symmetries of the graph. A
constraint is a rule that only applies to subsets of the graph or parts
of the drawing. For example, place a given node close to the center
of the drawing.
Graph drawing research aims to design algorithms that display
graphs reasonably fast, and conform to predefined layout requirements at the same time. In the past two decades, computational
efficiency of algorithms has been researched extensively. However,
little is known about the relevance of those layout requirements to
humans in graph understanding (effectiveness).
Recently, the research community has seen a growing interest in
evaluation which is to ensure effectiveness [3, 7]. To be more specific, empirical studies have been conducted to examine layout effects. Link crossings, one of most discussed graph drawing aesthetics, has been empirically validated and identified as the most important factor negatively affecting graph reading performance [14, 16].
Consequently, in designing automatical graph drawing algorithms,
a large amount of research has been devoted to crossing minimization. However, not every graph is planar. Particularly when a drawing convention is applied, crossings are often not removable. How
to handle the remaining crossings in the drawing remains unanswered. Prior research indicated that different crossing styles may
have different degrees of impact. For example, links may cross each
other either at nearly 90 degrees, or at very acute angles. This paper
describes a user study investigating how effects of crossings change
with the size of crossing angles.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, link crossings and related studies on effects of crossings are
introduced. Section 3 describes the details of the experiment and
Section 4 presents the results and findings. The experimental findings and their implications for graph visualization are discussed in
Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.
2 BACKGROUND
2.1 Link Crossings
In visualizing graphs as node-link diagrams, it is commonly accepted and employed as a general rule that the number of link crossings should be minimized whenever possible. As Bertin [2, p. 271]
mentioned, “the simplest, most efficient construction is one which
presents the fewest meaningless intersections, while preserving the
groupings, oppositions, or potential orders contained in the component”. Moreno [13, p. 141], who was the first to introduce node-link
diagrams (or sociograms) into social network analysis [19, p. 9],
also stated, “the fewer the number of lines crossing, the better the
sociogram.”
Crossings not only hide important information from the viewer,
but also make the viewer reluctant to approach the diagram in the
first place [4, 14]. Although minimizing the number of crossings
has long and widely been applied in producing diagrams (e.g., [5]),
it is Purchase and her colleagues who provided empirical evidence validating the aesthetic of link crossings (e.g., [14, 16]).
Purchase et al. [16] conducted the fist study to examine the effects
of three common aesthetics including symmetry, link crossings and
bends on human understanding of graphs. In this study, one dense

41

and one sparse graph were used. Each graph was drawn three times
to show each aesthetic at three different levels (“few”, “some” and
“many”); eighteen drawings were used in total. Three graph reading
tasks were used including one shortest path task. Their results [16]
indicated that both minimizing bends and minimizing crossings improve task performance, while the effects of symmetry still need
further examination.
Purchase [17] found in another study that minimizing crossings
was overwhelmingly beneficial in understanding graph structure;
link crossings was “the most important aesthetic”. A study conducted by Ware et al. [21] further indicated that for shortest path
tasks, “it is the number of edges that cross the shortest path itself
that is important, rather than the total number of edge crossings in
the drawing”.
2.2

Crossing angles

Given their negative effects, crossings have been a main concern in
graph visualization. However, in practice, crossing minimization is
a hard problem in designing algorithms for automatic graph drawing [6]. It is difficult to draw graphs with minimum crossings. On
the other hand, little attention has been paid to handling the remaining crossings to reduce their impact to the minimum.
Prior research has indicated that in some situations, crossings
may not be as bad as we normally think. For example, drawing
graphs without crossings can make some important structural features, such as symmetry, less apparent. Huang et al. [10] found
in a study that in perceiving sociograms, crossings are important
only for tasks that involve path tracing. Even when sociograms are
drawn to convey information about groups, it is more desirable to
cross links connecting the group members.

Figure 1: According to Ware et al. [21], the crossing on the right is
less confusing than that on the left.

Prior research also indicated that how links cross each other may
have different degrees of impact. For example, based on recent results from neurophysiology, Ware at al. [21] suggested that links
that cross at nearly 90 degrees are less likely to be confusing than
those crossing at acute angles (see Figure 1). Eye movement evidence provided by Huang et al. [8, 9] also supported this. From the
eye movement data, it appeared that close-to-90-degree crossings
were ignored by subjects, while acute-angle crossings caused very
slow eye movements, with extra back-and-forths around crossing
points.
Despite the facts mentioned above, the impact of crossing angles on graph reading performance has not been empirically validated with quantitative evidence [21]. The controlled experiment
presented in the next section was to fill this gap.
3

E XPERIMENT

This experiment1 was conducted to test the effects of crossing angles. According to Ware et al. [21] and the results of previous eye
tracking experiments [8, 9], small-angle crossings are more confusing than large-angle crossings.
1 Ethical

clearance for this study was granted by the University of Sydney, November 2005.

42

3.1 Design
To test the effects of crossing angles on path search tasks, we draw
the same graph in different ways; the graph has only one path between two preselected nodes. In each drawing, links cross the path
at the same angle, while in different drawings, the size of crossing
angles varied from 10 to 90 degrees. The layout of the path remains
the same across the drawings.
The task was to follow the path from one end to the other and
determine the length of the path (i.e. the number of links that form
the path). Effects of crossing angles on task performance were measured in terms of response time. We expected that more time would
be spent on drawings with small angles than on those with large
angles.
3.2 Stimuli
Examples of the stimuli can be seen from Table 1.
We randomly generated 16 graphs. In these graphs, there was
only one path connecting two specified nodes with the path length
ranging from 4 to 7. This range was to avoid subjects counting the
number of links without their eyes traveling on the path. There were
also separated links to cross the path.
There were seven crossing angles used; they were 10, 15, 20,
30, 50, 70, 90 degrees. The intervals between angles were larger
when angles are larger. Based on the results of pilot studies, small
angles appeared to have more dramatic effects than large angles.
Therefore relatively more small angles were used with the aim of
catching possible changes in effects.
Each graph was drawn 7 times, with each drawing having one
specific crossing angle. Across the 7 drawings, the layout of the
target path remained unchanged, and links crossed at the same locations of the path. The length of links crossing the target path
could be changed to make sure that a single link crossed the path
only once. From graph to graph, the layout of the target path, the
location of crossing points, and the number of crossing links can be
different.
For each graph, we also produced a path graph that only contained the target path without crossing links. The path graph was
drawn with the same layout as that of the target path in other 7 drawings. The path graph was added as a control condition to compare
possible differences in response time between its drawing (such as
the top left drawing in Table 1) and corresponding large-crossingangle drawings (such as the 90-degree or the 70-degree drawing in
Table 1).
Therefore, 16 sets of drawings were obtained with each set containing seven drawings of the same graph and one drawing of the
corresponding path graph; 16×(7+1)=128 drawings in total.
3.3 Subjects
Twenty-two subjects were recruited on a completely voluntary basis. They were either research or coursework postgraduate students
from the School of Information Technologies at the University of
Sydney. The subjects had normal or correct-to-normal vision and
were familiar with node-link diagrams. Upon the completion of
their assigned tasks, they were paid $10 each for their time and effort.
3.4 Online System
The drawings were displayed by an online system. The system was
designed to highlight the two nodes at the ends of the target path
as red, and display the drawing in the center of the screen. When
it was started, the system displayed one of the highlighted nodes
first. The subject was asked to look at the node and press the space
key on the keyboard to show the whole drawing. This was to make
sure that the eye was at the same position across the subjects when
the drawing was shown. The subject was also expected to start
path searching from this node. Once the answer was determined,

0

90

70

50

30

20

15

10

Table 1: One set of stimuli examples (the number below the drawing indicates the size of the crossing angle in degrees. 0 means no crossings)

43

the space key was pressed; the picture disappeared and an answer
screen appeared. On the right side of the answer screen, there were
six boxes with each representing one possible answer. The subject
was asked to click on one of the boxes. Once the answer box was
clicked, a red node of the next drawing was displayed, and so on.
The response time for each subject and each drawing was
recorded in real time by the system. The time started when the
drawing was completely shown and ended when the space key was
pressed.
3.5 Procedure
There were two blocks with each block containing 8 sets of the
drawings. The order of the blocks was counterbalanced across the
subjects. The order of drawings in each block was randomized with
the constraint that two drawings from the same set should be separated by seven drawings from other sets.
The experiment was conducted in a quiet laboratory room on
an individual basis. Before the experiment, the subject was asked
to read the tutorial material, practice, ask questions, and sign the
consent form. The experiment was started by running the online
system. During task performance, if a wrong answer was given, the
corresponding drawing was placed at the end of the block until the
correct answer was given. The subject was required to have a break
between blocks and at the middle of each block. After the online
task, a short questionnaire and a brief interview were conducted.
The whole experiment took about 35 minutes on average.
Each subject was required to view all the drawings. During the
preparation time, the subject was reminded that there was one path
only between red nodes. The subject was asked to follow the path
from the starting node immediately after the picture was shown,
without having an overall examination or looking at the other red
node first. The subject was instructed to determine the answer as
quickly and as accurately as possible.

Figure 2: Means of response time (sec.) (crossing angle=0 means
no crossings)

From Figure 2, it can be seen that in general, the subjects took
more time to complete the task when the crossing angle was small.
An analysis of variance with repeated measures was conducted on
the seven crossing conditions. The results indicated that there was
a significant effect of crossing angle on response time, F(6, 126) =
28.11, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.57 (η 2 represents partial eta squared, a
measure of effect size). This confirms the first hypothesis.

3.6 Hypotheses
Based on prior research presented in Section 2, we hypothesize that:
1. The crossing angle significantly affects response time.
2. There is a negative linear correlation between response time
and the crossing angle. That is, response time decreases with
increases in the crossing angle.
3. Response time with large crossing angles is not significantly
different from that with no crossings.
In particular, the third hypothesis was formulated also based on
the following considerations.
1. Crossings have negative impact on performance.
2. When the crossing angle is nearly 90 degrees, the impact can
be very small.
3. Given the drawings used in this experiment, when there are
no crossings on the path, the viewer may need more effort to
concentrate. When links cross the path at large angles, the
path appears outstanding and might be easier to follow.
4 R ESULTS
Only times of correct responses were analyzed. Each subject
viewed 128 drawings; 128×22=2,816 time entries were obtained.
The time analysis was based on medians. For each subject, the median time in a condition was calculated. These individual medians
across the subjects were averaged as the mean time that the subjects
spent in that condition. This method eliminates the effects of possible outliers, and was also used by Korner et al. [12]. The means of
median times were summarized in Figure 2.

44

Figure 3: Illustration of the trend relationship between time and angle

To test the second hypothesis, the means of the crossing conditions were plotted in Figure 3. From Figure 3, it appears as expected
that there was a general tendency for response time to decrease with
increases in the crossing angle. We formulated a set of linear trend
coefficients based on the experimental angles. Analysis of linear
trend [11] indicated that this trend between time and angle was significant, F(1, 21) = 36.47, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.64.
Further, as can be seen From Figure 3, the negative correlation
between time and angle turns to positive around the angle of 70 degrees. When the crossing angle is larger than 70 degrees, response
time started to gradually increase with the angle. To test whether
this trend change was systematic, we formulated a set of quadratic
trend coefficients orthogonal to the linear trend coefficients. Anal-

ysis of quadratic trend [11] indicated that this trend was significant,
F(1, 21) = 46.65, p < 0.001, η 2 = 0.69.
The third hypothesis requires equivalence testing. Equivalence
testing involves two steps: define equivalency and perform two
simultaneous one-tailed t tests (see, e.g., [18] for more details).
Defining equivalency is to determine a small tolerance value δ so
that two means that differ by less than δ can be considered equivalent. For this hypothesis, δ was defined as 10% of the time mean
of the control condition [18]. The mean time for the non-crossing
condition is 3.09 seconds. Therefore, δ =3.09×10%=0.31 second.
We compared two angle conditions: the 70- and 90-degree conditions with the non-crossing condition, respectively. For each
comparison, the null hypotheses for the two one-tail paired t tests
were: the difference between time means is greater than or equal to
0.31 and the difference between time means is less than or equal to
-0.31.
The mean difference between the 70-degree and non-crossing
conditions was 3.19-3.09=0.10 second. The tests indicated that
this difference was significantly less than 0.31, t(21) = −6.37, p <
0.001, and significantly greater than -0.31, t(21) = 3.23, p < 0.01.
Both null hypotheses were therefore rejected, and it was concluded
that response time with the 70-degree angle was statistically equivalent to that with no crossings.
The mean difference between the 90-degree and non-crossing
conditions was 3.27-3.09=0.18 second. The tests indicated that
this difference was significantly less than 0.31, t(21) = −6.25, p <
0.001, but not significantly greater than -0.31, t(21) = 1.56, p =
0.067. The null hypotheses could not be rejected at the same time,
and the alternative hypothesis that the 90-degree condition was
equivalent to the non-crossing condition was not supported in this
experiment.
5

D ISCUSSION

The experimental results showed that crossing angles had significant impact on response time in tracing a path. When crossing
angles were large, the subjects performed significantly faster than
when crossing angles were small.
The results also indicated that as illustrated in Figure 3, there was
a negative linear component and also a quadratic component in the
relationship between response time and the crossing angle. That
is, response time decreased significantly as the crossing angle increased. However, the rate of the decrease tended to level off when
the angle was close to 90 degrees. It is important to note that our
analysis of trend was only based on seven specific angles. However, given the nature of the experimental task, it is not expected
that when a different set of angles are used, the overall trend will be
very different from that illustrated in Figure 3.
The equivalence testing showed that when crossing angles were,
for example, around 70 degrees, the response time was sufficiently
near to that in the non-crossing condition to be considered equivalent (within the predefined δ ). In other words, drawing graphs with
large-angle crossings can be equally effective as drawing graphs
without crossings, in terms of response time for path tracing tasks.
It is not clear why the subjects in this experiment took slightly
more time with the 90-degree condition than with the 70-degree
and 50-degree conditions. The subjects generally commented that
it was easier to follow the path with close-to-90-degree angles than
with acute angles. For example, “When the crossing has a very
acute angle, it affects the path following task most. In this case,
the crossing lines are almost parallel to each other, which makes it
hard to identify the true path.” “Crossings make it hard to follow
the lines, especially when the angles are small.” It is harder “when
there are lots of crossings almost parallel to the links I am tracing”. “Crossings would require more concentration for small angles
than large angles.”
Some subjects also commented that “the right angle seems to

have no effects, sometimes even makes path tracing easier, while
the acute angle is confusing”. “Crossings help when the link is perpendicular to the path; crossings give me doubt when they are very
close and parallel to the path.”
It terms of the effects of crossings and crossing angles on eye
movements, the comments from the subjects were largely in line
with the observations of Huang [8]. For example, “Eye movement
was faster and smoother for crossings with wider angles than for
crossings with narrower angles.” “More crossed lines made my eye
movements slow.” “Crossed lines made it hard to count and remember the number of links. Sometimes I had to go back to count
again.” “I needed to slow down eye movement to find where the
link goes.” “Crossings blur the paths that I am interested in, hence
making my eyes more tired and making me blink more. Certainly,
it decreases my accuracy as there is more cognitive load and strain
on my eyes. Pictures with less crossings and larger crossing angles
are much easier to read.” “Crossings with acute angles may lead
my eye to the wrong path.”
5.1

Crossing Number Minimization and Crossing Angle
Maximization

In automatic graph drawing, the aesthetic of link crossings has been
researched extensively in terms of the number of crossings [4].
However, the crossing angle has not been considered as one of the
aesthetic criteria. This study indicated that only minimizing the
number is not sufficient. To reduce the negative impact of crossings to the minimum, the angles of remaining crossings should be
maximized as well. Finkel et al. [5] propose a force-directed curvilinear drawing method, which considers three aesthetics including
node angular resolution, link separation and crossing number. This
method may produce drawings with enlarged crossing angles, but it
is not guaranteed.
The finding that effects of crossings differ with the size of the
crossing angle has two main implications for graph drawing:
1. It is well known that minimizing the number of crossings
is computationally difficult and time consuming. Alternatively, to avoid this difficulty, we may draw graphs with a few
more large-angle crossings. But the resulting drawings can be
equally as effective as those with minimum crossings.
2. There are situations where crossings cannot be removed (for
example, graphs are nonplanar, or a drawing convention is applied), or where effort needed to remove all crossings cannot
be justified. In these cases, the crossing angle should be maximized.
In summary, taking into account crossing number minimization
and crossing angle maximization at the same time, and making
tradeoffs between them when necessary, helps to fully reduce the
negative impact of crossings.
5.2

Equivalence Testing and Superiority Testing

In visualization evaluation, superiority testing is the most common
statistical approach used. This approach asks “whether or not the
conditions under consideration differ”. However, this approach has
some limitations. For example:
1. The chance to detect a significant difference may be increased
by increasing sample size or test power [11].
2. Statistically significant differences may not be meaningful in
practice. For example, the difference between two conditions
can be too small to be considered as important; although the
new method results in better visualizations, it may take relatively more time and effort to construct them.

45

In evaluating graph visualizations, it may be more desirable to
take into consideration not just the visualization itself, but also the
cost involved in producing and maintaining it [1, 20]. In some
cases, the new visualization method may produce visualizations
that can be considered as being equally effective as those by the
current best method, but at a lower cost and greater convenience. In
these cases, equivalence testing as we did in this experiment may be
more suitable to use. This approach asks “whether there is a more
efficient way to achieve the same result” [18].
5.3

Confounding Factors

In performing controlled experiments, one of the major concerns
is the effect of confounding factors. This is particularly important
for graphs given the interconnecting relationships between nodes
and links; manipulating one factor may inevitably affect the other.
Ware et al. [21] present an ideal way to work around this issue, by
using real graph drawings and considering all possible factors at the
same time.
Since our aim in this experiment was only to examine how crossing angle affects response time when tracing a path, we used simple
purpose-constructed graphs, such as those in Table 1, to control the
number of possible confounding factors and their effects. In constructing the stimuli drawings, although it is impossible to exclude
all confounding factors, every effort had been made. For example,
in each set of drawings, layout of the target path remains the same,
as well as the locations of crossing points. These were to make sure
that the only difference between drawings was the crossing angle.
One exception was the distance between the parallel links. The distance reduced while the crossing angle decreased from drawing to
drawing (see Table 1). This was the result of keeping the crossing
locations unchanged while varying the size of the crossing angle.
The reduced distance made the drawings look denser. To minimize
the effect, the subjects had been reminded that there was only one
target path, and asked to trace the path without having a overall
look. Despite this, we may still roughly consider that the denser
look was the result of smaller crossing angles, therefore being able
to attribute the difference in response time to the difference in crossing angles.
6

C ONCLUSION

We have conducted a controlled experiment to validate the effects
of crossing angles. It was found that the the effects of crossings
differ with the size of crossing angles. To be more specific, the performance of path tracing tasks improves with increases in the crossing angle. However, the rate of improvement slows down when the
angle size is close to 90 degrees. These indicate that in drawing
graphs, to fully reduce the impact of crossings, not just the number
of crossings needs to be minimized, but also the size of crossing
angles should be increased.
This study also found that drawings with around-70-degree
crossings are equally as effective as those with no crossings. Although minimum-crossing drawings are more desirable, the finding
indicates that we may achieve the similar level of effectiveness by
drawing graphs with a few more large-angle crossings.
R EFERENCES
[1] Batini, C., Nardelli, E. and Tamassia, R. (1986) A Layout Algorithm
for Data Flow Diagrams. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
12(4): 538-546.
[2] Bertin, J. (1983) Semiology of Graphics: Diagmrams Networks Maps.
University of Wisconsin Press.
[3] Chen, C. and Czerwinski, M. (2000) Empirical Evaluation of Information Visualization: An Introduction. International Journal of HumanComputer Studies, 53(5): 631-635.
[4] Di Battista, G., Eades, P., Tamassia, R. and Tollis, I. (1998) Graph
Drawing: Algorithms for the Visualization of Graphs, Prentice Hall.

46

[5] Finkel, B. and Tamassia, R. (2004) Curvilinear Graph Drawing Using
the Force-Directed Method. In Proc. 12th International Symposium on
Graph Drawing (GD’04), LNCS 3383, 448-453.
[6] Garey, M.R. and Johnson, D.S. (1983) Crossing Number is NPComplete. SIAM Journal on Algebraic and Discrete Methods, 4: 312316.
[7] Ghoniem, M., Fekete, J.-D. and Castagliola, P. (2004) A Comparison of the Readability of Graphs Using Node-Link and Matrix-Based
Representations. In Proc. the 10th IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (InfoVis’04), 17-24.
[8] Huang, W. (2007) Using Eye Tracking to Investigate Graph Layout Effects. In Proc. Asia Pacific Symposium on Visualization
(APVIS2007), IEEE, 97-100.
[9] Huang, W. and Eades, P. (2005) How People Read Graphs: An Eye
Tracking Study. In Proc. Asia Pacific Symposium on Information Visualization (APVIS2005), CRPIT 45, ACS, 51-58.
[10] Huang, W., Hong, S.-H. and Eades, P. (2005) Layout Effects on Sociogram Perception. In Proc. 13th International Symposium on Graph
Drawing (GD’05), LNCS 3843, 262-273.
[11] Keppel, G. and Wickens, T.D. (2004) Design and Analysis: A Researcher’s Handbook. Prentice Hall; 4th edition.
[12] Korner, C. and Albert, D. (2002) Speed of Comprehension of Visualized Ordered Sets. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8:
57-71.
[13] Moreno, J.L. (1953) Who Shall Survive: Foundations of Sociometry,
Group Psychotherapy, and Sociodrama. Beacon House Inc.
[14] Purchase, H., Carrington, D. and Allder, J. (2002) Empirical Evaluation of Aesthetics-based Graph Layout. Empirical Software Engineering, 7: 233-255.
[15] Purchase, H., Carrington, D. and Allder J. (2002) Graph Layout Aesthetics in UML Diagrams: User Preferences. Journal Graph Algorithms and Applications, 6(3): 255-279.
[16] Purchase, H., Cohen, R.F. and James, M. (1996) Validating Graph
Drawing Aesthetics. In Proc. the Symposium on Graph Drawing
(GD’95), LNCS 1027, Springer-Verlag, 435-446.
[17] Purchase, H. (1997) Which Aesthetic has the Greatest Effect on Human Understanding? In Proc. the 5th international Symposium on
Graph Drawing (GD’97), LNCS 1353, Springer-Verlag, 248-261.
[18] Rogers, J.L., Howard, K.I. and Vessey, J.T. (1993) Using Significance
Tests to Evaluate Equivalence Between Two Experimental Groups.
Psychological Bulletin, 113(3): 553-565.
[19] Scott, J. (2000) Social Network Analysis: A Handbook. Sage Publications, 2nd edition.
[20] van Wijk, J.J. (2005) The Value of Visualization. In Proc. IEEE Visualization 2005 (Vis’05), 79-86.
[21] Ware, C., Purchase, H., Colpoys, L. and McGill, M. (2002) Cognitive
Measurements of Graph Aesthetics. Information Visualization, 1(2):
103-110.

