Identifying the Competencies of ‘Visual Literacy’ –
a Prerequisite for Knowledge Visualization
Ralph Lengler
Università della Svizzera Italiana
Ralph.Lengler@lu.unisi.ch

Abstract
Visual representations are becoming more important
for teaching, learning and communicating. This paper argues that a more profound understanding of the “vision
competencies” constituting “Visual Literacy” will enable
practitioners and researchers alike to produce more effective knowledge visualizations. The main contribution of
this paper is to identify some of the core competencies of a
visually literate person, by examining the abilities tested in
visual intelligence tests.
Keywords--- Visual literacy, visual media, visual representations, visual communication, visual intelligence

1. Introduction
Visual representations are increasingly appearing in
learning and teaching resources, delivered across a range of
media in a variety of formats: digitally in Web-based materials and multimedia as well as in other formats such as
print and transparencies. The proliferation of image-rich
resources is due in part to the wide availability of digital
images and access to the technology and software that facilitates the creation and delivery of visual materials. Furthermore, the use of visual media in learning and teaching
is supported by research demonstrating that learner preferences and styles can more effectively be addressed [1] and
that enhanced learning and retention take place through the
use of visual material [2, 3, 4, 5] .
A number of researchers in the educational context
have attempted to integrate those findings into their theories [6]. The intuitive appeal of finding out how individuals
think and learn has furthermore created a burgeoning market for diagnostic tools such as learning style tests. However, what characterizes all of those tools and models is
their low reliability and internal consistency [7].
On the other hand non-verbal IQ-Tests have been
around for more than 80 years with high scores in reliability as well as internal consistency. Originally developed to

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

be culturally “fair” intelligence tests, factor-analytical studies have shown them to measure visual intelligence [8, 9].
This paper examines some of those tests and by doing
so offers a more profound understanding of the “vision
competencies” which constitute “Visual Literacy”, a prerequisite to understand and create knowledge visualizations. The main contribution of this paper is to apply psychometrics to Knowledge Management.

2. Background and Rationale
Twenty-six years ago, American philosophy professor
James Flynn [10] discovered a remarkable trend: Average
IQ scores in every industrialized country on the planet had
been increasing steadily for decades. The climb has continued, with more recent studies showing that the rate of IQ
increase is accelerating. The biggest IQ rise has been
shown in non-verbal IQ-Tests like the Standard Raven
Progressive Matrices [11] which measures visual intelligence (See Figure 1).

Figure 1: The first matrix of the Raven’s
When you take the Ravens test, you're confronted with
a series of visual grids, each containing a mix of shapes

that seem vaguely related to one another. To answer the
implicit question posed by the test, you need to pick the
correct missing shape from a selection of eight possibilities. To "solve" these puzzles, in other words, you have to
scrutinize a changing set of icons, looking for unusual patterns and correlations among them. This is not the kind of
thinking that happens when you read a book or have a conversation with someone. But it is precisely the kind of
mental work you do when you, say, struggle to program a
VCR or struggle with the logic of a complex diagram.
In 2001, Flynn & Dickens [12] proposed a possible
explanation for this increase: Environmental feedback effects. That means our increased exposure to visual media
triggers a feed-back cycle resulting in dramatically enhanced visual processing skills on one side and on the
other in richer information delivery by the media. Taking
cinema as an example, our exposure to movies stimulated
our brains to process more visual information per timeunit, which in turn lead us to demand from the film industry to deliver more visual information by means of increased cuts or camera movement.
Support for this Hypothesis comes from Cinema Studies where Bordwell [13] has shown that the average shot
length in mainstream Hollywood movies decreased from 8s
in the 50ies to nowadays 3s. So, over the last 50 years,
we've had to cope with an explosion of media, technologies, and interfaces, from TV zapping to the World Wide
Web. And every new form of visual media - interactive
visual media in particular - poses an implicit challenge to
our brains: We have to work through the logic of the new
interface, follow clues, sense relationships. Perhaps unsurprisingly, these are the very skills that the Ravens tests
measure - you have to survey a field of visual icons and
look for unusual patterns.

3. The BIS-4 model of intelligence
Pattern recognition / visualization (as we have seen in
the Raven’s) is only one aspect of visual intelligence. One
of the most comprehensive intelligence batteries is the
“Berliner Intelligenz Strukturtest” (BIS-4) [14] which was
constructed out of a collection of 2000 tests. Out of this
collection they selected by means of cluster and factor
analysis those tests which best test distinct mental abilities.
According to their model, measurable intelligence consists
of 3 content [Visual-spatial, Numeric, Verbal] and 4 processing abilities [Speed, Memory, Creativity, Cognitive
Processing Capacity] (see figure 2), resulting in 12 distinct
areas of intelligence.

Figure 2: The BIS-4 model of intelligence
In the following paragraphs we will have a closer look
at the various competencies in the visual field as measured
by the BIS-4. This can help us understand to produce high
quality knowledge visualizations.

3.1. Processing speed
The ability SPEED is a measure of processing tempo,
concentration and ease of perception. Without time constraints, everyone should be able to complete a speed test.
Most conventional IQ-Test combine the dimensions
SPEED and PROCESSING CAPACITY: They start with
“puzzles” everyone can solve and become more and more
difficult as the test progresses. So Figure 1 of the Ravens is
a good example of a task measuring processing speed.
Another example of a visual speed test is the “Old English”
test of the BIS-4. This test measures how fast one can discriminate two different fonts. Or more generally speaking
how fast we can assign complex shapes to visual categories. A real world application area could be how fast we
see a certain icon on screen or a location on a map.

Figure 3: “Old English” font discrimination test

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

3.2 Memory
VISUAL MEMORY can best be characterized as the
skill of structuring, storing, and recalling knowledge in
maps. The best way to measure visual memory is to present
maps for memorization and asking afterwards to locate
certain objects in the map or to recall paths (like the path
memorization test in figure 4).

Figure 5: Logo-invention test

3. 4 Processing capacity

Figure 4: Path memorization test.
If visual memory is the ability to orient, locate and
store information in maps, this could explain why maps are
such an effective way of knowledge visualization.

3.3 Creativity
VISUAL CREATIVITY is a measure of how well we
can reconfigure shapes into new objects, or how well we
can express concepts with visual means. But to measure
creativity reliably and objectively is much harder: Every
solution is somewhat different; therefore the examiner has
in some way to judge a solution. For this reason most intelligence tests exclude creativity even though it correlates in
the same magnitude with ‘g’ [general intelligence] as the
other abilities. The Authors of the BIS-4 tackle this problem by saying that creativity consists of idea fluidity
(amount), idea flexibility (variety) and idea originality
(freshness). The first two can be measured; the third is
more open to judgment, so therefore measurement of originality is not included in the BIS-4. Here Visual Creativity
is measured by asking people to create new objects out of
some basic shapes or to invent logos for a small shop (see
figure 5).

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

PROCESSING CAPACITY could be defined as the
ability to imagine future events, to abstract concepts from
data and to recognize associations in events. Basically it is
the ability we most commonly associate with intelligence,
so we will examine the tests of this category closer. Because visual intelligence tests, like the Raven’s, were devised as a more effective way to measure ‘g’, or to measure
“g” without the cultural bias of language, it is not that clear
what abilities they actually measure. From more recent
research [8] it is now clear, that the abilities Rotation in 3D, Orientation and Pattern Recognition are more distinct
than originally thought.
In the BIS-4 visual processing capacity is measured
with five tests. According to the manual, the test, that best
measure ‘visual’, ‘processing capacity’ and ‘g’, is the ‘figural analogy test’ (see figure 6).

Figure 6: Figural analogy test
Recognizing analogies is a reasoning competency
needed for all sense making processes especially in communication. This skill is equally applicable to visual and
verbal literacy. But it seems that for communicating visually analogies are far more important than in verbal communication.
There are two more visual tests which correlate highly
with both ‘g’ and processing capacity: 3-D- Folding and
Charkoff’s Series Continuation Test. The other two, Bon-

gard’s Pattern Recognition and the Image Rotation test are
more related to vision competencies.
The 3-D folding test measures how well we can visualize and rotate objects in 3-D space. It is a test which requires a lot of thinking power as it requires you to rotate
the cube in your imagination.

In Image rotation one is asked to assemble a figure
from different pieces. Unlike 3-D Folding, this test is less
processing intensive as it requires only 2-D skills.

Figure 10: Image rotation test
Figure 7: 3-D folding test
In Charkoff’s Series Continuation Test one is asked to
continue a series by two more elements. Series Continuation is an ability which is very close to logical reasoning.

3.5 Visual Tests which are less related to vision
competencies
The factor-analytical studies done by the authors of the
BIS-4 also revealed that some visual tests actually assess
verbal competencies.
The abilities to categorize objects, or to reason if
something is true or false are competencies which belong
more to the verbal domain. The ‘SRA Pictorial Reasoning
Test’ [15] for example measures verbal skills with visual
means thereby mixing different competencies.
In this test one has to identify the object which doesn’t
belong to the same category as the other objects.

Figure 8: Charkoff’s series continuation test
In the Bongard-Test one is asked to deduce the rule
which underlie the presented patterns ‘A’ and ‘B’. This
kind of test is popular in entry exams for medical school,
as medical deans argue that it measures the ability to distinguish different kinds of tissue.

Figure 11: Pictorial reasoning test
If we wanted this test to truly assess visual competencies, then the object not belonging to the same category
should be identified according to its pattern like in the
Bongard Test.

Figure 9: Bongard’s pattern test

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

3.6 Implications & Limitations
Visual literacy as defined by the International Visual
Literacy Association is "a group of vision competencies a
human being can develop by seeing and at the same time
having and integrating other sensory experiences” [16].
From what we have learnt from the visual tests of the BIS4 we can define those ‘vision competencies’ as the group
of abilities to:
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9

Speedily locate, identify and assess patterns.
Speedily assign complex shapes to visual categories
Structure, store and recall objects and paths in maps
Reconfigure shapes into new objects
Express concepts with visual means in a wide variety of ways
Construct meaning by integrating different associated visual messages.
Imagine and rotate objects in 3-D space.
Simulate the future behavior of objects, based on
their pattern of change in a given time period.
Deduce the rules which govern patterns

This list of “vision abilities” should not be considered
exhaustive. As not all intellectual abilities are measurable
with paper and pencil tests, a more comprehensive definition of the Visual Literacy competences should also include assertions about declarative knowledge, visual social
skills and empathy.

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]

4. Opportunities and conclusions
Some competencies underlying visual literacy have
been identified by examining visual intelligence tests. An
argument has been made that the understanding of visual
literacy is an essential step for producing more effective
knowledge visualizations.
Considering the implications of the Flynn effect, we
can expect this trend of visual IQ increase to continue. As
kids play sophisticated computer games that simulate 3Dworlds, they train their visual processing capacities. This
means future generations will be able to absorb, understand
and process more and more complex visual messages.
Higher Visual Literacy will spur demand for more complex
and sophisticated knowledge visualizations. So it is safe to
say that to communicate visually will become increasingly
more effective and will gain importance over other modalities, such as verbal communication.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

Gardner, H. (1993). Multiple Intelligences: The theory in
practice. New York: BasicBooks
Carney, R.N., & Levin, J.R. (2002). Pictorial illustrations
still improve students' learning from text. Educational Psychology Review, 14(1), 5-26.
Dwyer, F. & Baker, R. (2001). A systemic meta-analytic
assessment of the instructional effects of varied visuals on
different types of educational objectives. In R.E. Griffen,
V.S. Williams & J. Lee (Eds.), Exploring the visual future:
art design, science and technology. Blacksburg, VA: The
International Visual Literacy Association.
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental Representations. New York:
Oxford University Press.
CASSIDY, S. (2004). Learning styles: an overview of
theories, models and measures. Educational Psychology
24(4), 419-444.
Rezaei, A. R. & Katz, L. (2004). Evaluation of the reliability and validity of the cognitive styles analysis, Personality
and Individual Differences 36(6), 1317-1327.
Johnson, W. & Bouchard, T. (2005). The Structure of
human intelligence: It is verbal perceptual and image
rotation (VPR), not fluid and crystallized. Intelligence 33,
393-416.
Jäger, A. O. (1984). Intelligenzstrukturforschung: Konkurrierende Modelle, neue Entwicklungen, Perspektiven. Psychologische Rundschau, 35, 21-35.
Flynn, J. R. (1980). Race, IQ, and Jensen. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Raven, J. C. (1943). Advanced Progressive Matrices. Oxford: Oxford Psychologists Press.
Flynn, J. R. & Dickens, W. T. (2001). Heritability Estimates Versus Large Environmental Effects: The IQ Paradox Resolved. Psychological Review 108(2), 346-369
Bordwell, D. (2001). Visual Style in Cinema: Vier Kapitel
Filmgeschichte. Frankfurt a. M.: Verlag der Autoren.
Jäger, A.O., Süß, H.-M. & Beauducel, A. (1997). Berliner
Intelligenzstruktur-Test (BIS, Form 4). Göttingen: Hogrefe.
McMurry, R., N. (1967). SRA Pictorial Reasoning Test.
Chicago: Science Research Associates.
International
Visual
Literacy
Association:
http://www.ivla.org/organization/whatis.htm (29.3.06).

