Implementation and Evaluation of Programming Environment using Real
Objects for Children
Mitsuru Iwata
Graduate School of Information Systems,
University of Electro-communications, Japan
miwata@is.uec.ac.jp

Yuka Fujie
NEC Corporation
Market Development Div., Japan
y-fujie@cw.jp.nec.com

Shun’ichi Tano
Graduate School of Information Systems,
University of Electro-communications, Japan
tano@is.uec.ac.jp

Tomonori Hashiyama
Graduate School of Information Systems,
University of Electro-communications, Japan
hashiyama@is.uec.ac.jp

Abstract

ronment for children. Finally, we conducted evaluation
experiments to check the validity of the system and
analyzed the results.

We developed a programming environment that promotes logic development in children. Dealing with the
real materials in their play environments is important
for children using this programming environment.
Based on our analysis, we propose a concept model and
the user interface for a play environment for children.
We confirmed the effectiveness of the programming
environment experimentally.

1. Introduction
By playing with toys, children increase their knowledge and creativity. Today, many educational toys are
available that use computers. One of them is a toy that
teaches programming, and understanding and learning
of programming effectively develop logical thinking in
children. Children can not only understand the concept
of system dynamics, but can also learn the mechanisms
of reasoning based on if-then rules through play. Since
little children often learn while moving or transforming
actual things, interaction with the physical world is an
important factor in the formation of their mental model.
Similarly, it is a necessary factor for adults in terms of
brain activation. Current programming environments
use mice and keyboards and differ from environments
where children usually play. Therefore, understanding
these environments in difficult for children.
In our system, children create graphical if-then rules
that represent changes in real world materials (e.g.,
stuffed animals and toys) with gestures as if they are
magicians. We previously developed a programming
environment where children can master rule-based reasoning and programming concepts while playing [16].
First, we analyzed problems in related work and examined important concepts for programming environments for children. Next, we designed a user interface
for the programming environment that stimulates logical thinking in children based on those concepts, and
we implemented a real world object programming envi-

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

2. Related work
We surveyed research on intellectual training using
computers for children. We classified it into three categories: programming language development for children, using tangible user interface (TUI), and using
personal belongings in environments where children
play.

2.1. Related work on programming
Many programming language development systems
aimed at promoting the creativity and logical thinking
of children exist.
Logo [1] is a system where a turtle on a computer
screen walks around according to the commands of
users and creates a drawing based on its path. In KidSim [2], Stagecast [3], and Viscuit [4], users can choose
characters and sounds and then create rules for the
movement or change of them by arranging their lines
and execute the rules. Squeak [5] is a programming
language and environment where users can program by
dragging and dropping processing tiles.
Children can not only create and express their imaginary worlds on computers easily, but can also learn the
fundamental perspectives and logical ideas of programming by using graphical programming languages.

2.2. Related work using TUI
Research has been done using physically manipulated materials as user interfaces.
1) Logo [1] + LEGO [6] (Mindstorm [7])
2) Cricket [7] - programmable bricks
3) Digital Beads [7]
4) Curlybot [8]
5) Triangles [9] - tiles
6) Electronic Block [10]

7) Block Jam [11]
8) SAGE [12] - stuffed toys
9) Topobo [13] - building kits.
Thus, imagination and creativity in children are
sparked by creating imaginary things by hand and operating them using their own programs.

2.3. Related work using personal belongings
I/O Brush [14] can capture the color, material, and
motion of familiar stuff using a brush to draw on a canvas. Power Goo [15] is a system where users can take
pictures and transform and animate the digital images.

2.4. Analysis
We analyzed the problems of each area of related
work.
(1) Related work on programming
Some related works [1-5] used materials such as restricted languages or behaviors that were specified beforehand. The programming can be divided into procedural languages and if-then rules. Since procedural languages [1, 4] require users to acquire specific program
language before using them, and keyboards are used for,
understanding program creation is difficult for children.
Children tend to consider the input procedure of languages as important while programming. By contrast,
since the if-then rules [2, 3, 5] can be created graphically, children can easily understand such program
creation. However, these systems are essentially pleasure-less learning of program languages. Moreover,
since conventional monitors, keyboards, and mouse are
used in these systems, they are no longer called toys.
(2) Related work using TUI
In other works [6-13], children understand the operation of physical objects intuitively and use them with
great interest by touching and manipulating them.
However, they can manipulate them only by the stuff
prepared beforehand by the system. Although other
related works [7, 9] use TUI, since they display on a
computer screen, children have difficulty matching
physical stuff with items displayed on computer screens.
(3) Related work using personal belongings
If personal items are used, children play enthusiastically [14, 15]. However, learning does not focus on
logical thinking while playing with toys in these systems.

3. Purpose and research approaches of our
study
From our analysis of related work, we developed a
concept model for a programming environment for
children.

3.1. Purpose
Programming by rules, using a TUI, and using personal belongings are important when children are programming. We developed a programming environment

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

where children can master logical ideas, rule-based
reasoning, and programming concepts naturally and
intuitively while playing.
Therefore, we constructed a programming environment with the following characteristics for children.
1. Learning of logical thinking, rule-based reasoning,
and programming concepts through play.
2. Use of a UI that lets children understand the concepts
of programming naturally and intuitively.

3.2. Research approaches
To support programming for children, we combined
programming by rules, use of a TUI, and use of personal belongings. Then, we developed key concepts for
creating a programming environment for children.
(1) The operation environment is on the floor or on a
desk. Children can play and learn easily and communicate with each other in the environment where they
usually play.
(2) Real world materials, such as stuffed toy, voices and
everyday sounds, or postures and gestures of people
can be used. Since children can use objects without
excluding those inherent functions and properties,
their creativity is cultivated.
(3) The programming method involves programming
with two pictures, which represents a simple state
transition (if-then rule) of real world materials, for
example, “If material X is in this condition, then it
will change to Y”. Children can not only create these
rules easily, but can understand the fundamental
view of programming intuitively and learn logical
thinking.
(4) UIs are unified using the idea of being a magician.
Children can understand the concept and the operation of rule-based programming more intuitively, and
imagination and creativity are encouraged.

3.3. Model of real world object programming
environment
Children use actual materials, such as stuffed animals
and toys, in the real world and create transitions by
graphical if-then rules with gestures as if they are magicians. We devised a programming environment in
which children can master logic, rule-based reasoning,
and programming concepts while playing (Figure 1).

4. System outline
We created a prototype system for the demonstration
experiment of the programming environment using real
world objects.

4.1. Target
We choose a desk top as an experiment environment
where children play. The real world materials were limited to objects, sounds, postures, and gestures. The cardinal rule consisted of transitions from conditional

scenes to consequent scenes of real world materials.
The conditional scenes consisted of pictures and sounds,
and the consequent scenes consisted of sounds and image sequences (i.e., animations of objects and people).
(4) Magic wand

(2) Real world materials

Hey!
R
in
grin
g

(1) Floor

Go!

(3) Graphical if-then rule

Figure 1. Programming environment with real
objects

4.2. System design
A camera was set into the ceiling to acquire still images and videos of the materials placed on the desk. All
environmental sound was acquired with an omnidirectional microphone and was amplified by an amplifier. The operation device must appear like a magic
wand and be wireless so that children can use it anywhere. To recognize the behavior of children, the threedimensional position of the magic wand was acquired
by two 2D position-sensing devices (KOKUYO
mimioBasic). The images and animations acquired by
the camera were projected on a desk from a projector
set into the ceiling, and sound is outputted from a
speaker. These system configurations are shown in Figure 2.

creation, operation, and execution are carried out by
gestures using a “magic wand.” In rule creation and
execution, children shake the magic wand and draw
circles.
(2) UI
Fundamental operations involve the creation, execution, and editing of magic.
a) Creation of magic
Children place personal belongings, such as stuffed
animals, on the desk. First, they create scenes before
magic is applied (IF scene) by encircling objects with
the magic wand. Next, children demonstrate how they
change after the application of magic (THEN scene) in
the encircled area with the materials, other materials, or
gestures. Finally, the magic occurs if children wave the
magic wand (Figure 3).
The system takes images and analyzes the stuffed
animals on the desk, the gestures of children, etc., and
shows the magic as two images, as illustrated in Figure
4.
Create IF scene
(IF image)

Arrangement and manipulation
of real world materials

Encircle by magic wand
Countdown

Preparation, movement, and
changing of real world materials

Create THEN scene
Manipulation of real world materials
(THEN image)
Wave magic wand
<Completion of magic>

Figure 3. Process of magic creation

Projector
Video camera
Projector

Scene before magic occurs
(IF image)

Video camera

PC
PC

Scene after magic occurs
(THEN image)

Figure 4. Example of if-then rule expressed by
images

Amplifier
Amplifier

Speaker

mimioBasic
(2D position
sensing device)
Omni-directional
microphone

Speaker

mimioBasic
Omni-directional Magic wand
microphone

Figure 2. System configuration

4.3. UI design
In this section, we explain the overall concept and
each concrete UI of our system.
(1) Overall concept: implementation of magic metaphor
A main window consists of a “magic world” where
rules are created and applied, a “magic book” where
created rules are displayed and edited, and a “magic
crystal ball” where created rules are previewed. Rule

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

b) Execution of magic
If children wave the magic wand, magic occurs on
the real world materials on the desk (Figure 5). The
system analyzes the situation on the desk and examines
whether the created magic (rules) can be applied to the
current scene. When the magic can be applied, the system superimposes the scene after the magic was applied.
The magic in the process of being applied is highlighted.
c) Editing of magic
- Deletion
The magic in the “magic book” will be deleted if an
“x” mark is drawn on it with the magic wand.
- Copy
If the image in the “magic book” is dragged and
dropped with the magic wand, a copy of the image is
displayed on the “magic world” in full size.

Wave magic wand
<Start application
of magic>
Application of
created magic

Arrangement and manipulation
of real world materials

Wave magic wand
Finish application
of magic

Figure 5. Process of application of magic
- Preview
If the magic in the “magic book” is encircled by the
magic wand, it will be played within the “magic crystal
ball”.
- Access to other page
If a page number label of the “magic book” is pushed
with the magic wand, images of magic on the page are
shown.

5. Evaluation experiments
We conducted three kinds of evaluation experiments
using adults and one evaluation experiment using children. The experiments using adults consisted of a “scenario experiment” for measuring whether the system
can be used naturally, an “applied theme experiment”,
and an “applied independent experiment” for verifying
the effectiveness of the system. The experiment using
children consisted of an evaluation experiment to examine whether they could use this system safely, understand UI intuitively, and have fun.
The adults were five postgraduate male students, and
children were a pair of two girls (4 and 6 years old).

5.1. Experiment 1: evaluation experiments using adults
First, the method for using the user interface and
hardware of the system was explained to each subject.
Then, the subject used the system freely for about 10
minutes to become familiar with it. The behavior of the
subjects was recorded by video, and all the operations
that the subject performed were logged during the experiments. After three experiments were completed,
subjects were asked to fill out a questionnaire. One of
the conditions of experiments is shown in Figure 6.

Figure 6. Applied theme experiment

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

(1) Scenario experiment
The subject operated the system according to 13 scenarios prepared beforehand that used all the UIs of the
system.
(2) Applied theme experiment
The subject created some magic (if-then rules) that
came out a specified execution result using the target
toys.
(3) Applied independent experiment
The subject created some magic for 20 minutes using
toys freely.

5.2. Experiment 1: results of evaluation experiments using adults
5.2.1. Analysis of results in scenario experiment
We found that this system could be used by natural
operation since the average success rate of all the functions was over 90%.
5.2.2. Analysis by number of times of operation and
questionnaire
The frequency rates for using each UI and operation
in editing magic calculated from the results of the “applied theme experiment” and the “applied independent
experiment” are shown in Figure 7. The “editing of
magic” UI was used more than the “creation of magic”
and “execution of magic” UIs, and the “page turning”
operation accounted for approximately half of the “editing of magic” UIs. Therefore, the subjects checked and
referred to the previously created magic and then created new magic and executed it. Moreover, all the operations in the editing of magic were used effectively.
Each UI
Editing of magic
(60%)

Editing of magic
Creation of
magic (25%)

Page turning
(47%)

Copying
(14%)
Previewing
(17%)

Execution of
magic (15%)

Deletion
(22%)

Figure 7. Frequency of UI operations
The questionnaire result are shown in Figure 8 using
a five-point Likert scale that ranged from agree to disagree about “I could use it easily” and “It was helpful
when creating and executing magic” for each UI. Subjects used these UIs easily to check the previously created magic.
The questionnaire results are shown in Figure 9 using
a five-point Likert scale that ranged from agree to disagree about “Using real world materials was good”, “It
enhanced logical thinking”, and “It was pleasant” for
the system. From the result, each item received a high
score.

3.8
3.8
3.8
4.2
3.6
4.0

Creation of magic
Execution of magic
Editing of magic
3.0

Copying

I could use it
easily.

3.6

It was helpful
when creating
and executing
magic.

4.3
4.2

Previewing
2.5

Deletion

4.0

Page turning

4.0

1

2

3

4

4.5
5

(disagree)
(agree)
Evaluation value

Figure 8. Questionnaire results about each UI
Using real world
materials was good.

4.0

It enhanced logical
thinking.

4.4

It was pleasant.
1

4.2
2

3

4

5

(disagree)
(agree)
Evaluation value

Figure 9. Questionnaire results of system
evaluation
5.2.3. Analysis by video
We analyzed the characteristic behaviors and operations of each subject from the video recorded in the
applied theme and applied independent experiments.
Two subjects considered what kind of magic was created by touching real world materials and then created
magic. Moreover, they checked the created magic by
execution, previewed the magic, and turned pages in the
magic book. When they noticed mistakes in the magic,
they considered why such execution results occurred,
remade the magic, and deleted the wrong magic. Since
one subject was checking the created magic by page
turning casually while thinking, logical thinking and
imagination about the creation of magic were developed. Another subject executed magic in various scenes
for the purpose of checking the magic and noticed some
mistakes.
The interaction (emergence phenomenon) with two
or more kinds of magic can be checked only by the
execution of magic. Therefore, the execution of magic
is important for enhancing logical thinking.

5.3. Experiment 2: evaluation experiment using
children
In the same way as the experiment using adults, the
method of operation of this system was explained to the
children at the beginning. Then, they used the system
freely together with an experimenter to become familiar
with it. There were no time restrictions. The behavior of
the children and the look on the desk were recorded by
a video camera during the experiment to analyze interaction of the children with this system.

5.4. Experiment 2: results of evaluation experiment using children
During the execution of magic when explaining the
operation of this system, children were surprised at the
changes taking place on the desk with a stuffed toy;
they touched the image projected on the desk from the
ceiling and peeked at the bottom of the desk repeatedly.
They placed the same stuffed toy as a projected image
next to it, checked whether they were the same, and
then tried to determine whether the magic could be applied on other positions. When they found that the same
magic was applied to the stuffed toy that they placed on
the table, they asked for more directions.
5.4.1. Interaction of children
Children accepted the idea of this system immediately. They helped each other in the process of arranging real world materials on the desk and selecting targets to which magic was applied with the magic wand.
Highlighting the magic that was being applied was useful for the children to understand the display of if-then
rules. During execution of magic where “Baikinman”
moves to the right for a while, a 4-year-old girl brought
a stuffed toy of “Dokinchan” and asked “Will this
magic work on Dokinchan?” (Baikinman and Dokinchan are characters from the popular Japanese cartoon
“Anpanman”.) A 6-year-old girl handed the stuffed toy
of Baikinman to the 4-year-old girl, while pointing to
the applied magic displayed in magic book, and said
“Yes, it will.” Then they checked that the magic could
be applied to Baikinman and Dokinchan.
Using if-then rules expressed with pictures and highlighting magic in process of application promoted the
understanding of the programming concept. In various
scenes, communication between the children was encouraged. Moreover, since the position of the magic
wand would become high if a tall toy is put on the desk,
it was hard for young children to operate it.
5.4.2. Used toys
When we asked children what kind of magic they
wanted to apply, they answered “I want to fill the table
with cakes”, “I want to drive a train”, etc. Children
looked for things that they played with at home. For
instance, a stuffed toy of Thomas the Tank Engine, a
police car, a soccer ball, or a notebook computer were
brought and used by them. They created magic using
unfamiliar toys after they actually touched and manipulated them to determine how it would work or change.
After children understood how to use of this system,
they enjoyed looking for various interesting real world
materials (mostly toys) and making magic using them.
Children were able to understand immediately how to
deal with real world materials as target objects.
5.4.3. Behavior of children
Children created and executed many kinds of magic
using their favorite things. Moreover, they brought a

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

stuffed toy of Thomas the Tank Engine and a toy police
car from the next room and created and executed magic
in which the police car changed into Thomas. Then,
although the magic was applied, the projected image
differed from their expected image. They were puzzled
in the beginning, taking Thomas in their hands and
watching it from various directions, and eventually they
understood that the projected image was not shot from
their stand-point but shot from the ceiling. The head
image of Thomas shot from the ceiling camera was
registered as a THEN image, although they had placed
it on a desk so that it might face them. Then, they
checked the position of the camera attached to the ceiling, placed the Thomas so that its face was turned toward the ceiling, and created the THEN image again.
From these experimental results, this system promoted understanding of the concepts of creation and
execution of magic by dealing with familiar objects that
can be touched, and displaying the execution image in
the original size. Furthermore, by unifying the system
appearance and all the operations using the idea of
magic, children enjoyed using this system and understood the method of operation intuitively. However, the
projection of images only shot from the ceiling confused children because the projected image differed
from the one they expected.

6. MagicPlayroom: extension of system to
floor level
In the current real world object programming environment, children could play only in the confined space
because the operation environment was restricted to the
desk. Therefore, we are going to extend the operation
environment of the system to a floor space so that children can play in a larger space. Moreover, we plan to
place three video cameras, three projectors, and many
2D position sensing devices in the ceiling and modify
or alter the UI to cover a larger area (Figure 10).
Projector
Video camera
Position sensing device
(ultrasonic receiver)

Position sensing device
(infrared receiver)

PC
Floor

Figure 10. System configuration of MagicPlayroom

7. Conclusion
We developed a programming environment that promotes logical thinking in children. Children can create
graphical if-then rules that represent changes of real
world materials with gestures as if they are magicians.
We built a programming environment where children

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

can master rule-based reasoning and programming concepts while playing and evaluated it.
To confirm the effectiveness of this system, we conducted three kinds of experiments using adults and one
evaluation experiment using children. From the experiments using adults, all UIs were used effectively.
From the evaluation experiment using children, children could use this system easily and understand each
UI intuitively. This system enhanced the understanding
of programming concept in children. Furthermore,
communication among children was encouraged in manipulating the UI, understanding the program concepts,
etc. However, little children had difficulty using the UI
on a desk. The projection of images shot from the ceiling confused the children as well.
In future work, the user interface of MagicPlayroom
(an extended system that uses the floor) will be designed and a prototype system will be built. Then, experiments for confirming the effectiveness of the
MagicPlayroom system will be conducted.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Hayao Nakayama
Foundation for Science and Technology and Culture.

References
[1] H. Abelson, A. A. DiSessa, Turtle Geometry: the Computer as a Medium for Exploring Mathematics, MIT
Press, 1980.
[2] A. Cypher, D. C. Smith, “KidSim: End User programming of Simulations”, CHI’95, pp. 27-34, 1995.
[3] Stagecast, http://www.stagecast.com/
[4] Viscuit, http://www.viscuit.com/ (in Japanese)
[5] Squeak, http://www.squeak.org/
[6] LEGO, http://www.lego.com/eng/
[7] M. Resnick, F. Martin, R. Berg, R. Borovoy, V. Colella,
K. Kramer, B. Silverman, “Digital Manipulatives: New
Toys to Think With”, CHI’98, pp. 281-287, 1998.
[8] P. Frei, V. Su, B. Mikhak, H. Ishii, “Curlybot: Designing
a New Class of Computational Toys”, CHI’00, pp. 129136, 2000.
[9] M. G. Gorbet, M. Orth, H. Ishii, “Triangles: Tangible
Interface for Manipulation and Exploration of Digital Information Topography”, CHI’98, pp. 49-56, 1998.
[10] P. Wyeth, G. Wyeth, “Electronic Blocks: Tangible Programming Elements for Preschoolers”, INTERACT 2001,
pp. 496-503, 2001.
[11] H. Newton-Dunn, H. Nakano, J. Gibson, “Block Jam”;
SIGGRAPH 2002, p. 67, 2002.
[12] M. U. Bers, J. Cassell, “Interactive Storytelling Systems
for Children: Using Technology to Explore Language
and Identity”, Journal of Interactive Learning Research,
Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 183-215, 1998.
[13] H. S. Raffle, A.J. Parkes, H. Ishii, “Topobo: A Constructive Assembly System with Kinetic Memory”: CHI’04,
pp. 647-654, 2004.
[14] K. Ryokai, S. Marti, H. Ishii, “I/O Brush: Drawing with
Everyday Objects as Ink”, CHI’04, pp. 303-310, 2004.
[15] Kai's Power Goo, http://www.scansoft.com/
[16] Y. Fujie, S. Tano, M. Iwata, T. Hashiyama, “Proposal of
Digital Desk Programming Environment by Real Objects
for Children”, Human Interface Symposium 2004, pp.
343-346, 2004. (in Japanese)

