Value Creation and its Visualization in E-business
Almira Karabeg
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Norway
almira@ifi.uio.no

Abstract
The purpose of this article is to view the interplay between technology, concept of value and the role of aesthetics in the Internet-based business through the lens of information design and knowledge and information visualization. We endeavor to show the “big picture”, the patterns in structuring and visualizing information around one
chosen theme. Showing how to put polyscopic modeling
into practice as methodology for designing information and
creation and visualization of knowledge, on the example of
authentic travel, is the main contribution of this paper.

1. Introduction
As Internet and more generally the technology continue
to transform the business world, researchers point out that
more research is needed to analyze how business models
contribute to the creation of wealth [1]. In spite of some
authors such as [11] who directly or indirectly claim that
the creation of value and wealth has more dimensions than
just profit, most models and frameworks continue to treat
value in this one-dimensional manner. Part of the blame for
the lack of research in this domain can be attributed to the
speed of development and speed of change within ebusiness. As stated in [11] “…the rules of competition in
virtually all industries are now changing faster than practitioners, academics, or consultants can generate new
frameworks and knowledge lenses to address the emerging
business challenges.”
Another part of the blame for the lack of analysis may
be the lack of methodology for working with existing
knowledge as well as creating/designing new knowledge.
In [7] we proposed methodology, Polyscopic Modeling, for
structuring and designing information for the web. The
same approach, polyscopic modeling, could help remedy
this situation.
In the second section we show how polyscopic modeling
can contribute to knowledge creation and representation.
In the third section we examine two different frameworks for value creation in information economy, both

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

conceptualized by researchers from the world of business
schools. The first framework represents quite traditional
economy based approach, while the second one has more
socio-economic direction, with some esoteric concepts,
such as kairos (perceived time) and emotional intelligence
as pillars of business relationships. Visual representations
for high level views are given for each framework and an
outline of what could be the low level information is given.
In the fourth section, we describe an attempt by a multidisciplinary team to formulate and put into practice a new
and different strategic framework for value creation within
one particular branch of industry - tourism. The work was
field specific (tourism), but the process of searching for a
new framework was quite similar to the process of branding and, as the matter of fact, may be viewed as a creation
of a new brand within the field of tourism – authentic
travel. In [8] socio-cultural aspects of authentic travel are
described, as an example of socio-culturally sensitive ebusiness. Socio-culturally sensitive e-business is again, a
new brand of e-business originating from the perceived
need of the society or culture, and carefully designed to
fulfill a specific role, definitely giving another dimension
to the concept of value.
During the process of creating the profile or brand for
the business, visualization played crucial role in the interaction between people from different disciplines joined in
an effort to define the profile. Communication between
participants from different fields was, during this phase of
the process, best facilitated through extensive use of symbols and ideograms to communicate ideas, meanings and
values. Diagrams, patterns and sketches have been used to
discuss different phases of the process and their relations
and dependencies. Images have been used to show aesthetics of the places, moods and emotions provoked in authentic travelers, and to help the participants to define the mission and the vision for the whole project. Insights obtained
from this phase of the work will be part of the bigger project exploring the role of the visual communication in multidisciplinary settings.
In the fifth section we look into the portal making
phase. Ideas, vision, mission and values need to find concrete visual presentations. We have discussed some principles and guidelines for conducting this process successfully

in [9, 6], as well as the need for design/evaluation characteristics. Design characteristics employed so far are visual
immediacy, visual impetus and visual impedance. Presently
we use these characteristics in relation to web design, but
in the world of business, there is abundance of literature
[12] suggesting that a lot of hiring, as well as strategic decisions are made in accordance with the first impression of
someone or something. First impression is strongly related
to visual immediacy and visual impetus.
In e-business, the challenges of visual communication
and interaction with the media as well as interactions
within media are of special importance. In section five we
take up only one aspect of the problem related to visual
communication and interaction design, the aspect of aesthetics. As the whole concept of authentic travel is based
on different premises than those of commercial tourism,
there was a desire for developing a different kind of portal
into the digital world, a portal that is visually distinguishable from other travel sites and that makes the values behind authentic travel clearly visible. Aesthetics was one
such value. Aesthetic itself has been redefined or designed
so that it also bears connotations of authentic, real, true.
The sixth section contains conclusions and possibilities
for further development.
It is unusual to put such a broad spectrum of topics into
a single article. Themes of different sections are indeed
very different, but we do not attempt to treat any topic in
depth. Rather, we endeavor to show the “big picture”, the
patterns in structuring and visualizing information around
the chosen theme. Showing how to put polyscopic modeling in practice (on authentic travel example) as methodology for designing information and creation and visualization of knowledge is the main contribution of this paper.

2. Knowledge Visualization and Polyscopy
Beauty and brains, pleasure and usability —
they should go hand in hand.

Donald A. Norman
One of the most acute problems of our time is the problem of managing the complexity and magnitude of information. Technology has enabled us to record and store all
sorts of information electronically. The problem is how to
find the right information, or how to use it in order to turn
it into knowledge. Powerful search engines are developed,
but they are not enough. One also needs a strategy of how
to organize information in order to use its power to our
advantage. Figure 1 shows the ideogram - a pictorial representation conveying an idea in a simple manner - that
captures the idea of how the information should be structured using
polyscopic modeling approach (see [8] for
more information on the use of ideograms in polyscopic
modeling).

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 1. This ideogram illustrates how the information should be structured using polyscopic modeling
approach
One selects a topic to be investigated, in our case value
creation in e-business. The triangle then represents hierarchy of scopes and views on the topic. Hierarchy in the
sense of high-level view (abstract view) and low-level view
(details, implementation etc).
The same ideogram could be used to state that all information has artistic, aesthetic, holistic, intuitive, emotional
etc. part (each of these words could be placed in the dot on
the i or the circle) as well as rational, detailed, factual, scientific etc. part (each of these words could be placed inside
the body of the i or the square of the ideogram).
Within the scope of this article, the theme, represented
by the triangle in Figure 1 is the creation of e-value. The
question is what are the dimensions of the e-value? This
question is likely to be asked by an entrepreneur starting
his/her own e-business or, for example, by an information
designer. The questioner might want to find out experts
views on the theme, but for start, he or she is interested in
the high level information. Gaining the familiarity with the
topic, one might want to find more precise, more detailed
information about the topic. Therefore, we try to find
scopes (lenses through which we can look at the main
theme at the high level) that do exist. From the multitude of
scopes, we chose two (described in Section 3). We then try
to apply these to one concrete e-business. Authentic tourism is the chosen example. As we will show in Section 3,
chosen models do not work well for authentic tourism. This
is a typical situation. One can pull in a bit from this model,
and a bit from that, but seldom one gets satisfactory solution that way – solution will always be a “patchwork”. At
this point, a new model or a framework that is consciously
designed for this specific need or task is needed. Other
models purpose is to bring into awareness the largest spectrum of e-value drivers (things that contribute to e-value).
The model to be designed should follow the pattern from
Figure 1. This is the theme of Section 4. A new scope,
within low-level views, or the square of this model, is then
focused upon. It is a scope representing one important as-

pect of e-business, namely its visual presentation on the
Internet. This is the theme of Section 5.
The idea is, in short, to explore a path from the top of
the triangle towards the bottom, uncovering triangles
within triangles. This is very much in the vain of recursive
thinking, with one fundamental difference – at every stage
of the process, one can stop and consider both higher up
scopes and the scopes at the same level. Extensive use of
knowledge visualization in creation of the high level views
contributes to ease and speed of cognition.

3. Two Strategic Frameworks for e-Value
Creation
3.1. Framework 1
Amit and Zott’s aricle on value creation in e-business
has appeared in 2001, not long before one of their main
examples of e-business value creation, namely beenz.com
has closed down. Beenz.com was a web-based currency
that closed down in August 2001. The distinguishing streak
of beenz.com was that the value it creates does not reside in
a single company, but rather in the network of partners it
brings together. According to Amit and Zott, if beenz.com
can create value, it does so because of its business model.
They offer a simple example that distinguishes the revenue
model from the business model.

ability to reduce information asymetry between buyer and
seller, by providing educational information about
products, as well as providing the buyer with prices,
comparison between products, consumer reports etc. Next
in line of possibilities is reduction of transaction time,
reduced distribiution costs, removal of intermediaries etc.
Complementaries: Internet offers the possibility of offering
complementary
services
(product
bundled
with
complementary products from other suppliers) or
information about them.
Lock-In: locks in visitors for consequent visits and
purchases.
Novelty: Internet offers limitless possibilities for designing
new business models (and revenue models as well).
This framework is perhaps necessary, but certainly not
sufficient, as the ticket to sucess. Namely, as mentioned
earlier, beenz.com has not succedded. Why? In [16] we
find one possible explanation: "In order for any payment
system -- online or not -- to work, it has to meet two
'critical mass' criteria," Crawford told the E-Commerce
Times. "There has to be a critical mass of places to use it -usability -- and there has to be a critical mass of ways to
obtain it -- availability. I don't think Beenz or Flooz
achieved either."
However, the given drivers in the 4-clover framework
are intuitive, and probably, making sure that all four are
well represented in the business model will give e-business
a good start.
In terms of polyscopic modeling ideogram, the 4-clover
of the Figure 2 would be the high level view of the model,
more detailed explanations of each driver low level views.
Now, each of the drivers could be represented in the same
way, giving high level view using an ideogram, picture, or
some other form of visual representation providing effective communication of the “big picture”, followed by more
detailed information (usually, but not limited to, textual).

3.2. Framework 2
Figure 2. The four key value drivers for value creation
in e-business from [1]
The revenue model is concerned with how do beenz.com
create revenue (by charging higher price to sell the
currency than to buy it back), while the business model is
about making space for virtual currency with network
partners. As one can have several business models that
need to be evaluated, Amit and Zott offer an eValue-cration
framework against which these various business models
can be measured. The framework is depicted in Figure 2.
Efficiency: The Internet offers many possibilities for
increasing efficiency. One of the most significant is its

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

In their paper from 2002, Kriger et al discuss the Amit
and Zott’s framework and propose a new one. Their
“…framework was initially created via an interactive process of examining company cases using published sources
(annual reports, teaching cases, trade articles and academic
articles) together with extant theory in a cyclic process of
sense making and framework generation. Our aim was to
attempt to understand inductively how e-businesses are
competing at multiple levels, ranging from the more macro
(economically) to the meso (in terms of social processes
and competencies) to the micro (psychologically in terms
of personal competencies and perception of space and
time). The resulting framework consists of four overall
dimensions that organizations use to engage in strategic

process in the information economy” (see [11]). The
framework is depicted in Figure 3.

powerful toot to help us design more complete information
as well as new knowledge.

4. Authentic Travel Framework

Figure 3. Key value drivers according to Kriger et al
Technological invention: two aspects are considered. The
first one is exploration innovations covering creation of
new product, service or introduction of new technology.
The second aspect is exploitation innovation, with focuses
on efficiency, covering some of the same as efficiency in
the 4-clover framework.
Relationships: play increasingly important role as the information economy is based on networks and alliances
aimed at gaining the competitive edge. This is a much
broader category than complementaries of the previous
framework, though there is an overlap. Kriger at al mention
external/internal and personal/interpersonal relationship,
pointing that trust and emotional intelligence are important
components of all mentioned relationships.
Time is looked on in two different ways: as chronos (clock
time) and kairos (perceived time). Perceived time, kairos,
plays an important role in e-business.
Aesthetics: creating products and services that are aesthetically superior to those of competitors. Aesthetics may be
achieved through design or behavior, changing the product
or the organization itself, respectively.
While there is no doubt that this framework brings new
and important elements that contribute to eValue and explains additional dimensions of value, it too is not complete.
The high level view for this framework is given by Figure 3. Visual representation is a simple diagram. Low level
view, as in the case of the model 1, provides more detaild
information as to what the drivers are. It represents the
facts, knowledge and research that the framework rests
upon solidly. Further, one should be able to see how this
process is repeated, creating more and more detailed scopes
and views. If we had some sort of library of scopes (which
is technologically possible), and a way to easily browse
through all hereto formulated scopes, we would have a

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Travel is the biggest industry in the world [19] with annual revenue of over 4 trillion euro. But the paradigm in
industry is changing. In order to avoid this change being a
change by default or, strictly by demand from the market, a
multidisciplinary expert group was formed to “design” the
concept of authentic travel and consciously channel the
change towards individual growth through authentic experience, towards tourism benefiting local population and
towards answering the cultural need in a conscious way.
Figure 4 shows the framework and Figure 5 shows the aspects of each of its constituents.

Figure 4. Framework for eValue creation in authentic
travel (AT framework)
The representation is chosen so that it explicitly embodies information design ideogram.
The three key drivers of e-Value creation proposed in
this framework are quite general and need to be understood
properly in their relation to our chosen example.
Relationships, technology, time, design and behavior
were also constituents of the frameworks from Section 3.
However, with authentic travel, each of them takes on additional aspects. For example, kairos, the perceived time
gains the attribute of quality, in addition to speed and ease;
relationship gains the aspect of team building and bonding.
The new and important aspect is putting knowledge explicitly as a driver of value. Knowledge or more precisely tacit
knowledge is one very important driver in authentic travel:
search for learning something genuine on the trip. Environment, for conscious traveler is also important – if he/she
experiences something authentic and is totally happy about
it, wants to share with his/her friends and family the same
tour, environment changes. The solution is not in keeping
quiet about it, but in finding creative solutions in order to
keep the environment positive, dynamic and desirable.
Destination differs from environment in that environment is

created by people, while destination is a physical location,
selected for authentic travel based on the sense of aesthetics. Aesthetics here does not mean just beauty, but also
putting, for example, place and activity together, so that
they match perfectly. This obviously, creates value for the
business.

Figure 5. Aspects of each of the constituents of AT
framework

5. Visual presentation of an e-business
The power to create and direct thought, Einstein felt, lay in the
dynamic energy of images juxtaposed in dominant counterpoint in
time, space, line, place, volume, and light.– from Barry [2]

One of the aspects of aesthetics in the framework from
previous section is design. One aspect of design is the design of the web site introducing the business to the world.
This scope then, visual presentation of e-business, is important for Authentic Travel project, but is also important in its
own right. It could be considered as a model of how to de-

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

sign/evaluate any presentation on the net. User interface
and usability are extremely important aspects of web design, but will not be explicitly discussed here, The literature on this theme is abundant, see for example [14].
According to polyscopic modeling methodology, the
opening page of the business should contain high level
information about the company. Consecutive pages should
be designed in such a way that scopes are clearly defined
and each of them repeats the main theme: high level (artistic, holistic), lower level (concise, simple, clear, detailed)
information. What design/evaluation characteristics would
such approach require? We chose to work with the following three (see [4], [5]):
visual immediacy - the first impression upon entering
the site, a characteristic of the visual representation that
enables viewer to perceive/recognize and cognitively process information embedded in the visual representation (or
parts of it) ‘at a glance’.
visual impetus – how attractive and inviting to action
and further exploration the site is
visual impedance – the hindrance or (often unintended)
negative implicature in a visual design that causes the receiver to be less receptive to the visual representation itself,
or causes deviance/deterioration in the message communicated trough the visual representation (see [14], [18]).
The characteristics to be designed into the high-level information about e-business are visual impetus, particularly
for the first time visitors (designers use a lot of Flash and
similar software products to produce moving images, attention catchers etc – these do not necessarily work as impetus) and visual immediacy. Visual immediacy discourages
the use of visual manipulators and encourages the use of
visual metaphors, associations, analogies, ideograms and
like only when carefully and well designed. As a high level
information, well chosen simple message in the right typeface suffices (see [3]) for many applications.
The characteristic that should not be designed into the
low level information is visual impedance. While designing/evaluating sites, the concept of reducing impedance
must be present at all times: the ease and logic of navigation, functionality of pages, their structuring, quantity of
information appropriate for the page and venues of knowledge representation (see [16]) all become of large importance.
Following the polyscopic modeling ideogram we could
present these ideas in the same way as e-value framework,
see Fig. 6. Using the model as design/valuation/learning/
training tool, at the high level one should have a clear and
well designed example of the characteristic, while at the
low level one should have guidelines and techniques for
designing the characteristic into the presentation.

[4] Karabeg, A., Akkøk, M.N., “Towards a Language for Talking
About Visual and Spatial Reasoning”, IVLA 2004, Pilansburg, 4-8
October, 2004.
[5] Karabeg, A., Akkøk, M.N.,Kristensen, K., “Towards a Language for Talking about Information Visualization Aimed at Presentation on the Web”, IV04 IEEE proceedings, 2004
[6] Karabeg, A., Akkøk, M.N., “Visual Representations and the
Web”, IVLA04: Book of Selected Writings, 2004.

Figure 6. Ideogram with design/evaluation characteristics for visual presentations

[7] Karabeg, A., Karabeg, D., “Polyscopy – a New Paradigm in
Design for the Web”, IV05 IEEE proceedings, 2005
[8] Karabeg, D., Socio-Culturally Sensitive E-business, submitted
to e-business Journal, special issue on e-business infrastructure

6. Conclusion

[9] Karabeg, D., “Ideograms in Polyscopic Modeling”, Proceedings of the Infovision 2000, London, England

Polyscopic modeling can be used to structure information
on any topic in a dynamic way, making information available from variety of scopes and levels within a scope. One
can at any time move either horizontally in the structure,
obtaining a high-level view from different scopes, or vertically, going to more or less detailed picture as needed
within a single scope, or to other scopes higher or lower in
the triangle. Looking at “big pictures” can help design a
new big picture for a sub problem, analyze specific scopes
or notice patterns which could in turn help designing the
really big picture at the very top of the triangle. This is the
movement towards more holistic knowledge of the selected
topic. Applying this methodology on the concept of
eValue, we have shown some rudimentary horizontal
movement (choosing two existing frameworks) and some
vertical movement – creating a framework for a particular
application, and then treating polyscopicaly one aspect of
that framework. Much work remains to be done: further
building of theoretical foundations, developing and using
new technology that supports polyscopic structuring and
creating visual representations that communicate efficiently. Our hope is that this article illustrates the possibilities of this approach.

[10] Karabeg, D. “Information Design – a New Paradigm in Creation and Use of Information”, Proc. IPSI 2003, VIP Sci. Forum,
Sveti Stefan, Monte Negro, October 5-11, 2003
[11] Kriger, M., Andersen, E., and Huemer L., “Sustainable Value
Creation in the Information Economy: A Strategy Framework
from Multi-disciplinary Perspective”, Strategic Thinking: Decision Making and Strategy Process, 22nd International Conference
of the Strategic Management Society, 2002
[12] Marky Stein, Fearless Interviewing: What to Do Before,
During and After an Interview, iUniverse.com, August 2001
[13] Norman, D.A. Emotional Design: Why We Love (Or
Everyday Things, Basic Books, 2004

Hate)

[14] Oberlander, J., “Grice for graphics: pragmatic implicature in
network diagrams”. Information Design Journal, 1996, 8(2): p.
163-179.
[15] Shneiderman, B., Designing the User Interface. Third edition: Addison-Wesley, 1998.
[16] Sowa, J.F., Knowledge Representation - Logical, Philosophical and Computational Foundations. Brooks/Cole, 2000.
[17] Vigoroso, M., ”Beenz.com Closes Internet Currency
Business”, E-Commerce Times, 08/17/01 6:39 PM PT

7. References

[18] Willis, D., “Effects of Using Enhancing Visual Elements in
Web Design”, American Communication Journal, 1999, 3(1).

[1] Amit R., Zott C, “Value Creation in e-business”, Strategic
Management Journal 22 (6-7), 2001

[19] World Travel and Tourism Council, Blueprint for New Tourism, http://www.wttc.org/blueprint/WttcBlueprintFinal.pdf, 2003

[2] Barry, A. M., Visual Intelligence: Perception, Image and Manipulation in Visual Communication, SUNY Press, 1997
[3] Horn, R.E., Visual Language: Global Communication for the
21st Century, Macro VU, 99

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

