Output Media Adapted Cartographic Visualisation

MSc. Alexandra Stadler, DSc. Mirjanka Lechthaler
Vienna University of Technology, Cartography and Geo-Media Techniques, Department of
Geoinformation and Cartography, Erzherzog-Johann-Platz 1, 1040 Wien, Austria.
{alex_stadler@gmx.at, lechthaler@tuwien.ac.at}
Abstract
In modern cartography of the late twentieth century,
the Internet offers an ideal platform for the
communication via maps. The map graphics pose as an
essential part of the graphical user interface in Atlas
Information Systems (AIS) that enables the user to
investigate the underlying data.
Existing AIS largely deal with functionalities, but
often do not concentrate on visualisation aspects. The
solutions vary from simple line graphics with hardly any
cartographic characteristics to systems that are based on
scanned maps, ignoring the technical restrictions of the
screen as an output medium. So the authors are
searching for high-class AIS which should rely on
cartographically improved map graphics suitable for
both, screen visualisation and high-quality printing.
Using legible map graphics which are adapted to
the technical requirements of the output medium is one of
the main criteria for user acceptance. Concerning the
definition of characteristic sheets for printed maps, much
experience has been gained within the last few decades.
The situation is not the same for screen
visualisation. Due to their technical restrictions, screen
presentations suffer from deformations of the graphic
elements. In order to produce legible maps, the map
graphics have to be adapted to the screen.
Keywords--- interactive atlas information systems
(AIS), cartographic visualisation, map graphics,
graphical resolution of output media.

1. Introduction
According to Goodchild [4], cartography is an
essential element for the future of geography and
geographic information sciences. The introduction of
digital maps and their daily use lead to a constantly
growing demand on efficient cartographic products.
For the last twenty years, the Internet has been the
new information transfer medium for cartographic
applications. It offers a variety of ways to communicate

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

spatial information through the adequate visualisation of
basic spatial data (topographic as well as thematic data).
It is no big surprise, that the most important application
areas are regional, national and global atlases in the form
of web-based, multimedia and interactive AIS.
Especially in case of an AIS, the map is the most
important element. It serves as an interactive and
dynamic information medium and thus is a guiding tool
that helps the user to explore the system in order to get a
deeper knowledge on spatial phenomena and processes.
Ormeling [16] uses the metaphor of a “geographical
switchboard”.
Through the visualisation and the embedded
functionalities in AIS, different users may obtain
individual information about the presented area in real
time. To support interactive data exploration through
database queries and resulting visualisations, the map
elements have to be linked to their corresponding
original objects [17, 21]. Via an access to these objects,
the deficiency of data transmission caused by the
technical restrictions of the screen is compensated. As a
matter of fact, AIS do not suffer from limitations
concerning the data exploitation any more.
But it is important to limit the range of possible
interactions to reasonable functionalities. It should be
done without making the user feel restricted. This form
of navigation is called "restrictive-flexible" [3].
Depending on their experience and objectives the users
themselves define their individual form of geo
communication [10]. Therefore it is essential to use
optimally prepared map graphics by applying rigorous
cartographic principles and good design techniques.
The application of screen-adapted map graphics
takes up more map space. Thus, it has an effect on the
information content of the atlas map. By the
implementation of interaction tools, the lower graphic
density is compensated by the ability to fully investigate
the system.
In addition, the system should provide the possibility
to print the resulting maps in high quality. This duality
requires cross-media-adapted map graphics for different
scales which is the topic of the work presented in this
article.

2. Atlas cartography
The original meaning of the
term “Atlas” refers to Greek
mythology. Atlas was one of the
Titans, a group of gods who fought
against Zeus and the other
Olympian Gods. They lost and Zeus
punished Atlas by forcing him to
carry the sky on his shoulders
forever (figure 1).
Figure 1 God Atlas carrying the sky on his
shoulders [23].
For a collection of various maps, the word “Atlas”
was first used by Gerhard Kremer (1512-1592, figure 2),
better known as Mercator. He used this term for the
“Atlas sive Cosmographicae Mediationes de Fabrica
Mundi et Fabricati Figura” (figure 3) – a collection of 74
maps first published in 1585.

2.2. From traditional paper atlases to atlas
information systems (AIS)
Traditional paper atlases have a fixed linear
structure – fixed by means of the format as well as the
limited scale range (depending on the representation
area) and linear according to the sequence of themes.
In table 1 Ormeling [15] summarised characteristics
of paper and web atlases. He considered view-only
atlases and paper atlases as the same category. According
to him, view-only atlases do not use technology
“adequately” by disregarding the advantages available
resources in the digital medium. He used multimedia and
dual concepts (static vs. dynamic, passive vs. interactive)
to analyse the differences between paper and digital
maps.
paper / view-only atlas
static
passive
maps only
limited selective
fixed map frames
compromise for all type of use
maps as final product

interactive / analytical atlas
dynamic
interactive
maps and multimedia
complete
panning and zooming possible
customised
maps as interface

Table 1 Differences between static and
interactive / analytic atlases (after Ormeling
[15]).

Figures 2 & 3 Gerhard Kremer (Mercator) and
his “Atlas sive Cosmographicae Meditationes
de Fabrica Mundi et Fabricati Figura” [24, 25].

2.1. Some definitions
According to the encyclopaedia of Cartography and
Geomatics [2], an atlas is a functional and systematic
collection of maps in the form of books, loose sheets or
files for electronic representation on the screen (AIS). An
atlas with its local, regional or global character offers not
only maps, but also static information like texts, tables,
figures and pictures as well as computer-aided dynamic
elements like voice, sound, animation and video clips.
The structuring of this information is based on given
objectives [8]. The primary target is to visualise global or
local regions and to point out dependencies on a wide
spectrum of additional thematic information. It is
particularly important to transmit the patterns of our
physical, temporal and socio-economic environment.
Atlases are considered to be the ultimate
cartographic products because they are most widely
known and used [9]. Presumably this wide acceptance of
cartographic products is induced in early education,
where children first get in touch with maps and atlases.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

By taking a closer look at table 1, one could arrive at
the conclusion that the only advantage of paper maps is
their resolution. Digital technologies attempt to free
cartography from these limitations. The emergence of
digital technologies enforced the omnipresence of
interactive maps. It is assumed that the barriers of static
cartography will be abolished in the near future by the
implementation of various AIS [15, 1].
The birth of digital atlases (AIS) was characterised
by hardware limitations (storage capacity) as well as the
lack of appropriate software (authoring tools for the
development of interactive applications). The “Electronic
Atlas of Canada” (1981) [20] was the first atlas to be
developed. Since then, increasing research efforts have
been carried out [6] not only by universities, but also by
governmental organisations and private companies.

2.3. Problems caused by new technology
New web technology and lower equipment costs
allow everyone, even those without cartographic
knowledge, to visualise spatial information by producing
their own cartographic products. For modern
cartographers it has become even more important to take
advantage of their competences in:
x the use of new presentation forms for the
visualisation of spatial information as well as
x a deeper insight into the whole cartographic
communication process (from data acquisition
to adequate data representation).

Unfortunately, existing AIS do not necessarily
reflect these competences. They largely deal with
functionalities, but often do not concentrate on
visualisation aspects. The design of maps varies from
simple line graphics with hardly any cartographic
characteristics (figure 4) to systems that are based on
scanned maps, ignoring the technical restrictions of the
screen as an output medium (figure 5).

3.1. Technical restrictions of the screen as an
output medium
A pixel is the elementary part of a digital pixel
matrix. Each pixel stores an individual intensity value,
which will become visible when visualised on the screen.

Figure 6 From device-independent pixels to
device-dependent output pixels.
Figures 4 & 5 Examples of digital maps that do
not fulfil the requirements of screen
representation [26, 27].
So, what the authors are searching for is a hybrid
system relying on cartographically improved map
graphics. It should be suitable for both, screen
visualisation and high-quality printing.

3. Screen-adapted cartographic visualisation
The design of screen-adapted atlas maps is a big
challenge for cartographers. During the design process
and editorial work they have to be both, map makers and
system designers. Their tasks include scale-dependent
visualisation, generalisation and harmonisation as well as
the optimal use of the screen as an output medium and
the Internet as a transport medium.
As long as the screen is only part of the production
process of an analogue map, the low resolution is no
obstacle. But when it comes to representations on screen,
the attention has to be turned towards the design of the
map graphics because the map forms the main element of
the system.
Efficient map graphics have to [7, 19, 5]:
x mediate spatial information,
x highlight substantial contents,
x ensure topological correctness,
x use associative signs,
x convey a clear and correct message,
x follow cartographic guidelines and
x (most important) be legible.
The visualisation of digital maps using characteristic
sheets for printed maps results in deformations of the
map graphics caused by the technical restrictions of the
screen. Thus the characteristic sheets have to be adapted
to the requirements of the new output medium [11].

When producing a digital map, device-independent
pixels (of which graphics are internally composed) have
to be converted into those output pixels one can see on
the screen (figure 6). This is done by screen masks and
ionisation respectively. The size of screen and output
pixels then define the resolution of the screen:
Resolution of the screen =
screen size / size of the output pixels
The average output pixel size is between 0.2mm x
0.2mm and 0.4mm x 0.4mm. For the following
investigations the authors had to define an average
output pixel size which then served as a conversion
factor between the amount of output pixels and the
covered screen area. In order not to neglect screens with
a lower resolution, the constant value of 1 pt
(typographic point1) = 0.375 mm [2] was chosen.
Compared to the average printing resolution of 0.1
mm, it can be seen that the resolution of the screen is
about 4 times lower than the resolution of the printed
map.
The low resolution is the most important restriction
of this output medium. Other restrictions are the form of
output pixels, colour depth, image interferences and
refresh rate.

3.2. Minimum dimensions
Depending on the resolution of the output medium,
we have defined minimum dimensions. They are
minimum values for the perception (or legibility) of
graphic elements (respectively map elements) concerning
their size and distance from each other under normal
conditions of perception [2].
Since the resolution of the screen was defined to be
app. 4 times lower than the resolution of printed maps,
minimal dimensions have to be 4 times larger.
The minimal line width for example is 0.1 mm in
paper maps. This equals the printing resolution.

1
The „typographic point“ is used in letterpress to define the size of
fonts.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Assuming a minimal line width of screen representations
which should equal the screen resolution, it would be 1
pt or rather 0.4 mm (table 2).
The only distinctions have to be drawn when it
comes to lettering. To be legible in printed maps, it has
to be relatively larger. To find reasons for that will be
part of our future studies.

x

avoidance of different line styles like dashed or
double lines and
x scarce use of linear elements (no area borders).
In terms of colours, there are hardly any technical
restrictions. Depending on the colour depth, a variety of
colours (defined by their additive RGB-values) may be
generated. To achieve standardised representations,
indexed web colours have been developed. Their
intensity differences fulfil the requirements of colour
differentiation.
Furthermore, the traditional demands on the use of
associative colours and the clear distinction between
foreground and background colours have to be met.

4. Suggestions for screen-adapted map
graphics within an AIS

Table 2 Minimum dimensions for paper and
screen (Maliü [13], Neudeck [14]).
The values listed in table 2 refer to the examination
of strongly contrasted map elements under normal
conditions of perception.

3.3. Some more basic rules for screen-adapted
map design
Besides regarding the minimum dimensions, it is
fundamental to consider some other restrictions
concerning the map design.
In terms of shapes, directions and patterns, the
following rules should be observed:
x use of rectangles and squares instead of circles,
triangles or complex signs,
x alignment parallel to pixels or rather the
prevention of transverse lines or signs,

During the cartographic communication process
(figure 7) original data is collected and stored in
databases but very seldom directly implemented into the
map (an exceptional case would be the representation of
aerial or satellite images). Normally the so-called basic
data only provides a geometrical and thematic basis for
the visualisation of map graphics. To be visualised
adequately it has to be adapted to the intended scale and
output medium by means of symbolisation,
generalisation and harmonisation.
Because fully automated adaptation is not possible
yet [22, 18], maps can not be derived on-the-fly in
individual scales. Therefore it is necessary to define a
series of fixed scales that can then be cartographically
processed. Each of those scales represents the real world
in another spatial resolution. The only link between
scale-dependent map graphics and original data are
interactive data exploration tools. They enable the user to
investigate the system and its underlying basic data and
thus build up a connection between the 2nd and the 1st
model.

Figure 7 The relevance of modelling for the cartographic communication process.
When thinking about a definition for map graphics,
the dual character of the system has to be regarded. The
system should provide visualisations suitable for the
screen as well as high-quality printouts. We have learned
that these two output media differ in terms of technical
and formal restrictions. To stay legible, the map graphics
have to be adapted for both cases.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

For that reason individual successions of scales for
both output media have been defined and
cartographically processed. In consideration of their
purpose, for each scale level the relevant data was
selected and adapted.

4.1. Screen-adapted map graphics for the screen
In consideration of the basic rules of screen-adapted
visualisation, the authors developed a recommendation
for a characteristic sheet of the basic map in scale 1:250k
[12]. There screen-adapted signs for several topographic
layers (namely political borders, rivers, lakes, streets,
railways, big cities and a permanent settlement area)
have been defined. In figure 8 the symbolised,
generalised and harmonised map graphics are
represented.
Using the same signs, further scales may be derived
only by adapting the map graphics to the aspired scale.

4.2. Screen-adapted map graphics for highquality printouts
Besides the presentation on screen, modern users
also expect an analogue output. As mentioned before, the
resolution of the screen is approximately 4 times lower
than that of printed maps. This implies that a screenadapted map can be used for printing in a scale that is 4
times smaller but has the same information content. So
the 1:250k screen map was used to generate a 1:1mio
print map (figure 8). As mentioned before, only writings
had to be treated separately.

Figure 8 Extract of the adapted screen map (1:250k, 72dpi – standard screen resolution)
and the corresponding printout in 4 times higher resolution and therefore
4 times smaller scale (1:1mio, 300dpi – standard print resolution).
may provide satisfying information on the geo space in
its entirety.

Conclusion
The quintessence of this work was to establish
connections between screen and paper as different types
of output media for cartographic applications in the form
of AIS: The resolution of a screen is approximately 4
times lower than the resolution of printed maps, so the
minimum dimensions had to be defined 4 times larger.
This is why the application of screen adapted map
graphics takes up more map space which has an effect on
the information content of the atlas map.
By the implementation of interaction tools, the lower
graphic density is compensated by the ability to fully
investigate the system and all the primary data behind it.
Taking into account these principles, both output media

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

References
[1]

[2]
[3]

ASCHE H. (2001): Kartographische
Informationsverarbeitung in Datennetzen – Prinzipien,
Produkte, Perspektiven. In: Herrmann Ch. und H. Asche
(Eds.): Web.Mapping 1. Heidelberg, Wichmann. 3-18.
BOLLMANN J. & W. G. KOCH (2002): Lexikon der
Kartographie und Geomatik. Heidelberg, Spektrum.
GARTNER G., K. KRIZ, Ch. SPANRING & A.
PUCHER (2005): The Concept of "Restrictive
Flexibility" in the “ÖROK Atlas Online”. In: International
Cartographic Association (Ed): Proceedings of the
International Cartographic Conference 2005, La
Coruna/Spain (CD).

[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

GOODCHILD M.-F. (2000): Cartographic Future on a
Digital Earth. In: Cartographic Perspectives, 36, 3-11.
HAKE G., GRÜNREICH, D. & MENG, L. (2002):
Kartographie. 8th run. Berlin, De Gruyter.
ICA (2005): Internet-based cartographic teaching and
learning: Atlases, map use and visual analytics.
Proceedimgs of Joint ICA Commissions Seminar.
International Cartographic Association, Universidad
Polytecnica de Madrid.
KEATES J.S. (1989): Cartographic Design and
Production, 2nd run. Longman Scientific & Technical,
Essex.
KRAAK J.-M. & F. ORMELING (1996): Cartography:
visualization of geospatial data. Longman Scientific &
Technical, Essex.
KRAAK M.-J. (2001): Web Maps and Atlases. In: Kraak,
M.-J. & A. Brown (Eds.): Web Cartography, Taylor and
Francis, London. 135-140.
LECHTHALER M. (2004): The relevance of cartographic
scale in interactive and multimedia cartographic
information systems. In: Lapaine M. (Ed.): Kartografija i
geoinformacije. Scientific and Professional Information
Journal of the Croatian Cartographic Society. 6-20.
LECHTHALER M. & A. STADLER (2006): “Cross
Media” gerechte Kartengraphik in einem AIS. In:
Schrenk, M. (Ed.): Geo-Multimedia 06. 11th International
Conference on Urban Planning and Regional
Development in the Information Society, CORP 2006.
LECHTHALER M. & A. STADLER (2006): CrossMedia Publishing over Scales. In: Proceedings of the 1st
International Conference on Cartography and GIS.
Borovets, Bulgaria.
MALIû B. (1998): Physiologische und technische
Aspekte kartographischer Bildschirmvisualisierung.
Dissertation, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität
zu Bonn. Druck- und Werbegesellschaft m. b. H., Bonn.
NEUDECK S.(2001): Zur Gestaltung topografischer
Karten für die Bildschirmvisualisierung. Dissertation,
Universität der Bundeswehr München, Issue 74.
ORMELING F. (1996): Functionality of Electronic
School Atlases. In: Köbben B., F. Ormeling & T. Trainor
(Eds.): Seminar on Electronic Atlases II, ICA Proceedings
on National and Regional Atlases. Prague. 33-39.

[16] ORMELING F. (2001): Das Bändigen von MultimediaKonzepten für den Online-Atlas der Niederlande. In:
Herrmann Ch. & H. Asche (Eds.): Web.Mapping 1 –
Raumbezogene Information und Kommunikation im
Internet, Wichmann, Heidelberg. 178 – 189.
[17] PERSSON D., G. GARTNER & M. BUCHROITHNER
(2005): Towards Typology of Interactivity Functions for
Visual Map Exploration. In: Stefanikis E., M.-P. Peterson,
C. Armecanis & V. Delis (Eds.): Geo-Hypermedia’05,
Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on
Geographic Hypermedia, Denver, Colorado, U.S.A.
[18] SESTER M., K. KREMEIKE & F. THIEMANN (2004):
Automatische Generalisierung raumbezogener
Datenbestände. Kartographische Nachrichten (4/2004),
159-164.
[19] SPIESS E., U. BAUMGARTNER, S. ARN & C. VEZ
(2002): Topographsiche Karten, Kartengraphik und
Generalisierung. Schweizerische Gesellschaft für
Kartographie (Eds.). Kartographische Publikationsreihe
Nr.16.
[20] SIEKIERSKA E. & D. WILLIAMS (1996): National
Atlas of Canada on the Internet and School-Net. In:
Köbben B., F. Ormeling & T. Trainor (Eds.): Seminar on
Electronic Atlases II, ICA Commission on National and
Regional Atlases, Prague. 19-23.
[21] STADLER A. (2004): Verknüpfung korrespondierender
Kartenelemente im Hinblick auf automatisierte
Fortführung. Diploma thesis, Department of
Geoinformation and Cartography, Vienna University of
Technology.
[22] WEIBEL R. (2004): Das Thema: Modellgeneralisierung
und kartographische Generalisierung – Stand und
Entwicklung. Kartographische Nachrichten (4/2004), 151152.
[23] www.culturaclasica.net/Astronomia/principal/Atlas.jpg
[24] www.megaliths.co.uk/mercator.png
[25] lamap93.free.fr/intranet/lml2/doc%20astro%20stage/
photos/mercator%20amerique.jpg
[26] www.ilgisa.org/Downloads/Oct04/GIS%20Geodatabase.
png
[27] users.med.auth.gr/~tsikaras/maps/map7.jpg
Web pages last visited on 21st of April, 2006.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

