Automated Schematic Mapping for MobileGIS: Technical developments and
Human Factors requirements
Suchith h a n d 1 , 3 Mark war& Sarah sharples3, Jim ~ i x o n ' Mike
,
~ackson'
'centerfor Geospatial Science, University of Nottingham, UK
School of Computing, University of Glamorgan, Wales, UK
3~nstitute
for Occupational Ergonomics, University of Nottingham, UK
E-mail :Suchith.Anand@;nottinpham.ac,uk
Abstract
This paper looks at how humanfactors requirements
can be considered in the context of graphic conflict
reduction for Mobile GIS applications. Currently this
reduction is achieved by using schematic mapping
techniques. With the advent of high-end miniature
technology as well as digital geographic data products
like OSMasterMap and OSCAR it is essential to devise
proper methodologiesfor map generalization specifcally
tailored for MobileGIS applications. This paper is
concerned with the problem of producing schematic
maps suitable for rendering on mobile display devices
(e.g. PDAs). The application of schematic mapping can
be-thought of as a data reduction technique for large
scale datasets to make it suitable for rendering in mobile
applications. These techniques have been based on
computation and have not incorporated any
understanding of how the simpliJicationaflects the ease
of use of the maps. It is therefore desirable to devise
suitable generalization techniques incorporating human
factors considerations for generating schematic maps
from large scale datasets for display on small display
devices to be usedfor MobileGIS applications.

1. Introduction
Mobile GIs refers to the use of geographic data in
the field on mobile devices like networked Personal
Digital Assistant (PDA). The main components for
Mobile GIs are global positioning system (GPS), mobile
device i.e. mobile phone, and communication network
with GIs acting as the backbone (Figure 1).
Location Based System (LBS) applications act
according to a geographic trigger-like input of a place
name, postcode, position of a GPS user, location
information from mobile phone network etc

Figure 1Basic components needed for MobileGIS
type applications

2. Background of Study
The need for understanding and applying
cartographic principles suitable for LBS using small
display devices is the underlying theme of the study. The
main characteristic of these devices is that they have
relatively small display areas. This compounded with the
need to display map data at scales smaller than its source
scale gives rise to the possibility of graphic conflict. Also
scale reduction will often require certain important
features for example roads to be exaggerated in size,
leading in some cases to overlapping of features. In short
it necessitates the need for developing optimal map
generalization techniques suitable for Mobile GIs
applications [3].
Map Generalization is the process by which small
scale maps are to be derived from large scale maps. This
requires the use of operations such as simplification,
selection, displacement and amalgamation of features
that are performed subsequent to scale reduction [6].
Figure 2 shows OSMasterMapOZ data (Ordnance
SurveyOCrown Copyright. All rights reserved, 2006)
displayed in various mobile devices using ESRI's
Arcpad.
It is important to consider the context of use of such
devices. Geographical displays are required to facilitate
and support navigational problem solving. However,
when displays are reduced to a small size then decisions
have to made about where detail should be removed,
which features should be exaggerated and these decisions
are likely to depend on the purpose for which the map is

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV'06)

0-7695-2602-0106 $20.00 @ 2006 IEEE

SOCIETY

being used. For example, in the case of a tourism
application, features of interest such as local landmarks,
museums and information points should be highlighted.
For use by the emergency services however, exact detail
of house names and numbers and access points are
particularly important.

small display devices is the underlying theme of this
paper. The main characteristic of these devices is that
they have relatively small display areas. This
compounded with the need to display map data at scales
smaller than its source scale gives rise to the possibility
of graphic conflict. Also scale reduction will often
require certain important features for example roads to
be exaggerated in size, leading in some cases to
overlapping of features. In short it necessitates the need
for developing optimal map generalization techniques
suitable for location based service applications.

3. Human Factor issues for small display
devices

Figure 2 OSMasterMapm data (Ordnance
SurveyOCrown Copyright. All rights reserved, 2006)
displayed in various mobile devices using ESRI's
ArcPad
Rogers & Scaife (1999) describe the process of
an
external
computational offloading, where
representation reduces the amount of cognitive effort
required to solve a problem. Problems may benefit from
"re-representation" where a particular type of
representation encourages a particular type of problem
solving strategy or behavior [7]. For example, by only
displaying major roads on a road map, users are
encouraged to select a route using these major roads,
rather than looking for possibly more direct routes using
smaller roads. It is important also to acknowledge that
there are known individual differences in problem
solving behavior and preferences for different types of
representations [8]. Therefore it may be appropriate to
introduce some user control into representation type,
emphasis and style.
Ordnance Survey through the introduction of digital
geographic datasets like OSMasterMapR and OSCAR@
has now made possible a digital map database of UK.
The OSMasterMap data has no scale and features are
digital representations of the world. All real world
objects are represented as explicit features and each
identified by a unique TOID (Topological Identifier).The
OSCAR@ (Ordnance Survey Centre Alignment of
Roads) data is derived from the continually revised
Ordnance Survey Roads database and provides digital
representation of road network of UK. The features are
classified into motonvays, A roads, B roads, minor
roads, pedestrianised roads and private roads. Each road
is classified using a feature code with unique identifiers
r51.
The need for understanding and applying cartographic
principles suitable for MobileGIS applications using

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV'06)
0-7695-2602-0106 $20.00 o 2006 IEEE

To understand the unique issues related to generalizing
maps for display on small display screen devices like
PDAs it is important to look into the specifications of
PDAs and tailor the solutions to suit the need. With the
current specification of PDAs available in the market
having processing power, memory capacity, screen
resolution and display size very much lesser than PCs,
there is a marked difference between the map
generalization requirements for display on a typical
desktop PC and that of a PDA.
Processing Capability of PDAs is in the range of 400
MHz .This implies that processor intensive operations
like on the fly map generalization need to be done on the
server side and only the final output be transferred for
display on the PDA screen. Also the memory capacity of
PDAs is range of 128 MB. This again highlights the
issue associated with storing large-scale voluminous
datasets like OSMasterMap (in Gigabytes) in the limited
memory space of PDAs.
Display Size of 50 cm2 for PDA screens necessitates
map images produced and optimized for that size. Screen
resolution is typically 240 x 320 pixels. The low display
resolution of PDA screens makes it necessary to render
the final output image based on the generalization carried
out as per the small display cartographic specification
developed to give maximum clarity and readability. For
visual proof (see Figure 3) where the image on the left
explicitly shows the spatial conflicts between roads and
building features rendered without applying specification
guidelines and the image on the right rendered as per the
map specification guidelines for 1:5000 scale which
shows fewer spatial conflicts[3].

4. Small Display Cartographic Guidelines
Ordnance Survey through the introduction of
OSMasterMap has now made possible a digital map
database of UK. With the large scale use and application
of mobile devices it is now possible to deliver digital
geographic information for mobile GIS applications. The
need to deliver the required map information on small
display screens of devices in particular PDAs,
necessitates the application of appropriate map

COMPUTER
SOCIETY

generalization techniques that are specifically tailored for
this purpose.
For verifying the suitability of OSMasterMap data for
small screen devices, the data for the St David's area in
Wales was loaded on ESRIs ArcPad and tested in a HP
iPAQ PocketPC h5400 series for display at various
scales to find out the extent of spatial conflicts between
features types.

applying schematization to help ease the interpretation of
information by the process of cartographic abstraction.
Schematic maps are built-up from sketches which
usually have close resemblance with verbal descriptions
about spatial features [4]. To understand the theory
behind schematization process it is important to know
the principles of cartography. Factors that need to be
taken into consideration are fixing the aspect ratio of the
resulting image to make the effective use of map space
when trying to fit and display on a small screen display
device of 240 x 320 pixel resolution. Enabling support
for vertical and horizontal scrolling will add more
flexibility to the user [I].

Figure 3 OSMasterMapB data (Ordnance
SurveyOCrown Copyright. All rights reserved, 2006)
displayed in a HP iPAQ using ESRI's ArcPad before
and after applying map specification guidelines for
1:5000 scale
The initial research concentrated on developing
cartographic specification for OSMasterMap data
suitable for small screen devices and tests carried out on
a wide range of display scales. Finally scale ranges of
1:2500, 1:5000 and 1:10000 were selected as most
appropriate for MobileGIS applications. It was found
that there is spatial conflict between features like roads
and buildings during scale reduction and since the
display screen is comparatively of small size the problem
becomes much more apparent that when compared for
desktop devices [2].
It has been shown that that the optimization techniques
based on simulated annealing algorithms perform well
for conflict reduction in map generalization in desktop
GIs systems. Simulated Annealing can be used to help
limit the number of map realizations generated. The
simulated annealing algorithm controls operations of
displacement, deletion, reduction and enlargement of
multiple map objects to help resolve spatial conflict
arising due to scale reduction 161.

5. Automated Schematic maps for Mobile
GIs applications
A schematic map is a diagrammatic representation
based on linear abstractions of networks. Typically
transportation networks are the key candidates for

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV'06)
0-7695-2602-0/06$20.00 O 2006 IEEE

Figure 4. Schematic map that is generated using the
prototype software from OSCAR dataset

A prototype Simulated Annealing technique has been
used to derive schematic map with reduced linear
information from the detailed OSCAR@ dataset. The
software makes use of the simulated annealing
optimization technique. It is currently implemented as a
VBA script within ArcGIS. These maps are subsequently
displayed within the ArcPad application on a HP iPAQ
PDA. Example output is shown in Figure 4.

6. Incorporating Human Factors in
automated schematization
Any computer-rendered geospatial representation
must allow users to form a link between what they see on
the screen and the real environment. A schematic map is
a diagrammatic representation based on linear
abstraction. Software has been developed using a VBA
scripts within ArcGIS to control operations of
displacement, deletion, reduction and enlargement of
multiple map objects to help resolve spatial conflict
arising due to scale reduction [6].
These operations of displacement, deletion, reduction
and enlargement have previously been done on a
computational basis using requirements such as

COMPUTER
SOCIETY

constraint definitions and simplification algorithms. This
paper proposes that it is important to incorporate
knowledge of human use of such maps when defining
algorithms for simplification. It is therefore necessary
firstly to identify the way in which people are likely to
use such representations, and then to identify the key
human factors considerations in schematic mapping.
Once these key elements have been identified, structured
evaluation of the incorporation of human factors
considerations in map optimization can be tested. A
principle of computational offloading can be applied,
where two
different
informational equivalent
representations can be used. A schematic is a (possibly
distorted) version of spatial truth. At best, schematics
allow efficient and accurate navigation. At worst, they
omit important information and could result in an
inaccurate or misleading spatial map to be formed by the
user.
Hollnagel and Woods (1993) propose the cyclical
Cognitive Systems Engineering model when defining the
user needs of systems used in a collaborative and
distributed context (Figure 5)

\

~nformat~onl
feedback

~odafiesf

Prowdesl
produces

u

current
understanding

Next

Dlrects 1 controls

Figure 5. Cyclical cognitive systems engineering model
This approach allows a change in emphasis from
interaction between humans and machines to a view of
the human-machine ensemble as a single, joint system.
It assumes that the non-human (e.g. computers, artifacts,
maps etc.) elements of the system are integral parts and
that decision making and problem solving happens
collaboratively as the mental models and maps within the
system are constantly consulted and modified. It also
places critical emphasis on the importance of considering
context of use (e.g. lighting conditions, screen size,
interaction method, leisure, work or emergency situation
etc.) and how that should be incorporated into system
design [9].
The following are key human factors considerations in
schematic mapping:

Information Requirements: It is important to decide
which map features should be included and which
omitted. These needs may very much depend on the
particular task being completed - for example, a rescue
worker in a collapsed building will find it very important
to know where gas pipes are likely to be located, and

may need information about the structural layout of the
building - they will also be likely to be working in
diminished lighting conditions with low potential for use
of colors in displays. In other cases it may be
appropriate to augment schematic information with
landmarks - in this case it is vital to know which
landmarks are most appropriate or important and how
they should be described - for example, should local
"nicknames" for landmarks be used?

Data complexity: One of the primary aims of map
simplification is to remove complexity from the
representation. However, it is important to assess how
much data is needed to allow the user to accurately
navigate. The aim of this work would be to incorporate
algorithms that can select appropriate levels of
complexity depending on user needs and experience, task
type and context of use.
Interaction design: PDA interaction metaphors are
typically transferred from standard PC interfaces. This
presents challenges in terms of icon size and design, but
more importantly for viewing of maps the capability for
vertical and horizontal scrolling is present. This scrolling
presents flexibility to the user, but may also lead to loss
of reference points and potential disorientation in a
navigation task.
User needs and capabilities: An aim of simplified
schematics is to reduce user workload and memory
burden. However, a potential consequence of this is that
a user's internal representation or spatial map may
therefore not be as detailed, and in the case of technical
failure the user may become lost more quickly. The
impact of reduction in geographic information on user
spatial maps therefore needs to be assessed. In situations
when topographic simplification has resulted in
considerable differences between the representation and
the real environment it is important to establish when
users become confused between the spatial relationships
seen in the environment and the schematic
representations on the screen.
Therefore it is important to consider the human
requirements and context of use when specifying map
designs and simplifications. This paper proposes that the
maps developed on the basis of computation should be
evaluated by users and that additional requirements
should be specified on the basis of these evaluations.

7. Human Factors Methodologies
Mobile GIs presents methodological challenges, not
least because of the range of users that could benefit
from the technology and the range of tasks carried out by
those users. Mobile contexts of use vary a lot, and may
even be continuously changing during use [lo].

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV'06)
0-7695-2602-0106 $20.00 O 2006

IEEE

SOCIETY

For example, a map that is designed for use by the
general public for leisure applications, locating shops
and services will need to be easy to use, without training.
A map for use in an emergency services context needs to
support route planning so the quickest route possible can
be identified and followed.
Typical tasks that users may undertake using mobile
G I s could include navigating routes, planning routes or
tracking others during an operation. These tasks may
require the addition of more intelligence into the map.
For example, partition map features into landmarks,
nodes, edges and paths. An understanding of the type of
task or user could specify this partitioning of space [13].
For example, navigating within a town-centre could
require landmark-based navigation whereas edges and
paths may be more important in a less urban
environment.

techniques share the advantage of potential uses in both
the laboratory and the field. However, further
development of guidelines and questionnaires for a
specifically mobile context is needed before reliable
results can be obtained and implemented.

8. Conclusions and Future Work
This paper describes the development of automated
schematic map generation techniques and cartographic
specification for large scale digital geographic datasets
suitable for Mobile G I s applications. Spatial conflict
between feature classes at the specified scale ranges are
to be dealt with by applying simulated annealing
metaheuristic optimization technique. The need for
incorporation of human factors requirements in the
automated generation of schematic maps for mobile
mapping applications has been identified, and this will be
done in future work.

7.1 Dependent variables

Acknowledgements

Any methodology must investigate variables relevant
to user group, user tasks or indeed both. These
considerations will affect the selection of dependent
variables when evaluating a mobile G I s application.
Dependent variables of interest could include
performance (successful navigation to target, speed of
journey, errors made), learning (ability to repeat or
describe a route), subjective experience (attitudes and
expectations of technology) and cognitive constraints
(mental workload, memory limitations, expertise etc).

The authors express thanks for the Ordnance Survey,
UK for the data used in this work.

7.2 Methodology selection
Developing methodologies that probe relevant
variables is central to integrating human factors
principles in mobile GIs. Laboratory studies have been
run in the area of cognitive ergonomics and human
computer interaction for a number of years, and are
likely to be suitable for identification of key usability
problems. Controlled studies examining symbology or
performance (for example) can allow the designer to
make informed choices about the kinds of
representations or design elements to include [14].
The anticipated environment of use can dictate or
even preclude field-based studies. Kjeldskov et al (2005)
review the challenges presented by gathering data in the
field. Their research included the use of rapid-reflection
techniques; users reported their thoughts whilst using the
technology, and observation in the field to develop a
rich-picture of user requirements [12]. Kaasinen (2005)
used field observation and self-report to evaluate several
location-based, navigation services, again developing a
detailed overview of user requirements [l 11.
Questionnaires and heuristic evaluation have the
potential to be used in a mobile G I s context. These

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV'06)
0-7695-2602-0106 $20.00 o 2006 IEEE

References
[I] M. Agrawala, Visualizing Route Maps, PhD Dissertation,
Stanford University, 2001
[2] S.Anand, J.M.Ware, G.E.Taylor., Generalization and
schematization of large scale digital geographic datasets
,for MobileGIS applications, Chapter 9 in Drummond, J.,
Billen, R., Forrest, D. and JoEo, E. (eds), Dynamic &

Mobile GIs: Investigating Change in Space and Time,
Taylor & Francis publications, 2006

[3] S.Anand, J.M.Ware, G.E.Taylor, Map Generalization for

OSMasterMap Data in Location Based Services & Mobile
CIS Applications, Proceedings of 12th International

Conference on Geoinformatics - GeoSpatial Information
Research : Bridging the Pacific and Atlantic, pp 54-60,
Gavle, Sweden, 2004
[4] S. Avelar, Schematic Maps on Demand: Design, Modeling

and Visualization, PhD Dissertation, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology, 2002

[S] Ordnance Survey, OSMasterMap and OSCAR Technical
Information, http:~!~u.w.ordnances~~~~ev.co.~~k
,2006
[6] J.M. Ware, C.B.Jones, Conflict Reduction in Map
Iterative
Generalization
Using
GeoInformaticQ:4,383-407, 1998

Improvement,

[7] Y. Rogers, M.Scaife, How can interactive multimedia
facilitate learning?, In Lee, J . (Ed.) Intelligence and
Multimodality in Multimedia Interfaces: Research and
Applications, AAAI Press: Menlo Park, CA, 1999
[8] J. Zhang, D.A.Norman, Representations in distributed
cognitive t a s b , Cognitive Science, 18, 87-122, I994

SOCIETY

[9] E. Hollnagel, D.D Woods, Cognitive Systems engineering:

New wine in new bottles, International Journal of ManMachine Studies, 18,583-600, 1983

[lo]

E. Kaasinen, User needs for location-aware mobile
services, Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 7, 70-79,

2003

[l 11 E. Kaasinen, User acceptance of location-mare mobile
guides based on seven JieId studies, Behavior &
Information Technology, 24(1), 37-49,2005
[12] J. Kjeldskov, C. Graham, S. Pedell, F. Vetere, S.Howard,
S. Balbo, J. Davies, Evaluating the usability o f a mobile

guide: The infience of Location. Participants and
Resource, Behavior & Information Technology, 24(1), 5165,2005

[13] J. Paay, J. Kjeldskov, Understanding and modeling built

environmentsfor mobile guide inteijiace design, Behavior

& Information Technology, 24 ( I ) , 21-35,2005

[14] P.Lai, A .Yeh, Assessing the effectiveness of dynamic

symbols in
cartographic communication,
Cartographic Journal 41 (3), 229-244,2004

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV'06)
0-7695-2602-0106 $20.00 O 2006

IEEE

The

C ~SOCIETY
MPUTER

