Plot-polling: Collaborative Knowledge Visualization for Online Discussions
Alex Ivanov, Thomas Erickson, Dianne Cyr
School of Interactive Arts and Technology, Simon Fraser University,
IBM T. J. Watson Research Center,
Faculty of Business, Simon Fraser University
alexi@sfu.ca, snowfall@acm.org, cyr@sfu.ca
Abstract
Online communities are extremely popular; yet most of
them still rely primarily on text for knowledge creation
and communication. This paper describes a graphical
webpoll prototype—a mix of information, knowledge, and
social visualization—that has been designed and deployed
in an online discussion board on herbal antidepressants.
The prototype, hereby named the “plot-poll”, allows users
to collaboratively construct a sequence of mini histograms
that indicate experienced mood change during a ten week
period. The pilot study shows that plot-polling is quite
effective in engaging low-frequency contributors to
participate. More work is required to support these
findings, and reveal whether the graphic format is able to
provide affective qualities to the user experience.

visualization prototype—the plot-poll—that has been
designed, implemented and tested in a pilot deployment in
an existing online community. We begin by outlining the
underpinnings of this work, briefly summarizing research
on online communities, and then situating our approach to
visualization relative to existing work. Next we describe
the community for which the visualization was designed.
After that, we describe the visualization itself, discussing
the rationale behind its design and related issues. Finally,
we outline its deployment, and the visualization’s
reception and use by the community. We conclude by
reflecting on our experience, and discussing future
directions.

2. Background
2.1. Online communities

1. Introduction
Online communities are an extremely popular form of
web activity. People use them for learning, selling,
investing, gaming and a host of other purposes including
just passing time. Such communities range in size from a
few dozen participants, to groups that number in the
thousands, and are supported by software that ranges from
ephemeral chat to 3D virtual environments. In spite of
their diversity of purpose, and range of forms, most
communication in online communities occurs via text. In
this study, we are concerned with how to encourage
participation in online communities, and in particular,
participation by low frequency contributors. We also hope
to increase the quality of the user experience overall, not
only by increasing the coherence of contributions, but
through improving more difficult to measure affective
qualities.
The premise of our work is that one means to this end is
to provide users with non- or less-textual ways of
participating. Specifically, we believe that this can be
achieved through a mix of information, knowledge, and
social visualization. In this paper we describe a

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Most online communities use text as the primary (and
often only) means of communication. While text is
powerful, we believe that providing additional modes of
communication could increase the engagement and
expressiveness of online environments. Efforts to engage
users rarely go beyond the purely functional, such as the
karma points in Slashdot.org [4] or stimulating
participation through conversation channelling [13]. And,
as Boyd et al. have remarked, “Nothing about the format
differentiates a support newsgroup about HIV from a
discussion group about the Simpsons TV show” [1, p.1].
Many researchers echo this sentiment, and have looked at
the field of environmental design for inspiration. Wenger
speaks of inviting different levels of participation in online
communities by “building benches along the sidelines and
a fire in the centre of the community that will draw people
to its heat” [23]. Indeed, current interface technology can
support a multiplicity of views where the audience is far
more integral to the experience [14]. The premise behind
this study is that engagement in online communities can be
achieved through a mix of information, knowledge, and
social visualization.
Wenger outlines eight categories of online
communities of practice: knowledge worker’s desktop;

collaborative project spaces; website communities;
discussion groups; synchronous interaction tools; elearning spaces; expertise exchanges; and knowledge
bases [23]. While we hope that our approach is applicable
to all eight categories, in this paper the focus is on the
design of online discussion boards. To our knowledge,
online discussions have not employed the sort of graphical
representation we discuss in this paper.

2.2. Collaborative Knowledge Visualization
Information Visualization (IV) is the use of computersupported, interactive, visual representations of abstract
data to amplify cognition [3]. IV does this by reducing the
amount of time to search and enhancing the detections of
patterns, for example. A well-known IV web-based
prototype is the Map of the (Stock) Market, accessible at
www.smartmoney.com/marketmap.
While IV is about access and presentation of large data
sets, Knowledge Visualization (KV) aims to improve the
creation of knowledge among people by giving them
richer graphic means of expressing what they know [2].
One example of an interactive KV is the Knowledge
Explorer. Embedded in the user’s desktop, it gives access
to an Intranet document repository via a concept map each
user constructs through his or her own actions [16]. This
contributes to the simultaneous construction of a second,
aggregate shared network map, which is also visualized.
The Knowledge Explorer is a form of user-created
knowledge, or ‘social computation’.
This brings us to Social Visualizations, intuitive
depictions of interactions in online space [5]. Erickson and
Kellogg [7] have introduced the concept of Social
Translucence with social proxies such as Babble, and more
recently the TaskProxy (see Figure 1), aiming to recreate a
shared sense of context in online activities [8]. Evaluations
have indicated that users appreciate having a coherent,
compact view of their community.

others [9]. Electronic voting has already been explored for
decades within the Delphi research. Turoff et al. [21]
propose collaboratively built visual representations of
concepts which users can discuss and agree upon
regarding their structure and properties. Prototypes of this
sort have been developed for physical discussion room
settings [22], and for Intranet Group Support Systems
requiring the help of a facilitator. For instance, the
I d e a q u a r i u m [6] is a research prototype for the
collaborative generation and assessment of ideas in an
advertising agency. Employees enter their ideas, and rate
those of others, inside an aquarium by using different
graphics of fish.
The real challenge in visualization, as Douglas
Engelbart has pointed out [22], is distributed
asynchronous collaborative knowledge construction.
Knowledge creation is a spiralling process of interactions
between explicit and tacit knowledge [15]. Nonaka draws
on the concept of “Ba”—a shared context that harbours
meaning—suggesting that shared spaces (physical, virtual,
or mental) can serve as a platform for knowledge creation.
But current online discussion boards are hardly what
Nonaka had in mind. As Scardamalia and Bereiter point
out:
Browser-dominant threaded discussion leads to a
shallower, linear landscape of ideas [with no way to]
signal the rising status for improved ideas as contrasted
with their nondescript entity in threads, folders, and
repositories where they are lost amid information glut”
[19, p.6].
Web polling in online discussion boards is not as
helpful to users as it could be. Typically created as a new
thread, polls appear inside it, and get buried quickly. In
addition, web polls typically make use of bar or pie charts,
which are not suitable for visualizing multivariate data.
This problem becomes evident in the site chosen for the
research setting for this study.

2.4. The St. John’s Wort discussion forum

Figure 1. A social visualization

2.3. Knowledge in online discussions
People have greater motivation to perform if they are
given information, via computing technology, about how
their performance compares with the performance of

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The site chosen as the research setting for this study is a
popular discussion forum on the herbal antidepressant St.
John’s Wort (SJW). The SJW herb extraction has been
clinically proven to be almost as effective as traditional
antidepressants [17]. The discussion board, located at
http://www.sjwinfo.org, has been running for ten years and
contains thousands of user comments in the form of
threaded discussions. Yet, like other discussion boards, it
offers no possibility for users to graphically express
information. The only systematised knowledge appears as
an extensive FAQ section. Visitors ask questions, such as
“when will the effects of the herb start to kick in?” Hence
the motivation of this study: to provide a qualitative

answer to this question using an online format that is more
accessible to the user. The hundreds of contributors, and
many more lurkers, at the SJW site are expected to serve
as the ‘population’ to answer the above question. Within
the past year, the number of unique visitors is a six-digit
figure (evidenced at http://www.sjwinfo.org/webstats/).
While there are no statistics how many of the SJW site
users are currently taking the herb, it is clear from the
posts that many of them are. This finding is consistent with
other online depression support groups [12].

at the current week only. The progression, however,
should be evident in the aggregate, as multiple users plot
their states. The plot-poll records votes from users who
have been taking the herb for anywhere from one to ten
weeks. To make sure we capture a representative snapshot
of this period, users are requested to plot their mood only
in the current week. Only one vote per person is allowed,
after which the plot-poll is no longer click-able. The latest
talley is visible upon refresh.

3. Design of the plot-poll
Guidance for designing online polls is limited to
suggestions that computation of the aggregated results are
performed automatically, and presented to users as soon as
possible in the same application for increased transparency
[18]. The first step in any visualization design is to
transform the raw data into a data map, and determine
whether a visual structure would improve the textual
information display [3]. The poll, embedded in the top of
the SJW site pages represents three variables: 1) the time
for the herb to start working (measured by a discrete scale
of ten weeks); 2) the amount that one’s mood has
improved (or worsened); and 3) the number of users that
have reported (marked) a particular relationship between
the above variables. In this case, the time-series and mood
scales are ordinal, while the frequency count is
quantitative. The rule of thumb for anti-depressants,
including SJW, is that one should wait at least four weeks
before expecting results, but that results could be noticed
as early as two weeks or as late as ten [17]. Hence, the ten
week timeline.
All this information could indeed be presented more
clearly with a graphical visual structure that enhances
pattern recognition (see Figure 2). Tufte gives multiple
examples of how plots can be extremely effective for
illustrating patterns [20]. The key question is which
variable gets spatial coding at the expense of others.
Space, in the case of this prototype, should arguably be
devoted to showing the pattern—for when and by how
much the mood improvement occurs. The users can click,
or ‘plot’, their mood for others to see in an at-a-glance
manner. The prototype is meant to be a collaborative
visualization, since members of the community create it.
The experience of mapping, or externalizing one’s
subjective experience into a public space (anonymously) is
expected to provide a feeling of contribution. The plot-poll
also reifies a shared context and mutual story—the
experience of ‘hanging in’ until the medication ‘kicks in’.
This qualitative webpoll uses a four-point scale,
emphasizing the expected positive change. The
representation is meant to record the relative state of users

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 2. 2005 plot-poll version and rationale
The very first prototype of the plot-poll, pilot tested in
2005 [11], made use of dots (bubbles) that increased in
size as users clicked on them (see Figure 2). Each click by
a unique user increased the dot area by one pixel in
diameter. A vector-based precise scaling using Flash was
also considered. This type of scaling can be seen in the
demo available at www.sfu.ca/~aivanov/demo.htm.

Figure 3. The 2006 plot-poll in context at day seven (screen-captured with permission)
In the current study (conducted March 2006), a
different prototype was developed (see Figure 3). Our
concern was that in the original approach—where each
click/mark ‘fused’ with the previous votes (see Figure
2)—once a dozen or so users had contributed, successive
clicks by other users would have an increasingly small
effects on the size of bubble, thus making the act of
participation at best unsatisfying, and at worst invisible.
Instead, we decided to use a visual representation in which
each click left a perceptible and equally-sized mark,
stacking a ‘brick’ next to those of other users. As in the
2005 version, we believe the blending of information
capture with visualization into one spot, in almost realtime, (click = mark) is a useful solution. That is, when a
user clicks, he or she immediately sees the results.
Our design of the plot-poll aptly makes use of graphics
for each week, which can be seen as inverted histograms.
In addition, because of the narrow banner-type format,
hues are used to represent the 4-point scale. Colours are
blue (for cold, night or sadness, i.e. depression), leading to
yellow (for warmth, brightness, i.e. happiness) for ‘much
better’ mood.
The technology of the current plot-poll also differs
from the previous version, which used the ASP.net
platform. To ensure compatibility across browsers, which
was a problem in the 2005 version, this time HTML is
generated by a CGI script written in Perl. PNG images for
the ‘bricks’ are programmatically generated by a second
Perl script utilizing the GD library. The script stores
cumulative vote counts in a file on the server. The script
sets a cookie to identify users that have already submitted
a vote. These users are subsequently returned a canvas that
is static (not click-able), displaying a ‘Thank You’ note,
and encourages them to fill out the survey. A prototype
demo of the current version is available at
http://www.collabographics.com/cgi-bin/polldemo.pl.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Other formats were also considered: line graph,
Chernoff faces, and the 100% stacked bar chart. We lack
space to discuss the reasons for discarding the first two,
but will disucss the 100% stacked bar chart. The
representation of the frequency variable is one problem,
although Figure 4 illustrates a way of representing this
with bar thickness. However, the format is not only more
difficult to implement, but it relies entirely on colours to
show a pattern—a problem for those who are colour-blind
or have monitors with different calibrations.

Figure 4. Mock-up of 100% stacked bar chart

4. Evaluation and discussion
Figure 3 shows the state of the plot-poll near the end of
the one week test period. Seventy-six people voted in the
first week of plot polling to indicate their experience with
SJW. When we consider that across the three main forums
that comprise the site, a total of 22 distinct users posted
comments or replies to comments during the same time
period, this is a very good level of participation. That is,
over its first week the plot-poll has been the most popular
channel for participation. The 76:22 ratio means the
majority of this participation has come from lurkers,
people who most likely would have been reluctant to talk,
but now contributed to the site by way of the plot-poll.
In addition, an exploratory survey was administered to
users to investigate their experience of the plot poll. Nine
statements, on 7-point Agree/Disagree scale, were adapted
from studies using the Technology Acceptance Model,

including categories for affect [10]. The statements and
mean response values appear in Table 1.
Table 1. Survey items and scores; n=15
Statement

Mean

I found this poll useful.
It was easy to use.
This poll was enjoyable.
It created a sense of human contact.
Its graphics really made a difference.
I found it well designed.
I trust this poll.
I would use such a poll again.
I would use it to track my mood over time.

5.27
5.80
4.73
4.53
4.73
4.93
5.20
5.93
4.93

The survey had a 20% response rate. Respondents rated
the plot-poll as useful and easy to use; most reported that
they would use such a poll again. The statements regarding
the affective benefits such as enjoyment were not ranked
as highly, but still rate positively.
We were disappointed by two things: a lack of
discussion of the plot-poll by users, and that most votes
were cast for the first week. In the future, the first issue
might be addressed by explicitly creating a thread for
discussion of the plot-poll. The second issue deserves
more elaboration. Because the plot-poll was only deployed
for about a week, users were asked to respond by plotting
their mood for current week (and indicating which week in
the 10 week sequence their points represented). We did not
allow users to enter points for multiple weeks because
retrospective reporting is known to be unreliable. It is not
clear whether the predominance of entries for the first
week indicates that those who were most attracted to the
poll were just starting out, or whether users simply
responded without reading the directions, and thus started
out at the 'beginning' of the chart.
Some limitations were obvious from the start, for
example that web polling cannot always present
statistically significant information. More interesting from
a visualization standpoint is portraying the number of
clicks beyond what can fit within the allocated cell. In both
2005 and 2006 tests, the click limit was not reached, but
one solution for a long-term deployment would be to
rescale the bricks (or other markers) whenever a new order
of magnitude is reached. Most importantly, future studies
could compare the plot-poll with a control condition of a
text-only poll. In addition, a long-term deployment that
allows users to plot their mood daily and track progress
over months would be very useful, as it is rated high in the
survey. Aspects of mood could also be explored: such as
depression versus anxiety.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

5. Conclusion and next steps
Our evaluation of plot-polling is currently in the early
stages. We are encouraged at the response rate during the
first week of testing, and are curious to see how usage of a
plot-poll format fares over time. Perhaps it will become a
locus of discussion in the forum. Alternatively, poll usage
in the first week may be due to its novelty, and we could
see a gradual decay in usage. To further explore these
issues, we intend to continue development of the design of
plot-polling, for this particular use case as well as for other
situations in which plot-polling might prove to be an
engaging artifact for an online community. Furthermore,
we plan to expand the survey items to more fully evaluate
user reactions to the plot poll, but with a larger sample of
users. To our knowledge, the fusion of the Technology
Acceptance Model with forms of user knowledge
visualization is a unique contribution.
Specifically, development of a plot-poll will be
considered for online communities of Yoga practice. The
mock-up shown in Figure 5 would aim to visualize
knowledge on a question such as: What is the typical
weight distribution in performing the Headstand pose? The
plotting canvas in this case would be the triangle in the
centre, representing the tripod formed by the head, arms
and wrists in this pose. Users would indicate how their
weight falls on the respective ‘pads’, which (like the bricks
in the mood plot-poll) would grow to indicate ‘weight’.
Weight here is meant both literally (as in body weight) and
figuratively (as in response significance).

Figure 5. Mock-up of plot-poll on Yoga
To conclude, despite the preliminary nature of the
evaluation, we believe that this simple and effective design
of plot-polling is an example of how to increase
participation in online communities. A longer-term
experimental design may support this further, show which
aspects of the plot-poll’s design stimulate participation,
and whether affective benefits are added by such
collaborative knowledge visualization.

[12] J. Lamerichs, “Discourse of Support: Exploring Online
Discussions on Depression”, PhD Dissertation, Wageningen
Universiteit, Netherlands, 2003.

References
[1] D. Boyd, H.Y. Lee, D. Ramage, and J. Donath, “Developing
Legible Visualizations for Online Social Spaces”, Proc. Hawaii
Int. Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii, January 7–10, 2002.
[2] R. Burkhard, “Towards a Framework and a Model for
Knowledge Visualization”, in Knowledge Visualization and
Information Visualization–Searching for Synergies, S.O. Tergan
and T. Keller (Eds.), Springer, 2005.
[3] Card, S.K., J.D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, Readings
in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think, Morgan
Kaufmann, Los Altos, CA, 1999.
[4] R. Cheng and J. Vassileva, “User Motivation and Persuasion
Strategy for Peer-to-peer Communities”, Proc. Hawai'i Int.
Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii, 2005.
[5] J. Donath, “A Semantic Approach to Visualizing Online
Conversations”, Communications of the ACM 45(4), 2002, pp.
48-49.
[6] M. Eppler and J. Mengis, “Persistence through Visualization
in Knowledge-intensive Conversations”, Proc. 9th Int. Conf.
Information Visualization, IEEE, London, UK, 2005.
[7] T. Erickson and W. Kellogg, “Social Translucence: Using
Minimalist Visualizations of Social Activity to Support
Collective Interaction”, Readings in the Social Navigation of
Information Space, K. Hook, D. Benyon, and A. Munroe (Eds.),
Springer, 2002.
[8] T. Erickson, W. Huang, C. Danis, and W. Kellogg, “Social
Proxy for Distributed Tasks: Design and Evaluation of a
Working Prototype”, CHI’04, Vienna, Austria, April 24–29,
2004.
[9] B.J. Fogg and S. Tseng, “Credibility and Computing
Technology”, Communications of the ACM 14(5), 1999, pp. 3987.
[10] K. Hassanein and M. Head, “The Impact of Infusing Social
Presence in the Web Interface: an Investigation across Different
Products”, Int. Journal of Electronic Commerce 10(2), Winter
2005-6, pp. 31-55.
[11] A. Ivanov and K. Funkel, “Graphical Web Polling for
Online Discussion Spaces”, iLOR05 Conference (Posters),
Vancouver, Canada, November 14-17, 2005.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[13] D. Millen and J. Patterson, “Stimulating Social Engagement
in a Community Network”, Proc. CSCW’02, New Orleans, USA,
2002.
[14] M. Nisenholtz, Keynote address at the 2004 Information
Industry Summit Software & Information Industry Association,
accessed March 20, 2006, at http://www.nytco.com/investorspresentations-20040127.html.
[15] I. Nonaka, R. Toyama, and N. Konno, “SECI, Ba and
Leadership: a Unified Model of Dymanic Knowledge Creation”,
Long Range Planning 33, 2000, pp. 5-34.
[16] J. Novak and M. Wurst, “Collaborative Knowledge
Visualisation for Cross-community Learning,” in Knowledge
Visualization and Information Visualization–Searching for
Synergies, S.O. Tergan and T. Keller (Eds.), Springer, 2005.
[17] Pressman, A., St. John’s Wort: The Miracle Medicine, Dell
Publishing, 1998.
[18] S.R. Salz and A. Voss, “Polling in Participation Systems: an
Exemplary Integration in Dito”, in DSS in the Uncertainty of the
Internet Age, T. Bui, H. Sroka, S. Stanek, and J. Gotuchowski
(Eds.), University of Economics in Katowice, Slovenia, 2003, pp.
347-365.
[19] M. Scardamalia and C. Bereiter, “Knowledge Building
Environments: Extending the Limits of the Possible in Education
and Knowledge Work”, in Encyclopedia of Distributed Learning,
A. DiStefano, K.E. Rudestam, and R. Silverman (Eds.),
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2003.
[20] Tufte E., Envisioning Information, Cheshire, CT: Graphics
Press, 1990.
[21] M. Turoff, S. Hiltz, M. Bieber, J. Fjermestad, and A. Rana,
“Collaborative Discourse Structures in Computer Mediated
Group Communications”, Proc. Hawaii Int. Conference on
System Sciences, Hawaii, 1999.
[22] Visualizing Argumentation: Software Tools for
Collaborative and Educational Sense-Making, P.A. Kirschner,
S.J. Buckingham Shum, and C.S. Carr (Eds.), Springer-Verlag:
London, 2003.
[23] Wenger, E., R. McDermott, and W.M. Snyder, Cultivating
Communities of Practice, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business
School Press, 2002.

