Merging Knowledge from Different Disciplines in Search of Potential Design
Axioms
Silke Berit Lang
ETH Zurich
Competence Center for Digital Design & Modeling
Haldeneggsteig 4, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland
lang@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
This paper presents the idea of merging different schools
of thinking which have been separated for centuries. Design as a process of creating artifacts and systems varies
substantially among individual disciplines. There exists no
universally valid and concise definition of the concept design. We first describe different understandings and uses
of design with a focus on architecture, engineering, management, and nature. We then show that there is a profound need for merging these different schools of thinking
and forming the discipline of design science. The term
‘Design Science’ got its first recognition in the 1960s but
without attaining a remarkable impact on affected disciplines. Progress in design research and multidisciplinary
work arose in the last decades. Research in knowledge
transfer and knowledge visualization supports the design
science’s ability to bridge the remaining gap between disciplines.

1. Introduction
Design is eminent throughout different disciplines of science, engineering, management, and architecture. However, within these fields its understanding differs significantly. Design research, including design methodologies
and design science, is a wide and comprehensive field. Even
though research on design can be traced back to the early
1960s it needs extensive research more than ever. The design methods developed in the 1960s and research in artificial intelligence in the 1980s provided some advances, but
did not have a remarkable practical impact. The fundamentals and principles of design are relatively little understood.
Surprisingly, small efforts have been made to investigate
key foundational issues about design and to formulate specific criteria to spawn it as an extensive scientific concept

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

and discipline. For specific engineering disciplines, such as
user interface design, for instance, there exist already handbooks with detailed design instructions. But a holistic understanding of design will enable completely new perspectives and approaches in architecture, engineering, management, and natural science. So far the potential of merging
knowledge from various disciplines is rarely investigated.
The newly founded Competence Center for Digital Design & Modeling at ETH in Zurich aims to acquire a fundamental understanding of salient, domain independent principles and methodologies underlying design. The goal is
the definition of domain and discipline independent axioms
underlying design in order to establish design as an independent scientific discipline. The center couples ETH’s vast
expertise in the fields of design and modeling beyond disciplines. The multidisciplinary organization consists of 25
research groups from 11 departments. In the frame of the
center we observe and structure a set of principles and patterns common to all of the involved fields (see Figure 1).
On the fundamental level we seek to gain a fundamental
understanding of design across disciplines. Therefore, it is
important to understand how design methods work and how
they can be transferred across disciplines. On the practical
level we verify the results of our fundamental research by
implementing them in suitable applications. Working together with industry partners brings our investigations into
industrial practice and assures the real world value of our
findings.

2. What is Design Science?
Design is typically concerned with creating things that
people want. According to S. A. Gregory the fundamental idea behind design is building a structure, pattern, or
system within a situation [12]. Engineering design is goaloriented and concerned with the process of making artifacts
and complex systems for expert use. In natural science de-

Archi
te

gement
na

g

Natur

al

• managing, learning, planning, and optimizing

Eng
ine

in
er

S

n c es
cie

M
a

u re
ct
Potential Design
Axioms

Figure 1. By exploiting synergies arising from
different disciplines placed, at the Competence Center for Digital Design & Modeling at ETH Zurich, we investigate whether
there are domain-independent design axioms
which can be formulated .

sign abides mainly by the laws of nature. Since the initial
brain work remains usually unseen to the outside, design
is mostly seen as a procedure related to material things.
However, engineers, technologists, scientists as well as architects, artists, and poets are involved in design processes.
These processes are more or less creative and imply a strong
thinking ahead component.
Many authors and scientists already have searched for a
definition of the term design. The following, not exhaustive, listing summarizes statements about design found in
the literature:
• an art form
• an applied science
• a process with an input and an output
• a goal directed problem solving and decision making
activity
• a deliberately intended or produced pattern
• creativity and imagination
• satisfying needs
• drawings, sketches, plans, calculations
• foresight toward production, assembly, testing and
other processes

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

• collecting and processing data
• transferring and transforming knowledge.
Design as a separate discipline has been formally acknowledged for the last 150 years in the manufacturing industry. Especially in engineering, the scientific developments in the early 1940s made great contributions for solving design problems. Multidisciplinary teams consisting of
engineers, industrial designers, psychologists, and statisticians were set up. In the beginning the focus of design research was on improving classical design by using systematic design methods. Since the 1990s, the focus has shifted
to automated design. The novel approach transforms information about the design problem into detail specification of
physical solutions using computers.

2.1. Design Science and its Origins
Design science is a systematic approach with the intention to find an appropriate design method. This design
method is a pattern of work which is independent of the
discipline and offers a way for solving problems.
2.1.1 Related Work
Regarding design and science there are two periods of special interest: The 1920s with their investigations on scientific design products, and the 1960s with their research on
scientific design processes. In the 1920s Theo van Doesbug
and Le Corbusier already had the desire to bring science
and design together [9, 15]. Both produced works based
on the values of science: objectivity and rationality. In
the 1960s the disciplines of urban design, graphic and interior design, industrial design, and engineering recognized
what nowadays is commonly understood as design and became an own discipline. The emergence of investigating
novel design methods has its origins in the upcoming problems of the 2nd World War. Novel, scientific, and computational methods have been investigated and applied to new
and pressing problems. The term ‘Design Science’ became
its recognition in the 1960s and was probably first used by
the technologist Buckminster Fuller. It was adapted by S. A.
Gregory in 1965 at the conference on The Design Method
[12]. Gregory defined design science as the study of design
in theory and in practice, in order to gain knowledge about
design processes, about design procedures to create material
objects, and about the behavior of its creators. According to
him, design is a process which has an input and an output
[12]. In 1967 Hubka established the International Conference on Engineering Design where he introduced their scientific approach to engineering design methods as design

science for the first time. They described design science as a
system consisting of logically related knowledge. This system should be able to organize the gained knowledge upon
designing.
2.1.2 Design Methodology
According to Cross [7] design methodology refers to the
study of principles and procedures of design in a broad and
general sense. It is concerned with how design is carried
out. In doing so it analyzes how designers work and how
they think. The aim is to make rational decisions which
adapt to the prevailing values. This is achieved by looking
at rational methods of incorporating scientific techniques
and knowledge into the design process. Design methodology became important as a research topic at the Conference on Design Method in 1962 [14]. In 1964 Christopher
Alexander published his PhD thesis “Notes on the Synthesis
of Form” in design methods [1]. His approach for solving
problems was to split design problems into small patterns.
In doing so he applied information theory. In 1967 the Design Methods Group at the University of California, Berkeley, was founded. Over the next decades design methodology gained in importance, especially in engineering and
industrial design. During this time design as a research
topic became common in Europe and the US. In 1966 The
Teaching of Design - Design Methods in Architecture conference was held in Ulm at the Hochschule f¨ur Gestaltung.
The Design Methods in Architecture Symposium was held
in 1967 in Portsmouth [4]. In the 1980s and early 1990s a
series of books on engineering design methods and methodologies and new journals of design research, theory, and
methodology were released. To name some of them: Design Studies (1979), Design Issues (1984), Journal of Engineering Design (1990), Languages of Design (1993), and
Design Journal (1997). The most relevant and important
design methodologists are: Morris Asimow, John Christopher Jones, Nigel Cross, L. Bruce Acher, T.T. Woodson,
Stuart Pugh, and David Ullman. The first design methodologists were scientists and designers, and made their investigations to find out rational criteria of decision making
with the aim to optimize decisions. Design methodologies
were used to offer appropriate methods for supporting creativity. Horst Rittel as a second generation methodologist
proposed problem identification methods influenced by the
philosopher Karl Popper. The significant differences to the
first approaches were user involvement in design decisions
and identification of user objectives.

2.2

Design and Architecture

There has been the need and motivation for designing
people’s living environment as long as the human race

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

has existed. Architecture evolved from the combination
of needs like shelter, worship and security, and of resources like existing materials and available knowledge and
skills. Architecture describes the art and science of designing the humans’ environment. This includes traditionally
the macrolevel of town planning, urban design, and landscape architecture as well as the microlevel of creating furniture. Today, immaterial spaces like virtual spaces and
cyperspaces are added. Design in architecture underlies a
targeted objective. Architectural design addresses feasibility and affordability as well as functionality and aesthetics.
It is concerned with the interaction of space, volume, texture, light, shadow, and abstract elements in order to satisfy
users’ demands. According to Vitruvius the three core principles are: durability, convenience, and beauty [23]. Traditionally, architectural design is a multi-layered dynamic
process which requires multiple steps and phases until the
design is adequate to satisfy the needs. Each phase is a revision and progression from the previous one based on analysis, evaluation of the analysis, decision to modify the concept, and finally to create a new concept. The design process
involves pondering, research, setbacks, and effort. Having continuous input and output flows, the design process
in architecture is often compared to a living system. To
achieve their visions architects balance art, science, materials, forms, style, and craft. Therefore, the design process
is interdisciplinary in nature incorporating fields such as organizational dynamics, cognitive science, psychology, sociology, engineering, and economics. A key role in architectural design is the representation to explore, assess, and refine ideas. These representations are speculative and serve
to simulate the imagination, to test initial thoughts, ideas
and concepts, and to generate alternatives [17].

2.3

Design and Engineering

Design in engineering is a feed-back process engaging the following engineering activities: understanding the
problem, concept generation, analysis and optimization,
testing and construction. Engineering design, therefore,
refers to the chain from research and development, manufacturing, construction to marketing based on scientific
principles, technical information, mathematics, practical
experience, and imagination. The focus is on the development of mechanical structures, machines, or structures
based on predefined functions with the maximum of economy and efficiency [16, 10]. Nowadays, engineers realize
technical functions more and more by immaterial and software technologies. Outcomes of the developments are the
design, the production, and the process. Hubka and Eder
[13] defined the process of designing as the transformation
of information from the condition of needs, demands, requirements, and constraints into the description of a struc-

ture. This structure is capable of fulfilling these demands
which include wishes of customer, stages and requirements
of life cycle, and all in-between states the product must run
through. Petroski [19] describes engineering as the art of
rearranging materials and forces of nature based on the constraints given by the immutable laws of nature. Engineering
itself is seen as a fundamental human process.

2.4

Design and Management Sciences

Design in management sciences is among others related
to organizational design, business process design, and product design.
The design of an organization is easily compared to the
design of buildings, airplanes, computers etc. In the same
manner, criteria and principles are important in architecture and engineering. A business strategy should set criteria which are necessary for determining the task to accomplish. Organizational design refers to the way in which
management is defined and is structured in the following
three stages: analysis, concept development, and implementation planning. Organizations are seen as living organisms: they start a self-development and change according to constraints. Therefore, they are not easily controllable or maneuverable. Thus, organizational structures need
high flexibility especially regarding communication, decision making, and resource utilization. A key aspect of today’s business development environment is the design and
improvement of processes and products. Businesses design
aims to streamline throughput, to reduce expenses, to reduce completion time, and to maximize output. Though
process design is not new there is still a need for concentrating on guidelines to effectively achieve business objectives. Driving factors are increasing productivity, reducing
budgets, competing in a global economy, and realizing technological innovations. Underlying design criteria for new
processes are optimization, effectiveness, fulfillment of customer requirements, support and sustainment of organizational development and growth. Nowadays, the basis for a
successful competition are the product design capabilities.
Successful product design is based on fundamentally improved approaches for organizing the design process, for reducing waste, and for providing products to meet customer
needs. Thus, helping to control risk and to significantly increase the sales opportunities is highly important. There is
a profound need for investigating the critical know-how to
design practical, action-oriented solutions which improve
product design performance. The challenge is to design
processes and methodologies that adapt to the dynamics
of constantly changing organizations. Most companies already have well-defined product design processes and have
mastered the ability to identify, create, and exploit opportunities for innovation on a systematic basis. A critical suc-

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

cess factor is reducing design cycles by optimization.

2.5

Design and Natural Sciences

Natural science is concerned with the understanding of
phenomena of the world. Scientists ask why a problem
arises and attempt to explain phenomena by formulating
them in terms of abstract laws. In doing so they create mathematical models based on observations. Natural science investigates knowledge about objects and phenomena in the
world, and explains and describes how they behave and interact with each other. Since there is no explicit designer in
the nature, the conventional understanding of design goes
not along with natural science at a first glance. However,
the influence of nature’s design is evident in human design.
Nature constructs extremely complex systems. These systems are robust against mismatches in components, defects
in construction, and failures of performance over large variations of operating conditions. For the creation of its organisms nature finds design solutions, such as structure formation, growth, self-assembly, self-organization, and emergent
systems behavior.

3. In Search of Potential Design Axioms
Section 2 reflected existing design science concepts and
design methods. However, there is still a profound lack in
merging disciplines and in exploiting synergies arising from
interdisciplinary research. The exciting and rewarding challenge is to incorporate principles of nature into human design processes. These processes are, for example, system
design in engineering, algorithm design in computer sciences, process design in management, and creative design
in architecture. The fundamentals and principles of design
in nature are relatively little understood and offer a largely
unexplored repertoire of approaches to the design of complex and elaborate systems. Design aims to manage complexity. The complexity in the task we are facing extends
conventional methods. Therefore, it is important to create a
cross-disciplinary added value. The potential lies in the advantageously importation of design methods from one domain to another one. This helps in developing non-reductive
approaches which contribute to manage the complexity of
a given problem. The translation of natural design principles into terms that other disciplines can work with will be
a major challenge. Since the notion of design differs significantly across domains it is important to recognize general principles and to establish guidelines and laws. In order to strengthen and establish design science as a domainindependent discipline a common language between these
domains, and defining and formalizing a set of design axioms would be very helpful. The ancient Greeks claimed
that an axiom is a self-evident truth. In general, an axiom

is defined as a fundamental inherent truth being observed to
be valid without a proof or demonstration. In a mathematical sense, axioms are formal logical expressions providing
the basis from which other knowledge is built upon. Therefore, the primary proposition of a system on which others
are based on and are proved by, are axioms. Design axioms
will foster to understand the fundamentals and principles of
design. They will provide the basis for further investigations on transferring and combining design methods from
one domain to other ones. The goal is the development of
non-reductive approaches for managing complex tasks.

3.1. Knowledge Visualization
A crucial factor for investigating design axioms will be
to bring together different schools of thinking and to bridge
the gap between them. In doing so the interdisciplinary
transfer of knowledge is essential. We have to find visualization forms which work across disciplines and allow transferring facts, insights, experiences, attitudes, values, expectations, perspectives, opinions, and predictions.
These questions are investigated in knowledge visualization. According to Burkhard’s definition knowledge visualization examines the use of visual representations to improve the transfer and creation of knowledge between at
least two persons [5]. Knowledge visualization research
aims at integrating methods from different fields such as
information design, information visualization, communication science, humanities, social sciences, visual perception,
and knowledge management. It tries to identify and assess computer based and non-computer based visualization
techniques that help in knowledge-intense processes, such
as the transfer and creation of knowledge. For effectively
transferring knowledge through visualization the following
questions need to be considered: What is the goal of using a visualization method? What type of knowledge needs
to be visualized? Who is being addressed? What is the best
method to visualize this knowledge? Answers to these questions lead to first conceptual frameworks that are described
in [6, 11]. These frameworks can, therefore, be seen as a
building block for investigating potential design axioms in
interdisciplinary research teams.

3.2. Information Architecture
Typically, architects face complex tasks and considerations that are too complex to grasp as a whole. Therefore,
they are trained in breaking them down into several stages.
Furthermore, by the nature of the architectural discipline
which bridges fundamental science and engineering, many
architects have the ability to merge rational and quantifiable parameters as well as more intermediate and uncertain variables. With these skills which bring different de-

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

mands together, and with their strength in inter-functional
communication, architects successfully contribute towards
bridging the gap between engineering, natural science, and
management science. This extension of traditional architecture leads to the field of information architecture. The term
information architecture was first coined in 1998 by Wurman. He combined technology, graphic design, and writing
or journalism [8]. Schmitt declares information which consist of architectural knowledge, building regulations, design
information, and sensory data as the fifth dimension of architecture [20]. Information architecture is among others
concerned with visualizing information systems in architecture, science, and business as well as communicating complex contents by using visualization techniques. After almost a decade there exists no exact definition of information
architecture and it is still an emerging field. Currently, several courses are establishing at architectural departments of
various universities like ETH Zurich, University of Sydney,
and Illinois Institute of Technology. For these reasons architects are predestinated to bring different schools together,
arbitrating between them, and contributing and investigating potential design axioms.

4. First Results
This paper presents key ideas and our visions of finding potential domain independent design axioms. Based on
our research and the existing domains with their knowledge
within our Competence Center for Digital Design & Modeling we are analyzing and finding out the common grounds
and the differences in their understandings of the mechanisms and processes underlying design. The disciplines are
covered individually and neutrally to obtain open-minded
discussions. Thus, we are able to exploit the synergies of
the different disciplines and contribute in bringing together
the vast amount of isolated knowledge sources. As a first
success we achieved bringing together experts from natural sciences, engineering, architecture, and management
to discuss about a fundamental understanding of design.
We observed that visualization and a common visual understanding facilitates the process of understanding. Therefore,
knowledge visualization would support the transfer and the
communication of knowledge among different disciplines.
We found out that the following topics are relevant to all
our members: Modeling & Simulation, Design Principles
and Design Criteria, Inverse Design, Self-Design, Large
Datasets, Interaction, Systems Design, Optimization, and
Statistics. Optimization and statistics are related to each
other. Optimization methods are developed in statistical
decision theory and management sciences. In engineering
design theory, for example, the importance of optimization
methods have increased in recent years. The handling of
large and complex dataset as well as the development of in-

teraction methods are highly relevant topics within the different disciplines. We realized that terms and notions as
well as optimization criteria differ among the different disciplines. Common research and transfer projects will force
the project partners to deal with different understandings
and make contributions towards potential design axioms.

5. Conclusions
We described different understandings and definitions of
design. Combining the extensive knowledge of different
disciplines regarding design will exploit the synergies arising from multidisciplinary research. Towards combining
different understandings, design axioms have to be investigated and formalized. It is important to recognize principles
of design, develop rules, and establish laws. With the help
of the evolving field of knowledge visualization and their
methods we are able to find a common language among the
different schools of thinking. By means of architects’ combinatory talent and their ability to arbitrate between groups
of interests we will merge different schools of thinking. We
are sure that in the future, design science will become a major topic both in academic research and in practical applications. Upcoming symposia, conferences, and the establishment of design centers and schools indicate that design
science is gaining in importance.

Acknowledgments

[5] R. Burkhard, “Learning from Architects: The Difference between Knowledge Visualization and Information Visualization”, In Proceedings of 8th International Conference on Information Visualization (IV04), London, IEEE, pp. 519-524,
2004.
[6] R. Burkhard, “Towards a Framework and a Model for
Knowledge Visualization: Synergies between Information
and Knowledge Visualization”; Knowledge and Information
Visualization: Searching for Synergies, Tergan, S.-O. and
Keller, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Heidelberg /
New York, Springer, 2005.
[7] N. Cross, “Developments in Design Methodology”, ISBN
047110248, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 1984.
[8] B. J. Davis, “An Interview with Richard Saul Wurman”, Design Matters (3) 2.
[9] T. van Doesberg, “Towards a Collective Construction”, De
Stijle, 1923.
[10] W. E. Eder, “Definitions and Methodologies”, in S. A. Gregory, The Design Method, London, Butterworth, pp. 19-31,
1966.
[11] M. Eppler, R. Burkhard, “Knowledge Visualization”, Encyclopedia of Knowledge Management, Idea Group, 2005.
[12] S. A. Gregory, “The Design Method”, London, Butterworth,
1966.
[13] V. Hubka and W. E. Eder, “Design Science”, ISBN
3540199977, Springer, 1996.
[14] J. C. Jones, D.G. Thornley, “Conference on Design Methods”, Oxford University Press, 1963.
[15] Le Corbusier, CIAM 2nd Congress, Frankfurt, 1929.

This work was supported and stimulated with fruitful
discussions by Professor Markus Gross, head of the Competence Center for Digital Design & Modeling at ETH Zurich.
We would like to thank all members of the Competence
Center for Digital Design & Modeling for their inspiring
discussions about their understandings of design. Special
thanks go to Remo Burkhard and Torsten Brodt for creative
discussions and valuable comments.

[17] R. H. McKim, “Experiences in Visual Thinking”, ISBN
0818504110, PWS Publishers, Boston, MA, 1980.
[18] G. Pask, “The Conception of a Shape and the Evolution of
a Design”, in J. C. Jones, D. G. Thornley (eds.), Conference
on Design Methods, Oxford, Pregamon Press, 1963.
[19] H. Petroski, “Invention by Design”, ISBN 0674463676,
Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1997.

References
[1] C. Alexander, “Notes on the Synthesis of Form”, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 1964.
[2] L. B. Archer, “Systematic Methods for Designers”, London,
The Design Council, 1965.
[3] L. B. Archer, “A View of the Nature of the Design Research”, In R. Jacques, J.A. Powell: Design Science:
Method, Guilford, Surrey: IPC Business Press Ltd., pp.3047, 1981.
[4] G. Broadbent, A. Ward (ed.), “Design Methods in Architecture”, London, Humphries, 1969.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

[16] R. J. McCrory, “The Design Method in Practice”, in S. A.
Gregory, The Design Method, London, Butterworth, pp. 1118, 1966.

IEEE

[20] G. Schmitt, “Information Architecture Basis and Future of
CAAD”, ISBN 3764360925, Basel, Birkenh¨auser, 1999.
[21] D.A. Schoen, “The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action”, New York, Basic Books, 1983.
[22] H. A. Simon, “The Sciences of the Artificial”, ISBN
0262193744, Cambridge, The MIT Press, 1996.
[23] Vitruvius, I. D. Rowland (ed.), Th. N. Howe (ed.) “Vitruvius: Ten books on Architecture”, ISBN 0521553644, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1999.

