Two sides of the story: Visualising Products and Processes in Engineering Design
René Keller, Tomás L. Flanagan, Claudia M. Eckert, P. John Clarkson
Engineering Design Centre, University of Cambridge
Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, United Kingdom
{rk313@cam.ac.uk, tlf21@cam.ac.uk, cme26@cam.ac.uk, pjc10@cam.ac.uk}
Abstract
This paper describes research on the use of multiple
views for modelling products and processes in the design
of complex products. Single visual representations of
design models only provide a limited perspective, hiding
important information from the designer. Based on an
industrial case study with an engine company, the utility
of multiple views in analysing model data is
demonstrated. The case study showed an industrial need
for improved visualisation techniques, as the currently
used method – Gantt charts of design tasks – did not
provide enough information in order to properly steer
the design process and predict process behaviour. This
approach of using a variety of different visualisation
techniques together with improved techniques for
modelling and simulating design processes provides
insight into the hidden dependencies between the design
artefact (the product) and its design process.
Keywords--planning.

Multiple

views,

design

process

1. Introduction
The design of large and complex products, such as
aircraft, involves the collaboration of 100s of people
doing a myriad of different tasks. Managing the
associated design processes is challenging due to obscure
component interactions and unpredictable task
behaviour. In many cases, designers have very little
overview over how their own tasks fit into the context of
the wider product despite being experts in their own field
and understanding the tasks of the people they work with
frequently. As a result, they find it difficult to proactively
communicate with their colleagues and warn them about
potential design changes. This can cause unnecessary
design effort and costly rework.
To overcome such problems the authors are
involved in devising and analysing design process
models, which contain rich information about the
connectivity between different aspects of the design
process. Because of the richness of the models, however,
text-based analysis becomes tedious and error-prone and
visual analysis is often advantageous. Visualisations of

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

design process simulations - a technique to predict
process behaviour - are even more challenging.
Additionally, visualisations of complex processes and
products are themselves complex and research is needed
to establish how different visualisation can be most
effectively utilised to support engineering design.
This paper explores how single representations can
be used to visualise different types of design information
and how alternative views of the same information can
be used to bridge the gap between process and product
views. It considers the case for multiple interlinked
views in facilitating process analysis arguing that
improved visualisations are critical in addressing current
challenges of engineering design.
A case study at a UK engine company identified a
need for improved visualisation techniques to improve
design practice. Current visualisations of design
processes heavily rely on the use of Gantt charts, which
sometimes consist of thousands of tasks, making them
impossible to read. They also hide important information
about potential task failures and rework.
During this case study, a model of the initial stages
of the design process for a diesel engine was constructed
based on information from the documented New Product
Introduction (NPI) process used by the company, from
interviews with designers and on-site observations of
design practice. The model employed a signposting
approach, a task-based parameter model with failure
probabilities for tasks, which allows the user to gain an
understanding of process risk through simulating the
process. Using this model, we will highlight limitations
of existing visualisation techniques and show how the
use of multiple views can reveal information hidden by
conventional visual representation strategies.

2. Visualisations of Design
No single representation known to the authors is
capable of showing all relevant process and product
information associated with a design project.
Nevertheless, Gantt charts are the prevailing
representation in industry. Alternative representations –
such as matrices and node-link diagrams – can be used to
visualise different design information and thus are of

benefit to designers and project managers who have to
interact with the project.
Gantt charts, matrices, scatter plots and node-link
diagrams can be used alone and in combination to
interrogate processes. Some representations are good for
some purposes and not for others: matrices are suitable
for representing dense data but, in many cases, are less
intuitive than graphical network representations [1]. Each
representation shows different information: for example,
Gantt charts contain rich data on task-timing, but no task
connectivity beyond temporal links, while Design
Structure Matrices (DSMs) show how different tasks are
connected together, but include no timing information
beyond task ordering

2.1. Task Networks
Node-link diagrams of tasks have been applied to
process representation for almost 50 years. Generic
approaches to project planning include CPM, the Critical
Path Method [2] and PERT, the Process Evaluation and
Review Technique [3]. Both visually represent the
dependency data in the form of node-link diagrams of
tasks. Gantt charts are essentially node-link diagrams,
where position and vertical size of a node visualise task
execution timing and task duration respectively.
Software implementations of Gantt charts can also show
dependency links between tasks but don’t provide
information about the nature of these links.
The critical path – the longest sequence of
consecutive tasks that establishes the minimum length of
time for project-completion – can be easily highlighted
on Gantt charts and other node-link diagrams. This
allows project managers to appropriately prioritise
resources in order to minimise project duration.
The advantage of node-link diagrams is that their
layout is much more flexible than that of matrices which
only allow ordering of rows and columns. Node-link
representations are especially suited if additional
information – e.g. strength of dependency between nodes
- can be incorporated into the layout. Clustering and
hierarchical layouts are possible as well. A collection of
different (standard) network layout algorithms can be
found in the extensive bibliography by di Battista et al.
[4]. Node link diagrams are proven to be a good
representation of sparse graphs [5].
Figure 1 shows the node-link diagram (in the form
of a Gantt chart) of a diesel engine design process. It
draws attention to indirect links between tasks, i.e. tasks
affecting other tasks that then again have effects on
subsequent tasks. This allows designers to foresee effects
of envisaged changes of task order on process duration.
In Figure 1, ‘Define Product Objectives’ has an indirect
effect on ‘Define Technical Objectives’ through the task
‘Define Technical Opportunities’ (indicated by the red
arrow).

Figure 1 Gantt chart showing task scheduling

2.2. DSMs
Another method of presenting connectivity is the
Design Structure Matrix (DSM) (see [6] and [7]). DSMs
are referred to as “a simple, compact, and visual
representation” [7] of a graph and are transposed
adjacency matrices. They are widely used by engineering
design researchers to both analyse product architecture
and processes.
A DSM is a square matrix with identically labelled
rows and columns and uses off-diagonal entries (tickmarks) to signify the dependency of one element on
another (Figure 2). When used to model the design
process, the matrices show tasks of processes and can be
reordered to achieve minimum iteration. Product models
can be generated to show the connectivity between
different components and organisational DSMs show
connections between teams.
User studies have shown that DSMs are particularly
suitable for representing direct links in dense graphs (see
[5] and [1]). However, they have limited capabilities
when showing indirect connections between nodes – in
such cases node-link representations outperform them.
2.2.1. Task DSMs: Numerous researchers (see for
example [8]) use DSMs as a basis for their work in
modelling design processes. Eppinger et al. [8] use
DSMs to examine processes with the goal of improving
the task order. Yassine et al [9] perform simulation
analysis based on the DSM method to model rework in
the automotive industry and to assess sensitivity to errors
in rework probabilities. Cho and Eppinger [10] discuss
how iterated tasks may be performed in sequence, in
parallel, or with varying degrees of overlap depending on
the extent of information dependency between tasks.

Figure 2 Task DSM of a diesel engine design
process

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 2 shows a DSM of the initial tasks performed
during the design of a diesel engine. The order of the
tasks reflects the order in which the tasks are performed
during project execution. One can see easily the direct
dependencies between tasks and possible iteration loops
indicated by marks above the main diagonal – for
example the link from ‘Design FMEA’ to ‘Create Initial
Parts List’ (highlighted in red). Browning [7] discusses
how the overall view eludes to the structure of the
underlying process and hence to likely iteration
behaviour.

Task name

if

at least lowconfidence
in geometry

Inputs

and

at least lowconfidence
in stress concentration

Output

and

at least lowconfidence
in bulk stress

Refine geometry
Refine geometry based
upon outline knowledge
of bulk stress and areas of
stress concentration

Task description

geometry

l

stress conc.

l

bulk stress

l

geometry

h m l

Confidence
mapping

Textual description
is transformed into
confidence mapping

at most high confidence

then in geometry

if ‘refine geometry’ task
is successful

Figure 3 Signposting - confidence mapping

As more complex products are designed to tight
deadlines, in fragmented teams, process risk is growing
due to increased concurrency of tasks coupled with
reduced overview and experience. There is a need to
ensure that product quality does not suffer as a result.
Pressure on schedules is strongly connected to product
design failures which can drive rework. However, the
link between product and process worlds is poorly
understood. This section considers how the visualisation
of both product (parameters) and process related (tasks)
information from signposting models of the design
process can provide insights into complex design
projects.

Initially, the Signposting approach was used to guide
designers to the next task, by showing those tasks for
which they had sufficiently good input data. Later, the
technique was developed further to supports optimum
task ordering Markov chain models used to establish the
best policy (preferred task-order) in terms of cost and
risk to reach the design goal [14]. It provided insight into
seemingly insignificant task precedences for a serial
design process which become important in the event of
iteration.
O’Donovan [15] extended the Signposting model to
include such features as resource constraints and learning
during rework. The extended Signposting model can be
used to construct detailed models of design processes – it
can capture multiple possible outcomes (different
degrees of success, different modes of failure) and
estimates of their likelihood; different task inputs
(information, workforce and other resources) and their
impact on the outcomes possible, and estimates of the
duration and cost of different iterations.
A software tool, which implements the signposting
modelling and analysis framework, allows the designer
to concurrently examine multiple views of the same
project (Figure 7). In addition to the previously
introduced views, further visual representations, which
reflect product and process information contained in
signposting models, have been developed and are
introduced in the following sections.

3.1. Signposting

3.2. Parameter DSMs

Signposting is a dynamic design process model
based on task connectivity through parameters [13].
Tasks constitute a conventional process representation as
found in Gantt charts. Design parameters [14] are an
abstract description of any attribute of the unfinished
product of the design process - anything that can be
named and that is related to the product can be defined as
a parameter. Components, requirements, performance
attributes and test results can all be parameters. Output
parameters from one task are used as inputs to another.
The state of a parameter is indicated in terms of the
confidence that the designer has in its refinement; a set
of parameter states defines the design state. A task-order
is implicit in the confidence values and the effect that
one task has on the process is determined by a
confidence mapping (see Figure 3). Iteration due to
failure probabilities can be modelled to a limited extent
by re-running a task with different confidence values.

Parameter DSMs can be created which show
patterns of parameter similarity which underpin
connectivity between tasks. Figure 4 shows the
dependencies of the key parameters of a diesel engine
obtained from the simulation of 100 processes. The
colour of the cells indicates the similarity - the degree to
which they are affected by the same tasks - for each pair
of parameters – red indicates a strong dependency and
green weak. Highly connected parameters – as the
‘Technical Confidence’ and the ‘Product Specification
Maturity’ in Figure 4 - are likely to prove susceptible to
change, i.e. changing one parameter will lead to changes
in similar parameters. Knowledge of likely change
propagation effects can benefit designers by reducing the
impact of unexpected changes.

2.2.2. Product DSMs: In addition to modelling task
connectivity, DSMs can also be used to show
connectivity amongst product components and
subsystems. For example, component DSMs have been
used to predict change propagation in complex products
[11]. It has also been shown that DSMs offer an effective
means to build models of products [12]. Reordering of
rows and columns can help identify clusters of highly
connected components which tend to drive iteration in
design processes. The reordered matrix indicates how an
envisaged change is likely to propagate through a design.

3. Linking Product and Process Worlds

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 4 DSM showing parameter similarities

3.3. Confidence Profiles
Confidence profiles are essentially line plots which
constitute an intuitive visual representation of how the
confidence associated with different parameters grows in
percentages as a project progresses (see Figure 5 for a
confidence profile plot for one simulated design process
of a diesel engine). Visual examination of confidence
profiles allows designers to identify similarities between
different parameters – such knowledge can prove
beneficial when performing design work as making
changes to the tasks affecting a parameter are likely to
affect similar parameters as well. Confidence profiles
also provide increased understanding of likely process
behaviour. In the ideal case, confidence increases
monotonically; confidence drops indicate task-failures
(see highlighted area in Figure 5), which can lead to
rework, and delays.

Figure 5 Confidence Profiles for the key
parameters of a diesel engine
The shape of confidence plots – whether confidence
is gained early or late in the design – also provides
insights into design risks. When much confidence is
acquired late in the process, deviations from targeted
confidence values are likely in the context of tight
deadlines, which constrain the time available for rework.

3.4. DSMs from Simulation
Conventional DSMs (see Figure 2) do not reflect the
probabilistic nature of design processes. In reality, the
task order may vary in response to delays, changing
requirements or resource shortfalls. Visual analysis of
data from multiple process simulations can give further

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

insights into the nature of the dependencies between
tasks as shown in Figure 6. The DSM in this figure
reflects weak dependencies (dependencies that do not
occur in every simulation of a process) between tasks
based on 100 simulations and also shows alternative
routes through the design process as highlighted by the
blue and yellow lines. The shading indicates the strength
of the precedence relationship between tasks resulting
from information dependencies. As one can see, there is
a strong relationship between the tasks ‘Identify
Technology opportunities’ and ‘Define Product
Objectives’, which was not shown in the previous
‘standard’ DSM view (Figure 2).

Figure 6 DSM showing probabilistic task
dependencies

3.5. Multiple Views for Design
Multiple visualisations in combination have
successfully been used to represent complex information
in general (see [16] and [17]) and have also proved their
value in a design-specific context (see [18] and [19]).
Jarratt et al [19] argue that there are two reasons for
using multiple views. Firstly, the amount of information
associated with a complex product is too large to be
displayed in one single visualisation: instead, this
information must to be decomposed into smaller chunks
that are easier to visualise and analyse. Secondly,
different visualisations can show different information,
revealing structure that cannot be shown in one diagram.
Task-based visualisations such as task DSMs and
Gantt charts show useful information about process
connectivity and duration but they provide little insight
into product-process dependencies besides task naming.
In addition, information on task connectivity captured in
Gantt charts is difficult to extract, manipulate and
interpret. Improved visualisations of task dependencies
are required to enable designers to determine how their
work fits into the bigger picture.
Parameter-based visualisations also suffer from
limitations. For example, confidence profiles and
parameter DSMs do not show any information about the
timing and connectivity level of corresponding activities.
In order to obtain a holistic view, interlinked productprocess visualisations are required.
Figure 7 provides an example of how multiple views
can be used to analyse complex design process models
and also exemplifies how multiple views can be

I
Hidden iteration probability
between ‘Identify
Technology Opportunities’
and ‘Define Product
Objectives’

III
Failure of task ‘Perform
Design FMEA’ results
in confidence drop in
‘Product Specification
Maturity’

II
High correlation between
‘Product Specification
Maturity’ and ‘Technical
Confidence’ parameters

Figure 7 Multiple views within and across the task and parameter domain

beneficial within and across domains. The top two plots a task DSM based on simulations and a Gantt chart show the benefit of multiple views within the task
domain. The DSM view gives an idea about the general
connectivity level of the tasks (the number of incoming
and outgoing dependency links), which was obtained
from 100 simulations and also includes task alternatives
– tasks that create the same design information but differ
in terms of resource utilisation, duration and/or cost. The
Gantt chart represents task scheduling by including
information about task durations in one process
simulation. As one can see, the potential iteration
between the task ‘Define product objectives’ and
‘Identify Technology opportunities’ is hidden in the
Gantt chart, but obvious in the DSM (I).
The bottom two plots in Figure 7 represent multiple
views of parameters in the product domain. The
parameter DSM on the left-hand side visualises
similarities of parameters. The similarity of the first two
parameters is shown by the highlighted red box and
reflects the similarity of the parameter trails (II).
The link between the parameter and task domain is
realised by the connection between the confidence
profile plot and the Gantt chart. As both plots share the
same X-axis (the duration of the design project),
comparisons are possible between the two domains.
Using both plots, it is possible to determine which tasks
affect which parameters and which parameters are
necessary in order to execute a task. It can also be seen
how much parameter confidence a task contributes by
examining the growth in confidence gained as different
tasks complete. This can yield an alternative perspective
on the project and give insights into project behaviour
that cannot be easily obtained by examining
representations of a single domain.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

In this example, the failure of the task ‘Perform
Design FMEA’ - indicated by the red bar in the Gantt
chart – results in a confidence drop of the ‘Product
Specification Maturity’. This failure drives rework of
task ‘Create Initial Parts List’ (III).
This information can then be used in the two DSMs
in order to gain further insights into the connectivity of
both the activities and parameters. For example, as the
parameters ‘Product Specification Maturity’ and the
‘Technical Confidence’ are strongly connected (which
can be seen from the parameter DSM), a task failure in
which affects either of these parameters is likely to have
indirect implications for the other. Thus, there is a likely
dependency between the task ‘Perform Design FMEA’
and the parameter ‘Technical Confidence’ which is
hidden in each individual representation and can only be
observed through the use of multiple views.

4. Conclusions
Understanding design connectivity is a major
challenge in industry and improved visualisations are
required to overcome the associated problems.
This
research
considered
how
different
visualisations can be used to represent information
associated with design processes, highlighting the merits
and limitations of each approach. We presented a set of
visual representations which simultaneously depict
product and process information – such representations
are particularly topical in light of industrial challenges in
performing product-process trade-offs. We described one
example, where such an analysis is useful in providing
designers with important information about the design
process. The methods described in this paper have shown
to be superior to currently used visualisation techniques
in design and have received positive feedback from

industry who agreed to further push the development of
the software tool, with the ultimate goal of further
analysing existing and future design projects.
The final contribution of this paper was to clarify the
benefits of using multiple views in combination, in the
specific context of design process modelling and
simulation. Future work focuses on more thorough
evaluation of the different visualisation in an industrial
setting.

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank the UK EPSRC for
funding this research and Perkins Engines Company for
support during the industrial case study.

References
[1] Keller, R., C.M. Eckert, and P.J. Clarkson, Matrices or
node-link diagrams: Which visual representation is better
for visualising connectivity models? Information
Visualisation, 2006 (accepted for publication).
[2] Kerzner, H., Project Management: A Systems Approach to
Planning, Scheduling and Controlling. 2006: Wiley.
[3] Malcolm, D.G., J.H. Roseboom, C.E. Clark, and W. Fazar,
Applications of a Technique for Research and
Development Program Evaluation (PERT). Operations
Research, 1959. 7(5): p. 646-669.
[4] Di Battista, G., P. Eades, R. Tamassia, and I.G. Tollis,
Algorithms for drawing graphs: an annotated
bibliography. Computational Geometry: Theory and
Applications, 1994. 4(5): p. 175-198.
[5] Ghoniem, M., J.-D. Fekete, and P. Castagliola, On the
readability of graphs using node-link and matrix-based
representations: a controlled experiment and statistical
analysis. Information Visualization, 2005. 4(2): p. 114135.
[6] Steward, D.V., The Design Structure System: A Method for
Managing the Design of Complex Systems. IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management, 1981. 28(3): p.
71-74.
[7] Browning, T.R., Applying the Design Structure Matrix to
System Decomposition and Integration Problems: A
Review and new Directions. IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management, 2001. 48(3): p. 292-306.
[8] Eppinger, S.D., D.E. Whitney, R.P. Smith, and D.A.
Gebala, A Model-Based Method for Organizing Tasks in
Product Development. Research in Engineering Design,
1994. 6(1): p. 1-13.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[9] Yassine, A., D.E. Whitney, and T. Zambito. Assessment of
Rework Probabilities for Design Structure Matrix (DSM)
Simulation in Product Development Management. in 13th
International Conference on Design Theory and
Methodology (DTM 2001). 2001. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
US.
[10] Cho, S.H. and S.D. Eppinger, A Simulation-Based
Process Model for Managing Complex Design Projects.
IEEE Transactions on engineering management, 2005.
52(3).
[11] Clarkson, P.J., C. Simons, and C.M. Eckert, Predicting
Change Propagation in Complex Design. ASME Journal
of Mechanical Design, 2004. 126(5): p. 765-797.
[12] Keller, R., C.M. Eckert, and P.J. Clarkson. Building
Connectivity Models in Design: Representations and Tools
to Support Cognitive Preferences. in Second International
Conference on Design Computing and Cognition
(DCC'06). 2006 (accepted). Eindhoven, Netherlands.
[13] Clarkson, P.J. and J.R. Hamilton, 'Signposting', A
Parameter-driven Task-based Model of the Design
Process. Research in Engineering Design, 2000. 12(1): p.
18-38.
[14] Melo, A.F. and P.J. Clarkson. Design process planning
using a state-action model. in 13th International
Conference on Engineering Design (ICED 01). 2001.
Glasgow, UK.
[15] O'Donovan, B., C.M. Eckert, and P.J. Clarkson,
Simulating Design Processes to Assist Design Process
Planning, in Proceedings of DETC '04. 2004.
[16] Baldonado, M.Q.W., A. Woodruff, and A. Kuchinsky,
Guidelines for Using Multiple Views in Information
Visualization, in Proceedings of AVI 2000. 2000. p. 110119.
[17] Unwin, A.R., Requirements for Interactive Graphics
Software for Exploratory Data Analysis. Computational
Statistics, 1999. 14: p. 7-22.
[18] Packham, I.S.J. and S.L. Denham. Visualisation Methods
for Supporting the Exploration of High Dimensional
Problem Spaces in Engineering Design. in International
Conference on Coordinated Multiple Views in Exploratory
Visualisation. 2003. London, UK.
[19] Jarratt, T., R. Keller, S. Nair, C.M. Eckert, and P.J.
Clarkson, Visualization Techniques for Product Change
and Product Modelling in Complex Design, in
Diagrammatic Representation and Inference, A.F.
Blackwell, K. Marriott, and A. Shimojima, Editors. 2004.
p. 388-391.

