LIQUID ARCHITECTURES:
MARCOS NOVAK’S TERRITORY OF INFORMATION
Camile A. Silva
Louisiana State University
camileandrade@yahoo.com

Abstract
The contemporary idea for interaction has embraced
new understandings of the content of experience and the
structure of space. New electronic technologies and
advanced digital media have separated realities from the
realm of the body and transformed experiences into
ubiquitous events. The architectural discourse, once
largely a discourse of form and style, has overcome these
limitations and encountered, in territories of information,
the product of a new way of thinking. Marcos Novak
emerges in this context of multimedia as an innovative
creator whose “liquid architectures” represent a break
with the traditional discourse of physicality. His creations

Introduction
The use of multimedia has propelled architectural
discourse beyond its traditional scope of form and style.
Architecture now embraces cyberspace. This allows for a
new reality to occur—a virtual one composed of the mode
of experience, the bodily existence, and the metaphoric
manifestation of codes and symbols. These three aspects
of cyberspace combined create a new structure that
enables new forms of behavior.
Marcos Novak emerges in this context as a pioneering
creator
whose
“liquid
architectures”—conceived
specifically for a virtual domain—bring forward this new
structure. Nevertheless, questions remain about how the
realities of cyberspaces are constructed and how they take
the individual into account.
Digital media, for example, have created a new
territory where reality is tempered by variations of visual
qualities, contents, and social expressions. This territory is
seen as digital technology in the form of data and
information. It is architecture in data space [1].
Architecture now encompasses the actual electronic

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

are meant for a virtual domain, and information is what
structures this new territory for architectural practice.
With respect to Novak’s structures, the approaches to
virtual spaces posited by scholars of new media culture
over the past few decades, either through
phenomenological aspects of the bodily existence and
modes of experience or through the poststructural
metaphoric manifestation of codes and symbols, do not
suffice. While Novak’s work does embrace both
philosophies, it also transcends them by crossbreeding the
reality of the individual with the virtuality of the structure.
Indeed, his architectures require a new concept of space
to come forward, where the manifestation of the mind in
the realm of the body calls for what is to be perceived as
real. Architecture is now characterized by the fusion of
information, art, and technology.

territory where the traversing of images, as information,
takes place. Marcos Novak believes that this world of
exchangeable information should be perceived
sensorially, and that the act of creating electronic territory
and involving the viewer in it as a physical entity
presupposes new art and architecture practices.
Cyberspace thus materializes a new virtual reality that
constitutes new forms of human experience.
Yet, how does one approach this new reality? Why is
it important to launch into new architectural practices? To
date, philosophers and scholars of new media have
approached virtual reality either through aspects of
phenomenology or through poststructuralism. With
respect to Novak’s work, however, these separate
approaches do not individually suffice. Based on the
emergence of cyberspace as a space that introduces us to
new realities of experience and communication, we must
reconsider both schools of thought and recognize that
qualities from each must be combined to decipher these
new territories. The metaphoric manifestations of codes
and symbols inciting new forms of human experience, as
identified in Novak’s work, shows how both philosophies

may come together and thus, instigate the formation of a
new school of thought.

The Philosophical Foundations
In the age of virtual reality, the corporeality of the
body is as important as the experience of space. In
cyberspace, one’s self-understanding increases as one
deepens one’s understanding of computer interaction.
Video artist Bill Viola refers to a world of “idea space,” a
nonlinear information matrix whose only limitation to its
spatial organization is human imagination [2]. This “idea
space” can easily be compared to cyberspace, since both
imply the existence of some sort of place, a limitless
place, characterized by its own architecture and structure
known as data space. Data space is then seen as a territory
of information where codes and symbols entered into a
computer’s memory create a set of parameters that
becomes a defining ground or structure. Such matrices of
structure as non-linear arrays of information represent one
aspect of poststructuralism useful for analyzing the work
of Novak.
Moreover, the exploration of these territories—the
traveling in data space—is what transforms the act of
viewing into an experience, a sensory experience [3].
Therefore, what limits space is not its physical boundaries,
but one’s sensing capabilities. Because phenomenology
deals with such sensory experiences, it may also be used
as a tool for investigating Novak’s structures.

Entering the World of Marcos Novak
Marcos Novak considers himself a “transarchitect.”
He defines “transarchitecture” as the intersection of
information, in the form of algorithms, and the material
world, as robotic prototypes [4]. This can be interpreted as
the intermingling of architecture and media, or of design
and computer/machine. It is through this interaction
between human and computer that the integration between
forms and interdisciplinary strategies takes place.
Consequently, Novak’s use of nonlinear information and
speculative philosophy can be analyzed in the context of
multimedia, since multimedia represents the combination
of different means of delivering information. Katherine
Hayles, Marshall McLuhan, Roy Ascott, William Gibson,
and Marcos Novak himself are examples of theorists who
think of multimedia as tools for manipulating information
and creating new experiences.

The Context of Multimedia
In considering the intermingling of architecture and
media, Katherine Hayles emerges as a key theorist. She
identifies, in the history of cybernetics, the union of

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

humans and the intelligent machine [5]. She also suggests
that history presents a shift from a human essence to a
posthuman one, and she describes the latter as “an
informational-material entity paralleled and reinforced by
a corresponding reinterpretation of deep structures of the
physical world” [6]. Thus, the idea of the posthuman calls
for a computational universe, where everything is code.
Information, control, and communication operate together
with cybernetics in order to bring the organic, as human,
and the mechanical, as computer, to a synthesis [7]. In a
way, this synthesis represents an attempt to embrace a full
range of human experience.
In the mid-1960s, Marshall McLuhan presented the
idea that electronic media would eventually transform the
nature of human beings. He believed that we, as humans,
define ourselves through technology and that we make
this technology an extension of ourselves. He suggested
that medium would then represent one’s extended body in
space [8]. Roy Ascott, on the other hand, pointed out that
the interaction between human and computer would
eventually result in a profound influence in artmaking,
since it would demand collaborative and interactive
modes of experience [9].
In modern information theory, the informational
function of synthesis—the one that unifies information,
control, and communication—suggests the probability of
eliminating dimensions, materiality, and necessary
connections with meaning [10]. Information becomes
more important than the materiality of things. In his 1984
novel Neuromancer, William Gibson introduces the new
term cyberspace to describe environments materialized by
a graphic representation of data abstracted from the
networking of computers. According to Gibson,
cyberspace is to be inhabited virtually. His notion of
inhabitable or immersive terrain is a fluid architectural
space that can be expanded endlessly through a kind of
discontinuous flood of images [11]. Hence, Novak’s use
of algorithms not only illustrates the importance of
informational function, but also proposes that spaces
become programmable and environments become fluid.
Ultimately, Novak’s “liquid architectures in
cyberspace” imply a shift in the notion of space in order
to include new attitudes toward the organization of
information. The built-in architectural forms, or “fluid
environments,” are intended to be responsive to viewers.
Multimedia is thus identified as the most complete use of
a computer’s potential for an individual’s experiences.

Algorithms: Tools for Creation
Novak’s compositions are essentially created by a
generic algorithm, followed by processes of
superimposition, masking, filtering, and merging of
scanned data in order to acquire new variations of images.
These compositions are subsequently mapped into a

three-dimensional one and launched into cyberspace,
resulting in “liquid architectures.” His “liquid
architectures” are then revealed in two algorithmic
compositions: one with variations of information and
another as a three-dimensional shape. In different times
and spaces, “liquid architectures” present new variations
[12].
However, these variations are not possible without
one’s immersion into the same cyberspace of “liquid
architectures.” “Dancing With the Virtual Dervish: Worlds
in Progress,” a multimedia cyberspace project created at
the Banff Center For The Arts in 1991, was the first
example of a new virtual space created through the
premises of liquid architecture. The challenge was to join
inner and outer worlds, moving into and out of virtual
space. With this project, Novak became the first architect
to design architecture to be experienced specifically by
immersion [13].
Approximately ten years after the creation of
“Dancing With the Virtual Dervish,” Marcos Novak, in
collaboration with the Los Angeles-based new media artist
Marcos Lutyens, created “Eduction: The Alien Within.” In
this project, the viewer is brought into a deep state of
“hypnotic trance” and partially introduced into a navigable
cyberspace through an inversion of vectors, an “e-version”
of the virtual into the real [14]. The viewer’s immersion,
complemented by his/her external control of algorithms,
establishes a set of transformations that suggests liquidity.

Three Conceptions of Virtual Spaces
Novak’s attempt to assign fluid ideas to architecture
was subtly described in an interview with Alessandro
Ludovico in 2001. In the interview, Novak talks about
three conceptions of virtual spaces: the “Platonic Ideal,”
which has to do with the development of consciousness
through
formalizing
perception
and
stabilizing
experiences; the “idea space,” which is a space where the
only limitation is one’s imagination and memory; and,
finally, the technologically constructed information space,
where the production of information results from the
involvement, interaction, and interplay of viewer and
space [15,16].
In spite of this context, cyberspace emerges as
nothing more than an extension of our mental space. It is
an extension of our consciousness [17]. Viewing becomes
experience, and experience takes place in a system of
communication. To think of this system is to enter into the
context of perception, where the motion of liquid
architectures is defined by one’s awareness. In cyberspace
reality, perception depends a great deal upon tactile
sensations, not simply visual ones. In this sense,
cyberspace is physical. The act of consciousness becomes
the act of handling this world of information.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

To Novak, cyberspace happens in one’s mind. It is a
laboratory for the production of one’s visions, where the
manifestation of the mind in the realm of the body is an
attempt to escape the confines of a limiting reality [18].
Its architecture is designed by algorithmic principles.
Form is merely a consequence of how its territory of
principles is perceived by the viewer. As a result, space
and use become variables. Information is variable and
dependent upon the involvement of the viewer. After all,
one’s involvement is what generates information. And
new involvement characterizes new behavior.

The Evidences of Postmodern Philosophy
One important aspect of Novak’s work is that his
architectural approach to cyberspace is mainly about new
aesthetic forms that enable new forms of action. With
respect to his creations, his approach to art and space, in
terms of new forms of action, may be viewed
phenomenologically, while the search for new aesthetic
forms may be viewed poststructurally. In an attempt to
find philosophical reasoning for Novak’s approach to
cyberspace, aspects of both postmodern schools of
thought must be considered.

The Phenomenologists
One can easily affirm that phenomenology is about
the actual content of lived experience, or the experience
belonging to consciousness [19]. Martin Heidegger, for
instance, used the phenomenon of everydayness to state
that one is not a spectator in the world, but rather one is
oneself in the world. His concept introduced the being
nature of beings. To him, the analysis of human behavior
should begin with experience. One must think of how one
perceives a virtual environment, how one acts in this
virtual world, and how one is oneself in this very new
world. Cyberspace, thus, should be intelligible through its
context and through one’s participation.
Heidegger also believed that the experience of space
emerges out of the experience of place itself [20]. Place is
defined by its locality, while space has to do with the
individual’s phenomenological awareness [21]. As a
result, space is not distinguished by its various places, but
by one’s sense of “being.”
On the other hand, computer networks and
subsequent technologies seem to eliminate the need for
physical presence and introduce the reality of
telepresence, since one experiences a distant location as
though it were close up. The act of consciousness, in the
sense of “being,” is what ends up directing one’s
existence in a cybernetic world. One’s physical reality is
surpassed by the achievement of perceptual and
phenomenal realities [22]. For that reason, the attributes

of cyberspace are, to a certain extent, also a manner of
being-in-the-world, of perceiving this world. Sensing
becomes a way of coexisting in cyberspace.
Another important phenomenologist was Maurice
Merleau-Ponty, who, contrary to Heidegger, was
interested in the spatiality of the body and in its mobility.
Merleau-Ponty believed that experience is existential
because the body engages in a sensory investigation [23].
The idea of oneness is established as if all sensory
properties constituted one. What his phenomenology of
perception does is restrict the use of space to a world of
sensory experience. In his 1995 book Art of the Motor,
Paul Virilio refers to Merleau-Ponty’s idea of real
environments being influenced by networks, by the
possibility of reconditioning the real world by a virtual
reality. Even though simulated, this reality represents a
new dimension to the normal dimensions of human
activity [24]. This new dimension is now informational.
According to Novak, being inside a territory of
information means that one’s entire body is immersed
[25]. New aspects of physicality and tactility are then
experienced through what he calls “dis/embodiment” [26].
It is important to clarify that in informational media, this
term stands for an alternative state of embodiment.
Without the slash, disembodiment represents dissolution,
whereas with a slash, it means change, transformation
[27].

The Poststructuralists
In postmodern philosophy, some scholars characterize
poststructuralism separate from postmodernism. However,
since poststructuralism is also influential in re-examining
the basics of knowledge and their relationship to
discourse, it presents itself as an interrelated field of
postmodernism. Deconstructivism, for instance, is
considered a poststructuralist approach to postmodern
philosophy. In literature, it represents an important tool for
exploring allusions to text with attention to metaphors and
figures of speech [28]. In cyberspace, these metaphorical
allusions are an unavoidable aspect of the language used
in explorations of space. The lack of materiality in this
territory of information is occupied by symbols, by
metaphors [29].
In a way, the work of Novak reflects this process of
deconstructivism in cyberspace. Novak uses algorithms as
processes of creating metaphors with which to design
liquid architectures. The use of metaphors not only
disrupts the linear process of design, but also suggests the
deconstruction of the limits of cyberspace. Liquidity
becomes the metaphor for this space of dismantling limits.
Novak describes the use of algorithms in experimenting
with architectural compositions as follows: “Using my
interpretation of Dawkins, Shannon’s information theory,
(...) I wrote such an algorithm, first for two dimensional

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

designs, then for three. A population of undifferentiated
forms would undergo random mutation, be tested against
an information-theoretic measure of beauty, which would
be its fitness function, and go on to reproduce or not
depending on whether the information content of each
individual and of the entire system was increased or not.
This was repeated for tens of thousands of cycles.
Amazingly, the results came back as recognizable,
elegant, even beautiful compositions. As far as I know,
these were the first such experiments in architecture”
[30].
Michael Benedikt affirms that experiments as such,
where spaces are perceived as objects of information, are
meant to be read [31]. Consequently, architecture deflects
from being an object of physical attractiveness and visual
qualities [32]. It becomes an object assimilated through
the sending of information [33]. Architecture is then
conceived in a non-linear process of design, transforming
cyberspace into a disconnected territory.
Another way of analyzing Novak’s work is through
the presence of the body in cyberspace, where one’s
understanding of territory automatically undergoes
fundamental changes. Simon Penny, for example,
considers it an oversimplification to claim that the body is
not present in virtual reality [34]. It is almost inevitable to
assume that Penny sees, in virtual reality technology, a
replacement of the body with a body image. Now, the
possibility of being at any place at any time is concrete; it
is “real.” The physical movement through space is also
replaced by image and information. The new technologies
have enabled the disappearance of distances and duration
by sending images across the world in real time.
So, if one thinks of cyberspace as a new space of
information, one must consider language as its form of
manifestation. Architecture becomes informational; it
becomes an algorithmic construction. The metaphor of
cyberspace is a virtual territory that only exists following
a pre-existing code of interconnectivity, that is, a preexisting group of images set up in a non-linear structure
of communication. This structure is thus a territory of
information, where spatial configurations are constantly
changing.

Conclusion
The work of Marcos Novak takes the individual into
a cybernetic structure where humans and intelligent
machines are united. Information is what enables this
crossbreeding between the reality of the individual and
the virtuality of the structure. His work, then, tries to
define the content of experience in this world.
With the outset of information in cyberspace, one
finds infinite possibilities of being anywhere at any time
through one’s own body image. Image and information
are what ultimately travel through space. However, it is

one’s senses that control this traveling of image and
information. A junction and disjunction of images,
metaphors, and simulations, all contributing to the
dismantling of limits, form this territory of ubiquitous
experience. It is upon this dematerialization that
architecture becomes liquid.
Novak’s “liquid architectures” represent both the
space of ubiquitous experience and the space of
dismantled limits. Therefore, the philosophical basis
necessary to decipher Novak’s work does not lie in
phenomenology or poststructuralism alone, but rather in
the combination of the phenomenological aspects of
perceptual and sensorial experiences and in the
poststructural characteristics of the use of metaphors in
creating the space. This merging of philosophies calls for
a new school of thought, one that fully embraces the
reality of new experiences in a virtual world.

The “Visionary Architecture”
The modernist utopia was a fantastic view of an ideal
world launched by the use of new technologies. Novak
also uses new technologies, or multimedia, to create a new
world, a new reality. His own metaphor for this process of
creating realities is “worldmaking” [35]. The difference
though, between the modernist utopia and Novak’s
“worldmaking,” is that the first relies on visual and
compositional aspects, whereas Novak’s creations
establish new ways of perceiving space. Virtual reality
then functions as a medium into those created realities and
so represents a step closer to a social world where the
symbolic and the real merge. Marshall McLuhan stated:
“Rapidly, we approach the final phase of the extensions of
man, when the creative process of knowing will be
collectively and corporately extended to the whole of
human society, much as we have already extended our
senses and our nerves by the various media” [36]. He
essentially suggested that our responsibility, as social
beings, extends to a global level rather than to ourselves
alone. Therefore, one can assume that, after information
technology, we have become aware of our actions on a
global scale, just as we are in our own limited physical
realm. However, Novak seems to have been restraining his
creations to manifestations of one’s mind in the realm of
his/her own body. In this sense, his creations are still very
experimental and have not yet been conceived for an
extended medium.
Consequently, one must conclude that Novak’s
architectures are essentially an attempt to escape the
confines of a limiting reality, where the joining of mind
and body dictates what is to be perceived as real. This is
what he calls “visionary architecture” [37]. It means
simply that he sees the territory of information as a virtual
laboratory, where the production of dematerialized
architecture in the form of principles, or algorithms,

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

represents his new architectural vision. As ideological as
such a vision sounds, it does bring a new purpose to
architecture. Architecture becomes informational.

References
[1] Hani Rashid, “Guggenheim Virtual Museum,” Domus 822
(January 2000): 26-31.
[2] Bill Viola, “Will There Be Condominiums in Data Space?”
Multimedia: From Wagner to Virtual Reality, eds. Randall
Packer and Ken Jordan (New York: W.W. Norton & Company,
2001), 287-98.
[3] Paul Virilio, The Art of the Motor (Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 1995), 133-56.
[4] Marcos Novak, “transArchitectures,” Telepolis: Magazin
Der Netzkultur, ed. Heise Zeitschriften Verlag (9/12/1996), at
CENTRIFUGE website:
http://www.heise.de/tp/r4/artikel/6/6069/2.html, accessed in
10/7/2004.
[5] Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual
Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics (Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press, 1999) 2.
[6] Hayles, 11.
[7] Hayles, 8.
[8] Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions
of Man (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1994), 1-4.
[9] Roy Ascott, “Behaviourist Art and the Cybernetic Vision,”
Multimedia: From Wagner to Virtual Reality, eds. Randall
Packer and Ken Jordan (New York: W.W. Norton & Company,
2001) 95-103.
[10] Hayles, 18.
[11] Packer and Jordan, xiii-xxxi. See also William Gibson,
Neuromancer: Remembering Tomorrow (New York: Ace
Books, 1984).
[12] Marcos Novak, “Liquid Architectures of Cyberspace,”
Cyberspace: First Steps, ed. Michael Benedikt (Cambridge: The
MIT Press, 1992), 225-54.
[13] Marcos Novak, “Transmitting Architecture: The
Transphysical City,” eds. Arthur and Marilouise Kroker
(11/29/1996), at CTheory.net electronic magazine:
http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=76, accessed
10/10/2004.
[14] Marialuisa Palumbo, “Eduction: Design by Algorithm”
Extended Play (12/28/2001), at Arch’it electronic magazine:
http://architettura.supereva.it/extended/20011228/index.htm,
accessed 11/5/2004.

[15] Marcos Novak, “Marcos Novak Interview,” interview by
Alessandro Ludovico (4/2001), at Neural.it electronic magazine:
http://www.neural.it/english/marcosnovak.htm, accessed
10/1/2004.

[26] Novak, “Architects or Worldbuilder?: Interview with
Marcos Novak.”
[27] Novak, “Architects or Worldbuilder?: Interview with
Marcos Novak.”

[16] Viola, 287-98.
[28] Thompson, 438.
[17] Peter Anders, “Anthropic Cyberspace: Defining Electronic
Space from First Principles,” LEONARDO 34 n.5 (Cambridge:
The MIT Press, 2001): 409-16.

[29] Anders, 409-16.

[18] Novak, “Liquid Architectures of Cyberspace,” 225-54.

[30] Marcos Novak, “CV Essay,” at CENTRIFUGE website:
http://www.mat.ucsb.edu/~marcos/Centrifuge_Site/MainFrameS
et.html, accessed 10/10/2004.

[19] James M. Thompson, ed., “Existentialism and
Phenomenology,” Twentieth-Century Theories of Art (Ontario:
Carleton University Press, 1995), 371-3.

[31] Benedikt, 1-25.

[20] Martin Heidegger, “Art and Space,” Rethinking
Architecture: A Reader in Cultural Theory, ed. Neil Leach (New
York: Routledge, 1997), 121-4.
[21] Heidegger, “Art and Space.”
[22] Michael Benedikt, ed., introduction to Cyberspace: First
Steps (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1992), 1-25.
[23] Samantha Longoni, “A Location Called Cyberspace,” in
The Body Is Back: Communication in Cyberspace (Master’s
Thesis, Media Communication Studies Program, 1997):
http://www.newschool.edu/mediastudies/sam/ch1b.html,
accessed 10/17/2004.

[32] Paul Virilio, The Aesthetics of Disappearance (France:
Semiotext(e), 1991), 76.
[33] Virilio, The Aesthetics of Disappearance, 101.
[34] Simon Penny, ed., “Consumer Culture and the
Technological Imperative: The Artist in Dataspace,” Critical
Issues in Electronic Media (New York: State University of New
York Press, 1995), 47-73.
[35] Marcos Novak, “TransTerraForm: Liquid Architectures and
the Loss of Inscription,” at KR Knowbotic Research website:
http://www.krcf.org/krcfhome/PRINT/nonlocated/nlonline/non
Marcos.html, accessed 10/28/2004.
[36] McLuhan, 1-4.

[24] Virilio, The Art of the Motor, 138.
[37] Novak, “Liquid Architectures of Cyberspace,” 225-54.
[25] Marcos Novak, “Architects or Worldbuilder?: Interview
with Marcos Novak,” interview by Knut Mork, The Write Stuff
Interviews (1995), at ALTX Online Network:
http://www.altx.com/int2/marcos.novak.html, accessed
10/1/2004.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

