GPU Rendering of the Thin Film on Paints with Full Spectrum
ˇ
Roman Durikoviˇ
c∗
University of Saint Cyril and Metod, Trnava, Slovakia.
Ryou Kimura
Software Department, The University of Aizu, Japan

Abstract
Spectrum-based rendering uses spectral distributions
instead of just three RGB colors for representation of
light sources and surface properties in rendering equation.
Since, spectrum has a value at every visible wavelength, the
spectrum-based rendering gives much accurate color computation compared to RGB-based rendering and it give us
opportunity to simulate wavelength dependent phenomena
and effects caused by spectrum difference. We introduce
a novel framework for spectrum-based rendering on GPU
(Graphics Processing Unit) to compute local illumination.
On this framework, the Phong reflectance model is implemented employing the spectral power distribution of light
source and the spectral reflectance of surface simulating
the color rendition of light sources and metamerism of surfaces. Multilayered thin film interference effects can also be
handled within this framework with interactive speeds. Additionally, we propose the area light source defined by the
spectral cube environment map and show the method for
conversion of RGB environment map into a spectral one.

1

Introduction

Color-based and spectrum-based renderings are the
frameworks to simulate the light transport within the scene
given by rendering equation. Color-based rendering uses
three colors red, green, and blue (RGB) to calculate the incoming radiance at camera point. Light sources and surface
reflectance are represented by RGB instead of wavelength.
It is the most popular framework for image synthesis.
The RGB-based rendering methods have several limitations, for example, the color rendition of light sources and
metamerism of surfaces caused by the difference in spectrum can not be handled by RGB-based rendering.
∗ e-mail: roman.durikovic@fmph.uniba.sk. Also with Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics, Comenius University, Slovakia

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Spectrum-based rendering uses spectral power distributions (SPDs) instead of RGB colors. This approach can
support wavelength dependent effects by using intensities at
each wavelength. The visible area of wavelength distributions of electromagnetic waves is from 380 nm to 780 nm.
Sampling points’ intervals from 1 nm to 5 nm will give the
sufficient result. The strength of spectrum-based rendering
is not only the simulation of wavelength dependent effects
but also better color computation in the reflectance function.
Spectrum-based rendering can also simulate wavelength dependent phenomena such as interference, dispersion, and
diffraction. These effects require the calculation of amplitude and phase.
We introduce a novel framework for spectrum-based rendering on GPU (Graphics Processing Unit) to compute local illumination. Multilayered thin film interference effects,
rendition of light sources and metamerism of surfaces can
be handled within this framework with interactive speeds.
We propose also the area light source defined by the spectral
cube environment map and show the method for conversion
of RGB environment map into a spectral one.
The framework is implemented on a common graphics
card. The rendering is performed interactively by processing the spectral data on the fragment processor of GPU utilizing its parallelism.

1.1

Related Work

The spectrum-based rendering framework [6] consists
of the part of reflectance function calculation and the color
computation part. The reflectance function calculates the
reflected wavelength distribution from the spectral power
distribution (SPD) of light source. The color computation
derives a color displayed on a monitor from a wavelength
distribution incoming to the camera.
A light source has a SPD which is power distribution in
wavelength of visible area. A SPD is measured by a spectrometer which measures irradiance or photon irradiance in
units of W /m2 and photons/m2 , respectively.

CIE standard illuminants (see Figure 1) are standard
light sources. Illuminant named A has relative SPD of a
tungsten filament whose temperature is approximately 2856
K. Illuminant D65 has relative SPD of average daylight with
a color temperature of approximately 6500 K. Some types
of light sources like fluorescent, mercury, and metal halide
lamps have spikes in their SPDs.

where Ir (λ ) is the intensity of the reflected light, Ii (λ ) is the
intensity of the incident light. Coefficients kd and ks control
the ratio of the diffuse and specular reflection, respectively.
Rd (λ ) is the spectral reflectance of the diffuse component of
→
−
→
− →
−
→
−
the surface, N is unit surface normal vector. L , R , and V
are unit vectors in the direction of a light, the reflection of a
light, and a camera, respectively. n controls the shininess of
the surface.
Colored plastic is made of transparent plastic and color
pigment. The specular and diffuse components of Phong
model correspond to the reflection of the transparent plastic
surface and color of the pigment, respectively. Therefore,
Rd (λ ) is considered as the spectral reflectance of pigment
in plastic (see Figure 9).

2.2

Figure 1. CIE standard illuminants.
The interference effect (or more precisely, amplitude
splitting interference) is an optical effect observed in natural objects such as seashells and insects. Industrial products
such as optical lens also demonstrate this effect. Light interference is caused by overlapping of light waves in thin
films. When light enters a thin film, light waves are reflected on two sides of the film, if the light waves overlap,
the energy of specific wavelengths are weakened. The implemented models simulating the interference effect caused
by single or multiple thin film layers are introduced is [4].
The wavelength dependent effects depend on energy, amplitude, and phase at each wavelength [3].

2

Reflectance Function

Phong Reﬂectance Model

The Phong reflectance model [1] is a phenomenological
reflectance model including diffuse and specular reflection.
Though the Phong model is not physically-based, it can create BRDFs similar to plastic surfaces:
→
− →
−
→
− →
−
Ir (λ ) = Ii (λ ) kd Rd (λ )( N · L ) + ks ( R · V )n ,

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Fresnel formulae give ratios of amplitudes of incoming
light to reflected and transmitted light for parallel and perpendicular wave
⎧
nt cos θi − ni cos θt
⎪
r =
⎪
⎪
⎪
nt cos θi + ni cos θt
⎪
⎪
n cos θi − nt cos θt
⎪
⎪
⎨ r⊥ = i
ni cos θi + nt cos θt ,
(2)
2ni cos θi
⎪
⎪
t
=
⎪
⎪
nt cos θi + ni cos θt
⎪
⎪
⎪
2ni cos θi
⎪
⎩ t⊥ =
ni cos θi + nt cos θt
where r and r⊥ are ratios of amplitudes of reflected electric field vectors parallel and perpendicular to the plane of
incidence, respectively. t and t⊥ are ratios of amplitudes
of transmitted electric field vectors parallel and perpendicular to the plane of incidence, respectively. Note that, the
reflected and transmitted light is polarized in Eq. 2.
Because the interference effect is a wavelength dependent effect, light is described with electromagnetic wave
with amplitude Φ0 :
Φ (z,t) = Φ0 exp i (kz − ω t) ,

Light reflection depends on surface properties such as refractive index, reflectance, absorbance, and transmittance.
A spectral reflectance is ratio of energies of light reflection
at each wavelength. Common spectral reflectances are collected in a Macbeth color chart.

2.1

Interference Reﬂectance

(1)

(3)

where z is the location, t is the time, k is the wave vector,
and ω is the angular frequency.
If incoming light at the incident point is defined as
Φi exp (−iω t), reflected light will be r0,1 Φi exp i (δ − ω t),
were r0,1 is the amplitude reflectance for the light incidence
from medium 0 to medium 1, and δ is the phase difference
along the reflected direction (see Figure 2).
The relation between reflected light Φr exp i (δ − ω t) and
incident light Φi exp i (δ − ω t) is described by the following
geometric series
Φr exp i (δ − ω t) = {r0,1 + [(t0,1t1,0 ) r1,2 exp iγ ]
× 1 + (r1,2 r1,0 ) exp iγ + (r1,2 r1,0 )2 exp i2γ + · · ·

3

W UW&L
W U U UW&L

U& L

&L

Q
Medium 0

Q

Medium 1

Q

Medium 2

W & L

G
Q

Q

W U&L

Figure 2. Multiple reflection on single layer
surface.

×Φi exp i (δ − ω t) ,
2π
γ=
Δ,
λ
Δ = 2n1 d1 cos θ1 ,

(t0,1t1,0 ) r1,2 exp iγ
1 − (r1,2 r1,0 ) exp iγ

(5)

3.1

Φi .

−r1,0 + r1,2 exp iγ
Φr
=
.
Φi
1 − (r1,2 r1,0 ) exp iγ

The energy reflectance of surface with a thin film layer is
then given by
R0,2 = |r0,2 |2 .

(7)

Light transmitting a thin film is also influenced by the interference effect and thus energy transmittance T0,2 derived
from energy conservation law is :

At the beginning of spectrum-based rendering, all resources must be set up. All data represented in spectral distribution, such as color matching functions, light sources,
surface reflectance, are stored as 1D arrays in floating point
textures with 32-bit per component. SPD data sampled at
intervals greater that 5 nm may cause color shifts, so high
precision data should be used for the accurate simulation of
optical effects such as metamerism, and color rendition using spiky light sources. Visible wavelengths are from 380
nm to 719 nm interval, sampling it with 1 nm interval we
get 340 spectral data points .
This large data can not be temporarily stored with a single pass operation and the fragment processor does not have
the ability to write fragment data in memory with arbitrary
addresses. Fortunately, random access memory reads are
possible through texture fetching, but output addresses are
fixed to specific pixels [2].
The local illumination model, proposed here consists of
two parts, the computation of spectral reflectance function
and the RGB color computation from SPD, refer to Figure 3.
3.1.1

T0,2 = 1 − R0,2 .

(8)

Finally, the light intensity exiting a surface is given by
Ir (λ ) = Ii (λ )R0,2 (λ ) + It (λ )T0,2 (λ ),

(9)

where Ii (λ ) is the intensity of incident light, It (λ ) is the
spectral reflecance of the substrat or the intensity of light
from the backside of transparent surface.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Spectrum-based Rendering on the
Fragment Processor

(6)

Taking into account Eq. 2 the entire ratio of the amplitude
of reflected to incoming light is rewritten to
r0,2 =

We implemented spectrum-based rendering on the fragment processor because of more flexibility for lighting and
fast texture fetch. Temporary registers, constant registers,
and texture fetch units on the fragment processor are used
to simulate reflectance functions. Temporary registers are
readable and writable while constant registers and texture
units are read-only. The fragment processor reads a fragment from input registers and writes a computed fragment
to output registers. Arithmetic instructions are executed
with SIMD (Single Instruction Multiple Data). Modern
fragment processors have the 128-bit 4-way SIMD architecture, so they can use 32-bit floating point. Our shader
programs are written in Cg [5] and GeForce 6800 GT is a
GPU used for our implementation.

(4)

where ri, j and ti, j are the amplitude reflectance and transmittance for the light incidence from medium i to medium
j from Eq. 2, γ is the phase difference, and Δ is the optical path difference. The geometric series in Eq. 4 can be
simplified to
Φr = r0,1 +

Proposed Implementation on GPU

Spectral Data Representation

In order to utilize the parallelism of the fragment processor
we represent the spectral data by uniform discrete samples
stored in an array.
The algorithm loops through all sampling points of spectrum stored in tristimulus (XYZ) values, evaluates the surface reflectance function and calculates the conversion integral from SPD to XYZ color representation (see Figure
4).

[

Reﬂectance
function

\

s

Light source

Reﬂected light

Surface properties

Surface structure

;
<



]

=

Color matching
function

Spectral
reﬂectance

Tristimulus value

¨ ;<= · ¨ ; ·  ¨ 5 · 
¸ ©  ¸  ©  ¸ 
© 
©  WR ¸ © < ¸  © *¸ 
¸  ª 
© % ¹ 
¸ 
© = ¹ 
¸ ª 
© 5*%¹ 
ª 

Figure 3. Proposed spectrum-based rendering algorithm on GPU.

On the fragment processor, 4 sampling points are loaded
from textures, stored in temporary registers, and used as 4way vectors in sequential order. By loading the quadruples
of sampled data we assume that values at each wavelength
are independent. This is true for many optical effects except for fluorescence and phosphorescence. Fluorescence is
the phenomenon in which light energy at a wavelength is
absorbed on a surface and then emission occurs at longer
wavelengths therefore our algorithm can not simulate this
effect.
1D arrays of spectral data in textures

display. The transformation is based on the human visual
system, consisting of two steps. First, the reflected light
is multiplied by color matching functions, and integrated.
Finally, tristimulus value XYZ is transformed to RGB color
space.
CIE XYZ color matching functions are often used in industry instead of the CIE RGB model because CIE XYZ
color matching functions, x(λ ), y(λ ), z(λ ), do not have negative ranges. Additionally, CIE XYZ color matching functions can be transformed to CIE RGB color matching functions by the linear transformation matrix. The y component
of CIE XYZ is the photopic visibility function which determines the brightness of light. It has the maximal value at
555 nm, therefore greenish yellow is the brightest color per
energy, (see Figure 5).
For given reflected SPD, I(λ ), the XYZ tristimulus values are derived by three integrals:
⎧
λmax
⎪
⎪
X =k
I(λ )x(λ )d λ
⎪
⎪
⎪
λmin
⎪
⎨
λmax
(10)
Y =k
I(λ )y(λ )d λ .
⎪
λmin
⎪
⎪
λmax
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎩ Z=k
I(λ )z(λ )d λ
λmin

The scaling constant, k, is selected to set Y = 100 at the
brightest point [1]:
k=

Input fragments

100
λmax

Fragment program
Light source

6DPSOHYDOXHV

λmin

Parameters

/RRSWKURXJK
DOOVDPSOLQJSRLQWV
Spectral reﬂectance

Reﬂectance
function
Additional
spectral data

s
[

s

Riemann
sum

s

,

(11)

S(λ )y(λ )d λ

where S(λ ) is the SPD of a light source.
Finally, XYZ values are transformed to RGB values.
Color spaces for LCD and CRT displays consist of displayspecific and standardized color spaces defined on a productby-product basis. There are standardized color spaces like
sRGB and Adobe RGB that are device-independent and

$GG

\

]

X

Y

Z

R

G

B

Color matching
function

Output fragments

Figure 4. Spectrum-based rendering diagram
on GPU.

3.1.2

Color Computation from SPD

After incident rays to the camera are calculated, the SPDs
along those rays are transformed to RGB color space of a

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 5. CIE XYZ color matching functions.

supported on general LCD and CRT displays. The following is the transformation matrix of XYZ to sRGB:
⎡

⎤ ⎡
R
3.2410
⎣ G ⎦ = ⎣ −0.9692
B
0.0556
3.1.3

−1.5374
1.8760
−0.2040

⎤⎡
⎤
−0.4986
X
0.0416 ⎦ ⎣ Y ⎦ . (12)
1.0570
Z

Integration Methods

Equations 10 and 11 include integration methods of spectral
distributions for fast and accurate transformation of SPD to
RGB color.
There are several methods that require small number of
sampling points and also reduce computation costs while
keeping accuracy. The Riemann integration will be used
despite of large number of uniform sampling intervals required for accurate calculation. We can still obtain the realtime response for complex meshes.

4

Spectral Environment Illumination

Let us consider for a moment the illumination by the
environment, in such case we will need to know the light
SPD that is different for all incoming directions. Simple
approach is to use and environment texture mapping. The
environment map is a cube or spherical texture with real
RGB values mapped on the cube or sphere around the rendered object. In order to have the spectral representation of
environment we need to transform each RGB triplet from
the environment map to a spectral distribution. Unfortunately, a single RGB triplet has infinite number of spectral
distributions also known as metamers. Problem is to find a
plausible metamer for each point in the environment map.
Our transformation method is simple and plausible for
environment maps. A SPD for main light source is decided
from the environment map as follows:

MCCB are the spectral distributions derived from the Macbeth color chart for the red, green and blue color, see Figure ??. The weights wR , wG , wB are determined by the following optimization problem:
For a given main light source with known spectra
SPDmls find the weights wR , wG , wB minimizing the error |RGB − RGBmls |, where RGB is spectral distribution
SPD(1, 1, 1) converted to the RGB color components, and
RGBmls is spectral distribution SPDmls converted to the
RGB color components.

5

Results

We demonstrate the implementation of proposed algorithms in our custom rendering system by using it to compute the real-time visualization of objects with different thin
film thickness. Shown images are captured directly from
computer screen.
Material structure in the first scene consists of chrome
oxide layer with thickness of 270 nm and refractive index
2.7. The substrate layer is a black pigmented plastic with
refractive index 1.45. Figure 6 demonstrates the ball illuminated by the SPD environment map.

Figure 6. Chrome oxide thin film interference.
Rendered ball (left) and material structure
(right).

• If the environment is exterior, main light source will be
the sun or standard light D65.
• For interior illumination, an artificial light such as incandescent or fluorescent lamps will be used.
Every pixel of the environment map occupied by the area
of main illuminator has the SPD of know illuminator. For
example the pixels occupied by the sun have the SPD of
standard sun illuminator. For the remaining pixels the RGB
values are converted to the SPD by the following equation
SPD(R, G, B) = (RwR MCCR + GwG MCCG + BwB MCCB ) SPDmls ,
where R, G, B are the input color components, SPDmls is
the SPD of selected main light source, MCCR , MCCG , and

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 7. Titanium dioxide thin film interference. Rendered transparent ball with film
thicknesses 150 nm (left) and 350 nm (right).

Figure 7 shows the transparent plastic surfaces with the
thin film of Titanium Dioxide. The refractive indices of the

thin film and substrate are 2.3 and 1.45, respectively. The
film thicknesses of left and right images are 150 nm and 350
nm, respectively. Surfaces in Figure 8 have gradual changes

6

Conclusion

In this paper we have presented a novel framework for
high quality real-time spectral rendering on GPUs. By utilizing the parallelism of the fragment processor and effective management of sampled data we obtained the accurate simulation of light wave effects such as color rendition
and interference while simultaneously obtaining a significant performance boost.
Realistic examples of transparent coatings used in paint
industry were simulated at interactive speeds.

Acknowledgments
This research was sponsored by grants from the EU-FP6MC–040681- APCOCOS and VEGA 1/3083/06.
Figure 8. Chrome oxide thin film interference
with increasing thickness from 100 nm to 400
nm.

of film thickness. The film thickness from left to right edge
of cylinders changes from 100 nm to 400 nm, respectively.
The refractive indices of the thin film and substrate are 2.7
and 1.45, respectively. Standard D65 light source is used in
these simulations.
Simulation of color rendition using the orange illuminators D65 illuminator, incandescent lamp and low pressure
sodium lamp demonstrate the effect when different materials look similar under similar illumination conditions, see
Figure 9 bottom left.

Figure 9. Simulation of color rendition using D65 (top row), incandescent lamp (middle
row), and low pressure sodium lamp (bottom
row).

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

References
[1] J. D. Foley, A. van Dam, S. K. Feiner, and J. F. Hughes. Computer Graphics Principles and Practice. Assison Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, Massachusetts, 2nd edition, 1996.
[2] M. J. Harris.
Gpgpu: Beyond graphics.
In Eurographics Tutorial, (Eurographics Annual Conference 2004),
http://developer.nvidia.com/object/gpgpu beyond graphics.html.
Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
[3] E. Hecht. Optics. Addison Wesley Publishing Company,
Reading, Massachusetts, 2nd edition, 1987.
[4] H. Hirayama, K. Kaneda, H. Yamashita, and Y. Monden. An
accurate illumination model for objects coated with multilayer films. In In Proceedings of EUROGRAPHICS 2000
Short Presentations, pages 143–150. Eurographics, Blackwell Publishing, 2000.
[5] nVIDIA co. Cg toolkit users manual a developers guide to
programmable graphics release 1.2. nVIDIA co., 2004.
[6] Y. Sun, F. D. Fracchia, M. S. Drew, and T. W. Calvert. A
spectrally based framework for realistic image synthesis. The
Visual Computer, 17(7):429–444, 2001.

