Tactile Glyphs for Palpation of Relationships
Noritaka Osawa
National Institute of Multimedia Education
2-12 Wakaba, Mihama
Chiba 261-0014 JAPAN
osawa@nime.ac.jp

Abstract
We propose the use of tactile glyphs to represent
abstract information such as hierarchical relationships. A
tactile glyph uses vibro-tactile feedback to the fingers and
palm of the hand. By comparing two tactile glyphs, one
for each hand, one can understand the relationships
between the information that the glyphs represent. The use
of tactile glyph comparison does not require remembering
complex stimulus patterns; it only needs that some simple
rules are learned. Although a limited number of stimuli
can be provided to one hand, techniques for mapping
hierarchical information to a pattern and using a
sequence of tactile feedback enable the representation of
relationships in a large hierarchy. Experimental
evaluations were conducted to clarify the features of the
tactile glyphs. The experimental evaluations suggested
that the tactile glyphs can be used to represent
hierarchical relationships and for palpation of
relationships.

new interface for immersive or somesthetic programming
environments.
In this study, a tactile glyph provided vibro-tactile
feedback to the fingers and palm of the hand using the
CyberTouch systems[7]. In other words, the tactile glyph
delivered vibration to six positions on the hand.
To identify a location in a large hierarchy using a tactile
glyph, the number of simple stimuli that can be delivered
to one hand is insufficient. We can use patterns of strength
variations and time sequences of stimuli to increase their
variation. We previously developed techniques to map a
location in a large hierarchy into a visual glyph and a
sound glyph. These techniques can be applied to tactile
glyphs. However, tactile sense properties have not been
studied from the viewpoint of aiding the understanding of
hierarchical relationships. Moreover, the resolution of
vibro-tactile feedback was expected to be lower than those
of visual and auditory feedback. Therefore, we
investigated the features of tactile feedback.

1. Introduction
Information visualization can use the senses to
represent information. This representation is not limited to
vision, although visual representation is the type most
frequently used. Auditory representation is also quite
common. Tactile representation, however, is not used
widely.
We have been developing a system called Ougi, an
immersive programming system utilizing multimodal
interfaces[13]. Figure 1 shows a snapshot and a screenshot
of the system. We think that the experience in immersive
systems should be enhanced. Tactile feedback can
enhance the experience of learning programming. In
immersive programming systems, tactile glyphs can help
people understand class relationships or type relationships
between objects through grasping and can enhance the
experience of immersive programming. We are planning
to use tactile glyphs for a kind of palpation of objects to
understand hierarchical relationships such as class
relationships in object-oriented programming. That is a

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 1. Photograph and screenshot of the
immersive programming system, Ougi.

2. Related work
As mentioned, we have already proposed and evaluated
2D/3D jigsaw-puzzle-like visual glyphs [11][14] and
sound glyphs [12] for representing hierarchical
relationships, such as class inheritance hierarchies, in an
object-oriented programming language. They will be
briefly described in Section 4.
Haptic feedback has been actively studied in
telerobotics and virtual reality research [1][4][17]. Haptics
involves both kinesthetic movement and tactile perception
and has been used for simulation of physical worlds. For

example, surgery simulation with haptics is used in
medical training [9].
Moreover, haptics has been used to teach nanoscale
sciences through virtual touch sensations [8]. Although
haptics is certainly important for visually impaired
students, we believe that haptic feedback would be useful
to the general public. From the viewpoint of
constructivists in education [2], haptics provides students
with the opportunity to become more fully immersed in
the process of acquiring knowledge and acquire
knowledge in new ways.
Haptics also has been investigated in information
visualization. Hapticon [5] is a haptic icon. It uses a single
degree of freedom (DoF) haptic display. Enriquez and
MacLean[5] believe that a low-DoF interface is
appropriate since they anticipate that haptic icons will be
most useful in simple interfaces. On the other hand, in our
work, we use the CyberTouch systems [7], which features
devices with many degrees of freedom but its mechanism
is simple and easy to implement. We thus think that our
tactile glyphs using multiple simple vibro-tactile feedback
devices are also useful.
Tactons [3] are tactile icons, which are structured,
abstract messages and can be used to communicate
messages non-visually. Tacton construction involves
several factors, such as frequency, the amplitude and
duration of a tactile pulse, rhythm, and location. Hlyphs
(haptic glyphs) have also been proposed in [15], which
describes the design principles and introduces the synoptic
hlyph and cavern hlyph as examples. The main aim of
hlyphs is to represent quantitative and qualitative
information. Hlyphs are similar to tactons and uses a
similar construction. The constructions are different from
that in our work, and our tactile glyphs are presently
intended for use in comparing two glyphs to determine
their relationships.
As mentioned, our tactile glyphs are presented through
both hands and can be compared to determine their
relationships. This is largely different from other studies.
Users do not have to remember a lot of glyph patterns to
determine the relationships in advance; they just need to
compare them. On the other hand, hapticon, tactons, and
hlyphs require remembering haptic patterns or textures
before their use. This suggests the need for a long period
of training.
Moreover, though hapticon, tactons, and hlyphs have
been proposed and discussed, they have not been
evaluated by experiment. On the other hand, we
conducted experiments to evaluate our tactile glyphs.
Various kinds of tactile feedback systems are available.
Force-feedback devices, such as SensAble Technologies'
PHAMToM, are now on the market, and Vibro-tactile
feedback devices, such the CyberTouch system (which
will be briefly described in the following section), can
also be purchased easily. Moreover force-feedback

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

steering wheels and joysticks are used in computer games
featuring racing and flight simulators. Vibro-tactile
feedback stimulators or vibrators are also widely used in
mobile phones and game controllers. Vibro-tactile
feedback stimulators are inexpensive and ready to use.
Vibro-tactile feedback can thus be used in a wide range of
applications.

3. Tactile glyph
Similar to our previous work with visual and sound
glyphs, the tactile glyphs in this study were mainly used to
represent hierarchical constraints. They are neither
intended to show their precise location in the hierarchy,
but they can identify a location and can be used to
determine the hierarchical relationships of them.
We used the CyberTouch system to give tactile
feedback to the hands. CyberTouch is used with a
CyberGlove instrumented glove. It features a small vibrotactile stimulator on each finger and one on the palm. The
strength of the touch sensation is controlled by the
vibrational frequency. When the vibrational frequency is
high, the energy of the touch sensation is also high.
Therefore, high frequency feedback is also called strong
feedback in this paper. The vibrational frequency is
between 0 and 125 Hz and the vibrational amplitude is 1.2
N peak-to-peak at 125 Hz.
Each stimulator can be programmed individually to
vary the strength of the touch sensation. This strength can
be specified by integer values between 0 (no vibration)
and 10 (full strength).
As stated, in our method, both hands were used to
recognize relationships between glyphs. One glyph is
given to the left hand and another to the right. Figure 2
shows CyberTouch systems with CyberGlove for both
hands.

Figure 2: Snapshot of CyberTouch systems for
both hands.

4. Mapping of information to glyphs
As a basis for understanding tactile glyphs, this section
briefly describes the visual and sound glyphs and the
mapping techniques used to alleviate problems in naïve
mapping methods.

4.1. 2D and 3D visual glyphs
We previously proposed the use of 2D glyphs [11] to
represent inheritance relationships in object-oriented
programming. Figure 3 shows an example of 2D glyphs in
a hierarchy. We also previously proposed the idea of using
3D diagrams composed of jigsaw-puzzle-like glyphs to
represent grammatical constraints [14]. These 3D
diagrams use convexo-convex, concave, wire frame, and
hole-shaped 3D glyphs. In this context, “Jigsaw-puzzlelike” is not limited to meaning an exact match between
shapes, although this constraint representation is similar to
matches between the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. The
relationships in a hierarchy can be represented by the
inclusion relationships of glyphs
Regarding the 2D visualization method, a position in a
hierarchy is represented as a closed polygonal glyph. The
naïve recursive mapping method is applicable when the
number of children of each node and the depth of the
hierarchy are small. However, it is not applicable if the
number of children is larger than the number of sides. If
the hierarchy is high (deep), the differences among the
glyphs for positions at the lower ends are so small as to be
indistinguishable. The proposed mapping techniques solve
these problems and can be applied to practical hierarchies.
The ideas of the mapping techniques are simple but
effective.
The following two conditions have to be maintained to
represent hierarchical relationships by inclusion
relationships.
(P-1) Glyphs of children are included in the glyph of
their parent.
(P-2) A node that does not have a hierarchical ancestordescendant relationship with another has a glyph
that does not include the glyph of the other node,
and vice versa.
In the naïve recursive method, one side of a parent
glyph is replaced with one shape. For example, replacing
one side of A with a rectangle generates B in Figure 3,
whereas our method uses many sides and shapes for the
replacement. If the number of children is large, different
shapes can be used: replacing one side of B with a
rectangle generates D, while replacing it with a triangle
produces F. Moreover, the condition (P-1) is maintained
even if more than one side is replaced at the same time.
When a hierarchy is high (deep), sides at a different
recursive level can be used for replacement. For example,
if the naïve recursive method is applied to G in, a side of
the small rectangle is replaced with a shape. However,
replacing one side of the large pentagon with a trapezoid
produces H. These mappings can maintain the condition
(P-2).
Our previous work demonstrated that our techniques
were able to assign unique glyphs to all classes in version
1.2 of Java 2 Standard Edition (J2SE), where the number

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

of direct children of the root class Object was 569, and the
maximum depth was 7. This shows that the proposed
glyph-generation method can be used for practical
hierarchies such as the J2SE class hierarchy (See our
previous work for details).

Figure 3. Example of 2D glyphs in a hierarchy.

4.2. Sound glyph
We have also proposed an auralization method for
representing hierarchical relationships[12]. This method is
used to generate sound passages, called sound glyphs, for
positions in a hierarchy. The relationships in the hierarchy
can be represented by the inclusion relationships of the
sound glyphs.
Sound glyphs are composed on the basis of chords. The
position in a hierarchy controls the time positions (timing),
pitches, and timbres of notes in sound representation.
Figure 4 shows examples of sound glyphs. Similar to
visual glyphs, simple mappings of a position to a chord
have problems such as heavy multiplicity of chords. We
developed a mapping method to alleviate such problems
on the basis of the mapping techniques of visual glyphs
(Details are described in [12]). The idea of the mapping
method for sound glyphs can serve as a basis of a
mapping for tactile glyphs.

Figure 4. Example of sound glyphs in a
hierarchy.

5. Rules of determination of relationships
To simplify the design of glyphs and make it easy to
compare the tactile glyphs with visual and sound glyphs

for the characterization of the tactile ones, we formulated
rules of relationships between tactile glyphs on the basis
of inclusion relationships. This is similar to the design of
the visual and sound glyphs, but it is new. An example of
tactile glyphs in a hierarchy will be given in Section 9.1
based on the result of our experiments.
If stimulus A is stronger than stimulus B, A includes B.
The number of stimulus points is limited, so we use a
stimulus sequence to represent locations in a large
hierarchy. This section describes the stimulus sequence
and the rules for determining relationships.

5.1. Stimulus sequence
In this study, a tactile glyph used a time sequence. This
study used only one-stimulus and two-stimulus glyphs for
simplicity although many-stimulus glyphs can be used. To
clarify the unit of the tactile stimulus, we adopted the
following stimulus sequence. Steps 4 and 5 were done
only for two-stimulus glyphs.
1. All stimulators are activated for 500 ms,
2. All stimulators are de-activated for 250 ms,
3. The first stimulus of the tactile glyph is given for
1000 ms, or 1 second,
4. All stimulators are de-activated for 250 ms, and
5. The second stimulus of the tactile glyph is given
for 1000 ms.
A long-term stimulus should be avoided because it
takes a lot of time to determine a relationship and
vibrations of a long stimulus numb the fingers, whereas
short-term stimulus may make it difficult to understand
the stimulus correctly. To balance efficient understanding
of the stimulus with correct understanding of it, we chose
1000 ms for the stimulus duration.

5.2. One-stimulus glyphs
First, the strength of the vibration felt by the
corresponding fingers and palm of the left and right hands
were compared. For each corresponding position, if the
strength of the vibration felt by both hands was the same,
the position was classified as being of the same strength
(s). This case includes instances when no vibration was
given at the position and when the same strength was
given at the position. If a stimulus point on the left hand
was stronger than the corresponding point on the right
hand, the stimulus to the left on the position was judged to
be stronger than that to the right (l). Conversely, if a
stimulus point on the right hand was stronger than the
corresponding point on the left hand, the stimulus to the
right on the position was judged to be stronger than that to
the left (r).
The strength of the glyphs was determined by
integrating the strength of all of the positions. The
subjects responded with one of four choices: (L=R),
(L>R), (L<R), or (L<>R). If all positions were (s), two
glyphs given to the hands had the same strength (L=R). If

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

there was a position whose strength was (l) and no
positions whose strengths were (r), the left glyph was
stronger than the right one (L>R). Similarly, if there was a
position whose strength was (r) and no positions whose
strengths were (l), the right glyph was stronger than the
left one (L<R). If there were both (l) and (r) positions, the
glyphs were classified as having non-ordered relationships
(L<>R).

5.3. Many-stimulus glyphs
The total strength of the two-stimulus glyphs was
exactly determined by considering two-stimulus glyphs as
one-stimulus glyphs that have 12 positions. Moreover, it is
also possible to determine the strength of two-stimulus the
glyphs from the relationship between the two strength
results of each stimulus in one two-stimulus glyph.
Similarly, the total strength of the many-stimulus
glyphs can also be determined by considering the manystimulus glyphs as one-stimulus glyphs. In other words,
we can use many-stimulus glyphs.

6. Experimental settings
We conducted two experiments to evaluate the tactile
glyphs and clarify the features of the tactile glyphs. The
experimental system was developed using Java[6] for
CyberTouch control. This section describes aspects of the
experimental setup that were common to both experiments.

6.1. Procedure
The task was explained to the subjects, and each subject
was given practice sessions to learn how to use the testing
program and understand the rule for determination. These
practice sessions were followed by data collection
sessions. After them, the subjects answered a
questionnaire.
A tactile feedback of a question in a task was given to
both hands. The subjects were allowed to try the tactile
feedback as many times as they liked. The subjects
answered with one of four choices : (L=R), (L>R), (L<R)
or (L<>R). The subjects also selected their confidence
level for each answer. Three choices were provided for the
confidence level: sure, neutral, and not sure, which were
respectively mapped to 1.0, 0.5 and 0.0 in the results.
6.1.1. Practice and data collection sessions
In the practice session, the system showed whether the
subjects answered correctly or not. The subject had to
answer correctly to proceed to the next practice, so they
had to answer repeatedly until they could give the correct
answer.
In the data collection sessions, the subjects were not
shown the correctness of their answers. The frequency of
each choice being the correct answer was the same.

6.1.2. Questionnaire
After they finished answering all the questions in the
data collection session, the subjects were asked to
complete a questionnaire. One question was, “How easy
was it to distinguish the vibration for one place? Please
rate each item.” The question applied to six positions: the
thumb, forefinger, middle finger, ring finger, little finger,
and palm. The other question was, “How easy was it to
determine the relationship of the vibration of the hands?”
The question consisted of four relations: left stronger than
right, left equal to right, left weaker than right, and left
neither stronger than nor weaker than nor equal to right.
The subjects were also asked to comment freely on the
experiments.

7. Experiment on Use of Strength
The first experiment aimed to evaluate the influence of
the number of stimuli and use of strength variations.

7.1. Subjects
Forty-two subjects took part in the experiment. They
were all university students, aged 19 to 23 years old. The
subjects had no experience with CyberTouch and were
paid for their participation in the experiment.

(r), little finger (l), and palm (p). These items are
separated by hyphens; that is, they are represented by (t)(i)-(m)-(r)-(l)-(p). For example, 0-5-0-0-3-0 represents no
tactile stimuli to the thumb, middle finger, ring finger, and
palm, tactile stimulus whose strength is 5 to the index
finger, and tactile stimulus whose strength is 3 to the little
finger.

7.3. Results
The results of the experiment on the use of strength are
shown in Figure 5 as the average values of accuracy and
confidence. The results of sets A, B, and C show that the
strength of the stimulus did not affect the accuracy of and
confidence in answers if only one stimulus was given to
each hand. Comparing the results of sets A, D, G, and L
shows that the increase of simultaneous stimuli decreased
the accuracy. Moreover, the results of sets E and F show
that the use of strength variations decreased the accuracy.
The difference between the accuracy and the confidence
of sets E and K is larger than other sets. Set E uses
strengths whose difference is small and set K uses
strengths whose difference is large. Although the
differences of strengths are considered as the main cause,
further experiments are needed because the size of each
task set was not large, i.e, 8 questions.

7.2. Stimuli
Table 1 summarizes the set of stimuli. Each task set had
8 questions. In the table, maximum of stimuli means the
maximum number of simultaneous stimuli possible to
deliver to one hand. When the maximum of stimuli was 2,
a maximum of two positions out of the six were able to
receive the tactile stimuli.
The strength column shows the variation of the strength.
When the strength was 5 only, stimuli of other strengths
were not used.

Task
set
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L

Table 1. Set of stimuli.
Example pattern
Max.
Strength
for one hand
of stimuli
1
5
0-0-0-0-0-5
1
3
0-0-0-3-0-0
1
10
10-0-0-0-0-0
2
5
0-0-0-5-0-5
2
5, 3
0-5-0-0-3-0
2
5, 10
10-0-0-0-0-5
3
5
0-5-0-0-5-5
3
5, 3
0-5-3-0-5-0
3
5, 10
0-5-10-0-0-5
3
3, 5, 10
0-10-0-0-5-3
2
3, 10
10-0-0-3-0-0
4
5
0-5-5-0-5-5

The pattern represents strength of tactile feedback to the
thumb (t), index finger (i), middle finger (m), ring finger

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Accuracy

Confidence

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

L

Figure 5. Influence of strength on accuracy of
and confidence in answers.

7.4. Questionnaire
In this questionnaire, the subjects were asked to rate
each item on a scale of 0 to 9.” On the scale, 0 was the
most difficult and 9 was the easiest.
Figure 6 and Figure 7 show respectively the ease of
distinguishing the vibration for each position, and that of
determining the relationship of the vibration of the hands
with standard deviation error bars.
Figure 6 shows that the thumb was the most favored
position for distinguishing the vibration. The ring and
little fingers were rated lower than other positions.
Figure 7 shows that it was a little bit more difficult to
determine when the strength was the same or not ordered
than when the strength to one hand was larger than to the

other hand, although the difference was not significant.
This suggests that it is better to use ordered strength, that
is, (L>R) or (L<R), if possible. Although there is a small
difference between (L>R) and (L<R), it is not significant.
Some of the subjects commented that the stimuli to the
ring finger and the little finger were difficult to distinguish.
The results of the experiment support this comment;
accuracy was low when tactile feedback was given to
these positions. This is probably because the sensibility of
those positions is low and the vibration to one finger can
influence other fingers and the palm.

8.2. Stimulus
Table 2 summarizes the set of stimuli in this experiment.
Each task set had 48 questions.
In the table, length of sequence shows whether the
glyph is a one-stimulus or two-stimulus glyph. The
strength column shows the variation of the strength. This
is the same as in the previous section. The example pattern
is also similar to that in the previous section but may
include two-stimulus glyphs.

Task
set

9
8
7
6
5
4

Table 2. Set of stimuli
Length of
Example pattern
Strength
sequence
for one hand

M
N

1
1

1
5

O

2

5

0-0-0-0-0-1
0-0-0-5-0-0
1st:5-0-0-0-0-0
2nd:0-0-5-0-0-0

8.3. Results

3
2
1
0
Thumb

Index

Middle

Ring

Little

Palm

Figure 6. Ease of distinguishing the vibration
for each position.
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
L=R

L>R

L<R

L<>R

Figure 7. Ease of determining the relationship
of the vibration of the hands

8. Experiment on Use of Sequence
The second experiment aimed to evaluate the influence
of the stimulus sequence. Only one strength was used and
the maximum number of stimuli was limited to one in this
experiment so that we could determine the influence of the
stimulus sequences.

8.1. Subjects

Accuracy

Confidence

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Twenty-six university students took part in the
experiment. They were paid for their participation. The
subjects had no experience with CyberTouch.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

Figure 8 shows the accuracy and the confidence in
answers of the experiment. Although the accuracy of task
set O is slightly lower than those of task sets M and N, the
use of time sequence did not affect the accuracy
significantly if the number of simultaneous stimuli was
one. When the number of simultaneous stimuli was one,
the strength does not influence the accuracy and the
confidence significantly.
The accuracy in this experiment is almost 100%. This is
higher than the accuracy in task sets A, B and C which use
one strength in Figure 5. We think that this is because
there were possibilities that strength variations were used
in the experiment on use of strength in the previous
section. In this experiment on use of sequence, the subject
understood that there were no possibilities of strength
variations.
The results show that it is possible to construct tactile
glyphs which are easy to perceive and reliable to
determine hierarchical relationships.

IEEE

M

N

O

Figure 8. Influence of time sequence on
accuracy of and confidence in answers.

8.4. Questionnaire
In this questionnaire, the subjects were asked to rate
each item on a scale of 1 to 5, where 1 was the most
difficult and 5 the easiest. The subject rated each position
on both hands.
The ease of distinguishing the vibration for each
position, and that of determining the relationship of the
vibration of both hands are respectively shown in Figure 9
and Figure 10 with standard deviation error bars.
Figure 9 shows that the thumb was the most favored
position for distinguishing the vibration. There are little
differences of ratings between the left hand and the right
hand, as expected. The ring was rated the lowest. The
ratings of the middle finger and the palm are respectively
higher and lower than the corresponding ratings in Figure
6. The differences are not significant, but they may be
dependent on the stimulus patterns. Anyway, these results
suggest that we need to adjust stimulus strengths to the
fingers and the palm to compensate for their varying
degrees of sensibility. For example, the stimuli to the ring
fingers should be stronger than those to the thumb.
Figure 10 shows the same tendency as the experiment
in the previous section, although L<>R was rated
relatively lower than in the previous experiment.
Left

Right

5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
Thumb

Index

Middle

Ring

Little

A few subjects said that long-term experiments of
vibro-tactile feedback decreased the sensibility of the
hands, and it was uncomfortable. We need to investigate
the improvement of vibro-tactile feedback for comfort.

8.5. Summary of Experimental Results
From our experimental evaluations, it is clear that it is
better to use presence of tactile stimulus rather than
strength variations. Moreover, a small number of stimuli is
better for improving the accuracy of comparison. The
sensibility of the fingers and the palm is different.
Stimulus strengths have to be adjusted to compensate for
this. For example, it is better to increase the strength of
stimuli to ring fingers.

9. Tactile Glyphs for Palpation
9.1. Example of Tactile Glyphs
Tactile glyphs can be composed on the basis of sound
glyphs. Stimulus positions can be mapped to pitches in the
sound glyphs. Figure 11 shows examples of tactile glyphs.
The node position in a hierarchy controls the time
sequences (timing), stimulus positions on hands. The
results of the experiment on use of strength in Section 7
discourage the use of strength variations. The results also
show that the maximum number of simultaneous stimuli
possible to deliver to one hand, which corresponds to the
multiplicity of chords in sound glyphs, should be
minimized to achieve high accuracy. Therefore we do not
use the strength variations and the number of the
simultaneous stimuli is limited to 2 in Figure 11.

Palm

Figure 9. Ease of distinguishing the vibration
for each position.
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0

Figure 11. Example of tactile glyphs in a
hierarchy.
L=R

L>R

L<R

L<>R

Figure 10. Ease determining the relationship of
the vibration of both hands.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Although timbres of notes were used in sound
representation, tactile textures, which correspond to the
timbres, are not used in tactile representation. The
maximum number of simultaneous stimuli in tactile

representation is more restricted than the multiplicity of
chords in sound representation. Due to these restrictions,
long stimulus sequences are needed to generate many
tactile glyphs for practical hierarchies. The results of the
experiment on the use of the stimulus sequence in Section
8 suggest that the use of long stimulus sequences does not
significantly decrease the accuracy of determination of
relationships between tactile glyphs although further
investigation is required.

9.2. Palpation of Relationships
As stated in the introduction, we plan to use tactile
glyphs for a kind of palpation of objects to understand
hierarchical relationships. Let us assume that a user is
editing a program in an immersive programming
environment and that the user grasps an object such as a
variable by his/her right hand and touches a container
object such as a left-value placeholder by his/her left
hand before the user places the variable into the left-value
placeholder. Tactile feedbacks of the tactile glyphs, which
represent types in a type hierarchy that the variable
belongs to and the left-value placeholder can include, can
be activated when both hands of the user touch the objects.
The user can examine a type constraint between the
variable and the left-value placeholder by comparing
tactile glyphs of them. We think that the tactile feedback
can enhance the experience of the user’s programming in
an immersive virtual environment.

10. Conclusion
We proposed the use of tactile glyphs to represent
hierarchical relationships by using vibro-tactile feedback
to the fingers and palm of the hands. Moreover, we
conducted experiments to clarify the features of the
proposed tactile glyphs. The experimental results clarified
the features of the proposed tactile glyphs and the results
are unique and useful in applying them to information
visualization using tactile feedback. A comparison of the
proposed tactile glyphs given to both hands does not
require a long training period to remember many patterns
for determining the relationships in advance of use.
We plan to develop a system that generates effective
and useful tactile glyphs for a practical and large hierarchy
such as that of the Java class. We will incorporate tactile
glyphs into our immersive programming system and
enable palpation of a program in the system. We will also
evaluate the generated glyphs by experiment using the
system.

11. References
[1] Biggs, S.J., and M.A. Srinivasan, Haptic Interfaces,
Handbook of Virtual Environments, K.Stanney (Ed.),
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 93-115, 2002.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[2] Brooks, J.G., and M.G.Brooks, In Search of Understanding:
The Case for the Constructivist Classroom, Association for
Supervision and Curriculum Development, 1999.
[3] Brewster, S., and L.M.Brown. “Tactons: Structured tactile
Messages for Non-Visual Information Display”. 5th
Australasian User Interface Conference (AUIC2004), pp.
15-23. Dunedin. 2004.
[4] Burdea, G., Force and Touch Feedback for Virtual Reality,
Wiley Interscience, 1994.
[5] Enriquez, M., and K. MacLean, “The Hapticon editor: A
tool in support of haptic communication research”. 11th
Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment
and Teleoperator Systems (HAPTICS'03), pp. 356- 362,
2003.
[6] Gosling, J., W. Joy and G. Steele, The JavaTM Language
Specification, Addison-Wesley, 1996.
[7] Immersion Corporation, CyberTouch
Force feedback
option,
<http://www.immersion.com/3d/products/cyber_touch.php>
[8] Jones, M. G., T. Andre, R. Superfine, and R Taylor,
“Learning at the nanoscale: The impact of students' use of
remote microscopy on concepts of viruses, scale, and
microscopy,” Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 40,
pp. 303–322, 2003.
[9] Niemeyer, G., K. J. Kuchenbecker, R. Bonneau, P. Mitra, A.
Reid, J. Fiene, and G. Weldon, “THUMP: An immersive
haptic console for surgical simulation and training,”
Medicine Meets Virtual Reality, pp. 272-274, January 2004.
[10] Osawa, N., "Generation and Evaluation of Glyph
Representing Superclass-subclass relationships," IEEE
Symp. on Visual Languages (VL2000), pp .81-82, 2000.
[11] Osawa, N., "Visualization of Inheritance Relationships
Using Glyphs", IEICE Trans. on Information and Systems,
Vol.E85-D, No.1, pp. 275-282, 2002.
[12] Osawa, N., "Sound Glyphs Representing Inheritance
Relationships," 6th International Conference on
Information Visualisation (IV2002), pp. 10-15, 2002.
[13] Osawa, N., K. Asai, M. Suzuki, Y. Y. Sugimoto and F.
Saito, "An Immersive Programming System: Ougi," The
12th International Conference on Artificial Reality and
Telexistence (ICAT 2002), pp. 36-43, 2002.
[14] Osawa, N., "Application of Jigsaw-puzzle-like 3D Glyph to
Visualizing Grammatical Constraints," IEEE Symp. on
Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing
(VL/HCC'05), pp. 293-295, 2005.
[15] Roberts, J.C., and K. Franklin, “Haptic Glyphs (Hlyphs) —
Structured Haptic Objects for Haptic Visualization,” First
Joint Eurohaptics Conference and Symposium on Haptic
Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator
Systems (WHC'05), pp. 369-374, 2005.
[16] Scott, C., K. Nyarko, T. Capers, and J. Ladeji-Osias,
“ Network intrusion visualization with NIVA, an intrusion
detection visual and haptic analyzer,” Information
Visualization, Volume 2 , Issue 2, pp. 82 – 94, 2003.
[17] Sherman, B., and A. Craig, Understanding Virtual Reality,
Morgan Kauffman Publishers, 2003.

