Using the Amazon Metric to Construct an Image Database based
on what people do, not what they say.
Theodor G Wyeld, Robert M Colomb
School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, The University of Queensland,
Queensland 4072 Australia
{twyeld@itee.uq.edu.au, colomb@itee.uq.edu.au}
Abstract
Current image database metadata schemas require
users to adopt a specific text-based vocabulary. Textbased metadata is good for searching but not for
browsing. Existing image-based search facilities, on the
other hand, are highly specialised and so suffer similar
problems. Wexelblat’s semantic dimensional spatial
visualisation schemas go some way towards addressing
this problem by making both searching and browsing
more accessible to the user in a single interface. But the
question of how and what initial metadata to enter a
database remains.
Different people see different things in an image and
will organise a collection in equally diverse ways.
However, we can find some similarity across groups of
users regardless of their reasoning. For example, a
search on Amozon.com returns other products also,
based on an averaging of how users navigate the
database. In this paper we report on applying this
concept to a set of images for which we have visualised
them using traditional methods and the Amazon.com
method. We report on the findings of this comparative
investigation in a case study setting involving a group of
randomly selected participants. We conclude with the
recommendation that in combination, the traditional and
averaging methods would provide an enhancement to
current database visualisation, searching, and browsing
facilities.

1. Introduction
Current image database metadata descriptors
include: size, file format, bit-depth, pixel ratio and so on.
Such descriptions have easily determined parameters.
Content is often more difficult to describe. Metadata
associated with the content of an image database is often
described in equally objective terms. If it is a photograph
of a sunset it is called a sunset. Other metadata may be
added such as clouds, what type, how many, location,
who it was taken by, colours, identifiable objects in the
photograph and so on. This metadata may follow one of
the accepted metadata schemas such as the Dublin Core
standard or the MPEG-7 multimedia standard, among
others [3, 1].
While the different types of descriptors offered by
the various metadata standards are easily identifiable
they may not necessarily help users find a particular

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

image in an image database. Indeed, images can be
categorised in as many different ways as there are people
to do the categorising. Not everyone sees the same thing
in an image. For example, an image may evoke ‘feelings’
that are not readily applied as metadata to an object.
However, when the user tries to retrieve a particular
image from the database their feelings may be the only
thing they remember about it.
Descriptors are usually textual. Hence, searching of
databases is via an abstract textual query on a textual
surrogate for the image, sometimes called a caption. The
problem with a textual surrogate is how best to describe
the object’s contents [2]? If we ask a group of people to
arrange a collection of images they will invariably
organise them in different ways for different reasons.
They may even give clear rationales for why they
arranged them in a particular order.
Wexelblat [4] attempts to address the problem of
visualization based on textual descriptors by identifying
the elemental components of a semantic space with
semantic dimensions of two broad kinds, absolute and
relative. An absolute semantic dimension can be
represented as an axis in a visualisation. The axes
organise a system of places into which objects may be
put. Relative semantic dimensions are either systems of
places that are idiosyncratic subdivisions of particular
larger places or, more interestingly, associations among
objects not associated with place at all. The example
given in Wexelblat [4] Figure 9.3 shows a collection of
courses arranged in a space with two absolute
dimensions, quarter and professor, with in addition a
prerequisite structure shown. The prerequisite structure is
a relative semantic dimension associating objects rather
than places. One course is a prerequisite of another even
if they are both moved in quarter and professor.
The problem remains, however, how best to
represent the way a diverse group of people arrange a
collection of images for their own idiosyncratic reasons
yet make this information available to other users? This
paper reports on a comparative study conducted to
address this dilemma. It is organised into three main
sections. The first discusses the background problem and
the notion of displaying averaged user preferences in a
dataset (Amazon.com). It then outlines a specific
problem where we can apply an averaging algorithm. As
a control, we propose initially a traditionally constructed
image database and visualisation schema. The second

section outlines the case study used. It includes how the
test was conducted, analysis of the interviews, and an
overview of the results of the interviews. We then apply
the averaging algorithm to the results. The third section
visualises the averaging results. In the fourth section we
compare the visualised averaging results with their
visualisation using the traditional method we started
with. This paper concludes with a brief discussion on the
outcomes of this system and what can be gleaned from it
that is not available in the traditional system alone
including future directions, such as scalability and the
efficacy of a combined system..

1.1 The Amazon Metric
Often the similarities we find in what is returned by
users of an image database or other type of database
differs greatly from user to user in the way they make
their initial selections. Nevertheless, when we compare
all collections or the groupings they make they seem to
follow some logical ordering independent of the
reasonings behind it. For example, when we search for a
book to purchase on Amazon.com what is returned also
is a small select range of books that Amazon.com
suggest “customers who searched for [product title]
ultimately chose:” also these others. We do not know
why they chose the other books but it usually comes as
little surprise that the secondary choices are indeed ones
that we may be interested in too. They do seem to fit
some sort of logical association. Although we have no
idea what this is, other than perhaps there are likeminded people who enjoy reading the same or similar
material to what we do. We will call this the
Amazon.com Metric (AM). It suggests an algorithm that
tracks how people search books and which ones are most
often associated with others.
We can draw an analogy between the way the
Amazon.com online book ordering system operates and
the way someone may ask one what their Zodiac sign is,
and when one tells them they say “aha, I knew it!” It is
the apparent predictability in both the Amazon.com
returned book list and the fortune teller’s tale that
indicates some tangible link between what we see or hear
and how impossible this would have been to have known
beforehand that evokes a sense of enigmatic intrigue.
They both make an association where none objectively
exists. What the fortune teller proposes, and the AM
suggests, is an association not an a priori fact but a post
facto interpretation of available information. Their post
facto prediction is based on results that are interpretable,
not really similar to what was know before in any
objective way. In the case of the AM, it returned similar
products based on how most people interact with the
search engine. It is the intrigue of why what is returned
appears similar that suggests they are – not any objective

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

similarity. This raises the question: how could we apply
this to an image database?

1.2 The Problem
To investigate the potential for the AM to help
organise images for constructing an image database, we
used a standing problem involving a collection of images
based around a common theme – fence spikes. The
problem was one which required a method for
determining similarity between two or more images. One
of the authors of this paper had been taking pictures of
fence spikes over a number of years at different locations
(see sample set below, figure 1). After awhile he noticed
that it was getting increasingly difficult to identify
whether he had seen a particular fence spike before or
not. Indeed, with the many hundreds of images he had
how could he quickly sort them to find an image that was
similar or even the same? If he could do this it would
save him the time of re-shooting the same fence spike.
The challenge was to find a nearness algorithm for
sorting the images.
As discussed earlier, the construction of a traditional
image database ordinarily starts by applying an expert
knowledge of the images’ content and context to the
metadata that is thought to be most appropriate for one’s
needs. However, as our images are of an ambiguous
nature (how many people take much notice of a fence
spike?) we felt that while such an image database might
satisfy our needs it may not be useful to others. We
needed to make an image database that could be
referenced by a wide variety of people with a potentially
equally wide variety of ways of sorting and referencing
its objects. To do this we needed to find how the way
people organise collections of images compares with
what they say about how they do it. By comparing what
people say about how they arrange the images we are
adding the reason behind the AM to the returned
suggested book list.

1.3 Traditional Method
As a control study, we constructed a traditional
image database for later comparison. The traditional
method for assigning metadata to images when
constructing an image database is to apply objective
features and content descriptions. For this exercise, we
concentrated on the content features of the objects
depicted in our collection of 60 images of different fence
spikes. We detected certain features which we could say
were common to many. We can find at least 14 different
features, characteristics, aspects, or attributes of the
spikes in the images. We can organise these features into
a table (see table 1).

Figure 1. Author’s collection of sixty images used in the study.
Table 1. The fourteen main different features of the sixty fence spikes.

Spiky

Wavy

3-Ends

Leafy

Arrow

Ball

Blunt

Bottle

Cross

Curly

Diamond

Flowery

Moustache

Plain

Our visualisation of the traditional database is based
on textual descriptions alone, created by an expert (see
figure 4). The question remains: how might a diverse
range of users organise the same image database? To
address this question we asked 20 people to arrange the
images in order of most to least similar and asked them
why they arranged them the way they did, and finally
compared this to our structured textual ordering.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

2. The Case Study
2.1 Setting
None of the 20 participants involved in this exercise
had ever seen the images before. They came from
diverse backgrounds – international, interstate, and local
students, researchers, professional people, and a home
maker. Their ages ranged from 24-64. There were four
females and sixteen males. For many, English was a
second language.
The sixty images were printed onto 2x3 cm cards.
The sessions were conducted in an isolated meeting

room with a large table (4x2 metres). Only one
participant and the researcher were in the session room at
the same time. The test took an average 20-30 minutes to
complete. A standard recording sheet was used in each
interview session.
The test question is in the forma of a statement made
at the beginning of the session: Arrange these images in
order of most to least similar. The question asked at the
end of the session was: Why did you arrange them in the
way you did?

2.2 The Test
The cards were placed in front of the participants in
no particular order. Most went straight into the task
without hesitation. They started by making either a long
row or small groupings of images in rows and columns.
They spent their time ‘getting to know’ the images first
by sifting through them trying to remember their
distinguishing features. After awhile they abandoned the
earlier rows they had created and moved onto new
orderings. Towards the end, they quickly eliminated the
remaining few images and announced they had finished
after 20 to 30 mins. When asked the final question, most
gestured to the images to help answer it. They often
picked images out of the arrangements to make their
point, or began to point towards the row-wise groupings.
They then began to describe, in few words, the reason
they were ‘different’. Often they would point to the last
image in a line-up and say why it was the most different.
Most complained that the initial question was not logical;
that there is no most or least similar – “apart from the
ball” (image number 22).

2.3 Analysis of Interviews
We saw a wide variety of approaches taken by the
participants. By looking at the four main typologies that
emerged we can begin to identify how the task was
approached:
• Background Contrast: There were participants that
organised the images in terms of the quality of the
image itself rather than what it contained. Hence,
these participants concentrated on the contrasting
features of the background. This suggests they may
not have known what was depicted in the picture
and focussed instead on what they could see on its
surface (four participants followed this schema).
• Size Difference: The next typology followed a
similar rationale. Instead of contrast levels of black
and white, however, they focussed on how much of
the picture’s surface the object depicted in it filled.
This did not require the participants to recognise the
objects depicted in the picture just that it was an
object with size (two participants followed this
schema).
• Simple to Complex: By far the largest group of
participants organised their images across a range of
simple to complex values. Within this schema there
were variations on what constituted complexity. The

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

main defining character of this schema was the fact
that they all focussed on the features of the objects
depicted in the images suggesting they recognised
what the objects were (seventeen participants
followed this schema).
• Outside any Category: The final schema is really a
sub-schema. It represents those images that were
identified as not fitting a larger gross category. What
is significant about this sub-grouping is that the
objects depicted in the pictures were referred to
explicitly suggesting recognition of the object itself
(six participants followed this schema).
All four key typologies, or combinations of their
subsets, could be represented in a given individual
participant’s organisational schema.
It is worth noting that while all participants
attempted to create a continuous range of images almost
all found this was not possible and separated out smaller
groupings within a grand scheme. There was a large
variation in their justifications for why they created the
smaller groupings.
The next step of the exercise was to try to make
sense of the variations between how participants
arranged their images and what they said. We applied the
AM algorithm in the form: how many times are any two
images paired in a group across all groups? To do this we
created a table in Access that included the following
columns: ParticipantID, GroupID, and SpikeID. There
are 1770 possible pairings.

2.4 Applying the AM to Results
Applying the AM to determine how many pairings
are common across all of the 1770 possible pairings
returns 1466 pairings. When we look at these results we
find that more than half of the participants arranged more
than half of the images in similar pairs across all groups.
Despite the wide variety in what they said, within what
they did we find there was more similarity. In other
words, despite having different rationales for organising
the images in the way they did most groups had at least a
similar pair contained. The following SQL query was
used to generate table 2.
SELECT T1.SpikeID, T2.SpikeID AS OtherSpike,
Count(*) AS OccursNo
FROM tables02 AS T1, tables02 AS T2
WHERE (((T1.SpikeID)<T2.SpikeID) And
((T1.GroupID)=T2.GroupID) And
((T1.ParticipID)=T2.ParticipID))
GROUP BY T1.SpikeID, T2.SpikeID
HAVING COUNT(*)>N
Table 2. This table shows those AM pairings
that have a count greater than 12.
MostPairsCount
SpikeID
OtherSpike

OccursNo

26

37

16

1

35

15

29

32

15

26

59

15

MostPairsCount
SpikeID
OtherSpike

OccursNo

35

55

15

15

41

15

58

59

15

1

48

14

4

60

14

37

58

13

37

59

13

36

47

13

47

54

13

35

48

13

1

55

13

26

58

13

17

54

13

49

59

13

From table 2 we notice many instances where
members of one pair share members of another pair and
so on. If we take a sample of the pair which achieved the
highest count across all groups and participants (26 and
37) we can correlate their rationales with where this pair
occurs in their groupings. At a finer level of detail than
the four super schemas identified earlier, from what they
said we can summarise their responses as one of ten
different sub-rationales (the number of participants using
this schema in brackets):
• Number of prongs (one);
• Number of points (one);
• Skinniest to fattest (one);
• Simple to complex (four);
• Leaves curving out (two);
• Number of angles (one);
• Background contrast (two);
• Similar shapes (two);
• Soft to sharp (one); and,
• Spikes moving out (one).
What is demonstrated in the list above is that, of the 16
participants who selected the same two as paired in a
group (26 and 37), some reasons were given by more
than one participant. This shows that the two ‘obviously’
go together for many different reasons. Thus,
underscoring that the interpretability of the Amazon
metric is post-facto, not a priori.

diversity of approaches and rationales to the task
expressed by the participants.
When we expand this to include a subset
visualisation of a count greater than 9 (which represents
more than half of all participants and images) we notice
an apparent clustering of highly interconnected similar
types around our most counted pair, tapering off to more
complex spikes (see figure 3). These other spikes, as we
move away from our most counted pair, are not only
more complex but tend to display leaves curving out.
Both the shift to more complex and leaves curving out
are features reasoned by at least six of the sixteen
participants’ schemas for placing the top pairing.

Figure 2. Visualisation of images where the AM
pairings have a count greater than 12 using the
images to display visual similarity (image 26
and 37 circled).

3. Visualisation of Results
We can visualise these results to gain a greater
understanding of the visual relationship between the
most paired images 26 and 37 at the local and global
scale. For example, in figure 2, which presents a selforganising graph using the results of the AM for a count
greater than 12, we can clearly see the similarity with the
other spikes in the immediate locale. We also notice that
the other groups included in this count similarly show an
extraordinary internal visual similarity given the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 3. Visualisation of images where the AM
pairings have a count greater than 9 (image 26
and 37 circled).

4. Comparing AM Results with the
Traditional Method
The earlier traditionally structured image database
we can say was addressing notions of place in

Wexelblat’s terms; where the different images are first
associated to a place-holder or class. We can have
classes that do not have any images/objects in them and
some images or objects can share multiple classes.
Hence, we could plot this in a multi-dimensional space
[5]. We chose to use a three-dimensional plotting (see
figure 4, see also figure 5 for the non-dimensional
network representation based on an ‘expert’ ordering).

themselves. The AM nearness system has no ordinal
sequence, hence there is no semantic sense between near
objects other than what we impose post facto. However,
as in the traditional model, the post facto ordination of
the AM system allows us to navigate its places. Where
the ordinal system in the traditional model comes from
arbitrary relationships that we can map between its
classes it relies on a priori, predictable, definable
difference. In the AM system we can only define
difference after the objects have been arbitrarily sorted.
When we return to the traditional method we find
the most paired images (26 and 37) do not display any
local similarity. We can conclude from this that as a
database organising schema these two images are not
likely to be paired. In other words, our expert metadata
schema would not assist the group of 20 participants
used in this study to find 26 and 37 as similar.

6. Conclusion

Figure 4. Wexelblat semantic dimensional
representation of all images (image 26 and 37
circled).

In conclusion we can say the AM creates very local
orderings. Each is at its own centre and nearly everything
else is out at infinity. Hence, we need the traditional
method's large-scale geometry to see the whole space.
Hence, the AM has proven to be a useful way to define
similarity in this database and is different from the more
structured traditional method. What this exercise
highlights are the benefits of incorporating multiple
schemas for organising an image database. This should
support different kinds of information-seeking
behaviour. The traditional method supports those users
who have a good idea what they are looking for in a
database. On the other hand, if the user wants to explore
the possibilities they can browse a large collection of
objects both of a global scale and locally supported by
how other users browse the same collection. Future work
would include evaluating the efficacy of the AM method
for constructing an image database with a larger number
of images.

References
[1]

[2]
[3]

Figure 5. Two-dimensional representation using
a non-dimensional self-organising graph using
the same images as those in figure 3 (image 26
and 37 circled).
In the AM system we were not plotting nearness
between places but nearness between the objects

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[4]

[5]

Chang, S.F., Sikora T. & Puri, A. (2001). Overview of
the MPEG-7 Standard. IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems for Video Technology, 11 (6), 688-695.
Colomb, R. M., 2002, information Spaces: the
Architecture of Cyberspace, Springer, London.
Dublin Core Metadata Initiative. (1999). Dublin Core
Metadata Element Set, Version 1.1: Reference
Description. DCMI Recommendation, 2 July.
http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/.
Wexelblat, A., 1992 “Giving Meaning to Place: Semantic
Spaces”, in (ed.) Benedict, M., Cyberspace: First Steps,
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Wyeld, T. G., 2005, “3D Information Visualisation: an
Historical Perspective”, in proceedings of Information
Visualisation ’05, London, 6-8 July, 2005.

