Colour Spectrum’s of Opinion: An Information Visualisation Interface for
Representing Degrees of Emotion in Real Time
James Ohene-Djan, Andrew Sammon, Rachel Shipsey
Goldsmiths College University of London
New Cross, London, SE16 6NW United Kingdom
j.djan@gold.ac.uk, a.sammon@gold.ac.uk, map01rs@gold.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper we present an information visualisation interface that enables a user to input a real-time continuous
flow of their predominant emotion incorporating degrees of
uncertainty relative to other choices. The novel equilateral
triangle-based interface allows users to express opinions on
temporal media presentations such as television advertisements, video and musical compositions. The continuous
flow of information generated by the interface is mapped
into a colour spectrum which reveals a user’s developing
opinion of the presentation. Such a colour spectrum not
only provides a visual snapshot to enhance statistical interpretations of user input but also provides valuable insight
into when, how and with what degree of certainty opinions were developed and changed over time. The Real-Time
Emotional Spectrum Tool (REST) is being developed to answer a need in the commercial research market. It is intended for use in gathering opinions from online audiences.

1. Introduction
Data visualisation is concerned with the transformation
of numerical or symbolic data into visual images to reveal
some important aspects of that data [15]. A key objective
in the data visualisation process is to establish an effective
communication channel for data aggregation and interpretation. Such a channel may also be used as an aid in problem solving. Data visualisation is an important tool for the
cognitive processing of data in disciplines such as market
research and on-line assessment and training.
Visualisation interfaces are coupled with data capture,
filtering, aggregation, mapping, rendering and viewing
technologies in order to realise the visualisation process.
Many different types of visualisation interfaces exist, representative examples are tree maps [5], fisheye views [12, 16],
and road maps [14]. Recent reviews on information visual-

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

isation interfaces can be found in [2].
In this paper we present a novel equilateral trianglebased interface that allows users to express opinions using
three dimensions whilst viewing temporal media. The interface is dynamic in that it allows users to input, in real-time,
a continuous flow of predominant emotions incorporating
degrees of uncertainty relative to other choices. This input
is then used to construct a colour spectrum using the RGB
(Red, Green and Blue) colour model [17]. The colour spectrum bar indicates changes in opinion, including degrees of
change between opinions, which are represented by different shades of colour. The current application for the interface is the assessment of television advertisements. It has
enabled the capturing of user’s authentic, spontaneous reactions.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
In section 2 we outline our motivations of the equilateral
triangle-based interface and provide a brief background to
our research. In section 3 we present the Real-Time Emotional Spectrum Tool (REST). In 4 we describe a user session using REST and in 5 we discuss our choices of shape
and colour. In section 6 we outline related work and finally,
we present our conclusions in section 7.

2. Background and Motivations
Interfaces for data capture can be classified into two distinct groups: static interfaces, used to capture collections
of data at a single point in time; and dynamic interfaces
used to capture continuous flows of data over a period of
time. [3, 13]. When attempting to elicit views or opinions
from users the predominant approach has been to devise visual interfaces that are static in nature and allow the user to
indicate choices by interacting with interface components
such as check-boxes, radio buttons, text fields and pull down
list boxes. When designing interfaces for assessment purposes these components are arranged to enforce a high degree of structure over the interaction process thereby requir-

Figure 1. Real-Time Emotional Spectrum Tool (REST).
ing the user to make absolute decisions regarding choices,
views and opinions. This is best illustrated by multiple
choice-based interfaces which do not allow the user to express any degree of uncertainty regarding choices made or
any degree of preference between offered choices. For example if a user is asked to make a choice from three different options A, B and C using a traditional multiple choicebased interface, the user cannot indicate that they are split
between choice A and C but prefer A over C. Furthermore a
user cannot indicate that they are 70% sure option A is correct. More generally, incorporating degrees of uncertainty
relative to other choices is not possible.
Dynamic interfaces are used to capture flows of data input over time [1, 18]. These interfaces are often used when
users are required to provide feedback on a temporal media presentation such as a film clip or musical composition. Typically such interfaces, which may be software or
hardware based, have two dimensions representing opposing options or choices and users are asked to oscillate using
a slider control between the two dimensions indicating their
view. Slider movements are recorded and then mapped on
to the time-line of the media presentation [3, 13]. Following this mapping it is possible to deduce a users view on
a presentation at a particular point in time. Although such
interfaces are effective in situations where only two choices
exist, a significant limitation is their failure to address situations where a third view point exists or where there is a
need to indicate choice relative to other possible choices.
Furthermore since it is possible for the user to make many
movements of the slider whilst viewing a media presentation, the amount of data generated by dynamic interfaces

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

can be relatively large and often requires detailed analysis
before it can be interpreted. The value of using information
visualisation techniques to interpret large datasets is known
and well understood [6].
A key motivation for our research was how to design an
interface that supported user input across a vector field of
three dimensions in which a collection of data points could
be easily accessed by users. We were further motivated by
the need to develop an architecture for the interface that allow a users input to act as parameters for information manipulation and visualisation. We wished to create an intuitive display in which a snapshot of a users emotions could
easily be observed. The inability of many of the current
generation of market research interfaces to enable users to
express emotion incorporating degrees of uncertainty relative to other choices was a further motivating factor for our
research.
Technically we wished to create a graphical representation of conflicting emotions. We wished to allow users to
use a mouse to input a collection of data points in real-time
whilst viewing a video file of a television advertisement.
Using this real time data we then wished to create an information visualisation that provided an intuitive display that
reflects the user’s emotion for each second of the video file
being played. The user interface we present is in part based
on the work of Moore [8]. In this paper he describes an
adapted assessment instrument called a Spatial Probability
Measure (SPM). The SPM allows effective measurement of
a learner’s strength of response or response certitude relative to other options.

Dont Know

78

88
Good

25

Bad
w = 100

Figure 2. Triangle Input System.

3.

Real-Time
(REST)

Emotional

Spectrum

Tool

The Real-Time Emotional Spectrum Tool (REST) is
a visualisation interface that aims to provide insight into
the subtle nuances and authentic, spontaneous reactions of
users viewing advertisements. The REST user interface
shown in Figure 1 consists of following components:
The Triangle Input System
The Emotion Display System

For each second of the advertisement each of the three
distance values are converted into a brightness factor rangfor the three colours red, green and
ing between and
blue. In this example we use red to represent good, blue
for bad and green for don’t know. Combining these brightness factors in the RGB colour space model gives each point
within the triangle a unique colour. Furthermore the colour
for a particular point will reflect its position. For example,
a point which is closer to the Red corner than to the other
two corners will be predominantly red in shade.
The formula used to calculate the brightness factor for
colour (where represents Red or Green or Blue) is:

The Media Player
The REST interface was developed using the java programming language and the media player was created using
the Java Media Framework. In the following subsections the
operation of each of these components is briefly described.

User input is captured via the triangle input system
shown in Figure 2. This is a graphical representation of
an equilateral triangle which is used to designate an area
within which the user can move the mouse. Each corner
of the triangle has an opinion such as good, bad and don’t
know. The user clicks inside the triangle to start the video
file. The user then moves the mouse near the corresponding
corners of the triangle where a certain opinion lies.
While the user is moving the mouse the location of the
mouse pointer within the triangle is being recorded for every second of the video file. The location of the mouse
pointer at any one time can then be measured against the
distances from the three corners of the triangle each showing a conflicting opinion. This gives three distance values
which can be used to evaluate the users opinion of the advert
for every second it is being played.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

where is the dimension of the triangle and
tance between the point and corner .
Thus in the example above we have

is the dis-

brightness factor Red
brightness factor Blue
brightness factor Green
These values are recorded and stored in a database for
every second of the advertisement.

From each triplet of brightness factors stored in the
database, a colour is created using the preset RGB colour
scheme. This colour is displayed as one small section on
the colour spectrum bar. The colour spectrum bar is created as the advertisement is viewed. It expands with time,
the colour changing in response to the viewers mouse movements.
Although the colour spectrum bar of a single user may
be merely pretty, the overall result of many of these bars

Figure 3. A User Session with REST.
stacked one on top of the other is much more meaningful.
A display of stacked bars will convey, literally in a glance,
the moments when the (majority of the) viewing audience
agreed that the advertisement was good or bad. This information will be conveyed by vertical bands of the same
colour. Thus a vertical band of red will imply that most
of the audience liked that particular section of the advert
whereas a vertical band of blue shows that most of the audience disliked that section.

The media player provides the ability to view the media
content that is to be reviewed via the REST interface. The
media player consists of a file chooser and a set of buttons
to control media playback. The media player gives the user
the ability to preview a media file before initiating a review.
The user can then play the video file by selecting the centre
of the triangle to begin the real time recording of the mouse
locations. When the video file ends it is an indication to
stop recording mouse location information.

The REST database enables users to register to assess
an advertisement and open a recording stream so that their
input can be transformed from numerical data into a visual
colour spectrum.
Recorded data is data aggregated and stored in a database
as brightness factors received for every second of the video
file played. This information is split into several tables and

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

referential integrity enforced. Details of users user names
and passwords are also submitted though the REST interface.
Further controls on the interface include the new review
button which enables the user to clear any previous reviews
made by the system. This includes clearing a users history of colour results and de-allocating the current media
file from the media player. The user then can select a new
media file to review and repeat the procedure shown previously. The final control on the interface is the Help Button
which displays a step by step guide on how to use the system in case the user is unsure as to how to use the system.

4. A User Session with REST
To begin a review session the user first selects the open
file button on the media player to select a media file to play.
The user then can select the preview button on the media
player to preview media footage. Once the user is satisfied
they have found the appropriate file they can start the review
by selecting the centre of the triangle. This will cause the
media file to restart and the recording of mourse locations
to begin. Once the media has started the user can move
the cursor around within the triangle near the relevant corners. The user can also pause and rewind the playing file.
As each second passes a colour spectrum appears under the
time scale line which represents the user’s opinion. Figure 3
shows the REST interface during this process.
Once the file has finished the colour bar ceases to produce anymore colours. When the advertisement has finished
calculations are performed on the data received to produce

Figure 4. User Session Results.

5. Uses of Shape and Colour

Love

Quite Like

Like

Don’t Like

Indifferent

Hate
Figure 5. Hexagon-Interface

Although this presentation of REST makes use of the
RGB colour space, there is further research to be undertaken
to determine which colours are best used to represent emotions. In their related work on Emotional Subtitles [9] the
authors are studying the relationship between colour, shape,
size and emotion. Changing the colours at the corners of
the user interface is possible and has great potential. Consider for example the benefits of using the colours red, blue
and yellow when researching political opinions. It should
also be feasible to change the shape of the tool thereby
incorporating a greater range of opinionsas appropriate to
the research being undertaken. For example, consider the
hexagon shown in figure 5.

6. Related Work

mean and median averages for each of the three opinions.
This information is then input into the database giving another means of analysing the results. This is done by the
user by selecting the save review button which displays a
textbox and a message asking for a username and password
to the database and the advert ID. This initiates a connection with the REST database and then inputs the results. A
spreadsheet of the results is also created with a filename
consisting of the username and advert ID. The results of a
REST session are shown in Figure 4.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

This section provides a brief overview of related work.
In [7] an early attempt is made at defining a framework for
examining the issues involved in developing information visualisation systems. This paper presents a framework for
the development of information visualisation systems and
addresses the components which must be considered in providing effective visualisations. A recent comprehensive taxonomy of information visualisation techniques can be found
in [10].
The form of the adapted assessment instrument called a
Spatial Probability Measure proposed in [8] has many similarities to the the REST interface. The use of the triangle interface and the monitoring of mouse input are both shared.

However in the REST system the interface is extended to
support information visualisation and a different calculation
is required to compute brightness levels. In [18] a new approach for the visualisation of time-series data based on spirals is described. this work provides an alternative view of
how large data sets can be interpreted and visualised.
LifeLines system [11] developed at the University of
Maryland. LifeLines provides an interface for visualising
biographical or personal history information. This is a good
example of how useful visual timelines such as the one proposed in this paper can be.
The Open Video Project [4], is an on-going effort to develop an open source digital video collection that can be
used for information retrieval and digital video research.
Comparisons can be drawn between the work reported here
and the general approach to the design of user interface
strategies developed as part of the project to enable people
to explore video from the collection effectively.
The work we present here has some similarities with that
reported in [18]. In this paper, an approach for the visualization of time-series data based on spirals is proposed. Spirals
are used to visualize large data sets and support the identification of periodic structures in the data. Our use of colour
spectrum’s as a visualisation technique for a time- series is
comparable with the use of spirals to specifically enhance
the identification of periodic patterns.

7. Conclusions
REST offers greater flexibility than previous visualisation interfaces without compromising on ease of use. The
dynamic interface allows users to record their true and instant reactions, change their opinion over time and express degrees of uncertaintly or preference relative to other
choices. The results can be displayed and analysed instantly
using the colour spectrum bar.

References
[1] C. Ahlberg and B. Shneiderman. Visual information seeking: Tight coupling of dynamic query filters with starfield
displays. In Human Factors in Computing Systems. Conference Proceedings CHI’94, pages 313–317, 1994.
[2] C. Chen, editor. Information Visualization Beyond the Horizon. Springer ISBN 1852337893, 2004.
[3] E. H. Chi. A taxonomy of visualization techniques using the
data state reference model. In INFOVIS ’00: Proceedings
of the IEEE Symposium on Information Vizualization 2000,
page 69, Washington, DC, USA, 2000. IEEE Computer Society.
[4] G. Geisler, G. Marchionini, M. Nelson, R. Spinks, and
M. Yang. Interface concepts for the open video project. In
ASIST 2001: Proceedings of the 64th ASIST Annual Meetings, v38, pages 58–75. ASIST, 2001.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[5] B. Johnson and B. Shneiderman. Tree-maps: A spacefilling approach to the visualization of hierarchical information structures. In Proc. of Visualization’91, pages 284–291,
San Diego, CA, 1991.
[6] D. A. Keim. Visual exploration of large data sets. Commun.
ACM, 44(8):38–44, 2001.
[7] J. B. Kennedy, K. J. Mitchell, and P. J. Barclay. A framework
for information visualisation. SIGMOD Rec., 25(4):30–34,
1996.
[8] D. R. Moore. Exploring gender effects on the spatial probability measure. In Proceedings of the 5th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies,
ICALT 2005, pages 435–436. IEEE Computer Society, 0508 July 2005.
[9] J. Ohene-Djan and R. Shipsey. E-subtitles: Emotional subtitles as a technology to assist the deaf and hearing-impaired
when learning from television and film. In 6th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies
Accepted, 2006.
[10] D. Pfitzner, V. Hobbs, and D. Powers. A unified taxonomic
framework for information visualization. In CRPITS ’24:
Proceedings of the Australian symposium on Information visualisation, pages 57–66, Darlinghurst, Australia, Australia,
2003. Australian Computer Society, Inc.
[11] C. Plaisant, B. Milash, A. Rose, S. Widoff, and B. Shneiderman. Lifelines: Visualizing personal histories. In CHI,
pages 221–227, 1996.
[12] M. Sarkar and M. H. Brown. Graphical fisheye views. Communications of the ACM, 37(12):73–84, 1994.
[13] B. Shneiderman and C. Plaisant. Designing the user interface: strategies for effective human-computer interaction.
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 2004.
[14] R. Spence, editor. Information Visualization. Addison Wesley; 1st edition, 2000.
[15] E. R. Tufte. The visual display of quantitative information.
Graphics Press, Cheshire, CT, USA, 2001.
[16] O. Turetken and R. Sharda. Development of a fisheye-based
information search processing aid (fispa) for managing information overload in the web environment. Decis. Support
Syst., 37(3):415–434, 2004.
[17] G. Ward and E. Eydelberg-Vileshin. Picture perfect rgb rendering using spectral prefiltering and sharp color primaries.
In EGRW ’02: Proceedings of the 13th Eurographics workshop on Rendering, pages 117–124, Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, Switzerland, 2002. Eurographics Association.
[18] M. Weber, M. Alexa, and W. M&#252;ller. Visualizing
time-series on spirals. In INFOVIS ’01: Proceedings of the
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01), page 7, Washington, DC, USA, 2001. IEEE Computer Society.

