Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2008
A. Vilanova, A. Telea, G. Scheuermann, and T. Möller
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 3

Classification and Uncertainty Visualization of Dendritic
Spines from Optical Microscopy Imaging
Firdaus Janoos†1 , Boonthanome Nouansengsy 1 , Xiaoyin Xu 2 , Raghu Machiraju 1 , and Stephen T.C. Wong 4
1 Dept.

of Computer Science and Engineering & The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA
and Molecular Imaging Center, & Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
4 Harvard Center for Neurodegeneration and Repair & Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
2 Functional

Abstract
Neuronal dendrites and their spines affect the connectivity of neural networks, and play a significant role in
many neurological conditions. Neuronal function is observed to be closely correlated with the appearance, disappearance and morphology of the spines. Automatic 3-D reconstruction of neurons from light microscopy images,
followed by the identification, classification and visualization of dendritic spines is therefore essential for studying
neuronal physiology and biophysical properties. In this paper, we present a method to reconstruct dendrites using
a surface representation of the dendrite. The 1-D skeleton of the dendritic surface is then extracted by a medial
geodesic function that is robust and topologically correct. This is followed by a Bayesian identification and classification of the spines. The dendrite and spines are visualized in a manner that displays the spines’ types and the
inherent uncertainty in identification and classification. We also describe a user study conducted to validate the
accuracy of the classification and the efficacy of the visualization.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.5 [Comp. Graphics]: Comp. Geom. and Obj. Modeling I.3.8 [Comp. Graphics]: Apps. I.4.6 [Image Proc. and Comp. Vision]: Seg.

1. Introduction
In neurobiology, the study of the morphology and
function of neuronal structures such as dendrites and
spines (see Fig. 1) is essential for understanding neuro–
degenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s [SMLS∗ 05],
Parkinson’s [CHW∗ 97], tuberous sclerosis complex syndrome [TAR∗ 05], and fragile X syndrome [JWR∗ 06, etc.].
Additionally, important aspects of cognitive function such
as learning, attention and memory are correlated with
spine morphology and distribution [ZKS∗ 04, etc.]. It is
hypothesized that spine structure affects the physiological
properties of the synapses located on them [BW88, etc.]
and is an important predictor of the function of neural networks [HJT92]. Accurate identification and morphological
classification of dendritic spines is an important problem
and has been widely studied. Most existing methods for
spine detection and classification have heavy requirements
† firdaus@ieee.org
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

of time consuming manual supervision and are infeasible
for large data-sets. Therefore, automated methods for 3-D
reconstruction, detection, classification and visualization
of dendritic spine morphology are needed in order to
study whether changes in their dimensions could alter their
biophysical properties [Dim02].
Although individual spines can be broadly classified as
“stubby,” “mushroom,” or “thin”, they do not neatly fall into
one of the three categories, but rather, exist as a continuum of
shapes [HJT92] and sizes (see Fig. 1(b)). It is desirable that
any automatic classification algorithm capture this uncertainty, and the visualization system display the uncertainty
in a perceptually meaningful fashion. “Leaving uncertainty
out of a data visualization promotes assumptions that lead
to more uncertainty in the reasoning process” [ZC07]. However, in the extensive literature that we surveyed, we could
not locate any such probabilistic method with respect to dendritic spines.
In this paper, we present a method to perform Bayesian

F. Janoos et al. / Uncertainity Visualization of Dendrite Spines

880

(a) Original microscopy data.

(b) After de-noising segmentation
and floating spine head connection.

Surface reconstruction.

Figure 1: Fig. (a) is a volume rendering of the original microscopy data. Fig. (b) shows a volume rendering after de-convolution,
de-noising, segmentation and floating spine head connection. The arrows in Fig. (b) point to some of the spines on the middle
dendrite. The blue arrows indicate clearly identifiable spines. The red arrow points to a more ambiguous case. Fig. (c) shows a
surface reconstruction of the dendrites.

spine identification and classification, followed by a visualization of the spines with a perceptual rendition of the uncertainty in classification. The dendrogram model of the dendrite is another contribution of this work. Also given are the
results of a user study we conducted to measure the accuracy
of the spine identification/classification and the perceptual
efficacy of the visualization. The outline of our paper is as
follows:
In section 2, we review the previous work in the domains
of spine identification and uncertainty visualization. In section 3, we briefly explain the reconstruction of the neuronal
dendrite from the 3-D microscopy image, the creation of
a surface representation, followed by the extraction of the
curve-skeleton (1-D backbone) based on the medial geodesic
function, and the construction of the dendrogram model. The
details of the reconstruction, and skeletonisation procedure,
along with parameter selection and quantitative validation
will be reported in [JMX∗ 08].
The Bayesian spine identification/classification scheme
which captures the spine type from among a continuum of
possible shapes is given in section 4. Using the principles of
uncertainty visualization, various methods of displaying the
dendrite to show the spine type and the uncertainty in classification are discussed in section 5. This section also gives the
results of a user study carried out to quantify the accuracy of
the identification/classification algorithm and the quality of
the visualizations. Finally, in section 6 we conclude with a
discussion on the techniques presented, and outline our directions for future investigation.
2. Related Work
2.1. Neuron Reconstruction and Spine Identification
The literature on neuron reconstruction is extensive and is
beyond the scope of this paper. See [Dim02] for a plenary
survey of neuron reconstruction and analysis methods. Most

of the current methods of reconstruction and spine analysis are semi-automatic, requiring frequent user guidance
[GG90, etc. ], and are consequently time consuming and not
reproducible. Some automated methods for reconstruction
represent neuronal structures as a tree of connected cylinders
or similar mathematical objects [AKLS∗ 02, etc. ], which detracts from their capability to provide accurate morphometry
and visualizations. They also have trouble detecting degenerate types of spines and have to be manually supervised.
Other methods [CRT94, etc. ] employ medial axis methods
to build a graph representation of dendritic structures and use
this to identify spines. Unfortunately, medial axis algorithms
tend to be very sensitive to noise, and hence suffer from poor
accuracy. In [KLZ∗ 02], the authors present a method to perform hard (binary) spine classification, and thereby fail to
capture the natural uncertainty in determining the spine type.
2.2. Uncertainty Visualization
A primary goal of effective visualization is to provide a complete and accurate visual representation of data and models for users to interpret. The visual representation of error and uncertainty, caused either at the point data creation, acquisition, transformation, analysis or presentation
is therefore important, and has been noted as one of the
top problems in scientific visualization [Joh04]. For a detailed overview on uncertainty visualization, the reader is
recommended to refer to [ZC07]. The following categorization of uncertainty visualization techniques were proposed in [PWL97]: (a) Glyphs, (b) Geometric modifications,
(c) Modifications of visual attributes, (d) Animations, (e)
Sonfications and (f) Psycho-visual adaptations. The following mechanisms have been variously proposed in literature
[LPSW96, PWL97, LP07, LFLH07, etc]: pseudo-color, displacement maps, bump maps, ribbons, flow envelopes, flowline curvature, batons, motion blur; volumetric techniques
such as displacement fields, opacity, and transfer functions;
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

F. Janoos et al. / Uncertainity Visualization of Dendrite Spines

sonifications such as tones and pitches; glyphs like barbell,
box, ellipsoidal, error-bar, spherical, vector, etc. Attributes
such as hue, saturation, brightness, sharpness, iso-surface
thickness, opacity, and reflectivity have also been used to express uncertainty [RLBS03, KUS∗ 05, etc]. Textures are another technique widely used to bring out the uncertainty in
visualizations [Int00, etc].
3. Reconstruction
In this section we briefly describe the dendrite reconstruction
pipeline consisting of de-noising, segmentation, floatingspine head connection, iso-surface extraction and fairing followed by curve-skeletonisation. We selected a surface representation over traditional neuronal models, because it has
the advantage that it faithfully captures the shape of the dendrite while allowing enforcement of smoothness constraints
on the shape. For a more detailed exposition on these methods the reader is referred to [JMX∗ 08].
3.1. Image Acquisition and Processing
3-D images of pyramidal neurons in rat hippocampi expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) were acquired using
a two-photon laser scanning microscope (2PLSM) with a
40× objective and 0.8 NA. The image stacks have dimension 512 × 512 × 12 voxels at 0.07µm × 0.07µm × 1µm resolution. Fig. 1(a) shows a volume rendering of the original microscopy image. Image de-convolution is required in
order to correct for the microscope’s point spread function
(PSF), which causes out-of-focus objects to appear in the
optical slice. The nature of the imaging process introduces
the following types of artifacts in the images: (i) photon shot
noise, (ii) photo-bleaching effects, (iii) unrelated structures,
and (iv)floating spine heads. These artifacts require the additional processing steps described next.
The excitation intensity in the neuronal tissue exhibits
shot noise and sharp variations, which prevents further analysis of the data such as segmentation and edge detection.
To eliminate this effect we use non-linear diffusion filtering [PM90] (Eqn. 1) to remove the high-frequency noise
while avoiding the blurring and localization problems of linear Gaussian smoothing.
∂u
= div(D(|∇uΣ |2 )∇uΣ )
∂t
1
D(|∇u|2 ) =
1 + |∇u|2 /λ2nl
uΣ = KΣ

u

on

Ω × (0, ∞),

regularized by an anisotropic Gaussian KΣ with a 10 : 10 : 1
ratio of scales.
Thanks to the edge enhancing property of non-linear diffusion, global thresholding of the intensity field gives a reliable and accurate segmentation of the dendrites. This is because the intensity variations outside the neuronal tissue are
almost zero, while edges at the boundaries of the neuronal
objects become sharper, and hence a threshold of just above
zero is very effective in isolating the dendrite.
The dendrite images contain floating spine heads, separated from the main dendritic backbone, caused due to
photo-bleaching and limited microscope resolution. The
sample also contains unrelated tissue fragments that show
up as disconnected blobs during imaging. While the spurious fragments need to be removed, the floating spine heads
need to be connected back to the main dendrite. It has been
observed that valid spine heads tend to point towards the
dendrite, while the dendrite also has a protrusion pointing
towards the spine, and both are in close proximity of each
other. Fig. 2(a) shows a 2-D projection of a segmented neuron image with three detached spine heads (circled in red)
and a few spurious fragments. For spine heads 1 and 3 locating the closest point on the main backbone is sufficient to
determine the connection. However, for case 2, a join to the
closest point (yellow arrow) is incorrect. Here, along with
the orientation of the spine head itself, the protuberance in
the dendrite (green arrow) should be used to guide the connection.
To connect valid floating spine heads with the dendrite,
the dendrite and the fragments are grown along the directions in which they protrude (i.e. directions of maximum curvature), using the active contours level-set formulation [CKS97]. The boundary ζ(t) = {x|ψ(x,t) = 0} of the
neuron at time t is encoded as the zero level-set of the field
ψ(x,t). The update equation of the level-set is given by:
∂ψ
= g(ψ)(c + κ)|∇ψ|
∂t

where,

g(ψ) =

1
. (2)
1 + |ψ|2

Here, κ is the curvature along the level-set contour and c
is a balloon force that evolves the level-set outwards. The
term κ|∇ψ| guides the evolution of the front using the local
curvature. If a join occurs within a fixed number of timesteps it is a valid spine, else it is discarded as a spurious
fragment.
Fig. 1(b) shows volume renderings of the data after deconvolution, de-nosing, segmentation and floating spinehead connection.

(λnl > 0),
.

881

(1)

Here, Ω is the domain of the image g : Ω → R; u(x, 0) =
g(x); and λnl plays the role of a contrast parameter, smoothing low contrast areas (|∇u| ≤ λnl ) and enhancing high
contrast areas (|∇u| > λnl ). To account for the 1 : 1 : 10
anisotropy in the imaging resolution, the diffusion filter is
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

3.2. Surface Extraction and Fairing
The surface of the binary dendritic volume is obtained by
iso-surfacing at any value between (0, 1), using extended
marching cubes [NH91]. This surface is over-tessellated and
suffers from artifacts of staircase noise and jagged edges. To

F. Janoos et al. / Uncertainity Visualization of Dendrite Spines

882

Fig. 3(a) shows a 1-D curve-skeleton (in blue) overlaid on its
dendrite.

(a) Floating spine heads

(b) Speed Image

(a)
(c) Connected Image
Figure 2: Illustrative example (in 2-D) of the floating spine
head problem and its solution. Fig. (a) shows the neuron image after segmentation with floating spine heads and spurious tissue fragments in 3-D. Fig. (b) shows the speed function that controls the level-set evolution. Fig. (c) shows the
floating spine head connected to the backbone.

eliminate these artifacts we first apply a Laplacian fairing
algorithm [Tau95], which smooths the mesh without shrinkage. Next, the tessellation density is reduced by decimating the mesh using the quadric error metric [GH98]. Fairing
and decimating the surface has two benefits: (i) it simplifies
the model and makes further computations more efficient,
and (ii) it allows us to control the smoothness of the model.
Fig. 1(c) shows the results after this step.
3.3. Curve-Skeletonisation
A curve-skeleton is a 1-D curve, possibly with branches, in
the center of the object. A related and much more well defined concept is the medial axis which is also referred to as
the skeleton. For a 3-D shape, however, the medial axis has
2-D components and, therefore, cannot be a substitute for a
1-D skeleton. Another disadvantage of the medial axis is its
intrinsic sensitivity to small changes in the object’s surface.
We use the definition of curve-skeleton based on the medial geodesic function [DS06], which combines an intrinsic property of the surface (the geodesic distances) along
with its embedding in R3 (the 2-D medial axis), thereby
capturing the shape information comprehensively. Such a
curve-skeleton is mathematically proven to be homotopically equivalent to the original object (topology preserving),
isometrically invariant, thin (1-D), centered within the object, able to distinguish the different components of the object, stable and robust, and it preserves object connectedness.

(b)

Figure 3: Fig. (a) shows surface rendering of a dendrite
with its 1-D curve-skeleton overlaid in blue. The dendrogram
is shown in Fig. (b) with branch chains in red and backbone
chains in blue. The original curve-skeleton is in green.

The curve-skeleton is used to construct an attributed tree
structure D ≡ {V, E}, called a dendrogram, which compactly encodes the geometry and topology of the dendrite.
The set of vertices is V = {vi |v ≡ (x, d)}, where x ∈ R3 are
the spatial coordinates, and d ∈ N is the degree of the vertex. The set of edges is E = e|e ≡ [vi , v j ], γ, d , where
vi , v j ∈ V are its vertices, γ is the length of the edge, and d is
the diameter of the medial ball.
The dendrite tree has two types of chains of edges
{e1 , e2 , . . . en }: (i) branch chains Cbr that start at leaf node
(v1 |d(v1 ) = 1) and end at a branch node (vn+1 |d(vn+1 ) > 2)
and (ii) backbone chains Cbb that run between two branch
nodes. In Fig. 3(b), the dendrogram of the curve-skeleton
(in green) is shown, with branch chains in red and backbone
chains in blue.

4. Spine Classification
The spine classification problem is twofold: (i) to determine
whether a branch chain is a valid spine, and (ii) to classify
the spine according to its shape.
In [HJT92], the authors suggest a taxonomy of spine
shapes (stubby, thin, and mushroom), based on spine length
(L), average spine diameter (davg ), spine diameter at the
head (dh ), and spine diameter at the neck (dn ). Valid spines
are constrained by a maximum (Lmax ) and minimum length
(Lmin ), and an upper limit dmax on their diameter. Spines are
said to be “thin”, if the length is greater than the neck diameter, and the neck and head diameters are similar. Spines are
“mushroom” if the head diameter is much greater than the
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

F. Janoos et al. / Uncertainity Visualization of Dendrite Spines

neck diameter. They are “stubby” if the neck diameter is similar to the spine length. (See Fig. 4) Spines in the mushroom
category may overlap the thin and stubby shape categories.

(i) Probability that Cbr is a spine: The probability that a
branch chain is a spine P(spine|Cbr ) is mediated only by L
and davg , and consequently P(spine|Cbr ) = P(spine|L, davg ).
Using Bayes’ rule:
P(spine|L, davg ) =

Figure 4: Morphological criteria for determining the shape
class of the dendritic spines. Figure reproduced from
[HJT92].

The following algorithm determines the length and various diameters of each branch chain Cbr .
i For each edge ek in the chain, its diameter dk and length
γk are known. Construct an edge–diameter curve of
(∑ki=1 γi , di ) pairs. (The blue solid line in Fig. 5). The
total length of the branch chain is L = ∑ni=1 γi
ii Fit an order–3 polynomial in a least-squares sense
through this curve. (The green dashed line in Fig. 5).
iii Determine dh , dn , and davg from the locations and values
of the maxima and minima and from the mean value of
the edge–diameter curve, as shown in Fig. 5.

883

P(L, davg |spine)P(spine)
P(L, davg )

(3)

We determined P(spine) = 0.44 through manual verification of a few dendrites in our data-set (6 dendrites,
with 74 branch chains). Assuming L and davg to be statistically independent, we get the marginal distribution
as P(L, davg ) = P(L)P(davg ). Using the Parzen window
non-parametric density estimation method [DHS00], we
learn marginals P(L) and P(davg ) for our entire data-set.
Again, assuming independence of L and davg , the likelihood
P(L, davg |spine) is modeled as a bi-variate Gaussian distribution P(L, davg |spine) = N (L|L, σL ) × N (davg |davg , σdavg ).
In the selected subset, we observed that the histograms of
lengths and thickness for true spines were Gaussian-like,
allowing us to model their likelihoods by Gaussians, with
means (L, davg ) and standard deviations (σL , σdavg ) respectively.
(ii) Probability that Cbr is thick: The ratio
L/davg determines the thickness of a spine, i.e.
P(thick|Cbr ) = P(thick|L/davg ). Again, by Bayes’ rule
P(thick|L/davg ) = P(L/davg |thick)P(thick)/P(L/davg ).
Here, we found P(thick) = 0.57 by manually examining the
same dendrites as in (i). The marginal P(L/davg ) was again
learnt using Parzen windows. The likelihood distribution
P(L/davg |thick) was approximated by a negative sigmoid
1/ 1 + exp −(L/davg − thickβ )/thickα . Here, thickβ ,
the center of the sigmoid, and thickα , its spread were
selected empirically.
(iii) Probability that Cbr is short: This probability is controlled solely by L. Therefore, P(short|L) =
P(L|short)P(short)/P(L). As in (i) and (ii), we found
P(short) = 0.71 and established P(L) using Parzen
windows. P(L|short) was also a negative sigmoid
1/ 1 + exp −(L − shortβ )/shortα , whose parameters
were empirically set.

Figure 5: The plot of branch chain diameter d versus length
l for a mushroom spine.
Due to the natural variability of shapes and sizes in dendritic spines, it is not always possible to cleanly partition a
spine into one of the three categories, and a “soft” or probabilistic classification mechanism is required. We propose a
Bayesian scheme for each branch chain Cbr , as follows.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(iv) Probability that Cbr is mushroom-shaped:
This term depends upon the ratio dh /dn . As before,
P(mush|dh /dn ) = P(dh /dn |mush)P(mush)/P(dh /dn ). In
steps similar as before, P(mush) = 0.28 and the distribution
for P(dh /dn ) were found. P(dh /dn |mush) was modeled by
positive sigmoid 1/ 1 + exp −(dh /dn − mushβ )/mushα ,
with manually set parameters.
(v) Probability that Cbr is thin shaped: This is given by
P(thin|Cbr ) = P(¬thick|Cbr )P(¬short|Cbr )P(mush|Cbr ).
(vi)
Probability
that
Cbr
is
stubby
shaped: This is calculated as P(stubby|Cbr ) =
P(thick|Cbr )P(short|Cbr )P(¬mush|Cbr ).

884

F. Janoos et al. / Uncertainity Visualization of Dendrite Spines

5. Visualization with Uncertainty Cues and Results
To visualize the results of the Bayesian spine identification and classification in a perceptually expressive fashion, we leveraged the paradigm of uncertainty representation through pseudo-color. In section 5.1 we present the visualization methods for the spine identification confidence
P(spine|Cbr ). In section 5.2, the visualization methods for
spine classification are presented. We polled our users with
regards to the accuracy of the classification algorithm and
perceptual merits of the visualization. The results of this user
study are described in section 5.3.
5.1. Visualizing Identification Uncertainty
In this case, the dendritic surface is associated with a single uncertainty variable, viz. P(spine|Cbr ). We display this
variable in one of the following ways (See Fig. 6):
(VIS-I) Modulation of surface hue surface.
(VIS-II) Modulation of surface saturation.
(VIS-III) Modulation of chrominance channel U of the
YUV color space.
5.2. Visualizing Classification Uncertainty
The problem of visualizing the classification information is a
much tougher one, as the dendritic surface is now associated
with four variables, viz. α = P(stubby|Cbr ), β = P(thin|Cbr ),
γ = P(mush|Cbr ), and Ψ = P(spine|Cbr ). To achieve this we
use the following color modulation schemes (See Fig. 6):
(VIS-IV) R, G, B as linear functions of α, β, γ and exponential in Ψ, i.e. R = (aα)qΨ . (Similarly for G, and B). The
optimal weights were selected manually for best perceptual
discrimination between spine shape classes.
(VIS-V) By using the α, β, γ weights to perform barycentric interpolation between red, green and blue in the perceptually uniform Luv color space, in terms of the u and v components. Here L = kΨ, where the perceptually optimal k was
empirically determined.
5.3. User Study
To evaluate the visualizations, we conducted a user study
with five expert users. Our data-set consisted of ten microscopy images, which had approximately three dendrites
each, and approximately fifteen spines per dendrite. In the
first study, the users were asked to examine the original microscopy images, identify the dendritic spines and classify
them, with confidence between [0, 1]. The results were aggregated across the users and compared with the results generated by our algorithm, using a Student’s t-test. False discovery rate (FDR) correction was performed for the multiple comparisons problem. The difference between the human and algorithmic classifications was not found to be statistically significant (α = 0.01). A summary of this study is

shown in Table 1. Here σH is the mean variation across the
users in the confidence values assigned to the same spine,
and σH−M is the mean variation between the average human assigned confidence value and the machine assigned
value. From this we note that the variation between human
and machine assigned confidences was of the same order as
the inter-human variation.
Table 1: Accuracy of identification and classification algorithm.

P(spine|Cbr )
P(thin|Cbr )
P(mush|Cbr )
P(stubby|Cbr )

σH
(Inter-human)
0.104
0.171
0.135
0.112

σH−M
(Human-machine)
0.143
0.119
0.124
0.132

The second study was designed to gauge the perceptual effectiveness of the different visualizations. For this, the users
were asked to rank the methods on a scale of 1 to 10, for the
following features: (Q-I) the method increases visual clutter (lower is better), (Q-II) the method aids in locating valid
spines, (Q-III) the spine classifications appear perceptually
correct, (Q-IV) the color scheme is intuitive and easy to understand, (Q-V) the visualization aids the study of the dendritic spines and their morphology. The results of this survey
are shown in Table 2. Based on this survey, we were able
Table 2: Results of user survey for the perceptual characteristics of the visualizations.
Method
VIS-I
VIS-II
VIS-III
VIS-IV
VIS-V

Q-I
6.1
3.3
5.2
4.1
4.2

Q-II
7.4
8.6
6.4
7.4
7.7

Q-III
NA
NA
NA
8.7
8.5

Q-IV
5.2
7.6
5.6
7.3
6.9

Q-V
7.7
8.6
7.2
6.5
7.8

to confirm the a priori expectation that the simple mapping
function for the single variable case to surface color saturation would produce the best perceptual results. While, it
was, as expected, harder to develop a good visualization for
the multi-variate uncertainty, we were surprised that a simple RGB color mapping (VIS-IV) could be perceptually so
rich and even comparable to the perceptually uniform Luv
color space. This may be explained, in part, by the fact that
most computer users are habituated to the RGB color space,
and have learnt to infer the weighting of the primaries from
the combined color.
6. Conclusion
We have presented a method to reconstruct dendrites and
their spines from 3-D microscopy imaging. We proposed a
surface representation of neurons in contrast to traditional
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

F. Janoos et al. / Uncertainity Visualization of Dendrite Spines

(VIS-I) Spine identification probability displayed as hue

885

(VIS-II) Spine identification proba- (VIS-III) Spine identification probbility displayed as saturation
ability displayed as a chrominance
channel (U from YUV )

(VIS-IV) Spine classification with
spine type controlling R, G, B channels

(VIS-V) Spine classification with
barycentric interpolation in the Luv
color space.

Figure 6: Visualization of spine identification and spine classification probabilities.

neuron models, as they provide better fidelity while allowing
control on the smoothness of the object boundary. We were
able to extract robust and topologically correct 1-D curveskeletons of the dendrites. In this paper, a dendrogram model
was developed to graphically express the dendrite. The main
contribution of this paper was a method to perform identification of valid spines, and classification of the spines based
upon their morphology, in a Bayesian fashion. The accuracy
of this method was compared with manually verified ground
truth, and was found to be within acceptable tolerance. The
results of the identification/classification algorithm were visualized according to principles of uncertainty visualization
through the use of pseudo-color. The quality and perceptual
merit of the visualizations were evaluated in a user study,
and its findings have been described.
From our experiments with a range of uncertainty visualization techniques (including noise, bump-mapping, geometric distortion and blurring - all not presented here), we
believe that color and opacity are highly descriptive in the
representation of uncertainty for the problem at hand. We
noted that visualization techniques that distort the shape of
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

the object (like bump-mapping) were not suitable in a clinical setting, and added too much visual clutter without conveying significantly more information. However, we feel we
not have yet identified the most optimal color modulation
functions that provide maximum discrimination of the information, with minimum visual clutter. Our current direction
of research involves finding perceptually better mappings
of the uncertainty variables to color/opacity, experimentally
and through a literature search of prior art. Going further, we
would like to explore other mechanisms of uncertainty visualization, such as textures and glyphs, to convey the spine
classification confidences.
References
[AKLS∗ 02] A L -KOFAHI K. A., L ASEK S., S ZAROWSKI
D. H., PACE C. J., NAGY G., T URNER J. N.,
ROYSAM B.: Rapid automated three-dimensional tracing of neurons from confocal image stacks. IEEE
Trans. Info. Tech. Biomed. 6, 2 (2002), 171–187.
[BW88]

B ENSHALOM G., W HITE E. L.: Dendritic spines

F. Janoos et al. / Uncertainity Visualization of Dendrite Spines

886

are susceptible to structural alterations induced by degeneration of their presynaptic afferents. Brain Res 443
(1988), 377–382.

N IMCHINSKY E. A., S VOBODA K.: An image analysis algorithm for dendritic spines. Neural Comp. 14, 6
(2002), 1283–1310.

[CHW∗ 97] C OMERY T. A., H ARRISDAGGER J. B.,
W ILLEMS P. J., O OSTRA B., I RWIN S. A., W EILER
I. J., G REENOUGH W. T.: Abnormal dendritic spines in
fragile X knockout mice: Maturation and pruning deficits.
PNAS 94 (1997), 5401–5404.

[KUS∗ 05] K NISS J. M., U ITERT R. V., S TEPHENS A., L I
G.-S., TASDIZEN T., H ANSEN C.: Statistically quantitative volume visualization. In IEEE Vis. (2005), pp. 287–
294.

[CKS97] C ASELLES V., K IMMEL R., , S APIRO G.:
Geodesic active contours. IJCV 22, 1 (1997), 61–97.
[CRT94] C OHEN A. R., ROYSAM B., T URNER J. N.:
Automated tracing and volume measurements of neurons
from 3-D confocal fluorescence microscopy data. J. Microscopy 173, 2 (1994), 103–114.

[LFLH07] L I H., F U C.-W., L I Y., H ANSON A. J.: Visualizing large-scale uncertainty in astrophysical data. In
IEEE TVCG (2007), vol. 13, pp. 1640–1647.
[LP07] L JUNG P., P ERSSON A.: Uncertainty visualization in medical volume rendering using probabilistic animation. IEEE TVCG 13, 6 (2007), 1648–1655.

[DHS00] D UDA R. O., H ART P. E., S TORK D. G.: Pattern Classification. Wiley-Intersci. Pub., 2000.

[LPSW96] L ODHA S. K., PANG A., S HEEHAN R. E.,
W ITTENBRINK C. M.: UFLOW: Visualizing uncertainty
in fluid flow. In IEEE Vis. (1996), pp. 249–254.

[Dim02] D IMA A.: Computer Aided Image Segmentation
and Graph Construction of Nerve Cells from 3D Confocal
Microscopy Scans. PhD thesis, Tech. Univ. Berlin, 2002.

[NH91] N IELSON G. M., H AMANN B.: The asymptotic
decider: resolving the ambiguity in marching cubes. In
IEEE Vis. (1991).

[DS06] D EY T. K., S UN J.: Defining and computing
curve-skeletons with medial geodesic function. In EUROGRAPHICS (2006), pp. 143–152.

[PM90] P ERONA P., M ALIK J.: Scale-space and edge
detection using anisotropic diffusion. IEEE PAMI 12, 7
(1990), 629–639.

[GG90] G LASER J. R., G LASER E.: Neuron imaging
˚ PC-based system for image combinwith neurolucidaUA
ing microscopy. Comp. Med. Imag. Graph. 14 (1990),
307–317.

[PWL97] PANG A., W ITTENBRINK C., L ODHA . S.: Approaches to uncertainty visualization. Vis. Comp. 13, 8
(1997), 370–390.

[GH98] G ARLAND M., H ECKBERT P. S.: Simplifying
surfaces with color and texture using quadric error metrics. In IEEE Conf. Vis (1998).

[RLBS03] R HODES P. J., L ARAMEE R. S., B ERGERON
R. D., S PARR T. M.: Uncertainty visualization methods in isosurface rendering. In EUROGRAPHICS (2003),
pp. 83–88.

[HJT92] H ARRIS K. M., J ENSEN F. E., T SAO B.: Threedimensional structure of dendritic spines and synapses
in rat hippocampus (CA1) at postnatal day 15 and adult
ages: Implications for the maturation of synaptic physiology and long-term potentiation. J. Neurosci. 12 (1992),
2685–2705.

[SMLS∗ 05] S PIRES T. L., M EYER -L UEHMANN M.,
S TERN E. A., M C L EAN P. J., S KOCH J., N GUYEN P. T.,
BACSKAI B. J., H YMAN B. T.: Dendritic spine abnormalities in amyloid precursor protein transgenic mice
demonstrated by gene transfer and intravital multiphoton
microscopy. J. Neurosci. 25, 31 (2005), 7278–7287.

[Int00] I NTERRANTE V.: Harnessing natural textures for
multivariate visualization. IEEE Comp. Graph. Appl. 20,
6 (2000), 6–11.

[TAR∗ 05] TAVAZOIE S. F., A LVAREZ V. A., R IDENOUR
D. A., K WIATKOWSKI D. J., S ABATINI B. L.: Regulation of neuronal morphology and function by the tumor
suppressors Tsc1 and Tsc2. Nat. Neurosci. 8 (2005),
1727–1734.

[JMX∗ 08] JANOOS F., M OSALIGANTI K., X U X.,
M ACHIRAJU R., W ONG S. T., H UANG K.: Robust 3d
reconstruction and identification of dendritic spines from
optical microscopy imaging. To appear in MedIA (2008).
[Joh04] J OHNSON C.: Top scientific visualization research problems. IEEE Comp. Graph. Appl. 24, 4 (2004),
13–17.
∗

[JWR 06] JACOBSEN J., W U C., R EDWINE J., C OMERY
T., A RIAS R., B OWLBY M., M ARTONE R., M ORRISON
J., PANGALOS M., R EINHART P., B LOOM F.: Earlyonset behavioral and synaptic deficits in a mouse model of
Alzheimer’s disease. PNAS 103, 13 (2006), 5161–5166.
[KLZ∗ 02]

[Tau95] TAUBIN G.: A signal processing approach to fair
surface design. In SIGGRAPH (1995), pp. 351–358.
[ZC07] Z UK T., C ARPENDALE S.:
Springer, 2007, pp. 164–177.

Smart Graphics.

[ZKS∗ 04] Z ITO K., K NOTT G., S HEPHERD G., S HENO LIKAR S., S VOBODA K.: Induction of spine growth and
synapse formation by regulation of the spine actin cytoskeleton. Neuron 44, 2 (2004), 321–334.

KOH I. Y. Y., L INDQUIST W. B., Z ITO K.,
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

