Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2008
A. Vilanova, A. Telea, G. Scheuermann, and T. Möller
(Guest Editors)

Volume 27 (2008), Number 3

Physically-based Dye Advection for Flow Visualization
Guo-Shi Li1 , Xavier Tricoche2 , and Charles Hansen1
1 Scientific

Computing and Imaging Institute, School of Computing, University of Utah, USA
2 Department of Computer Science, Purdue University, USA

Abstract
Dye advection is widely used in experimental flow analysis but has seen less use for visualization in computational
fluid dynamics. One possible reason for this disconnect is the inaccuracy of the texture-based approach, which is
prone to artifacts caused by numeric diffusion and mass fluctuation. In this paper, we introduce a novel 2D dye
advection scheme for flow visualization based on the concept of control volume analysis typically used in computational fluid dynamics. The evolution of dye patterns in the flow field is achieved by advecting individual control
volumes, which collectively cover the entire spatial domain. The local variation of dye material, represented
as a piecewise quasi-parabolic function, is integrated within each control volume resulting in mass conserving
transport without excessive numerical diffusion. Due to its physically based formulation, this approach is capable
of conveying intricate flow structures not shown in the traditional dye advection schemes while avoiding visual
artifacts.
Keywords: Flow Visualization, Dye Advection

1. Introduction
The advancements of computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) [And95] research has resulted in a large number
of flow datasets generated by numerical simulations.
New technologies, such as particle imaging velocimetry (PIV) [SWK03], also offer new ways to obtain the
quantitative measurements of flow fields from real-world
experiments. One way to effectively inspect the numerical
flow datasets of ever mounting size and complexity is
to recreate the computational analogy of experimental
techniques, since their visual interpretation has been well
studied and understood in the experimental fluid analysis.
One such technique is dye advection, which imitates a
scenario where the external dye material is continuously introduced into the flow field to depict global structures originating from the injection site. It has a long history in experimental fluid analysis and had contributed to many major
discoveries. In the CFD community, however, the use of dye
advection for the visual interpretation of the computational
data is relatively limited. One possible explanation for this
disconnect is the physical inconsistency between the visualization and the fluid simulation methodology. The standard
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

approach of dye advection in the flow visualization community is based on the principle of semi-Lagrangian texture advection, e.g. [JEH00, Wei04]. In this method, intermediate
Lagrangian points located at pixel centers are traced back in
time to transport the dye material. Although this formulation is easy to understand and allows for efficient hardware
accelerated implementations, it is inherently non-physical
and has severe drawbacks. The first issue is numerical diffusion, which introduces artificial diffusive behavior into
the resulting visualization. The second issue concerns the
conservation of mass. It is known that the semi-Lagrangian
advection scheme can spuriously increase or decrease the
mass of dye material due to the lack of a continuity formulation [Rnc92]. As illustrated in figure 1, the combination
of these two issues can result in misleading visualizations
which in turn lead to an incorrect interpretation of the underlying flow physics. Although several correction schemes
such as [JEH02, Wei04, SS04] have been proposed to tackle
these issues, they remain non-physical and therefore introduce undesirable artifacts into the visualization.
To address these problems, in this paper we propose a
physically-based dye advection scheme for flow visualiza-

728

Guo-Shi Li & Xavier Tricoche & Charles Hansen / Physically-based Dye Advection for Flow Visualization

Figure 1: Visualization of a synthetic flow exhibiting a splitting behavior. Left: dense texture visualization using GPUFLIC [LTH06]. Middle: dye advection visualization by the semi-Lagrangian texture advection scheme. The pattern appears
to be divergent and diffusive. Right: accurate visualization by the physically-based control volume dye advection scheme.

tion based on the fluid dynamics concept of control volume. In this method, the transport of the dye material by
the flow is achieved by advecting individual non-overlapping
control volumes collectively representing the entire spatial
domain. The local distribution of dye material within each
control volume is represented as a piecewise quasi-parabolic
function, which is integrated within control volumes to obtain the mass to be transported with less numerical diffusion [CW84]. The mass of the dye material is conserved
during advection thanks to the physically-based construct.
While not interactive, with this method the intricate structures in the numerical flow datasets can be faithfully conveyed without non-physical artifacts. Although similar concepts have been widely used in numerical simulations of
various disciplines such as meteorology [BPL04] and astrophysics [SKFS05], to our knowledge it is yet to be utilized
by the flow visualization community to achieve accurate dye
advection visualization.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2
we review related work of dye advection for flow visualization. Section 3 discusses the background of material transport phenomenon using texture advection. The theoretical
foundation of the physically based dye advection scheme
based on control volume advection and integration is provided in Section 4, followed by implementation details in
Section 5. The results, comparison to existing schemes, and
discussion are provided in Section 6. Finally, we conclude
the paper and point out possible future research avenues in
Section 7.
2. Related Work
Introducing foreign material such as smoke and dye into the
flow for visualization purposes has a long history in experimental fluid dynamics. Comprehensive discussions on this
topic from the experimental aspects can be found in standard
texts such as [Mer87]. In the flow visualization community,

many methods had been proposed to create the computational analogy of experimental techniques. Max [MBC93]
proposed the notion of the flow volume to visualize 3D flows,
which iteratively creates a tetrahedral grid from a starting
surface. The vertices of the starting surface are traced forward in time to form layers of prisms, which collectively
constitute the spatial dispersion of dye material induced by
the flow. It was later extended in [BML95] to unsteady flow.
Since this approach only computes the outmost boundary
of the dispersion phenomenon instead of the actual physical transport process, the resulting visualization cannot accurately convey the material distribution inside of the geometric grid.
Dye advection can also be implemented using the principle of texture advection. In this approach, the distribution
of dye material is represented as a color texture which is
evolved over time using the flow. Although methods belonging to this category are primarily designed for dense texture visualization, dye advection can be achieved when localized patterns instead of noise are advected in the texture.
Shen et al. [SJM96] introduced a searching scheme to propagate the dye material in the texture space and combined
it with LIC rendering [CL93] to highlight features in the
flow field. Jobard et al. [JEH00] proposed to use the dependent texture functionality provided by the graphics hardware
to iteratively advect and blend textures for flow visualization. Originally designed for steady flows, this method was
later extended to handle unsteady flows and was referred to
as Lagrangian-Eulerian Advection (LEA) [JEH01, JEH02].
Instead of per-pixel semi-Lagrangian backward advection in
LEA, Image Based Flow Visualization by van Wijk [vW02]
utilizes a coarser rectilinear grid to sample and warp the texture forward in time to achieve material transport. It is capable of emulating a wide range of dense texture flow visualization techniques as well as dye advection.
Texture advection methods are known to suffer from nuc 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Guo-Shi Li & Xavier Tricoche & Charles Hansen / Physically-based Dye Advection for Flow Visualization

Figure 2: Visual artifacts in non-physical texture advection.
Left: numerical diffusion in the semi-Lagrangian texture advection scheme. Right: clamping-based correction schemes
can cause unnaturally sharp patterns. If the correction is
applied periodically, popping artifacts can occur due to patterns that alternatively exhibit blurring and sharp boundaries.

merical diffusion. Jobard et al. [JEH02] introduced a clamping scheme to adjust the sharpness between the dye material and the background. Weiskopf [Wei04] modeled the interface between the dye material and the background as a
level-set distance field which was periodically re-initialized
to eliminate numerical dispersion. This scheme was later
extended in [WBE05] to visualize flow divergence. Kim et
al. [KLLR07] introduced an error compensation scheme into
levelset computation to reduce diffusion and dispersion.
3. Transport of Dye Material with Texture Advection
There are several options to achieve the transport of dye material in the flow field. The purely Lagrangian approach, in
which the dye released for advection is seen as a collection
of individual particles, is impractical due to the prohibitively
high computation and storage requirements. From the Eulerian standpoint, the conservation of dye material is described
as a function of space and time and can be expressed as the
following advection equation:

∂Φ
∂Φ
+v·
=0
∂t
∂x

(1)

where Φ and v are the material distribution function of
the dye and the vector field, respectively. Since the direct
solution to equation 1 has an unconditionally unstable error
term with exponential growth [KK03], in the flow visualization community the texture advection scheme is therefore
commonly used to avoid this problem. It is known as a semiLagrangian approach as the evolution of Φ is computed at
each discrete pixel center x of the domain:
Φ(x,t) = Φ(x ,t − ∆t)

(2)

where x is the departure point leading to x and is computed
by backward advection, and ∆t denotes the size of the time
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

729

step. Since x in general does not coincide with grid points,
interpolation is used to obtain Φ(x ,t − ∆t). Although the
semi-Lagrangian texture advection scheme is unconditionally stable even with relatively long time stepping [Sta99],
it is subject to numerical diffusion due to the use of linear
interpolation to sample Φ at x [BFMF06]. Please see figure 2 (a). Because this smearing phenomenon results purely
from the algorithm and is not related to the physical process, it can possibly lead to a wrong interpretation of the
dataset under investigation. Although clamping based methods [JEH02, Wei04] have been proposed to suppress the numerical diffusion term, their practicality is limited due to
their non-physical premise. The rate of the numerical diffusion introduced into the resulting visualization depends on
many parameters, including the size of spatial and temporal discretization, and most importantly, the dynamics of the
flow dataset itself. A single global threshold cannot properly deal with the aggregate influence of all these factors.
As a result, in complicated flows it is difficult to distinguish whether a feature is introduced by small scale flow
motion or numerical diffusion. This can cause the flow to
appear frozen [JEH00], or lead to popping artifacts in which
the patterns alternatively exhibit blurring and sharp boundaries if periodical resetting [Wei04] is employed. The resulting visualization also appears unnatural due to the binary
dye/background interface. Please refer to figure 2 (b).
Another issue associated with this approach not yet addressed by the flow visualization community is the violation of the law of conservation. It is well recognized that
the semi-Lagrangian scheme does not conserve invariant
properties of the system, such as mass of humidity in meteorology [NM02] or vorticity in visual simulation of fluids [ETK∗ 07]. This is because the interpolation polynomial
can overshoot or undershoot within the fixed local stencil,
causing artificial increase or decrease of mass to the system.
As illustrated in figure 3, a slight difference in the flow field
can cause either an increase or decrease of the total mass of
the system with the same initial dye material distribution. In
figure 1 (b), the dye pattern fails to branch due to the spurious increase of dye material, which in turn results in an
erroneous visualization where the flow appears to be divergent. Although this problem can be partially mitigated with a
monotonic interpolation function [FSJ01] or a posterior correction scheme [SS04], due to the lack of a continuity formulation these methods can only ensure global but not local
mass conservation. Detailed discussion on this issue can be
found in [Lau06].

4. Physically-based Dye Advection using Control
Volume Transport
The issues discussed in the previous section can be overcome
by a physically based formulation of the material transport
phenomenon based on the concept of control volume analysis commonly used in fluid dynamics [And95]. A control

730

Guo-Shi Li & Xavier Tricoche & Charles Hansen / Physically-based Dye Advection for Flow Visualization

Figure 4: Material transport via control volume integration.
The total mass contained in Vi (shaded in orange) is computed by integrating Φ at t n−1 .
Figure 3: 1D illustration of the non-conservative nature
of the semi-Lagrangian texture advection scheme. The total mass in the system can either decrease (top) or increase
(bottom) depending on the behavior of the flow.

which implies that total mass of the dye material M within
control volume Vi remains invariant over time.
4.2. Control Volume Advection and Mass Integration

volume is a closed system defined by virtual boundaries in
the flow field. According to the Reynolds Transport Theorem [CC06], the total mass contained within a moving control volume traveling with the flow remains constant as the
mass flux across its boundary is zero. The total mass to be
transported to a given control volume Vin thus should be
equal to that within Vin−1 , the same control volume at a
previous time. Using a figure of speech, it is equivalent to
throwing a net upstream to “fetch” the total mass enclosed
therein. Figure 4 provides a one-dimensional illustration of
this process. To compute the evolution of dye patterns in the
entire domain, it is discretized into non-overlapping control
volumes which transport the mass individually. In this section, we discuss the foundation of this physically-based material transport scheme for dye advection.
4.1. Continuity Equation
Consider an one-dimensional control volume Vi with two arbitrary moving boundaries x1 = x1 (x,t) and x2 = x2 (x,t),
integrating equation 1 then applying Leibnitz’s rule [LP95]
leads to:

d
dt

Z x2
x1

Φdx − Φ(x2 )

dx2
dx
− Φ(x1 ) 1
dt
dt

+ (Φ(x2 )v(x2 ) − Φ(x1 )v(x1 )) = 0

(3)

since the entire control volume is moving along the flow,
dx2
1
i.e. dx
dt = v(x1 ) and dt = v(x2 ), the above equation can be
simplified to the following continuity form:
dMVi (x1 , x2 )
d
≡
dt
dt

Z x2

Φ(x)dx = 0
x1

(4)

Based on the Reynolds Transport Theorem, the rate of
change of the dye material within control volume V is:

d
dt

Z xn
2
x1n

Φ(x,t)dx =

d
dt

Z xn−1
2
x1n−1

Φ(x,t − ∆t)dx +

Z xn
2
x1n

S(x,t)dx

(5)

where S represents the combined contribution of sink/source
terms. Integrating both sides of equation 5 by time, the total mass of dye material transported to V at t can be obtained
by integrating the material distribution function Φ within the
interval defined by the boundary of Vi at t − ∆t, plus the injection or removal of dye material made to Vi at t. In 1D the
boundary of Vi at t − ∆t, i.e. x1n−1 and x2n−1 , can be obtained
by backward integration. In 2D, assuming the boundary of
a control volume Vin is defined as a polygon, the same process is achieved by tracing its vertices back in time which
are then connected together to form a new polygon denoting
Vin−1 . It can be shown that the boundary of a convex control volume traced back in time remains convex if the time
stepping in terms of the Lipschitz number is not too large
for the flow shear [SP92]. The complete evolution of Φ over
time thus can be computed by evaluating equation 5 on every
control volume, which collectively discretizes the entire spatial domain. The transport of dye material using this method
is mass-conserving by construction.
4.3. Piecewise Quasi-parabolic Material Distribution
In addition to the physical foundation for conservative dye
advection provided in section 4.1 to 4.2, the local variation
of Φ in each control volume also needs to be specified to
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

731

Guo-Shi Li & Xavier Tricoche & Charles Hansen / Physically-based Dye Advection for Flow Visualization
dataset
size (x,y,t)
CV res
time(sec)
mass change(%)

Split
64x64x10
128x128
532.8
+3.2

JP8
200x200x400
400x400
10069.1
-4.7

Karman
768x231x1500
1536x462
43213.2
-5.1

Table 1: Dataset statistics and timing numbers.

Figure 5: Visualization results using (a) piecewise constant
and (b) quasi-parabolic material distribution function.

compute the integral in equation 5. Although mass conservation can be achieved with any parametric function satisfying
equation 4, it can be shown that the naive choice, i.e., piecewise constant distribution, is mathematically equivalent to
the first-order Euler-Forward scheme [LP95], which is excessively damped. In order to better capture the local variation of material distribution within each control volume, we
opt for the piecewise quasi-parabolic representation by Nair
and Machenhauer [NM02]:

Φi, j (x, y) = Φi, j + αx x + βx

1
− x2
12

+ αy y + βy

1
− y2
12

(6)

where Φi, j denotes the cell average within Vi, j , and both x
and y are assumed to be in the range of [−0.5, 0.5]. Other
coefficients are:
αx = ΦRi, j − ΦLi, j ,βx = 6Φi, j − 3(ΦRi, j + ΦLi, j )
D y
U
D
αy = ΦU
i, j − Φi, j ,β = 6Φi, j − 3(Φi, j + Φi, j )

(7)

D
ΦLi, j , ΦRi, j , ΦU
i, j , Φi, j represent the material distribution at
each of the four boundary midpoints of a two-dimensional
control volume and are obtained by cubical interpolation [CW84]. Figure 5 compares the visualization results between a piecewise constant and a quasi-parabolic material
distribution function using the same vector field as in figure 1.

5. Implementation
The physically-based formulation for advection described in
section 4 can be easily translated to implementation. Pseudocode can be found in the supplementary material at EG
Digital Library [EGD08]. Details are provided in the following.
The two dimensional spatial domain is evenly discretized
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

by M × N rectangular cells, each representing a control volume, Vi,nj . The boundary edges of Vi,nj are defined by its
corner points, which are shared with neighboring cells to
avoid uncovered spatial regions caused by numerical inconsistency. Please refer to figure 6 (a). Each cell maintains the
total mass of the dye material and the parameters in equation 7 derived from its neighboring cells. To achieve control volume based material transport, we first trace all corner
points back in time using the standard Runge-Kutta 4th order numerical integration scheme. Each Vi,n−1
j , constructed
with its corner points traced back in time (figure 6 (b)), is
then used to perform intersection tests against the rectangular cells of the spatial domain to generate a set of intersection
regions (figure 6(c)). In figure 6(d), the density distribution
function Φ is integrated over the intersection region using
Riemann sum. In all of our experiments 400 sample points
are evenly distributed in each intersection cell. The density
distribution function is evaluated on those that fall within
the intersection region. To accelerate the intersection and integration process, we only consider rectangular cells overlapped with the bounding box of Vi,n−1
j that contain non-zero
mass.
6. Results and Discussion
We have implemented the proposed physically-based control
volume transport scheme for two-dimensional dye advection
in C++ on a standard Windows PC with 2.4 GHz Intel Core
2 Duo processor and 3 GB of system memory. The Computational Geometry Algorithms Library (CGAL) [CGA08] is
utilized for polygon intersection. The statistics and performance numbers are reported in table 1.
Three flow datasets are used in experiments with the proposed physically based dye advection scheme. The visualization of dye advection is overlaid upon dense texture visualization showing instantaneous flow structures generated
by GPUFLIC [LTH06]. Split (figure 1) is a synthetic flow
showing a separating behavior. Figure 7 shows the visualization of the JP8 dataset, which is an unsteady pool fire simulation of burning jet engine fuel. The top, middle, and bottom
row of figure 7 compare the snapshots of the time sequence
generated with the proposed algorithm, the texture advection
scheme [JEH02], and the level-set method [Wei04], respectively. Compared to the proposed scheme, the texture advection method fails to faithfully convey detailed patterns due to
excessive diffusion and mass loss. In the level-set method the
upper structures in the flow are missing since the fast propagation of dye material in the proximity of the plume is com-

732

Guo-Shi Li & Xavier Tricoche & Charles Hansen / Physically-based Dye Advection for Flow Visualization

(
a
)
(
a
)

(
b)
)
(
b

(
c
)
(
c
)

(
d)

Figure 6: Control volume advection and mass transport in 2D. (a) The spatial domain is discretized into control volumes
sharing corner points. (b) Control volume Vinj advected back in time. Intersecting cells are shaded in light blue. (c) Intersection
regions of Vi,n−1
j . (d) The local density distribution function is integrated over the intersection region using Riemann sum on
sample points (purple).

pletely suppressed by clamping. The third dataset used in our
experiments is Karman (figure 8), a numerical simulation of
the classical von Kármán vortex street phenomenon, where
a repeating pattern of swirling vortices caused by the separation of flow passing over an obstacle. In this experiment,
the patterns generated by the texture advection method are
blurry due to numerical diffusion and loss of mass. In the
level-set method, intricate structures are lost because of the
binary dye/background threshold. Although the mass conservation is not perfectly achieved numerically due to inaccuracy caused by Riemann sum integration, this method is
capable of conveying detailed structures not shown in the traditional texture-advection method thanks to physically based
formulation. While the method is computationally expensive, we believe that interactivity can be achieved with a
parallel implementation since equation 5 is intrinsically Lagrangian and our algorithm is therefore embarrassingly parallel.
7. Conclusion and Future Work
We have proposed a novel physically-based dye advection
scheme for flow visualization. Unlike traditional texture advection based approaches, the proposed method is based
on the concept of control volume analysis typically used in
fluid dynamics. Due to its physically-based formulation, this
method is capable of faithfully depicting detailed structural
and temporal features in the underlying flow fields while
avoiding any non-physical artifacts, which is not achievable with existing texture advection based methods. Combined with dense texture technique the proposed method can
be used to accurately and effectively analyze the numerical
datasets resulted from CFD simulations without loss of details. Although this method is computationally intensive, its
control volume based formulation can easily lead to a parallel implementation for performance gains. In the future,
we would like to pursue a GPU acceleration scheme of the
proposed method for interactive visualization. Another possible avenue of future research is the extension to three-

dimensional unstructured grids, which is the common practice in the CFD community to discretize the computational
domain.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Daniel Weiskopf for providing leveset dye advection code. This work was made
possible in part by United States NSF CNS-0551724,
CCF-0541113, IIS-0513212; DOE ASC Alliance C-SAFE,
SciDAC-VACET; and NIH/NCRR CIBC P41-RR12553-08.
References
[And95] A NDERSON J. D.: Computational Fluid Dynamics. McGraw-Hill, 1995.
[BFMF06] B RIDSON R., F EDKIW R., M ULLER F ISCHER M.: Fluid simulation. SIGGRAPH 2006 course
notes, 2006.
[BML95] B ECKER B. G., M AX N. L., L ANE D. A.: Unsteady flow volumes. In VIS ’95: Proceedings of the 6th
conference on Visualization ’95 (Washington, DC, USA,
1995), IEEE Computer Society, p. 329.
[BPL04]

B OWLING L. C., P OMEROY J. W., L ETTEN D. P.: Parameterization of blowing-snow sublimation in a macroscale hydrology model. Journal of Hydrometeorology 5, 5 (2004), 745–762.
MAIER

[CC06] C ENGEL Y., C IMBALA J.:
Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Application. McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math, 2006.
[CGA08] C GAL, Computational Geometry Algorithms
Library, 2008. http://www.cgal.org.
[CL93] C ABRAL B., L EEDOM L. C.: Imaging vector
fields using line integral convolution. In SIGGRAPH
’93: Proceedings of the 20th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (New York, NY,
USA, 1993), ACM Press, pp. 263–270.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Guo-Shi Li & Xavier Tricoche & Charles Hansen / Physically-based Dye Advection for Flow Visualization

733

Time

Figure 7: Visualization of the JP8 dataset using dye advection. Top row: physically-based dye advection. Middle row: texture
advection method. Bottom row: level-set method. The time sequence is from left to right.

[CW84] C OLELLA P., W OODWARD P.: The piecewise
parabolic method (PPM) for gas-dynamical simulations.
Journal of Computational Physics 54 (1984), 174–201.
2008.

M. Y.: Lagrangian-eulerian advection for unsteady flow
visualization. In VIS ’01: Proceedings of the conference
on Visualization 2001 (Washington, DC, USA, 2001),
IEEE Computer Society, pp. 53–60.

[ETK 07] E LCOTT S., T ONG Y., K ANSO E., S CHRÖDER
P., D ESBRUN M.: Stable, circulation-preserving, simplicial fluids. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 26, 1
(2007), 4.

[JEH02] J OBARD B., E RLEBACHER G., H USSAINI M.:
Lagrangian-Eulerian advection of noise and dye textures
for unsteady flow visualization. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 8, 3 (2002), 211–
222.

[EGD08] Eurographics
Digital
http://www.eg.org/EG/DL.

Library,

∗

[FSJ01] F EDKIW R., S TAM J., J ENSEN H. W.: Visual
simulation of smoke. In SIGGRAPH ’01: Proceedings of
the 28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (New York, NY, USA, 2001), ACM,
pp. 15–22.
[JEH00] J OBARD B., E RLEBACHER G., H USSAINI
M. Y.: Hardware-accelerated texture advection for unsteady flow visualization. In VIS ’00: Proceedings of
the conference on Visualization 2000 (Los Alamitos, CA,
USA, 2000), IEEE Computer Society, pp. 155–162.
[JEH01]

J OBARD B., E RLEBACHER G., H USSAINI

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

[KK03] K ARNIADAKIS G. M., K IRBY R. M.: Parallel
Scientific Computing in C++ and MPI. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, USA, 2003.
[KLLR07] K IM B., L IU Y., L LAMAS I., ROSSIGNAC J.:
Advections with significantly reduced dissipation and diffusion. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 13, 1 (2007), 135–144.
[Lau06] L AURITZEN P.: An inherently mass-conservative
semi-implicit semi-lagrangian model. Ph.d thesis: Department of Geophysics, University of Copenhagen, 2006.
[LP95]

L APRISE J. R., P LANTE A.: A class of semi-

734
Time

Guo-Shi Li & Xavier Tricoche & Charles Hansen / Physically-based Dye Advection for Flow Visualization

Figure 8: Visualization of the Karman dataset using dye advection. Left column: physically-based dye advection. Middle column: texture advection method. Right column: level-set method. The time sequence is from top to bottom.

lagrangian integrated-mass (slim) numerical transport algorithms. Monthly Weather Review 123, 2 (1995), 553–
565.

fragmentation:. mass accretion and evolution of protostars. Memorie della Societa Astronomica Italiana 76
(2005), 193–210.

[LTH06] L I G.-S., T RICOCHE X., H ANSEN C.: GPUFLIC: Interactive and accurate dense visualization of unsteady flows. In Eurographics/IEEE-VGTC Symposium
on Visualizations (2006), pp. 29–34.

[SP92] S MOLARKIEWICZ P. K., P UDYKIEWICZ J. A.: A
class of semi-Lagrangian approximations for fluids. Journal of Atmospheric Sciences 49 (Nov. 1992), 2082–2096.

[MBC93] M AX N., B ECKER B., C RAWFIS R.: Flow volumes for interactive vector field visualization. In VIS ’93
(1993): Proceedings of the 6th conference on Visualization ’93 (1993), IEEE Computer Science Press, pp. 19–
24.
[Mer87] M ERZKIRCH W.: Flow Visualization Second
Edition. Academic Press Inc. (London), 1987.

[SS04] S UN W.-Y., S UN M.-T.: Mass correction applied
to semi-lagrangian advection scheme. Monthly Weather
Review 132, 4 (2004), 975–984.
[Sta99] S TAM J.: Stable fluids. In SIGGRAPH ’99:
Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (New York,
NY, USA, 1999), ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing
Co., pp. 121–128.

[NM02] NAIR R. D., M ACHENHAUER B.: The massconservative cell-integrated semi-lagrangian advection
scheme on the sphere. Monthly Weather Review 130, 3
(2002), 649–667.

[SWK03]

[Rnc92] R NCIC M.:
Semi-lagrangian piecewise biparabolic scheme for two-dimensional horizontal advection of a passive scalar. Monthly Weather Review 120, 7
(1992), 1394–1406.

[vW02] VAN W IJK J. J.: Image based flow visualization.
In ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) (New York, NY,
USA, 2002), ACM Press, pp. 745–754.

[SJM96] S HEN H.-W., J OHNSON C., M A K.-L.: Visualizing vector fields using line integral convolution and dye
advection. In VIS ’96: Proceedings of the 6th conference
on Visualization ’96 (San Francisco, CA, USA) (1996),
IEEE Computer Society Press, pp. 63–70.
[SKFS05] S CHMEJA S., K LESSEN R. S., F ROEBRICH
D., S MITH M. D.: Star formation from gravoturbulent

S TANISLAS M., W ESTERWEEL J., KOMPEN J.:
Particle Image Velocimetry: Recent Improvements: Proceedings of the EUROPIV 2 Workshop.
Springer, 2003.
HANS

[WBE05] W EISKOPF D., B OTCHEN R. P., E RTL T.: Interactive visualization of divergence in unsteady flow by
level-set dye advection. In SimVis (2005), pp. 221–232.
[Wei04] W EISKOPF D.: Dye advection without the blur:
A level-set approach for texture-based visualization of unsteady flow. Computer Graphics Forum 23, 3 (2004),
479–488.

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

