Interactive Poster: Resource Systems Reference Database
David Lu *

Lauren Dietrich

Futurefarmers

Stanford University

Figure A.

ABSTRACT

This interactive poster proposes a novel, explorative way to
browse a database containing links to resource systems-related
information online. Our approach is an illustrative one, and draws
on our combined backgrounds in computer science, graphic and
interaction design, sustainability, community organization, and
urban design. The data visualized in our prototype was collected
by students in the course Sustainable Habits, which Lauren
Dietrich taught at Stanford University during Winter 2004.

Figure B.

Students, in their research and reading, contributed 70+ pieces
of resource system and sustainability-related literature to a shared
reference collection. The goals of this visualization project were
to:

CR Categories:
H.4.3 [Information Browsers], H.5.2
[Graphical User Interfaces (GUI), Interaction Styles, Screen
Design]
Keywords: sustainability
1

INTRODUCTION

The course Sustainable Habits, recently taught [1] at Stanford
University by co-author Lauren Dietrich, strove to encourage a
questioning of provisions, to inform the community about
resources we are dependent upon, and promote a systems
understanding of individuals as members of resource cycles.
Course participants looked in depth at the operational systems
providing basic need services to Stanford campus. Assessing the
sustainability of both the resource systems and our impacts within
these systems, students considered their own habits. Synthesizing
learning from lectures, readings, and personal research, students
worked with University staff to assess both efficiency of existing
systems and student awareness of resource consumption, and
provided suggestions for enhanced sustainability in systems
management.
* email:
** email:

dahveed@david-lu.net
lifegame@stanford.edu

**

2

1.

develop a visual language for expressing individual
references and their relationships to resource system
categories;

2.

design a malleable, explorative interface for browsing
the reference collection;

3.

encourage reflection about sustainability.

DATA

Each reference in the reference collection possessed attributes
such as Title, Author, Publication Date, and Locator (URL). It also
possessed number values, ranging from 0 to 3, indicating a level
of relevance to each of 8 categories of resource systems: food,
water, buildings, time, energy, organization, wastes, and
transportation. A value of 3 indicated a strong relationship. A
value of 0 indicated a nonexistent one. In addition, the reviewer of
the reference was allowed to annotate the reference with
comments. A snapshot of the data used for the project is available
for download as an XML file [2].
3

VISUAL LANGUAGE & INTERACTION

The visualization presented in this poster evolved from handdrawn idea sketches to a refined, screen-based software prototype
[3] implemented in Macromedia Flash and ActionScript. This
prototype can be viewed in any browser equipped with version 7
or higher of the Flash plug-in.
Research references contributed by students at Stanford
University together create an emergent visual composition [Figure
A]. Each reference, represented by a square, is connected to one or
more resource systems. Clicking a resource system text label
reveals references to which it is connected.

Figure C.

Figure D.

Figure E.

Figure F.

Line weight conveys strength of relationship [Figure B]. A
heavy line indicates that a reference features a system. A medium
weight line indicates that a reference includes a system. Finally, a
thin line indicates that a reference merely mentions its connected
resource system. References that feature a system are additionally
treated with overlay text in orange.
When lines have been turned on for multiple systems,
references belonging to the intersection of sets are highlighted
[Figure C]. Here, references that belong to both the food and
water systems are highlighted, and marked with overlay text.
Resource system labels can be dragged, allowing for a
malleable composition [Figure D]. Here, the categories Buildings
& Infrastructure and Energy & Infrastructure are isolated in
relation to the other systems.

4

CONCLUSION

It is our hope that this visualization be the first in a series of
interpretations of interconnected systems data. We see this initial
sketch as a learning exercise, in which we have developed a
compelling visual vocabulary for expressing patterns and
relationships.
We also intend this to be a starting point for viewers to explore
their connections to myriad systems through commonplace
activity and life-sustaining daily habits. It is our hope that systems
visualizations may provide tenable access to complex
information; by highlighting patterns of mutual influence and
accurately connecting actions to effects we hope such
visualizations bring about social change in an emergent way.
To view the software prototype, please visit [3].

Hovering [Figure E] over any orange overlay text will reveal
meta information (Title, URL, Author, Publication date, Reviewer,
Reviewer Comments) about the active reference. Clicking will
open the reference in a new browser window.
Similarly, hovering over any square will reveal the same
details, and will display connections to related resource cycles
[Figure F].

REFERENCES
[1] http://sustainability.stanford.edu/cee57si.html
[2] http://tenableinfo.net/resource_systems/database.xml
[3] http://tenableinfo.net/resource_systems/

