InfoVis 2004 Contest: WilmaScope Graph Visualisation
Adel Ahmed∗

Tim Dwyer†

Colin Murray‡

Le Song§

Ying Xin Wu¶

School of Information Technologies
The University of Sydney, Australia
National ICT Australia

A BSTRACT
Our visualisation of the IEEE InfoVis citation network is based
on 3D graph visualisation techniques. To make effective use of
the third dimension we use a layered approach, constraining nodes
to lie on parallel planes depending on parameters such as year of
publication or link degree. Within the parallel planes nodes are
arranged using a fast force-directed layout method. A number of
clusters representing different research areas were identiﬁed using
a self organising map approach.
Keywords:
map
1

infovis contest, graph visualization, self organizing

O UTLINE

Our general approach is a fairly standard visualisation pipeline with
the following steps: (1) parse the data ﬁle and generate the internal
data structures; (2) classify papers and authors; generate graphs,
ﬁltering edges and colouring nodes according to classiﬁcations; (3)
ﬁnd clear layout for the graph; and (4) generate still images and
animations of the graph.
Steps 1–3 are achieved using custom Java programs. The result
of step 3 is a set of ﬁles which can be loaded into the WilmaScope
(http://wilma.sourceforge.net) graph visualisation system.
A custom layout engine was created for WilmaScope which provided improved layout for the scale-free networks that were created
by step 2. The ﬁnal images and animations were created by loading
the WilmaScope graph ﬁles with the node-positions determined in
step 4, into a 3D modelling package.
2

C LASSIFICATION

The paper classiﬁcation method is based on a spherical selforganizing-map (SOM) [5]. The vector data using to train the SOM
is calculated based on a term histogram. Each document is transformed to a vector based on the frequency of words in its title, abstract and keywords. We use a stemmer to change the words into
their morphological root and we use a stop-word list to eliminate the
meaningless words such as “the”, “some”, etc. After that, the most
popular words (“information”, “visualization”, “data” etc.) and the
words that appear less than 5 times in total are eliminated. 827
∗ e-mail:

aahmed@it.usyd.edu.au

† e-mail:dwyer@it.usyd.edu.au

‡ e-mail:cmurray@it.usyd.edu.au
§ e-mail:lesong@it.usyd.edu.au

¶ e-mail:Christine.Wu@nicta.com.au

National ICT Australia is funded by the Australian Government’s Backing Australia’s Ability initiative, in part through the Australian Research
Council

Figure 1: Research Area Evolution

words remain so each vector is 827 dimensional. Some papers were
removed because no words remained after the above preprocessing.
In order to increase the accuracy, we weighted each word according
to the term frequency / inverse document frequency. The clustering
is then done by a 42 neuron spherical self-organizing map.
The following research areas were identiﬁed based on the ﬁrst
method: “Database Query and Data Mining”, “System Design”,
“Web Data”, “Interaction”, “Graph Drawing”, “Focus + Context
Techniques”, “Software Visualization”, “Hierarchy”, “Multidimensional Data Analysis”, “Trees”, “Text and Image Information Retrieval”
3

G RAPH D EFINITIONS

In order to investigate the data-set from different perspectives, several different graph deﬁnitions were used. A graph G = (V, E) consists of a set of nodes V and edges E where each edge e = u, v
represents a relationship between two nodes u, v ∈ V .
Citation Network — The citation network is the most direct mapping of the source data to a graph structure G. Each node v ∈ V
is a paper. We considered two deﬁnitions for the set V : (1) all papers including papers from outside the IEEE InfoVis proceedings
such that |V | = 1800; (2) only those papers from the IEEE InfoVis
proceedings: |V | = 600.
The graph G is directed in that each edge is an ordered pair (u, v)
such that u cites v.
Co-Citation Network — Nodes are again papers. Edges are unordered pairs e = u, v such that u, v ∈ V are papers that appear to-

edges. We therefore customised the FADE algorithm in several different ways to better show the network topology. The ﬁrst variation
uses edges that repel instead of attracting. No repulsive force is
used, instead a force uniformly attracting all nodes to the origin is
added. The result is that high degree nodes are pushed to the outside where they can be seen more clearly. The second variation is a
more typical FADE method but proceeds in several stages. Firstly,
positions are found for the highest degree nodes. These positions
are then ﬁxed while lower degree nodes are positioned. This approach is based on an idea from [1] but the third dimension is used
to better show the degree-based partitioning of nodes by assigning
the different classes of nodes to different layers. One of our renderings, with layers constrained to concentric spherical shells, is
shown in Figure 2.
We arranged the research area evolution graph by constraining
research area nodes to layers deﬁned by year. See Figure 1.
5

Figure 2: Citation network

gether (co-cited) in at least one other paper’s list of citations. Each
edge e is assigned a weight we according to the number of papers in
which u and v are co-cited. |V | = 523 and |E| ≤ 7000. |E| is easily
reduced to a more manageable number by thresholding on we .
Author Network — Nodes are authors of IEEE InfoVis papers.
An edge e = u, v exists if there is at least one paper for which u
and v are both authors. The weighting we is assigned based on the
total number of papers coauthored by u and v. |V | = 981 and |E| >
10000. Again, in the examples E is ﬁltered based on a threshold on
we .
Research Area / Author Network — A slight modiﬁcation to the
Author network involved adding a node for each of the 11 research
areas identiﬁed above. Edges were then created between each author node and the node for each research area in which that author
had published a paper.
Research Area Evolution Network — We created a graph (network) of citations between research areas in different years. That
is, we created a graph G = (V, E) where each node u ∈ V represents
all the papers published in a particular year in one of the above research areas and each directed edge (u, v) ∈ E indicates a citation
in a paper u of a paper in v.
Before visualising this graph we created additional edges between pairs of nodes representing sequential years in the same research area. Thus all nodes in each research area formed a chain
(“worm”), ordered by year of publication. See Figure 1.
4

G RAPH L AYOUT

Force-directed layout was chosen for its innate ability to show clustering and outliers. In order to better utilise the 3D visualisation
space we constrained nodes to lie on a series of parallel planes, see
[4]. Various assignments of nodes to planes were tried, for example:
in-degree (eg. number of citations) or year of publication.
In order to layout the large graphs in reasonable time a version of
the FADE algorithm [7] was implemented, reducing the complexity
of the force-directed algorithm with a spatial partitioning.
We found that the citation and author networks were scale-free,
with the degree of connectedness of nodes following a power law
such that a small number of nodes participated in the majority of

G ENERATING STILL IMAGES AND ANIMATIONS

In order to render the ﬁnal images and animations the graphs arranged by WilmaScope were imported into 3DS Max using a number of custom scripts. The animations were carefully constructed to
demonstrate effective navigation through the graph structure — focusing on one node then navigating to another following a camera
path that attempts to preserve a viewer’s mental map of the graph.
6

R ESULTS

Detailed results are discussed in our competition report. However,
our most notable ﬁndings were (brieﬂy): most highly cited papers
were clearly visible as “peaks” in the degree based partitioning of
the citation network; erroneous future citations were clearly evident from the research area evolution “worms” visualisation (see
Figure 1); and research organisations — headed by a small number
of famous, senior researchers, with lesser, typically, postdoctoral
researchers in the middle tier and students and afﬁliates in the bottom tier — were visible as “mountains” in the Co-Citation network
(see Figure 2).
R EFERENCES
[1] Visualisation of power-law network topologies. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh IEEE International Conference on Networks (ICON 2003),
pages 69–74. IEEE, 2003.
[2] Jan William Buzydlowski. A comparison of self-organizing maps and
pathfinder networks for the mapping of co-cited authors. PhD thesis,
Drexel University, 2002.
[3] Chaomei Chen and Steven Morris. Visualizing evolving networks:
Minimum spanning trees versus pathfinder neworks. In Proceedings of
the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualisation, pages 67–74, 2003.
[4] David Dodson. Comaide: Information visualization using cooperative
3d diagram layout. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium
on Graph Drawing (GD’95), volume 1027 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 190–201. Springer, 1995.
[5] T. Kohonen. Self-Organizing Maps, volume 30 of Information Sciences. Springer, third edition, 2001.
[6] A. Quigley. Large Scale Relational Information Visualization, Clustering, and Abstraction. PhD thesis, University of Newcastle, Australia,
2001.
[7] A. Quigley and P. Eades. Fade: Graph drawing, clustering, and visual abstraction. In Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium
on Graph Drawing (GD2000), volume 1984, pages 197–210. Springer,
2000.

