Case Study: Visualizing Visualization
Frank van Ham∗
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
Technische Universiteit Eindhoven
P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven
The Netherlands

A BSTRACT
In this case study we attempt to visualize a real-world dataset consisting of 600 recently published information visualization papers
and their references. This is done by first creating a global layout
of the entire graph that preserves any cluster structure present. We
then use this layout as a basis to define a hierarchical clustering.
The clusters in this hierarchy are labelled using keywords supplied
with the dataset, allowing insight into the clusters semantics.
CR Categories:
H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces—Graphical User Interfaces; H.2.8 [Database
Management]: Database Applications—Data Mining I.5.5 [Pattern
Recognition]: Clustering—Algorithms
Keywords: Graph Visualization, Graph Drawing, Clustering,
Small World Graphs, Information Visualization

1

I NTRODUCTION

Cross referenced document collections such as the one presented in
the 2004 Information Visualization contest are very commonplace
in today’s world. Other examples include large encyclopedias or
dictionaries and even the Internet itself can be thought of as a document collection. Insight in the structure of these networks can tell
us a lot about the prevailing global topics and their interrelations.
However, visualizing these networks can be quite a challenge because of their often highly interconnected nature.
A useful concept in this respect are small world graphs, first discovered by Milgram [1] in 1967. Small world graphs are graphs
that have a small average shortest path length (the average length of
the shortest path between all pairs of nodes). The only property that
distinguishes them from random graphs is the fact that small world
graphs are clustered to some extent. That is, we can identify groups
of nodes that have a lot of interconnections (connections to other
nodes in the same group), while having a comparably small number
of intraconnections (connections to other nodes in different groups).
The amount of clustering in a graph can be expressed by the clustering coefficient [3]. The clustering coefficient is 1 for a complete
graph and 0 for a graph with no edges. We computed clustering
coefficient of 0.064 for this graph, an equally sized graph with a
random edge distribution has a coefficient of 0.005, indicating that
some clustering is present in the contest graph. Since this clustering
is the only thing that separates this graph from a random graph our
visualization will focus on extracting these structural clusters. For
this we employ a modified force directed layout technique to create
a global layout, and then cluster the graph based on this layout. We
∗ e-mail:

fvham@win.tue.nl

discuss this layout technique and the clustering in section 2. An
overview of the analysis process is given in section 3. Finally we
discuss results in section 4.
2

L AYOUT AND CLUSTERING

One way to extract cluster structure from the given graph, is by
explicitly clustering the graph based on its structure. Clustering
in itself is a fuzzy problem however, there is no single clear-cut
definition of a cluster and based on the structure of a graph, it is
very well possible that nodes can belong to multiple clusters. Even
when given a clustering, creating a satisfactory layout of a small
world graph is no trivial task, because of the large number of edges.
Instead we use a different approach and base the clustering of a
graph on its layout. This is only possible if the layout accurately
reflects the clustering. We adapted a force directed layout technique
with a modified force model from [2]. The result is a layout of the
entire graph in which the geometric distance between two clusters
of nodes is inversely proportional to the coupling between the two
clusters. The coupling between two clusters A and B is defined as
E(A,B) / (Size(A) * Size(B)) where E(A,B) represents the number
of edges connecting A and B. In these layouts strongly connected
groups of nodes show up as visually dense clusters of nodes, and the
closest (groups of) nodes are those which are coupled the strongest.
Based on the layout generated in the previous step we can generate a clustering. First, we assign all nodes to singleton clusters. We
then iteratively select and merge the geometrically closest clusters
in the layout, assigning this newly created cluster to the weighted
average positions of the previous clusters. This process is repeated
until we are left with one single cluster, resulting in a binary hierarchy of clusters. Each cluster is assigned a level l in the hierarchy
that corresponds to the distance between its two subclusters.
We can then abstract from the layout by defining a minimum
abstraction level A, and only displaying the part of the cluster hierarchy with l > A. We can even define an increasing function A(d) in
which the abstraction level depends on the distance to a focal point
f , to obtain a view with local detail inside a global context.
3

A NALYSIS

As a basis for the analysis of the data we first created a global layout
using the force directed algorithm described in the previous section.
The resulting layout showed a large central cluster with a number
of satellite clusters. Most satellite clusters could be easily identified as side interests of Information Visualization by examining the
paper titles, classifying them as algorithm animation, volume visualization and image similarity. Inside the main cluster there was
some smaller scale clustering present, but manual inspection did
not reveal any immediate clues for their shared content (if any). We
created a hierarchical clustering based on this layout and coarsened
the graph to about a quarter of its original size (150 nodes). Since
each paper has a number of keywords attached we can use these
to scan for common keywords in a clustered set of papers to get

Figure 2: Cooperations between researchers in the InfoVis ﬁeld.

Figure 1: Overview image of the InfoVis research ﬁeld.

an impression of the clusters content. There were three problems
however.
First, not all papers had keywords, we solved this by adding the
words in the papers title to the keyword set of a paper. Secondly,not
all keywords are meaningful. For example, some keywords are too
general (’information visualization’), and some words in the paper
title are not relevant (’a’,’an’,’with’). To solve this we manually
created a list of keywords that are to be ignored.
A final (bigger) problem is that there is no uniformity in keywords: fisheye techniques are keyworded with (amongst others) ’fisheye’, ’fish-eye’, ’fish-eye technique’ and ’fisheye views’.
The same goes for treemaps (’treemap’,’tree-maps’,’tree-map’
and ’tree-map visualization technique’), multidimensional (’multidimensional’,’multi-dimensional’,’multi-dimensional information
space’,’multidimensional information space’) and many others.
These differences in spelling reduce the accuracy in mapping keywords to clusters. Since we expected to find clusters of common
authors, we also included author names in the keyword set. Unfortunately, author names suffered from the same problem, although
this was compensated to some extent by an (incomplete) list of
equivalent authors.
We then mapped common keywords to clusters, only displaying
them when the relative amount of keywords or authors in a cluster
was over a preset threshold. For keywords we used a threshold of
0.3, for authors 0.5. The resulting image (Figure 3) gives a rough
overview of the information visualization research field. To emphasize major research areas we manually applied a color to each node
in the graph based on their keywords.

Other coloring options we used were the possibility to mark papers based on author (to see what research field an author is in) or
by year of publication (to see what research fields were particularly
active in a given time interval).
To visualize relations between authors we used a different edge
set than the references given in the dataset. Instead, we defined
an edge between two papers if there is an overlap between their
respective author sets. We used a similar procedure to the one outlined above to compute a layout and attach keywords (Figure 3).
Here we see a much stronger clustering structure present because
most authors work with a fixed set of coauthors within a fixed research area. The combination of author and topic keywords allow
us to quickly asses the research field an author is in.

4

D ISCUSSION

The tool we used was specifically designed to be able to deal with
small world graphs such as this one. Most other tools do not perform very well on graphs with a fairly small diameter. The fact that
we used a less well known force model that tries to map structural
properties to distances, allows us to infer structural properties from
the resulting layout. Using explicit clustering to identify research
areas is a difficult route since one does not know the number of
clusters beforehand, and it does not remove the obligation to create a meaningful global layout of the entire graph afterward. Our
approach has the following advantages
• The ability to interactively select any desired granularity in
the layout, makes it easy to select a semantically meaningful
clustering by looking at the keywords that appear.
• The clustering is based on a global layout of the entire graph,
meaning we can preserve the users mental map when changing the granularity.
and disadvantages
• Since the clustering is directly based on the layout, the quality
of the clustering is dependent on the quality of the layout. The
layout results from an iterative optimization procedure and is
not necessarily the global optimum.
• Our layout algorithm currently still uses a naive O(N 3 ) implementation of a spring embedder and does not scale well.
The resulting images give an impression of the Information Visualization field. The fact that most of the papers reside in one strongly
connected cluster, is probably a consequence of the lack of specialization in InfoVis. Because Information Visualization is an applied
science, good solutions will often apply different combinations of
techniques, meaning that researchers in the field have to be knowledgeable in different areas.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Milgram. The small world problem. Psychology Today, 2:60–67,
1967.
[2] A. Noack. An energy model for visual graph clustering. In Proc. 11th
Int. Symp. on Graph Drawing, pages 425–436. Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[3] D.J. Watts and S.H. Strogatz. Collective dynamics of ’small-world’
networks. Nature 393, pages 440–442, 1998.

