Hypothesis Visualization
Diane Cluxton
Stephen G. Eick
Jie Yun
SSS Research, Inc.
1.
2.

ABSTRACT
We have constructed an information
visualization tool for understanding complex
arguments. The tool enables analysts to
construct structured arguments using judicial
proof techniques, associate evidence with
hypotheses, and set evidence parameters such
as relevance and credibility.
Users
manipulate the hypotheses and their
associated
inference
networks
using
visualization techniques. Our tool integrates
concepts from structured argumentation,
analysis of competing hypotheses, and
hypothesis
scoring
with
information
visualization. It presents new metaphors for
visualizing and manipulating structured
arguments.
CR Categories
Visualization
1

and

Subject

Descriptors:

Hypothesis

INTRODUCTION

An argument ties facts and evidence to a conclusion via a
logical sequence. The goal of argument visualization is to present
this sequence by showing the relationships among facts, evidence
and the hypotheses. Hypothesis visualization shows the structure
of an argument, its evolution through time, the strength of the
supporting evidence and alternative arguments. It also identifies
missing, weak, negative evidence, and uncertainty. Effective
hypothesis visualization will highlight weaknesses in an analysis,
contradictory evidence, and suggests “holes” that can be filled
with additional investigation.
2. EVIDENCE, HYPOTHESES, INFERENCES, AND ARGUMENTS
The essential aspects of an argument consist of three
components: Evidence, Hypotheses, and Inferences. Each of
these components is philosophically deep and related to the
fundamental aspects of science and logic. In fact, as described by
Schum (1994), at a basic level evidence cannot be defined in such
a way that its definition is not circular.
2.1 Evidence
Evidence involves a fact and a hypothesis (see below) that is of
interest to an observer. Facts come in an essentially unlimited
variety and form, depend upon the observers, and even change
through time. Kadane and Schum (1996, p. 40) identify four
things that we need to know about facts:

“It is impossible to know all the facts.
There is frequent disagreement about what the facts are
in some situations of concern. Persons have different
standpoints and may see ‘the facts’ quite differently.
Facts are frequently not stationary. A source that we
believed credible six months ago may now appear to be
untruthful.
What we take as ‘fact’ depends upon the extent to which
we have corroborative evidence from independent
sources.”

3.

4.

A fact becomes evidence if it is relevant to a hypothesis, either
positively or negatively.
2.2 Hypotheses and Sub-hypotheses
Hypotheses are questions or conjectures of interest to an
observer.
Hypotheses may involve alternative possible
explanations, possible answers, or alternative estimates.
Hypotheses may have substructure. It is sometimes possible to
partition a high-level hypothesis into a set of sub-hypotheses. The
substructure decomposition is always a hierarchical tree. The
hierarchy may be several levels deep before bottoming out in
questions that can be directly assessed and answered by evidence.
2.3 Inferences, Arguments, and Inference Networks
An inference is an argument that connects evidence with a
hypothesis. Inferences may also connect sub-hypotheses with
other sub-hypotheses higher up on the hypothesis decomposition
or with the ultimate hypothesis. A reasoning chain is a sequence
of inferences that start with evidence and lead to a hypotheses.
There may be sub-hypotheses within the inference chain.
Inferences
are
logical arguments, sometimes
called
generalizations, which support the conclusion called for in the
hypothesis. Figure 1 shows a simple inference reasoning chain
from evidence to a hypothesis.

H

Inference

Hypothesis
Cert(H) = Cred(E11)R11R1

I1 = Rel H1*Cert(H1 )
R1 = relevance
H1

Inference

Hypothesis

Inference
I2 = RelE2*CredE2

Sub Hypothesis
Cert(H1) = Cred(E11)R11
I11 = Rel*Cred
R11 = relevance

E11

H
Inference
I1 = RelE1*CredE1

E1

E2

Evidence

Evidence

Evidence

=
Figure 1.
(right).

3.

Direct reasoning chain (left), Redundant chain

CONSTRUCTING ARGUMENTS

Constructing an argument is a creative task that involves
looking at evidence, formulating conjectures, creating hypotheses,

associating evidence with hypotheses, creating sub-hypotheses,
and iterating. The most successful environments will encourage
analysts to explore new hypotheses and alternative explanations
for the evidence. Philosopher C.S. Peirce (1955) calls this process
abduction. A related process involves marshalling evidence and
organizing the evidence around the hypotheses.
1.

2.
3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

Browse Evidence – use searching, sorting, filtering,
reordering, and navigating techniques to navigate
through sets of evidence.
Create Hypothesis – creating hypotheses and subhypotheses that explain bits of evidence.
Associate Evidence with Hypotheses– and also with
sub-hypotheses.
Use Judicial Proof Constructs – that capture the
inferential structure of the relationship between the
evidence and hypotheses.
Set evidence relevance and credibility – although
evidence may come with known credibility, users must
determine how relevant evidence is with respect to a
given hypothesis.
Combine hypotheses – combining hypotheses enables
users to create reason about large arguments and
partitioning hypotheses into smaller units enables users
to tackle problems in bite-sized chunks.
Restructure hypotheses – users need to be able to rearrange and manipulate hypotheses to facilitate
abduction.
Edit previously created arguments – through the editing
process users can refine the inferential structure of their
argument.

functions (see below) that rate the hypotheses against each other
(competing) or individually (multiple).

4.

IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS AND DATA STRUCTURES

Our structured argumentation tool is a Java application. We
developed data structures to represent Hypotheses, Evidence,
Inferences, and Arguments (Inference Networks). The data
structures capture key aspects of the problem.
The rich
visualizations are written using JOGL1.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge support from ARDA’s GI2Vis
Program and DARPA.
We are particularly grateful and
acknowledge that many of our ideas came from Frank Hughes and
David Schum, and particularly Schum’s 1994 and 1996 books.
We also acknowledge several conversations with Bill Zangwill
whose enthusiasm for ACH encouraged us to try and integrate
ACH with structured argumentation. Curt Boylls and Liza Krizan
of NSA also provided encouragement and ideas.
REFERENCE
1.

Heuer, R. J. (1999). Psychology of Intelligence
Analysis. Central Intelligence Agency.

2.

Kadane, J.B. and Schum, D.A. (1996). A Probabilistic
Analysis of the Sacco and Vanzetti Evidence. Wiley,
New York, NY.

3.

Kirschner, P.A., Shum, S.J., and Carr, C.S. (2003).
Visualizing Argumentation: Software Tools for
Collaborative and Educational Sense-Making. SpringerVerlag: London.

4.

Lowrance, John D. and Harrison, Ian W. and Rodriguez,
Andres C. (2002). “Structured Argumentation for
Analysis,” in Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Systems Research, Informatics, and
Cybernetics: Focus Symposia on Advances in
Computer-Based and Web-Based Collaborative
Systems, Baden-Baden, Germany, pp. 47-57.

Table 1. Figure 2. Interface for Constructing Structured
Arguments

3. HYPOTHESIS ANALYZER – INTERACTIVE ANALYSIS OF
COMPETING HYPOTHESES
Heuer’s (1999) Analysis of Competing Hypothesis is a
technique for marshalling evidence, developing alternative
hypotheses, and associating evidence with hypotheses. As shown
in Error! Reference source not found., Heuer suggests creating
an evidence-by-hypothesis matrix display with evidence on the
rows and hypothesis on the columns. In our implementation, as
suggested by Waltz (2003), we added columns for evidence
credibility and evidence denial and deception, an integer between
1 (easily spoofed) and 10 (impossible to spoof). The colored cells
in the matrix display indicate evidence that is relevant to a
hypothesis. The cell color may encode the relevance, inferential
force, or both. The barplots along the top show the current
“score” of the hypotheses. We currently have two scoring

dicluxton@sss-research.com
eick@sss-research.com
jieyun@sss-research.com

