GADGET/IV: A Taxonomic Approach to Semi-Automatic
Design of Information Visualization Applications
Using Modular Visualization Environment
Issei Fujishiro
Department of Information Sciences
Ochanomizu University
fuji@is.ocha.ac.jp

Rika Furuhata
Graduate School of Humanities and Sciences
Ochanomizu University
rika2@imv.is.ocha.ac.jp

Yoshihiko Ichikawa
Department of Information Sciences
Ochanomizu University
ichikawa@is.ocha.ac.jp

Yuriko Takeshima
Graduate School of Humanities and Sciences
Ochanomizu University
yuriko@imv.is.ocha.ac.jp

Abstract

derstanding of and insight into the data have been proposed,
and a new research field, termed information visualization,
has emerged for the pursuit of post-WIMP user interfaces
[2, 5, 18, 4, 6].
One of the important roots of information visualization
is scientific visualization, where in the past decade, easy-touse visual programming environments, termed Modular Visualization Environments (MVEs) [1], have been commonly
used. MVEs allow the user to follow a rough guideline to
select and connect built-in functional units, called modules,
and construct his/her own visualization applications, called
networks. The reusability and customizability of networks
make MVEs the de facto standard for scientific visualization. These same merits of the use of MVEs are expected to
be found equally in the field of information visualization.
In practical situations, however, since most of the MVE
users are not visineers (visualization specialists) [16], they
are not always familiar with how to map their datasets to
proper graphical representations. Consequently, it has been
frequently reported in many scientific and engineering disciplines that the powerful set of built-in mapping modules
is not fully used to construct necessary visualizations for
realizing the intrinsic nature of their datasets. The situation
is supposed to become much worse in information visualization, because potential users in the GII are true novices
at computations, and the population is predicted to reach
8
4
O (10 ), relative to O (10 ) users in scientific disciplines
[12]. Therefore, a certain mechanism needs to be incorporated into MVEs, which makes use of heuristics and expertise of visineers to offer support for the user in designing
his/her information visualization applications with MVEs.
The GADGET (Goal-oriented Application Design Guid-

Since novice users of visualization systems lack the knowledge and expertise in data visualization, it is a tough task
for them to generate efficient and effective visualizations
that allow them to comprehend information embedded in
the data. Therefore, systems supporting the users to design
appropriate visualizations are of great importance. The
GADGET system, which has been developed in our previous study, interactively helps them design scientific visualization applications by presenting appropriate MVE prototypes according to the specification of the visualization
goals expressed mainly with the Wehrend matrix. This paper attempts to extend this approach in order to develop a
system named GADGET/IV, which is intended to provide
the users with an environment for semi-automatic design of
information visualization applications. To this end, a novel
goal-oriented taxonomy of information visualization techniques is presented. Also an initial design of the system architecture and user assistance flow is described. The usefulness of the GADGET/IV system is illustrated with example
problems of Web site access frequency analysis.

1 Introduction
In the rapid growth of widely accessible data due to the
development of the Global Information Infrastructure (GII)
[10], efficient and effective data exploration facilities are
needed. The recent progress in visual computing technologies has enabled us to visualize large amounts of data interactively. Many techniques for facilitating the user's un1

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

targets 1 . The classification of actions distinguishes problems in terms of the representation goals, while the classification of targets groups techniques based on the nature of
objects in the target domain [19].
In order to make the approach accepted in the field of
information visualization as well, an enriched vocabulary
for the set of actions is considered on the basis of a related
literature survey. We collected candidates for actions from
200 representative information visualizations in references
(InfoVis symposium series and [2, 5, 4, 6]). Then, refining
them through the use of Roget's Thesaurus [15] yielded the
following action set A, comprised of fourteen verbs and verbal phrases: f“Associate”, “Classify”, “Categorize”, “Compare”, “Emerge structure of”, “Find structure of”, “Identify
feature of”, “Rank”, “Reveal change of”, “Reveal clustering
of”, “Reveal distribution of ”, “Reveal patterns of ”, “Reveal
relationships of”, “Reveal structure of”g.
Meanwhile, for the set of targets D, the vocabulary
used in [13] is again adopted herein. The set D includes
seven kinds of targets: f“Scalar”, “Nominal”, “Direction”,
“Shape”, “Position”, “Spatially Extended Region or Object”, “Structure”g. An example of a visualization goal is
“Categorize nominal”.
Once a visualization goal is specified with a combination of action and target(s), we can associate a set of information visualization techniques which meet the goal.
We abstracted the collected set of techniques from the
above-mentioned references into a hierarchy of techniques
as shown in Fig. 1 by referring to [20]. For example,
“PieChart” can be selected as one of the primary techniques
to achieve the goal “Categorize nominal”.

ance for module visualization EnvironmenTs) system,
which has been developed in our previous study [8], interactively helps the user design scientific visualization applications. GADGET does this by presenting appropriate
techniques, algorithms and examples, primarily according
to the specification of the visualization goals expressed with
a goal-oriented taxonomy, called Wehrend Matrix, of existing visualization techniques [19, 13]. The purpose of this
paper is to extend this approach in order to propose the next
version of the system named GADGET/IV (Information Visualization), which is intended to assist the user in visualizing abstract data stored in databases as well as simulated/sampled data in scientific and engineering disciplines.
The basic idea for the extension is to augment the goaloriented design guidance capability by combining with the
Wehrend matrix another taxonomy proposed by Shneiderman [17], called data Type by Task Taxonomy (TTT).

2 GADGET/IV Taxonomy
This section is devoted to the description of a goaloriented taxonomic approach which the GADGET/IV system adopts to realize the MVE-based application design
guidance. Section 2.1 gives the basic idea of the original
Wehrend matrix, and discusses the enrichment of the vocabulary used in the new Wehrend matrix for classifying information visualization techniques. Section 2.2 describes how
the enriched Wehrend matrix is combined with the Shneiderman TTT to refine the goal-oriented specification of information visualization design directives. Section 2.3 formulates the GADGET/IV user assistance in the design of
MVE applications for information visualization.

2.2 Combining Enriched Wehrend Matrix with
Shneiderman TTT

2.1 Enriching Wehrend Matrix
The data Type by Task Taxonomy (TTT) was proposed
by Shneiderman [17] for the specification of information
visualization tasks. The Shneiderman TTT is akin to the
Wehrend matrix in that any visualization tasks are specifiable by a combination of data types (targets) and tasks
(actions). The data types of the TTT characterize the taskdomain information objects and are organized by the problems that the users are trying to solve. The data types
include f“1D”, “2D”, “3D”, “Temporal”, “MultiDimensional”, “Tree”, “Network”g. The tasks in the TTT are taskdomain information actions that the users wish to perform.
The tasks include f“Overview”, “Zoom”, “Filter”, “Detailson-demand”, “Relate”, “History”, “Extract”g. By accounting for the structural similarity between the two types of
taxonomies, we attempted to combine them to construct the
GADGET/IV taxonomy of information visualization tech-

As the primary concept for the visineers' knowledge representations, GADGET/IV relies heavily on the Wehrend
matrix, which was originally proposed by Wehrend and
Lewis, as a simple, but powerful goal-oriented taxonomy
of visualization techniques [19]. The concept was utilized
for indexing a collection of over one hundred data visualizations in [13]. Its feasibility was also proven by the GADGET system [8], the predecessor of GADGET/IV. Here, this
taxonomic knowledge of visineers is reused at the first stage
of interaction with the user to specify his/her design directives.
The Wehrend matrix hypothesizes that the identification
of a visualization goal (what the user expects to extract from
a given dataset) suggests appropriate techniques to use in
achieving that goal. In the Wehrend matrix, visualization
goals are identified simply by pairing words (verbs and objects) from two types of vocabulary lists, i.e., actions and

1 In the original paper [19], these terms correspond to operations and
objects, respectively.

2

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

Visualization
Techniques

BarChart

CitySpace

A new item Dimension is defined independently of the
target data types to describe Dimension (the number
of independent data variables involved) with a given
dataset. Then, “1D”, “2D”, “3D”, and “MultiDimensional” in the TTT can be treated uniformly as domain
elements of Dimension. Also “Temporal” is treated as
an external item to specify whether the temporal axis
is needed.

StachedBarChart
PolarBarChart

Histogram
LineChart

TileBars
ErrorBars
CityScape (GeographicalMap)
SteppedSurfaceChart
LineChart (GeographicalMap)

Link

LinkNet

ParallelCoordinate
PieChart

Link (GeographicalMap)
ScatterCube

ScatterPlot

TileGraph
ScatterPlot (GeographicalMap)

Tree

ConeTree

Thumbnail
TimeTable

TreeMap
VennDiagram

DataSheet

Topography

Geographical is introduced as another external item to
specify whether geographical maps are utilized in the
visualization, since they serve as an important criterion
for selecting appropriate visualization techniques [6].
Enriched Wehrend Matrix
Action

Distortion
GeographicalMap

Relate

Shneiderman TTT

Goal
Filter

Target

OtherTechniques

Zoom

Overview

Details-ondemand

Extract

Figure 1. A hierarchy of information visualization techniques used in the GADGET/IV system.

History

Figure 2. Goal-oriented taxonomy refined in
GADGET/IV.
niques. Note that herein the Shneiderman TTT should be
combined orthogonally with the enriched Wehrend matrix
to realize the progressive approach to visual data exploration.
Fig. 2 shows a rough sketch of the refined goal-oriented
taxonomy adopted by GADGET/IV, where the mutual relationships between the Shneiderman TTT and the enriched
Wehrend matrix are clarified. To summarize:

2.3 Formulating GADGET/IV Taxonomy
Having refined the taxonomy, we are now in a good position to formulate the GADGET/IV taxonomy and the mechanism of user assistance in the design of MVE applications.
Considering that the action “Associate” requires more
than one target 2 , the set of visualization goals P is defined
generally as follows:

Any visualization goals specified with the enriched
Wehrend matrix can be viewed as subtasks of the
“Overview” task in the Shneiderman TTT.

P A

“Relate” is supposed to be realized implicitly with
Wehrend's actions: “Associate” and “Reveal relationship of”.

2

D:

The set of visualization goals can serve as an effective index
system to select matched visualization techniques. Specifically, the set function KC of classification is defined by:

Once the visualization goal is achieved, the user is
allowed to manipulate the overview image in a progressive manner with the three specific kinds of actions: “Filter”ing-out data with little relevance to current tasks; “Zoom”ing into areas of interest; and getting “Details-on-demand”.

KC : P 7! 2V
where V denotes the set of techniques. For example, the
set value for KC (“Compare”, “Scalar”) includes “ScatterPlot”, “BarChart”, “LineChart”, “Particle Advector”, and
“Streamline”.
In addition to the visualization goals, such characteristics of the target dataset as the domain dimensionality O,
involvement of the temporal axis T and involvement of the

The functionalities corresponding to “History” and
“Extract” are offered by the system browser in itself,
which reuses either all or part of visualization results.
As for the vocabulary of target data types, “Tree” and
“Network” data types can be treated as subtypes of
“Structure” in the Wehrend matrix.

2 Note that the number of targets is conceptually different from that of
dependent variables.

3

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

geographical map G are used as important criteria for selecting a more restricted set of visualization techniques as
candidates. Hence, a refined set function KV is defined as
follows:

The system manager is the kernel to control the transition
of the system, such as retrieval from the knowledge-base,
display of the results through the GUI, and transfer of module networks to the MVE. The knowledge-base system is
consulted through the querying subsystem at the transition
from one state to another. The GUI and the MVE are the
accessible components for the user. The GUI passes input
data to the system manager, and shows the retrieved knowledge back to the user, and the like. The MVE allows the
user to modify a network and its properties.
The current version of the GADGET/IV system has been
implemented by using Microsoft Access as the knowledgebase management system, Microsoft Visual C++ 6.0 as the
GUI builder, and AVS/Express5.0 as the MVE, all running
on a Dell PC Server (CPU: PentiumIII 500MHz, RAM:
768MB, OS: Windows/NT4.0).

KV : (P O T G ) 7! 2V
For instance, the set value for KV (“Compare”, “Scalar”,
:

“1D”, “Yes”, “No”) includes “ScatterPlot”, “BarChart”, and
“LineChart”.
In order to make it possible to select appropriate MVE
modules, the set function KN for choosing module networks can be introduced so as to have type:

KN : V !
7 2N M
(

)

where M is the set of principal mapping modules offered by
an MVE, and N (M) is a class of directed graph with the
elements of M as nodes, and denotes the set of networks.
This is because in general for each of the visualization techniques, there are more than one known implementations.

specification
interaction
status info

3 System Overview of GADGET/IV

vis parameters
visualization

GUI

This section overviews the GADGET/IV system with a
special focus on the main flow of design guidance and the
entire system architecture.
Information visualization techniques are assumed to be
classified in advance in terms of the taxonomy formulated
in Section 2.3. This classification makes techniques orderly,
and is useful for selecting the effective categories of MVE
visualization module networks.
The behavior of the GADGET/IV system can be described with six steps. The system first allows the user to
specify his/her visualization goals in the directives (step 1),
and shows the list of the recommended visualization techniques (step 2). If the user needs, he/she can consult the
system to obtain empirical knowledge about the application
domains and prior application examples corresponding to
each technique retrieved (step 3). Each of the visualization
techniques presented in step 2 has a corresponding MVE
module network. The selected network, once loaded to an
MVE, is executable and modifiable (step 4). The recommended network is “full fledged”: it is comprised of a principal module that implements the selected mapping technique, and supporting modules that implement pre/post processes such as database access, filtering, resizing, rendering,
and image display. Hence, the user can apply the suggested
network to his/her own dataset on the spot (step 5) to get an
overview image (step 6).
Fig. 3 shows schematically the fundamental architecture of the GADGET/IV system with internal data/control
transfers. GADGET/IV consists of an MVE, a GUI, a
knowledge-base system, a querying subsystem, and a dedicated system manager loosely coupling these components.

MVE
interaction components

design
directives

internal
status

module info
dataset

System Manager
design
directive

SQL
commands

Querying
Subsystem

SQL
commands

knowledge
data

KBMS
KB

retrieval components

Figure 3. GADGET/IV system architecture.

4 Case Studies
This section demonstrates how the user guidance mechanism based on the refined goal-oriented taxonomy works to
select appropriate information visualization techniques. As
the source data for three case studies, a log dataset on October 1, 1999 comprising 2,680 requests to the Web site of
our laboratory was taken. This dataset was extracted from
server logs by a specific script to store into a log database.
Although HTTP server log files contain details on the visitors to the site, there are too many data to capture the access
patterns. Judicious choice of log data visualization techniques can provide a more intuitive means to comprehend
such data.
4

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

of “PieChart” applications (step 3).
By clicking the right button “Apply”, the corresponding
MVE's network is loaded and appears in the MVE window
(step 5). The top three modules are used to open, issue a corresponding query to, and reformat the retrieved data from
the log database (Fig. 4(c)). Fig. 4(d) shows the resulting
image, from which we can find at a glance that about one
fourth of the accesses on that day came from educational
organizations (step 6).

(a) Design directive specification

(c) Recommended network

(b) Recommended
techniques

visualization

(a) Recommended network

(b) Overview image

(c) Filtered image

(d) Zoomed image with details

(d) Resulting PieChart image

Figure 4. Visualization design results(Case 1).

4.1 Case 1
First suppose that the user wants to know which organization accesses the top page of the laboratory's Web site frequently. The visualization goal is interpreted in the enriched
Wehrend matrix (step 1). In this example, action and target
are “Categorize” and “Nominal”, respectively. Dimension
is set to “1D”. Both items Temporal and Geographical are
set to “No” (Fig. 4(a)).
According to the input design directive, the set of appropriate techniques is retrieved from the knowledge-base. The
hierarchy of information visualization techniques in Fig. 1
is shown in the distorted form of the cone trees [14] (step
2). In this case, “PieChart” is displayed as the most recommended technique at the front (Fig. 4(b)). Each technique is attached with three menu button icons: to show
corresponding application domains; application examples;
and the MVE network (from left to right). A subwindow
showing the application domains related to “PieChart” pops
up on the cone tree window in Fig. 4(b). Also, a Web
browser window can show thumbnails and hotlink URLs

Figure 5. Visualization design results(Case 2).

4.2 Case 2
Next, consider that the user wants to know more details
on the access log data by comparing each user's page to find
out which organization accesses it frequently. In this example, the action and target may be “Compare” and “Nominal”, respectively. As the independent nominals include the
type of organizations and page owners, Dimension is set to
“2D”. Both items Temporal and Geographical still remain
“No”. As the recommended information visualization techniques, “BarChart”, “LineChart” and “ScatterPlot” are retrieved this time from the knowledge-base. Suppose that
the user selected “CityScape”, which is the subtechnique of
5

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

the three case studies with a Web site access frequency
dataset, it was demonstrated that the system can capture
the different views of information from the same dataset
according to the user's specifications of visualization goals.

“BarChart”, and whose MVE network is shown in Fig. 5(a).
The generated overview image is shown in Fig. 5(b), from
which it turns out that most accesses from educational organizations were concentrated on a couple of page owners.
Next, the user can interactively manipulate the overview
image. Fig. 5(c) and (d) show the different views of the
same dataset, which are created by performing filtering, and
zooming and details-on-demand operations on the overview
image, respectively. The former gives a collection of data
where the total number of requests is more than 100. A
slider can be used as an interactive tool to adjust the threshold value. The latter image zooms the scope into a narrow
area of interest. Here again, interactive scope adjustment is
very helpful. Also displayed is the detailed information on
a specific page owner.

The following are left as future issues:
1. Although the GADGET/IV system provides a simple, but powerful means for visualization goal specification, additional user navigation mechanisms are
needed to fill the gap between the user's intuitive requirements for visualization in practical cases and interpretable design directives.
2. The technique classification function KV should return
a subset of V as a sorted list of techniques in the order of effectiveness, which could be based primarily
on further literature surveys and empirical test uses.

4.3 Case 3
Lastly, consider a situation where the user wants to know
the day long time series of the access frequency to the top
page of the laboratory's Web site. The visualization goal
can be specified as “Reveal change of scalar”. Dimension is
set to “1D”, and the item Temporal is set to “Yes” this time.
“LineChart”, and “ScatterPlot” are retrieved as the recommended information visualization techniques. The MVE
network of “LineChart” and its resulting image are shown
in Fig. 6(a) and (b), respectively. The daily access profile
can be easily understood from Fig. 6(b), which shows that a
large number of accesses occurred in the nighttime.

(a) Recommended network

3. An effective tool is required for assisting the user in
authoring queries to access target databases without
any knowledge about SQL programming. The methods within MWMD [11] would be useful in developing
a module-based query formulation interface.
4. Interactive functionalities such as filtering, sorting,
zooming, and details-on-demand vary slightly according to the recommended information visualization
techniques. For example, for zooming of tree or
network datasets, non-linear distorted transformation
techniques such as fisheyes [9] are more suitable than
linear viewing techniques. GADGET/IV should suggest to the user which types of interactive functionalities accompany each of the recommended techniques.
5. Although the current goal-oriented taxonomy can
serve as the guideline to select desirable data mappings
from a source data form to visual structures, the details on how each of the data variables is characterized
with visual mapping attributes can not be suggested.
By using a design space taxonomy of information visualizations proposed by Card, et al. [3], a variety of
candidates for visual structures could be suggested to
obtain an overview of the nature of a given data. Also
it is a challenging theme to exploit the merits of the
taxonomy in terms of the visual object-guided similarity search for information visualizations.

(b) Resulting image

Figure 6. Visualization design results(Case 3).

5 Concluding Notes
6. Upstream design assistance is also of extreme importance. For example, meta data (DD/D) consultation
makes it possible to derive data forms which are more
suitable for effective visual mapping, as achieved in
[7].

In this paper, we have presented GADGET/IV as an
information visualization support system which provides
the user with a semi-automatic environment to design information visualization applications using an MVE. Through
6

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

Acknowledgements

[9] G. W. Furnas: “Generalized fisheye views,” In
Proc. ACM CHI' 86 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, Visualizing Complex Information
Spaces, 1986, pp. 16–23.

The authors have benefited from continuous discussions
with Prof. Yoshifumi Masunaga of Ochanomizu University. The authors appreciate comments on the English from
Dr. Karen Vierow of Nuclear Power Engineering Corporation. This work has been partially supported by the Ministry
of Education, Science, Sports, and Culture, the Japanese
government under Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C)
09680330, and CMD Research, Ltd.

[10] N. Gershon and S. G. Eick: “Computer graphics
and visualization in the global information infrastructure,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
16(2):60–75, March 1996.
[11] Y. Ichikawa, N. Ukai, R. Furuhata, and C. Watanabe:
“MWMD: A module-based workbench for multimedia database programmers and users,” In Proc. 5th International Conference on Foundations of Data Organization, Kobe, November 1998, pp. 231–240.

References
[1] G. Cameron (ed.): Special Focus: Modular Visualization Environments (MVEs), Computer Graphics
29(2):3–60, May 1995.

[12] M. Jern: “Information drill-down using Web tools,” In
W. Lefer and M. Grave (eds.): Visualization in Scientific Computing ' 97, Springer-Verlag, 1997, pp. 9–20.

[2] S. K. Card, S. G. Eick and N. Gershon: Information
Visualization, ACM SIGGRAPH Course Notes 8, August 1996.

[13] P. R. Keller and M. M. Keller: Visual Cues – Practical Data Visualization, IEEE Computer Society Press,
1993.

[3] S. K. Card and J. D. Mackinlay: “The structure of
the information visualization design space,” In Proc.
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization ' 97,
Phoenix, October 1997, pp. 92–99.

[14] G. G. Robertson, J. D. Mackinlay, and S. K. Card:
“Cone tree: Animated 3D visualizations of hierarchical information,” In Proc. CHI' 91, April 1991,
pp. 189–194.

[4] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman:
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision
to Think, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1999, Ch. 1.

[15] Roget's II the New Thesaurus, Houghton Mifflin Company, 1986.

[5] T. Catarci and I. F. Cruz (eds.): Special Section on
Information Visualization, ACM SIGMOD Record,
25(4):14–54, December 1996.

[16] L. J. Rosenblum and B. E. Brown: “Guest editors' introduction: Visualization,” IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications, 12(4):18–20, July 1992.

[6] C. Chen: Information Visualization and Virtual Environments, Springer-Verlag, 1999.

[17] B. Shneiderman: Designing the User Interface Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction, 3rd
ed., Addison-Wesley, 1998, Ch. 15.

[7] M. Derthick, S. F. Roth, and J. Kolojejchick: “Coordinating declarative queries with a direct manipulation
data exploration environment,” In Proc. IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization ' 97, Phoenix, October 1997, pp. 65–72.

[18] A. van Dam: “Post-WIMP user interfaces – the human connection –,” Communications of the ACM,
40(2):63–67, February 1997.
[19] S. Wehrend and C. Lewis: “A problem-oriented classification of visualization techniques,” In Proc. IEEE Visualization ' 90, San Francisco, October 1990, pp.139–
143.

[8] I. Fujishiro, Y. Takeshima, Y. Ichikawa, and K. Nakamura: “GADGET: Goal-oriented application design
guidance for modular visualization environments,” In
Proc. IEEE Visualization ' 97, Phoenix, October 1997,
pp. 245–252.

[20] L. Wilkinson: The Grammar of Graphics, SpringerVerlag, 1999.

7

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

