Redefining the Focus and Context of Focus+Context Visualizations
Staffan Björk & Johan Redström
PLAY: Applied research on art and technology
The Interactive Institute, Box 620, SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden
http://www.playresearch.com
{staffan.bjork,johan.redstrom}@interactiveinstitute.se
Abstract
The increasing diversity of computers, especially among
small mobile devices such as mobile phones and PDAs,
raise new questions about information visualization techniques developed for the desktop computer. Using a series
of examples ranging from applications for ordinary desktop
displays to web-browsers and other applications for PDAs,
we describe how a focus+context technique, Flip Zooming,
is changed due to the situation it is used in. Based on these
examples, we discuss how the use of “focus” and “context”
in focus+context techniques change in order to fit new
areas of use for information visualization.
Note: For a longer version of this paper, see CD-ROM
Proceedings of IEEE Information Visualization 2000.

1. Introduction
Computers are soon being used in almost every kind of situation. However, there is still much work to be done on
how to develop interaction design such as information visualizations that work in these new situations. The approach
to modify computers and their software to the environment
they are used in has been labeled “situated computing”. As
the term situated computing may be given many interpretations, and the research community has yet to give an
explicit definition of the term, we will stay with a rudimentary notion of situated technology as technology developed
for a specific situation or setting with the aim to make it
more transparent in relation to a task or situation.
As an illustration of the challenges and constraints posed
by situated computing, we will present experiences on how
the Flip Zooming visualization technique had to be adapted
for various situations, including use on PDAs. The aim of
this paper is to highlight some of the implicit presumptions
of focus+context techniques we have identified while
working with Flip Zooming. Even though these presumptions also can be found in other researchers' work, they
have become obvious to us when using the technique in
new areas of use.

2. Focus+Context visualization
The basic idea with focus+context visualizations is to
enable users to have the object of primary interest presented in detail while at the same time having an overview
or a context available. Following the early work of Furnas
[9], Spence & Apperley [27] and others, a number of visualization strategies have been developed. The Graphical
Fisheye Views [21] and the Rubbersheet View [22] display
two-dimensional maps and images using graphical distor-

tions. The Perspective Wall [16] and the Document Lens
[20] make use of perspectives to give a combined overview
and detail presentation. The Table Lens [17] uses a spreadsheet-like presentation to visualize information. Techniques developed to visualize graphs and hierarchies
include the Continuous Zoom [1], the Hyperbolic Tree
Browser [14], and Cone Trees [19].
In some ways, the early work on focus+context visualization was “situated”. For instance, the Fisheye View [8]
by Furnas used the structural properties of programming
languages to support the many different levels a programmer has to work on simultaneously. Further, the BiFocal
Display [25] by Spence and Apperley was designed to
meet the needs of the “office professional” who has to deal
with a number of different kinds of information more or
less simultaneously.

2.1. Initial remarks
Work has been conducted on how to explicitly classify
focus+context techniques using various analogies, including space-scale diagrams [10], rubbersheets [15], non-linear magnification fields [13], multiple dimensions of
transformation [26], and higher-order visualizations [5], or
by describing them as interactive externalizations [28].
However, if there exists a definition of focus+context techniques that researchers agree upon, it is implicit in the literature. This being said, the following description of
focus+context techniques comes rather close to being such
a definition:
“[focus+context] start from three premises: First, the
user needs both overview (context) and detail information (focus) simultaneously. Second, information
needed in the overview may be different from that
needed in detail. Third, these two types of information can be combined within a single (dynamic) display, much as in human vision.” [7, p. 307]
Assuming that this is an accurate description of how
researchers define focus+context, one can make some initial remarks on the premises of focus+context techniques.
First, the users requirements are described as needs of
information, and that there is a need to access information
on at least two levels of detail simultaneously. There is also
a more implicit premise that the information visualization
will provide both of them. This can be contrasted with a
situation where sources of information outside the computer provides contextual information to something displayed on the screen or when the computer supports the
user with contextual information about something outside

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

the computer. By designing information visualizations that
provide both levels of detail, one makes an implicit
assumption that the computer will have the users, more or
less, complete attention.
Second, the fact that the information needed in the overview and in detail may differ, does not only imply that the
actual presentation may be different, but that the very kind
of information may be different in the two cases. Finally,
the notion that focus and contextual information can be
combined within a single display does not imply that it is
the best solution at all times.
Looking at the focus+context visualization techniques
that have been developed, there seems to be some implicit
requirements and limitations. Even though we do not think
that any of these are due to the premises in the “definition”
used above, they can be explained by using this definition
as a basis. For the areas of use that these techniques have
been developed, these limitations are often motivated, but
in order for focus+context techniques to be applicable in
other types of situations, it may be necessary to modify or
abandon them. To do this, one must first explicitly state the
limitations.

from local to global. As the user can hide the context in
each of the visualizations, the appearance of the context as
a whole can be manipulated without changing the focus.

3. Applications

3.4. WEST

In the follow examples, we will show how the notion of
focus+context changed as the Flip Zooming visualization
technique was used in a number of different applications
for a variety of tasks. Briefly, the Flip Zooming technique
presents discrete and sequential information in a number of
tiles. These tiles are presented in a left-to-right, top-to-bottom fashion that maintains the sequential structure of the
information and allows the user to select one tile as the
focus. This focus is placed in the center of the display area
and is given more screen space.

The WEST (WEb browser for Small Terminals) application
[6] was designed for browsing web pages using PDAs.
Similar to the Zoom Browser, web pages were divided into
small parts that were shown in different tiles. The tiles were
ordered hierarchically, in order to support efficient and
structured navigation. However, the very limited screen
display meant that only a few of the tiles could be shown
simultaneously. To further aid navigation, each tile could
present its information in three ways: thumbnail view, text
summary view, or link view (see figure 4). WEST was a
further step away from traditional focus+context techniques. It is a hierarchical visualization, but only shows the
local context as only one level is presented at a time. Further, the user can adjust the view of both focus and context
depending on how the application is used.

3.1. The Zoom Browser
The first application to use the Flip Zooming technique was
the Zoom Browser [11]. In this web browser, several web
pages can be viewed simultaneously and each page is split
into a suitable number of tiles linked together by a line (see
figure 1). The Zoom Browser conforms to the basic notions
of focus+context techniques. However, it offers the user the
possibility to view the context information in three different ways: as thumbnails, as summaries, or as a mixture of
both. Further, the user can choose not to have any focus,
creating a view where all tiles are given equal amounts of
screen space.

3.2. The Hierarchical Image Browser
One feature of Flip Zooming is that it allows for hierarchies
of visualizations to be visualized as one visualization (c.f.
[2]). In the Hierarchical Image Browser [12], the Flip
Zooming technique was used to present images of paintings
and sculptures according to style and place of origin (see
figure 2) in a fashion similar to how an exhibition is
ordered into rooms, sections, etc. The Hierarchical Image
Browser has the basic functionality of focus+context techniques but allows the user to manipulate the appearance of
both the focus and the context by manipulating inner visualizations. Further, since the context is divided into several
levels by the use of a nestled visualization, there is a clear
distinction between different levels of context, ranging

3.3. The Digital Variants viewer
The Digital Variants viewer [3] was developed to support
literature research on variants of the same texts. Each text is
shown in a Flip Zooming visualization by dividing the text
into a number of tiles comparable to pages in a book. These
presentations are then placed in an outer Flip Zooming
visualization, creating a two-layered visualization. To support comparison of two of the inner visualizations, the outer
visualization provide two foci placed together at the top of
the display area. To ease the comparison of the two focus
tiles of the inner visualization, the layout strategy of these
inner visualizations also had to be modified (see figure 3).
In addition to deviating from focus+context techniques in
the same way as the Hierarchical Image Browser, the Digital Variants viewer provides two foci in the outer visualization and places the foci slightly separated from the
contexts.

3.5. PowerView
The PowerView application [4] was developed to provide
access to the most common information on PDAs, i.e.
address entries, meetings, e-mail, and to-do lists. As PDAs
often are used in public areas when the user is interacting
with other people, the application was developed to be used
in a supportive role for other activities. To provide the user
with a relevant context once an individual piece of information had been retrieved, we introduced information links
between items to enable the user to indicate a relationship
between two pieces of information, regardless of information type (see figure 5). Thus, the information links form a
semantic layer on top of the information structure that
enables the application to customize what is shown in the
context objects depending on what is in focus. Similar to
WEST, it only provides local context in each view, but
PowerView provides heterogeneous contexts where several
different types of information are show together.

3.6. PowerCom
Based on PowerView, the PowerCom application was
developed with the aim of exploring how functionality such

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

as telephony and context awareness [23] can be incorporated with an integrated presentation of information normally stored on PDAs. The main difference in the
application compared to PowerView, is that PowerCom
handles several context views simultaneously since several
activities and events can be taking place at a time. By having these context views available, the user can easily switch
between them without having to select the relevant entry
and retrieve the information manually (see figure 6). The
PowerCom application goes one step further in trying to
match the focus and the context of the information visualization with the user’s focus of attention and the user’s context. As this focus can quickly change between different
activities and any activity can require several types of
information to perform, the application is designed to support rapid changes of focus, and to provide a unified presentation of several different kinds of information.

4. Discussion
When developing these applications, we have each time
been forced to expand, reduce or modify the Flip Zooming
technique. During these modifications, we have exposed a
number of preconceptions about Focus+Context techniques
in general. These preconceptions should not be seen as negative in themselves; in fact, in most cases they are probably
the most sensible approach. However, in some new areas of
use alternative methods or variations may be advantageous
or even required for a technique to be feasible, and in these
cases, the preconceptions may limit the usability of the
technique.

4.1. Focus or foci?
A seemingly trivial observation of the name focus+context
visualization is that focus is not in its plural form, foci. In
most applications, this might be a natural limitation since
users often only work with one object at a time. However,
some activities require users to directly compare objects or
switch between several different objects very rapidly. As
long as techniques require explicit user input to change
focus, there always exists a small interaction overhead cost,
making it more difficult to switch between activities. One
way to remove or mitigate this overhead is to allow several
foci at the same time or to make it very easy to switch
between different foci.
In its original form, Flip Zooming did not allow users to
work with several foci in parallel. However, multiple foci
were enabled in the Digital Variants Viewer in order to support the comparison of documents. In the PowerCom, multiple foci were also introduced but were not visualized
together as they represented the different activities not
being performed simultaneously. The RubberSheet view
[22] exemplifies another variant of having multiple foci.

4.2. Focus vs. center of attention
Traditionally, focus+context techniques change focus when
a user has selected a new point of interest, in the form of a
particular position on the display or a distinguishable
object. However, when the user is performing an activity or
task involving other applications, or even people and
objects outside the computer, the focus of the visualization
does not match the center of the user’s attention: while the
focus selected by the user in the visualization still is a focus

in that it might be close to describing the user’s interest, it is
not the only focus that interaction designers have to
acknowledge in order to create usable technology. In the
case of traditional focus+context techniques, the difference
between the focus of the visualization and the user’s center
of attention might not have been a great problem, since the
PC is usually occupies it’s users more or less complete
attention. However, when designing for mobile users, or for
any setting where the environment has to be acknowledged,
understanding this distinction might be important.
When working with the PowerView and PowerCom
applications, we tried to design with this distinction in
mind. Some consequences of this line of reasoning was that
several different information types should be presented
together, and that every view in the applications should
focus on helping the user with a simple task. Looking at
related work, Spence and Apperley designed the BiFocal
Display [27] as an information visualization technique
dealing with a number of different kinds of information
more or less simultaneously.

4.3. Differentiable context
When using a hierarchical visualization, the distinction
between local and global context is almost trivial: some
pieces of information are more closely related than others,
depending on where in the hierarchy they are located. This
can be used to create different presentations of context
objects depending on how far from the focus they are
located. This is, for instance, used in the Fisheye View [8]
and in several graphical focus+context techniques based on
distortion, where the distortion increases with the distance
from the object in focus (c.f. [14]). However, the activity at
hand might also require the user to be able to manipulate
how the context is presented. We define a context as being
a differentiable context if one can distinguish and manipulate different parts of the context independently.
Due to the modularity of hierarchical Flip Zooming
visualizations, both the Hierarchical Image Browser and
the Digital Variants Browser automatically support differentiable contexts. Looking at related work, Sarkar and
Brown [21] use a function G(x) to determine where context
objects should be placed, giving two examples (based on
Cartesian and polar geometric transformations). By introducing variants of these functions with parameters that the
user can control, these techniques could be extended to
allow the user to modify the presentation of the context in a
fashion similar to that found in dynamic queries [24]. Giving the user some form of control over the degree of interest (DOI) function in [9,17] would also enable user-defined
context presentations, but would be most beneficial if the
context is easily differentiable.

4.4. Multiple views of context
Similar to the point made about focus, the word context is
in singular form in focus+context visualizations. This is
often intuitive, as the context of something is everything
that is perceived to be near it. However, what is near it
depends highly on the viewer’s point-of-view. Changing the
point-of-view may radically change the perception of the
context (and the focus) without changing what is the focus
of the visualization. Translated to focus+context visualizations, changing the point-of-view becomes the possibility
to easily change the whole context, or the presentation of
the focus and context, while maintaining the same focus.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

The Zoom Browser and WEST used multiple ways of
presenting the same focus and context in order to provide
the user with several ways of accessing the information
visualized. The PowerCom applications also used multiple
context but for another reason. As it enables the user to rapidly switch between different activities, each represented
by a selected object in the application, it is only natural that
each of these has it own context.

4.5. Homogenous and heterogeneous contexts
Most information visualizations only visualize one type of
information. The use of such a homogenous context makes
it possible to use the inherent structure of the information in
order to create a structured presentation. However, many
times different types of information are related, e.g. an
email from a person and the contact entry for that person.
Presenting such information together as a context creates a
heterogeneous context.
Both the PowerView and PowerCom application uses
heterogeneous contexts. By doing this, they differ from
most visualization techniques, which may show different
types of information, but either merge all information into
one presentation or treat all information as belonging to a
more general type that incorporates all types present. With
the PowerCom application, the use of audible information
was introduced, creating a system where additional perceptual modes such as hearing, are added to what might constitute focus and context in an application. This expansion can
be seen as a tentative step towards what Card, et al. [7, p. 7]
calls information perceptualization.

5. Concluding remarks
Using a number of examples, we have illustrated how
methods and principles from information visualization can
be applied in novel settings and be made to fit constraints
posed by situated computing. It has been our ambition to
illustrate two issues that interaction designers will have to
face when even more forms of computer use enters the
agenda. First, to what extent existing techniques might be
applied, and second, to learn more about the existing techniques by using them in new areas of use. As for the first
ambition, we have described what modifications had to be
made of the Flip Zooming technique for use in different situations. As for the second, we presented a number of preconceptions or premises of focus+context visualizations
that may restrict the development of focus+context visualizations for novel use situations.
While the applications presented here differ from more
traditional focus+context visualizations in some ways, we
still think that they qualify as such. While the notion of
“focus” and “context” has been given partly new interpretations, this has been in order to pursue the basic ideas of
focus+context visualization. In other words, in order to
realize the essential ideas of focus+context techniques in
new situations of computer use, one must move beyond the
traditional notions of focus+context techniques.

6. Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank all the people that have
participated in the development of the Flip Zooming technique, especially Lars Erik Holmquist and Peter Ljungstrand at the PLAY studio of the Interactive Institute.

7. References
1. Bartram, L., Ho. A., Dill, J., and Henigman, F. The Continuous Zoom: A Constrained Fisheye Technique for Viewing and Navigating Large Information Spaces, in Proc. of ACM UIST ’95, pp. 207215, ACM Press, 1995.
2. Björk, S. Hierarchical Flip Zooming: Enabling Parallel Exploration of
Hierarchical Visualizations. In Proc. of AVI 2000, pp. 232-237, ACM
Press, 2000.
3. Björk, S., and Holmquist, L.E. The Digital Variants Browser: An
explorative tool for literature studies. In Proc. of Computers, Literature and Philology, Edinburgh, UK, 1998.
4. Björk, S., Holmquist, L.E., Ljungstrand, P., and Redström, J. PowerView: Structured Access to Integrated Information on Small Screens.
In Extended Abstracts of CHI ’2000, pp. 265-266, ACM Press, 2000.
5. Björk, S., Holmquist, L.E. and Redström, J. A Framework for
Focus+Context Visualization. In Proc. of IEEE Information Visualization ’99, pp. 53-57, IEEE Press, 1999.
6. Björk, S., Holmquist, L.E., Redström, J., Bretan, I., Danielsson, R.,
Karlgren, J., and Franzén, K. WEST: A Web Browser for Small Terminals. In Proc. of ACM UIST ’99, pp. 187-196, ACM Press, 1999.
7. Card, S.K., Mackinlay, J.D., and Shneiderman, B. (Eds.) Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think, pp. 1-34, Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, California, 1999.
8. Furnas, G.W. The FISHEYE View: A New Look at Structured Files.
Bellcore Technical Report, 1981.
9. Furnas, G.W. Generalized Fisheye Views. In Proc. of CHI ’86, pp. 1623, ACM Press, 1986.
10. Furnas, G.W., and Bederson, B.B. Space-Scale Diagrams: Understanding Multiscale Interfaces. In Proc. of CHI ’95, pp. 234-241,
ACM Press, 1995.
11. Holmquist, L.E. The Zoom Browser: Showing Simultaneous Detail
and Overview in Large Documents. In Human IT, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp.
131-150, ITH, Borås, Sweden, 1998.
12. Holmquist, L.E., and Björk. S. A Hierarchical Focus + Context
Method for Image Browsing. In SIGGRAPH 98 Sketches and Applications, p. 282, ACM Press, 1998.
13. Keahey, T., and Robertson, E.L. Non-Linear Magnification Fields. In
Proc. of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization ’97, IEEE
Press, 1997.
14. Lamping, J., Rao, R., and Pirolli, P. A focus+context technique based
on hyperbolic geometry for visualizing large hierarchies. In Proc. of
CHI ’95, pp. 401-408, ACM Press, 1995.
15. Leung, Y.K., and Apperley, M.D. A Review and Taxonomy of Distortion-Oriented Presentation Techniques. In ACM Transactions on
Computer-Human Interaction, Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 126-160, ACM
Press, 1994.
16. Mackinlay, J.D., Robertson, G.G., and Card, S.K. The Perspective
Wall: Detail and Context Smoothly Integrated. In Proc. of CHI ’91,
pp. 173-179, ACM Press, 1991.
17. Rao, R., and Card, S.K. The Table Lens: Merging Graphical and Symbolic Representations in an Interactive Focus+Context Visualization
for Tabular Information. In Proc. of CHI ’94, page 222, ACM Press,
1994.
18. Rao, R., Pedersen, J.O., Hearst, M.A., Mackinlay, J.D, Card, S.K.,
Masinter, L., Halvorsen, P-K., and Robertson, G.G. Rich Interaction in
the Digital Library. In Communications of the ACM, Vol. 38, No. 4,
pp. 29-39, ACM Press, 1995.
19. Robertson, G.G., Mackinlay, J.D., and Card, S.K. Cone Trees: Animated 3D Visualizations of Hierarchical Information. In Proc. of CHI
’91, pp. 189-194, ACM Press, 1991.
20. Robertson, G.G., and Mackinlay, J.D. The Document Lens. In Proc. of
UIST ’93, pp. 101-108, ACM Press, 1993.
21. Sarkar, M., and Brown, M.H. Graphical Fisheye Views. In Communications of the ACM, Vol. 37, No. 12, pp. 73-84, ACM Press, 1994.
22. Sarkar, M., Snibbe, S.S., Tversky, O.J., and Reiss, S.P. Stretching the
Rubber Sheet: A Metaphor for Viewing Large Layouts on Small
Screens. In Proc. of ACM UIST ’93, pp. 81-91, ACM Press, 1993.
23. Schilit, B., Adams, N., Want, R. Context-Aware Computing Applications. In Proc. of Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, pp. 85-90, IEEE Computer Society, 1994.
24. Shneiderman, B. Dynamic Queries for Visual Information Seeking.
IEEE Software, Vol. 11, No. 6, pages 70-77, 1994.
25. Spence, R. New concepts in Visual Displays. In Proc. of Vision and
Visual Display Units, Institute of Opthalmology, London, U.K., pp. 61 to 6-9, 1981.
26. Spence, R. A taxonomy of graphical presentation. In INTERACT ’93
and CHI ’93 conference companion, pp. 113-114, ACM Press, 1993.
27. Spence, R., and Apperley, M. Data base navigation: an office environment for the professional. Behavior and Information Technology, Vol.
1, No. 1, pp. 43-54, 1982.
28. Tweedie, L. Characterizing Interactive Externalizations. In Proc. of
CHI ’97, pp. 375-382, ACM Press, 1997.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

Figure 1. The Zoom Browser, providing a view of several
different web pages divided into a number of tiles.

Figure 2. The Hierarchical Image Browser. Flip Zooming
visualizations are shown within other Flip Zooming visualization, creating a hierarchy where every node has its own
focus.

Figure 3. The Digital Variants Browser. The top level Flip
Zooming visualization uses two foci in order to facilitate
comparasion between two different texts.

Figure 4. The WEb browser of Small Terminals (WEST). All
three views are shown in their actual resolution of 160*160
pixels. The views are, from left to right, the thumbnail view,
the keyword view and the link view.

Figure 5. PowerView application showing a hetergenous
context.

Figure 6. The initial view in the PowerCom application.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

