ThemeRiver: Visualizing Theme Changes over Time
Susan Havre, Beth Hetzler, and Lucy Nowell
Battelle Pacific Northwest Division
Richland, Washington 99352 USA
1+509+375-6948
{susan.havre | beth.hetzler | lucy.nowell}@pnl.gov
Abstract
ThemeRiver™ is a prototype system that visualizes
thematic variations over time within a large collection
of documents. The “river” flows from left to right
through time, changing width to depict changes in
thematic strength of temporally associated documents.
Colored “currents” flowing within the river narrow or
widen to indicate decreases or increases in the strength
of an individual topic or a group of topics in the
associated documents. The river is shown within the
context of a timeline and a corresponding textual
presentation of external events.

Keywords: visualization metaphors, trend analysis,
timeline

1. Introduction
In exploratory information visualization, one goal is
to present information so that users can easily discern
patterns. Patterns reveal trends, relationships, anomalies, and structure in the data, and may help users

Figure 1: ThemeRiver™ uses a river metaphor to represent theme changes over time.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

confirm knowledge or hypotheses. Perhaps more importantly, they also raise unexpected questions leading
users to new insights. The challenge is to create visualizations that enable users to find patterns quickly and
easily. ThemeRiver, shown in Figure 1, is a prototype
system designed to reveal temporal patterns in text
collections.
Information visualization systems such as Envision
[13], BEAD [1], LyberWorld [ 3, 4] and SPIRE [18]
represent each document or group of documents with a
glyph or icon, portraying various document attributes.
Various methods have been explored for showing
change over time in document-centric visualizations.
See Section 3 below.
However, a user may be less interested in documents
themselves than in theme changes within the whole collection over time. For example, how did Shakespeare’s
themes change during various periods of his life or in
relation to contemporary events? Such information is
difficult, if not impossible, to glean from most visualizations. A visualization that focuses on themes, rather
than documents, could be more useful for such exploration.
ThemeRiver provides users with a macro-view of
thematic changes in a corpus of documents over a serial
dimension. It is designed to facilitate the identification
of trends, patterns, and unexpected occurrence or nonoccurrence of themes or topics. In our prototype, we use
time as the serial dimension. We provide contextual
information through a timeline and markers for cooccurring events of interest. Figure 1 shows a sample
ThemeRiver visualization. This paper describes the
design of ThemeRiver, walks through a sample information exploration session, and discusses results of formative usability testing.

2. Design
Our major design goal was to provide a visualization
of theme change over time. Consider using a histogram
to visualize these changes. In a histogram (such as the
one shown in Figure 2), each bar represents a time slice,
and color variations and size within the bar represent
the relative strength of themes specific to that slice.
However, understanding the histogram requires users to
work at integrating the themes across time because the
bars are anchored to a baseline and the position of a
particular theme within the bars may vary considerably.
Like a histogram, ThemeRiver uses variations in
width to represent variations in strength or degree of

representation. However, it connects the strength values
in adjacent time slices with smooth and continuous
curves. The horizontal flow of the river represents the
flow of time. Colored currents that run horizontally
within the river represent themes. Each vertical section
of the river corresponds to an ordered time slice.
The width of each current changes to reflect the
thematic strength for each time slice. For example, in
Figure 1 the theme “soviet” increases in relative
strength in June 1960 as indicated by the widening of
the upper bright orange current. “Soviet” loses relative
strength in July and August; thus the same current narrows in the next two time slices. “Soviet” then increases
significantly in relative strength in September; the
current widens proportionately.
Currents maintain their integrity as a single entity
over time. If a theme ceases to occur in the documents
for a period of time and then recurs, the current likewise
disappears and then reappears. Consistent color and
relative position to other themes make theme currents
easy to recognize. In Figure 1, the lower purple band
depicts the changes in relative strength of the theme
“cane.” The “cane” current occurs grows and shrinks
over time; “cane” occurs most strongly in March 1961.
We believe that ThemeRiver’s continuous curves
have much to do with its usability. The Gestalt School
of Psychology [8], founded in 1919 in Germany,
theorized that with perception, “the whole is greater
than the sum of the parts.” Simply put, during the
perception process humans do not organize individual,
low-level, sensed elements, but sense more complete
“packages” that represent objects or patterns. In his
recent book [6], Hoffman presents a compelling discussion of how our perceptual processes identify curves
and silhouettes, recognize parts, and group them together into objects. Numerous aspects of the image influence our ability to perceive these parts and objects,
including similarity, continuity, symmetry, proximity,
and closure. For example, it is easier to perceive objects
that are bounded by continuous curves than those that
contain abrupt changes [17].
The vertical proximity of the river currents makes it
easy for users to judge the relative width of currents and
thus the relative strength of the themes. Similarly, symmetry around the horizontal axis of the river, a current,
or group of currents makes it easier for users to perceive
flow patterns and changes. Widths of currents combine
to show cumulative widening and narrowing, representing changing strength for the selected set of themes as a
whole.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

Values for theme strength can be calculated various
ways. For example, they might represent the number of
documents containing the word. Because the river loses
its continuity and structure if there are too few or too
many themes, we created several theme subsets for
exploration.
We have implemented a proof-of-principle prototype
and used it to explore data from multiple sources.
Figure 1 portrays data from a collection of speeches,
interviews, articles, and other text associated with Fidel
Castro. The visualization includes the river, a timeline
below the river, and markers for related historical
events along the top. With ThemeRiver, users may
• display topic and event labels
• display time and event grid lines
• display the raw data points
• choose among drawing algorithms for the
currents and river.
Users may also display the associated time or theme
name by simply moving the mouse across the image. In
addition, users may pan and zoom to see other time
periods or parts of the river and to see more detail or
broader context. In this sample data set, we found
several interesting correspondences between themes and
events, such as the expansion of the “oil” theme just
before Castro confiscated American oil refineries (see
Figure 1).

3. Related Work
Many systems include features for viewing time. One
common method is to show discrete time slices. For example, in the Spatial Paradigm for Information Retrieval and Exploration (SPIRE) Galaxy visualization [18],
users may choose to progressively step through time,
showing only the icons for documents originating within
each specified time period. Another common approach
is to show time as an attribute of documents, as done in
the Virginia Tech’s Envision system, which lets users
map various metadata values, including date, to x-axis,
y-axis, or color, shape, or size graphical encodings [13].
More similar to ThemeRiver in intent are systems
that focus directly on time. The LifeLines system,
developed jointly by the University of Maryland and
IBM, has been used to visualize medical records and
juvenile criminal records [14, 15]. The visualization
displays time along the x-axis and uses the y-axis to
categorize events. Bars depict duration for a given
event, and graphical attributes such as color show event
attributes. TmViewer uses a similar approach, adding

the ability to show parent-child relationships with lines
between related time bars [10]. The DIVA system [12]
uses animation to show how particular measured values
change in relation to the temporal flow of a video. To
help groups collaborating to create a document or other
artifact, the Timewarp system developed at Xerox
PARC [2] lets users view and edit multiple timelines of
the changing state of that artifact. The metaphor used is
similar to a state diagram, with lines connecting state
nodes and branches. Additional work on timelines
includes Karam’s [7] and Kullberg’s [9].
We know of no other systems that use the river metaphor to depict the passage of time. However, Tufte [16]
presents a similar idea in an artist’s illustration showing
trends in music. In that illustration, width represents
sales and proximity indicates influence of preceding
styles. Our work differs in several aspects, such as the
use of color, the inclusion of contextual events, and the
ability to generate the visualization automatically from a
potentially very large collection of documents.

4. Usability Evaluation
Early in ThemeRiver’s development, we carried out
a simple formative usability evaluation with two users.
Questions we wanted to answer with this evaluation
included
• Do users understand the metaphor?
• Can they identify themes that are more often
discussed?
• Does the visualization help them raise new
questions about the data?
• Do they interpret details of the visualization in
ways we had not expected?
• How does their interpretation of the
visualization differ from that of a histogram
showing the same data?
The data were the Castro collection described above,
focusing on the years 1960-1963. We represented the
same data both in ThemeRiver and in a histogram that
we created using a spreadsheet. (See Figure 2.) We
made the content of the histogram as similar as possible
to ThemeRiver’s. For example, the histogram depicted
thematic content by months, using the same values that
drive ThemeRiver. The month timeline was shown
along the bottom and we added an event line to the
histogram like the one in ThemeRiver.
Usability evaluation began with a brief explanation
of the purpose of the session, followed by an introduction to the data. Both participants viewed the data in
both visualizations; one participant started first with the

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

Figure 2: Like ThemeRiverTM in Figure 1, this histogram uses the Castro collection data and
depicts changes in thematic content over time.

histogram and one with ThemeRiver. We asked each
participant questions about what they observed in each
display.
Examples of specific questions include
• In July ’62, what are the three most discussed
themes?
• Where is a new theme introduced?
Examples of more general questions include
• What looks interesting here – what do you
want to explore?
• How would you like to change or manipulate
the view?
We captured verbal protocol during this discussion.
At the end, we asked participants to complete a short
questionnaire, with feedback about the visualization and
possible enhancements.
From the verbal protocol and from user behavior, we
observed that the users had no difficulty in understanding the metaphor. They were able to identify themes
that were strongly represented and able to understand
the relationship between the width of the current and
theme strength. The visualization also triggered questions about the reasons behind certain theme strengths

and patterns. For exploratory visualizations, this is a
good result; we believe that a visualization should help
the user identify questions of interest to explore.
Questionnaire responses showed that users found
ThemeRiver easy to understand. They also found
ThemeRiver useful, particularly for identifying macro
trends. They told us that it was less useful for identifying minor trends because the curves tend to deemphasize very small values. We asked about the value
of the river metaphor, and users rated it highly as well.
They observed that the connectedness of the river
helped them follow a trend more easily over time than
in the histogram; this result is compatible with the perception principles described by Ware [17].
Users liked some features of the histogram and recommended adding them to ThemeRiver. One such feature is the ability to see numeric values that drive the
histogram and river currents. One user expressed more
trust in the histogram, because she “knew” that the bars
were exactly the data values, whereas she was not sure
exactly what the data values were in ThemeRiver. Her
point is a valid one, especially because the curved lines

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

of ThemeRiver do require that we interpolate between
data points to produce the curves. We have added the
capability for users to see the exact data points on
demand.
Although users liked the abstraction to the whole
collection and thus away from individual documents,
both users suggested adding features to access documents if desired. They wanted the ability to see the total
number of documents during any time period and to get
the text of each document on demand. They wanted to
select a current and see the documents that contributed
to it.
Users also wanted the ability to reorder the theme
currents. Options they discussed included user-defined
ordering and ordering by correlation, so that themes
appearing together in the documents would be nearby in
the river.

5. Interactions and Sample Usage
Based on usability evaluation results, we added a
number of features to combine the best of both the river
metaphor and histogram capabilities. This section pre-

sents a sample usage scenario, illustrating the
capabilities of the current version.
We used ThemeRiver to explore the 1990 Associated Press (AP) newswire data from the TREC5 distribution disks, a set of over 100,000 documents (see
Figure 3). To explore the selected themes in this collection, a user might begin with a high-level survey of the
visualization by panning along the course of the river.
The user might look for wider currents that signal heavy
use of a topic, such as the one for “baghdad” in Figure
3. Changes in the color distribution of the river signal
changes in themes. We see such a change in August
1990, when the “kuwait” current, which had vanished in
late July, suddenly appears and rapidly widens. The
user could also look for narrow currents in the river that
signal relatively light use of particular themes.
In an earlier paper, Hetzler et al. [5] explored the AP
data set with a variety of our visual analysis tools, focusing on large theme changes surrounding the Iraqi
invasion of Kuwait on August 2. ThemeRiver also reflects these large theme changes. Near the right side of
Figure 3, we see several currents that expand dramatic-

Figure 3: AP data from July - August 1990. A wide current in the river indicates heavy use of a topic,
while changes in color distribution correlate to changes in themes.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

ally at the time of the invasion, which is shown on the
event line above the river. Labels have been turned on
for currents representing the themes “kuwait,” “iraq,”
“saddam,” and “baghdad.” ThemeRiver reveals some
additional detail not noted in the earlier study. The
theme “oil,” which is persistent across the image, also
expands noticeably at this time. The themes of “kuwait,” “iraq,” and “saddam” show up in small bursts
before the invasion but are not persistent. News stories
corresponding with these bursts covered the verbal conflicts leading up to the invasion. This distinction
between persistent and bursty themes is one advantage
that ThemeRiver provides over document-centric visualizations.
During late June and throughout July 1990, the
themes appear relatively consistent. A user interested in
the more prominent themes might turn on theme labels

as shown in Figure 3 to discover that the main themes
represent “bush” (President Bush), “germany” (the reunification discussions), and “communist.” Some
smaller variations in theme are also apparent, such as
the widening of the “nato” band, related to the NATO
decision to redefine their military strategy.
Figure 4 shows the ThemeRiver from earlier in the
summer of 1990. In late May, a large change in theme
strength is shown, this time not matching any previously
identified events. Some of the larger currents here are
“gorbachev,” “bush,” and “summit.” This might suggest
that Bush and Gorbachev both attended a summit.
Viewing the pertinent news documents from that time,
we found that a four-day summit meeting took place in
Washington among several world leaders, including
Bush and Gorbachev.

Figure 4: ThemeRiver™ of AP data from June - July 1990 identifies very different events from those
revealed immediately afterwards (Figure 3).

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

Some more subtle changes can also be seen in Figure
4. For example, a small current near the middle of the
river expands slightly near the beginning of June and
again near the end of the month. This is the current for
“earthquake.” The wider areas correspond with the
quakes in Peru and Iran respectively.
In each of the figures shown so far, there are portions
of the river that are extremely narrow overall. In fact,
for the AP rivers (Figures 3 and 4), the river seems to
narrow quite frequently. On closer inspection, we see
that the narrow spots correspond with Sundays. Because
the river contains only a subset of the themes in the
collection, we do not know at this point whether the
news is generally lighter on Sunday or whether other
topics dominate on that day. This uncertainty is one of
the points that came up early in user testing. In
response, we have added a feature allowing the user to
show a histogram representing the total number of
documents in a given time slot, along with the portion
represented by the themes in the river (see Figure 5).
With this histogram, it is apparent that in general fewer
news stories are released on Sunday than on other days
of the week.

based on metadata and compare the themes in the two
partitions as separate rivers. Figure 6 shows two parallel
rivers: the lower river shows AP news stories from
Washington, D. C. and the upper river shows the news
stories from New York. Some differences in major
themes are immediately apparent. The Washington
themes emphasize Bush, the Senate, and the Supreme
Court. The New York stories show a major growth in
the themes “apartheid” and “mandela”; this corresponds
with the visit of Nelson Mandela to the US. He arrived
first in New York, where he spent several days before
proceeding to Washington.

Figure 6: Parallel rivers let users compare AP data
from Washington, D.C. and New York from the
same time period.

6. Discussion and Design Challenges

Figure 5: The addition of a histogram to ThemeRiver™ reveals that news is light on Sundays,
not that themes shift.

Sometimes users may want to compare theme
changes in one set of documents to those in another set;
alternatively, they may wish to partition a collection

Ideally, a visual metaphor facilitates discovery by
presenting data in an intuitive, easy way that is consistent with the user’s perceptual and cognitive abilities.
Lakoff and Johnson [11] argue that metaphors are wired
into our understanding of particular concepts, using
evidence from common linguistic expressions. One example they cite is the many English expressions that
imply that Anglo-Americans understand time in terms

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

of motion relative to ourselves. Some expressions characterize time as moving (e.g., “the time will come,”
“don’t let the opportunity pass”), while others imply
that people are the ones moving through time (e.g., “as
we go through the years”). From formative usability
evaluation and anecdotal feedback, we have observed
that the river metaphor is intuitive and easy to understand. We believe the river metaphor of theme currents
changing over time gets part of its strength from this
cultural understanding.
Focusing on themes rather than documents changes
issues of scalability. ThemeRiver visualizations have
little dependence on the number of documents represented. For example, if theme strength is determined by
the number of documents containing each theme word,
a single pass through the collection is needed to
calculate the values, which may be displayed similarly
regardless of collection size. On the other hand, the
number of currents that can be reasonably included in a
single river is limited. Options for addressing this issue
include grouping through color families, as suggested in
Figure 7, or using each current to represent a set of
themes rather than a single theme.

themes into related groups and displaying each group
with a color family. Figure 7 shows a portion of our
color legend with such an ordering, which emphasizes
changes in related themes and may make it easier to
understand relationships among them.
A key cognitive advantage of the river metaphor
over a simple histogram lies in the curving continuous
lines that define the boundaries between topic currents.
But it is also important that the visualization not
mislead users. Because dates are not continuous data,
we must approximate the true boundaries by interpolating between discrete data points. As long as the resolution of the data is sufficient, ThemeRiver provides an
overview that meets our criteria for intuitiveness, ease
of use, and integrity. If the user zooms in farther than
the data resolution supports, the “truthfulness”
approximated by the interpolated lines is questionable.
While the resolution of data forces a lower limit on
the level of zoom, we can deal with the problem of “too
much” resolution by combining time slices. That is, as
the user zooms out, we can increase the amount of time
per time slice and combine theme weights. In this way,
we can maintain a suitable level of truthfulness without
slowing the rendering speed to a crawl by trying to draw
more detail than necessary.
With interactive visualizations, calculation and drawing speeds are important. For the current features of
ThemeRiver, it is sufficient to calculate the drawing
points on startup and then recalculate only after a configuration change. Nevertheless, a fast, efficient algorithm is needed. We are investigating curved-line algorithms and ways to speed up both the calculations and
the rendering.

7. Conclusions
Figure 7: Tracking related themes is simplified by
assigning them to the same color family. This
ensures related themes appear together and are
identifiable as a group.

Color choices pose an interesting design challenge.
Color perception depends on local contrast. However,
because themes come and go, it is impossible to predict
which colors will be adjacent at any given time. Moreover, we want to show a relatively large number of
themes in the river and still achieve acceptable discriminability. Currently we are exploring a solution suggested during formative usability evaluation: sorting

ThemeRiver is a demonstration prototype, developed
to test the value of the metaphor. We are continuing to
add interaction capabilities to it. We also need to
develop ways to build the event timeline automatically
and to provide more flexibility in selecting and ordering
the theme currents. From formative usability evaluation,
we learned that users want to know more about the
context of the river and want to access the documents
that contribute to it at a particular point in time.
We conclude that ThemeRiver is potentially valuable
for information analysts and plan to develop it into a
full production system.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

8. Acknowledgments

8.

We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of our
colleagues at Battelle to the development and testing of
the ThemeRiver visualization. Special thanks for
contributions to this paper go to Grant Nakamura, Alan
Willse, Sharon Eaton, Wanda Mar, and Dan Donohoo.
Battelle Memorial Institute’s Information Synthesis
Platform funded this research.

9.

11.

9. References

12.

1.

2.

3.

4.

D. Brodbeck, M. Chalmers, A. Lunzer, and P. Cotture,
“Domesticating Bead: Adaptiing an Information
Visualization System to a Financial Institution,”
Proceedings of InfoViz ’97. IEEE Computer Society, Los
Alamitos, CA, 1997, pp. 73-80.
K.W. Edwards and E.D. Mynatt, “Timewarp: Techniques
for Autonomous Collaboration,” Proceedings of CHI’97,
Association for Computing Machinery, Inc., 1997, pp.
218-225.
M. Hemmje, “LyberWorld: a 3D Graphical User Interface for Fulltext Retrieval,” Conference Companion on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1995, pp. 417 418.
M. Hemmje, C. Kunkel, and A. Willett. “LyberWorld - a
Visualization User Interface Supporting Fulltext Retrieval,” Proceedings of the 17th Annual International
ACM-SIGR Conference on Research and Development
in Information Retrieval, 1994, pp. 249 -259.

B. Hetzler, P. Whitney, L. Martucci, L., and J.
Thomas,
“Multi-faceted Insight Through
Interoperable
Visual
Information
Analysis
Paradigms,” Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, InfoVis '98, 1998,
pp.137-144.
6. D.D. Hoffman, Visual Intelligence: How We Create
What We See, W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.,
New York, 1998.
7. G.M. Karam, “Visualization Using Timelines,”
Proceedings of the 1994 International Symposium
on Software Testing and Analysis, 1994, pp. 125137.

10.

13.

14.

15.

16.

5.

17.
18.

K. Koffka, (1935), Principles of Gestalt
Psychology, Harcourt-Brace, New York, 1935.
R.L. Kullberg, “Dynamic Timelines: Visualizing
the History of Photography,” Proceedings of CHI
’96, 1996, pp. 386-397.
V. Kumar and R. Furuta, “Visualization of
Relationships,” Proceedings of Hypertext 99, ACM
Press, Darmstadt, Germany, 1999.
G. Lakoff and M. Johnson, Metaphors We Live By.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1983.
W. Mackay and M. Beaudouin-Lafon, “Diva:
Exploratory Data Analysis with Multimedia
Streams,” Proceedings of CHI’98, 1998, pp. 416423.
L.T. Nowell, R.K. France, D. Hix, L.S. Heath, and
E.A. Fox, “Visualizing Search Results: Some
Alternatives to Query-Document Similarity,”
Proceedings of SIGIR ’96, ACM Press, Zurich,
1996, pp. 67-75.
C. Plaisant, D. Heller, J. Li, B. Shneiderman, R.J.
Mushinlin, and J. Karat, Visualizing Medical
Records with LifeLines. CHI ’98 Summary, 1998,
28-29.
C. Plaisant, B. Milash, A. Rose, S. Widoff, and B.
Shneiderman, “Lifelines: Visualizing Personal Histories,” Proceedings of CHI ’96, Association for
Computing Machinery, Inc, 1996, pp. 221-227.
E.R. Tufte, Visual Explanations: Images and
Quantities, Evidence and Narrative, Graphics
Press, Cheshire, CT, 1997, 90-91.
C. Ware, Information Visualization: Perception for
Design, Academic Press, San Diego, 2000.
J.A. Wise, J.J. Thomas, K. Pennock, D. Lantrip, M.
Pottier, A. Schur,, and V. Crow, “Visualizing the
Non-Visual: Spatial Analysis and Interaction with
Information from Text Documents,” S.K Card, J.D.
Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, (editors.), Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
Think, Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 1999,
pp. 442-45

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

