New Methods for the Visualization of Electric Power System Information
Thomas J. Overbye
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
overbye@ece.uiuc.edu
Abstract
One area in need of new research in information
visualization is the operation and analysis of large-scale
electric power systems. In analyzing power systems, one
is usually confronted with a large amount of multivariate
data. With systems containing tens of thousands of
electrical nodes (buses), a key challenge is to present
this data in a form so the user can assess the state of the
system in an intuitive and quick manner. This is
particularly true when trying to analyze relationships
between actual network power flows, the scheduled
power flows, and the capacity of the transmission system.
With electric industry restructuring and the move
towards having a single entity, such as an independent
system operator or pool, operate a much larger system,
this need has become more acute. This paper presents
several power system visualization techniques to help in
this task. These techniques include animation of power
system flow values, contouring of bus and transmission
line flow values, data aggregation techniques and
interactive 3D data visualization.

1. Introduction
One area in need of new research in information
visualization is electric power system operation and
analysis. Most people give little thought to the source of
the power that comes out of the electric outlet. And why
should they? The electric power grid has been designed
as the ultimate in plug-and-play convenience. The
regulated monopoly structure of the electric utility
industry meant that consumers had no choice but to buy
power from their local utility. Electric utilities were
vertically integrated “natural” monopolies serving
captive markets.
That is, the electric utility did
everything in a particular geographic market, from
owning and operating the generation, owning and
controlling the transmission grid in that market, to

Jamie D. Weber
PowerWorld Corporation
weber@powerworld.com
providing the wires that actually connected to the
customer. Hence there was little competition within the
industry and little need for new visualization techniques.
But the times they are a-changin. The electric power
industry in the United States and throughout much of the
world is in a period of radical and rapid restructuring.
The ultimate goal of much of this restructuring is lower
prices, to be achieved through the development of
competitive markets for electricity.
The regulated
monopoly structure is rapidly being replaced by a
paradigm of “open access” by all to the transmission
grid. In the United States Congress passed the Federal
Power Act in 1992. This legislation required opening the
transmission grid to competition. In 1996 to implement
this competition the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission (FERC) issued Orders 888 (Promoting
Wholesale Competition Through Open Access,
Nondiscriminatory Transmission Services by Public
Utilities), and 889 (Open Access Same-Time Information
System). Thus the means to achieving the goal of lower
costs is to superimpose a highly competitive market on
the existing high voltage transmission grid.
Easier said than done. The humble wall outlet is
actually a gateway to one of the largest and most complex
man-made objects ever created. For example, in North
America the entire electrical grid is really just one big
electric circuit, excepting a few islands and other small
isolated systems. This grid encompasses billions of
individual components, tens of millions of miles of wire
and thousands of individual generators with power
outputs ranging from less than 100 kW to more than
1000 MW.
But being an electrical circuit, the grid obeys the laws
of physics. However, these physical laws are often at
odds with the artificial rules being imposed on the grid to
facilitate competitive markets. The result: high price
volatility and increased potential for widespread
blackouts [1]. An extreme example of this new volatility
in prices occurred during the later part of June 1998. For
several days electricity spot market prices in the Midwest

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

soared three hundredfold from typical values of 2.5 cents
per kWh to $7.50 per kWh. Because the affected utilities
were only able to charge their customers fixed rates of
less than 10 cents per kWh, they lost a lot of money very
quickly. And, of course, others made money. Other
markets have experienced almost as much volatility both
during 1998, 1999 and most recently in summer of 2000.
Most germane to the information visualization issue
is the cause of this price volatility. During the June 1998
price spike generation was in short supply in the Midwest
due to high electric demand from hot weather. It was,
however, available elsewhere on the grid. But because of
thermal overloads on just two devices – a transmission
line in Northwest Wisconsin and a transformer in
Southeast Ohio – no additional power could be
transferred into the Midwest from either the West or the
East. The reason: loop flow. The electric power flow
associated with a transaction between two utilities does
not flow along a path specified by a legal contract.
Rather, it spreads out through a significant portion of the
grid, looping around so to speak. In the event of an
overload of a transmission system device new power
transactions are not allowed if any of the transfer would
flow through the overloaded device in the direction to
increase the device’s loading; existing transactions may
also need to be curtailed.
For example, the shaded region in Figure 1 contours
the utilities (shown with the small ovals) that could not
sell additional power to a utility in Northern Illinois
because of the two overloads mentioned above. The
contour indicates the percentage of the power transfer
that would have flowed through the overloaded devices.
Shaded utilities on the left could not sell because of the
overload in Northwest Wisconsin, those on the right
because of the overload in Southeast Ohio.

Figure 1: Utilities Unable to Sell Power to Northern
Illinois during June 1998 Price Spike

The extreme economic consequences of overloads in
the transmission grid has served as a wake-up call to the
electric power industry concerning the need for better
methods for visualization of power system economic and
engineering information. For the most part, visualization
tools for power engineering have evolved little beyond
the “one-line diagrami.” The one-line diagram is a
roughly geographic representation of all the transmission
lines, transformers, generators and major load centers
within the grid. Great latitude is often given from exact
geography, since areas with a high concentration of
electric facilities (e.g., urban areas) are usually greatly
expanded. In a typical utility control center, system
quantities, such as power flows and voltages, are usually
represented with analog fields on a set one-line diagram
consisting of all the utility’s substations. Other values
are usually shown with tabular numerical fields. An
overview of the system is usually only available on a
static map board with the only dynamic data shown using
different colored lights.
This needs to change. Restructuring is resulting in
the creation of much larger markets. Rather then
transacting with their neighbors, utilities are buying and
selling in a transcontinental market. Restructuring is
resulting in the creation of much larger markets under
the control of a single system operator. For example, the
proposed Midwest Independent System Operator will be
responsible for the operation of the grid in portions of
eleven states [2]. This will result in even more buses and
other devices to monitor and control. Simultaneously,
the entry of many new players into the market and the
increase in power transfers will result in even more data
to manage. Finally, electric grid operators will come
under increased scrutiny since their decisions, such as
whether to curtail particular transactions, can have a
tremendous financial impact on market participants.
Power system analysis will need to be modified in a
number of different ways to handle these new challenges.
One such modification is in how system information is
presented to the user. In this paper several new
techniques for the visualization of system information are
presented.
Earlier work has, of course, been done in the area of
developing visualization techniques to aid in interpreting
power system data, although few have actually made it
into the hands of practicing engineers. Several recent
examples are described in [3]-[9]. This paper addresses
several methods of visualization for helping users extract
i So named because the actual three conductors of the
underlying three phase electric system are represented using a
single equivalent line.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

useful information associated with grid operation from
the tidal wave of power system data. These techniques
include animation of power system flow values,
contouring of bus and transmission line flow values, data
aggregation techniques and 3D visualization. Results are
shown for several large scale power systems. The
techniques presented here have been implemented in
PowerWorld Simulator [10]; earlier versions of this
package have been described in [11], [12], [13].

2. Line Flow Visualization
Key to understanding the state of the grid is knowing
the current flows and percentage loading of the various
transmission lines. This can, however, be quite difficult,
particularly for large systems. By far the most common
means for representing transmission grid flows is
through the use of the one-line diagram. Traditionally
MW/Mvar/MVA flows on transmission line and
transformer (lines) have been shown using digital fields.
Such a representation provides very accurate results, and
works well if one is only interested in viewing a small
number of lines.
One newer technique is to supplement such
representations with animation used to illustrate how
power is actually flowing in a system [12]. For example,
Figure 2 shows a one-line diagram of the high voltage
(345 kV and above) transmission grid in the Eastern
Interconnect in North America. The actual power flow
model itself contains over 30,000 electrical nodes (buses)
and 41,000 high voltage lines. Only the small number of
high voltage buses and lines are initially shown on the
one-line. To indicate the direction of real power flow
(MW), small arrows are superimposed on each
transmission line, with the arrow pointing in the
direction of the flow and the size of the arrow
proportional to the MW flow on the line. The advantage
of this one-line approach is even when using a static
representation, such as a figure in a paper, the reader can
quickly get a feel for the flows throughout a large portion
of the system.
However a much more dramatic affect is achieved
when the flows are animated. With modern PCs
animation rates of greater than ten times per second can
be achieved even on large systems such as shown in
Figure 2. The effect of the animation is to make the
system appear to "come to life". Our experience has been
that at a glance a user can gain deep insight into the
actual flows occurring on the system. The use of
panning, and zooming with conditional display of objects
gives the user the ability to easily study the flows in a
large system.

Another visualization idea that has proven useful for
quickly indicating the loading on a large network has
been the use of dynamically sized pie-charts. Figure 3
again shows the Figure 2 system with pie-charts used to
indicate the loading on each line; for this example the
animated flows have been reduced in size. The
percentage fill in each pie-chart is equal to the
percentage loading on the line, while the size and color
of the pie-chart can be dynamically sized when the
loading rises above a specified threshold. Assume in the
Figure 3 case the user was only concerned with those
lines at or above 70% loading. By specifying that the
pie-chart increase in size by a factor of 5 if above 70% or
a factor of 7 if above 80%, it is easy, even in a large
system, to see the heavily loaded lines. Using pie charts
to visualize these values is helpful, but this technique
also runs into difficulty when a large number of pie
charts appear on the screen. To remedy this problem, an
entirely different visualization approach is useful:
contouring.

Figure 2: High Voltage Line Flows in Eastern U.S.

Figure 3: Pie Charts Showing Line MVA Percentages

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

3. Contouring Bus Data
For decades, power system engineers have used one
line diagrams with digital numerical displays next to
each bus to represent bus-based values. The advantage of
this numerical display is that the results are highly
accurate and are located next to the bus to which they
refer. The disadvantage of this display is it is impractical
when one wants to examine more than a handful of
buses, say to find a patterns in the power system. To
overcome this problem the use of contouring is presented
[9], [14], [15].
Contours have, of course, been used extensively for
the display of spatially distributed continuous data. The
problem with displaying power system data with a
contour is that it is not spatially continuous. Voltage
magnitudes only exist at buses. Therefore virtual values
must be created to span the entire two-dimensional
contour region. The virtual value is a weighted average
of entire by data points with different averaging functions
providing different results [15]. Once these virtual values
are calculated a color-map is used to relate the numeric
virtual value to a color shown on the screen. A wide
variety of different color maps are possible, with one
common mapping being the use of blue for lower values
and red for higher values.
An example is shown in Figure 4, which contours the
voltages at approximately 1000 of the 115 and 138 kV
buses in the New York and New England regions. As
can be seen, the contour provides an overview of the
voltage profile of the entire region. Of course other
contour mappings could be used. Figure 5 shows the
same case, but with a color mapping such that only those
buses with voltage magnitudes below 0.98 per unit are
highlighted.

Figure 5: Voltage Magnitudes at 115/138 kV with
Values below 0.98 per unit
Finally, contouring need not be restricted to bus
voltage magnitudes. Electricity markets are increasingly
moving towards spot-market based market mechanisms
[16] with the United Kingdom, New Zealand, California
Power Exchange in the Western U.S., and PJM Market
(covering parts or all of Pennsylvania, New Jersey,
Maryland, Delaware, Virginia and the District of
Columbia) in the Eastern U.S. as current examples. In
an electricity spot-market, each bus in the system has an
associated price. This price is equal to the marginal cost
of providing electricity to that point in the grid.
Contouring this data allows market participants to
quickly assess how prices vary across the market. As an
example, Figure 6 plots the actual locational marginal
prices (LMPs) in the PJM market on 2:00 pm, Friday
August 20, 1999. The variation in prices is due to
constraints in the transmission grid. In this case, lower
priced electricity is available in Pennsylvania, but
transmission constraints prevent electric users in
Maryland and the District of Columbia from obtaining
this power.

Average 29.42
Standard Deviation 3.39

Figure 4: Voltages Magnitudes at 115/138 kV Buses in
New York and New England

Figure 6: Locational Marginal Prices in PJM at
2pm on August 20, 1999.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

Similarly, the technique could be used to contour the
LMPs generated by an optimal power flow (OPF) study.
Figure 7 shows the same contouring technique applied to
the OPF results of a study using a 9270 bus system to
model bus marginal prices in the Northeast U.S. [17] .
In this study marginal prices were calculated for 5774
buses, with approximately 2000 of these values used in
creating
the Figure 7 contour.
The contour is
superimposed on a map of the high voltage transmission
lines in the Northeast. Pie charts are used to indicate the
constrained transmission lines (i.e., those loaded to 100%
− note the price differential between New York and New
England caused by a constrained line on Northern New
York/New England boundary.

each power system element. For example, if a line has a
PTDF value of 10% for a particular power transfer, then
10% of that power transfer would flow on that line – if
the power transfer is 300 MW, the line’s MW loading
would change by 30 MW.

Figure 8: Eastern Interconnection Line Loading Contour

Figure 7: Locational Marginal Prices for Northeast U.S.

4. Contouring Line Data
Besides being useful to represent bus-based values,
contouring can also be applied to line-based values. As
an example, Figure 8 shows about 1400 of the 345 kV
and above lines of the U.S. portion of the North
American Eastern Interconnect. Superimposed on the
one-line is a contouring highlighting the line flows that
are above 50% of their MVA rating. Again, the
advantage of the contour approach is at a glance it is
possible to determine the location of potential system
congestion even in a very large system. Similar to the
Figure 5 case, the key to the successful application of
contouring on the data set is to only contour the
information of interest to the user, in this case lines
loaded above 50% of their limits. Less heavily loaded
lines are not of interest and hence not included in the
contour.
Line contouring can also be used to visualize
transmission line power transfer distribution factors
(PTDFs). In short, a PTDF value shows the incremental
impact a power transfer, from a specified source of the
power to a specified sink for the power, would have upon

Figure 9: Transmission Line/Transformer PTDFs for a
Transfer from Florida to Wisconsin
Figure 9 shows the PTDFs for a proposed transaction
from Florida to Wisconsin. The PTDFs are calculated
using the 30,000 bus, 41,000 line model used earlier.
From the figure it is readily apparent how the transfer
flows throughout the system.
PTDF contours are
especially useful because of their more continuous nature.
One can quickly look at this contour map and see which
parts of the system experience increases in line loadings.
The 5% contouring threshold was chosen because the
North American Electric Reliability Council (NERC), the
watchdog group charged with insuring the reliable
operation of the North American power grid, may require
that a power transfer be curtailed if any of the
transmission lines with PTDFs above 5% for that
transaction are overloaded. For the Figure 9 case at least

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

5% of the power transfer would flow on over 250
different lines. Thus a market participant would find the
information shown in Figure 9 to be quite valuable in
considering the transaction.

5. Data Aggregation with Flowgates
While previous techniques have proven to be
extremely useful in analyzing the large amounts of data
found in the electric power system, it is also useful to
consider ways of aggregating the data. One such
approach is the flowgate idea currently advocated by
NERC. Such data aggregation can be extremely
important when calculating the capacity of the
transmission grid to undertake additional power transfers
(known as Available Transmission Capacity or ATC).
A flowgate is simply a collection of transmission
system lines that usually serve as a proxy for limits other
than the line thermal limits. For example, voltage or
transient stability constraints might be implemented
using a flowgate. Grouping the lines into a flowgate
reduces the amount of information that must be
monitored when performing economic and/or operational
security analysis of the system. A common flowgate is
the sum of the tie line flows between two utilities. To
represent this information, similar to Figure 1 ovals are
drawn which represent the individual utilities (actually
the ovals represent control areas, which may consist of a
single utility or may represent a grouping of utilities
operating as a “pool”), while lines are drawn between the
ovals to represent the flowgate. Line flow animation and
pie chart visualization can then be used on this type of
display. Figure 10 shows the flowgate PTDF values for a
transfer from Commonwealth Edison in Northern Illinois
to the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) .

Figure 10: Pie Chart Visualization of Flowgate PTDFs
A difficulty with using pie charts to display PTDF
values is many of the PTDF values are small, making it

difficult to accurately ascertain the PTDF value − a pie
chart that is 5% filled looks quite similar to one that is
10% filled, yet the later has twice the value of the former.
This difficulty can be overcome through the use of line
based contouring techniques. Figure 11 shows the same
data as Figure 10, except the data in Figure 11 is
represented using a contour.

Figure 11: Contour Visualization of Flowgate PTDFs

6. Interactive 3D Visualization
The previous data visualization techniques can be
quite useful when one is primarily concerned with
visualization of a single type of spatially oriented data,
such as bus voltages or transmission line flows. However
in power system analysis one is usually confronted with a
large amount of multivariate data. Data of interest could
include a potentially large list of independent and
dependent variables, such as bus voltage magnitudes,
transmission line loadings, generator real and reactive
reserves, transformer tap and phase positions, scheduled
and actual flows between areas, and interface loadings.
In more advanced applications, such as the optimal
power flow (OPF), contingency analysis, and available
transmission capacity (ATC) calculations, this list of
variables is even longer. This section presents results on
the use of an interactive 3D visualization environment to
assist in analyzing this vast amount of information [18].
In developing such an environment several key issues
must be addressed. First and foremost, in visualizing
power system data there is usually no corresponding
“physical” representation for the variables. For example,
there is no physical representation for the reactive power
output of a generator, or for the percentage loading of a
transmission line. Rather, these value are typically
shown as a numerical value on either a one-line diagram
or in a tabular display. This contrasts with the use of

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

interactive 3D for power system operator training, in
which the 3D environment seeks to mimic, as closely as
possible, an existing physical environment. It also differs
from the use of interactive 3D for some types of scientific
visualization, in which the purpose of the environment is
to visualize physical phenomena, such as flows in a wind
tunnel or molecular interactions. To address this issue,
an environment based upon the common one-line
representation serves as a starting point. The new
environment differs from the one-line in that a one-line
is a 2D representation, whereas the new one is 3D. How
this third dimension can be exploited is covered in the
following sections.
The second issue is the 3D environment must be
highly interactive. In power systems there is simply too
much data to simultaneously display all the data that may
be of interest. Rather the user should be able to quickly
and intuitively access the data of interest.
A third issue is the decision on the hardware and
software to use to implement it. For pragmatic reasons,
such as budget constraints and the ability to use existing
software, the environment described here is based upon
the widely available PC platform and used standard input
devices, such as a mouse and keyboard, for the
interactive control. A benefit to this approach is that it
allows the potential to make it available to a wide variety
of users, without requiring new hardware. Furthermore,
there is nothing that precludes augmenting the
environment in the future to include more specialized
hardware, such as 3D mice, shutter glasses to simulate
steroscopic vision, and head-mounted displays.
For software the PowerWorld Simulator [11], [12]
was modified to allow 3D drawing and interaction using
OpenGL. With OpenGL, most of the software
modifications necessary to support a 3D environment,
such as viewpoint perspective transformations, hidden
surface removal, lighting, and the transformations for
stereoscopic viewing, are handled almost transparently.
Building upon the PowerWorld Simulator platform
allowed easy development of 2D one-lines, that could
then be seamlessly used as the basis for the 3D
environment and also allowed it to be interactive so that,
for example, when the user clicked on a circuit breaker a
power flow is solved, resulting in a new system state.
To introduce the environment, Figure 12 shows a
traditional 2D one-line for a small thirty bus system,
augmented using animation to show the system flows.
Figure 13 shows the same one-line in the 3D
environment, with the exception that now generators are
represented using cylinders of potentially varying
heights. The one-line has been mapped into 3D using a
perspective projection. The one-line is now oriented in

the xy-plane (horizontal plane), while the generators extend in the z (vertical ) direction. In Figure 13 the height
of each generator is proportional to its reactive power
output.
30-Bus Case Demo Case
Generation
192.48 MW
47.63 MW

1

Demand
189.40 MW

Losses
3.08 MW

Cost
955.73 $/hr

63.69 MW

109%

2

19

14

28
3

4

8

12

5

13

16

6 MW

11

12.42 MW

-19 MW

7

6
9

18

15

17

11 MW
10 MW
11 MW
20
26

12 MW

10

20.74 MW

23

91%
25
68%

22

21

24

9 MW
57%

35.58 MW

27

12.42 MW

83%
29

30

Figure 12: Traditional One-line View of 30 Bus System

Figure 13: VE View of 30 Bus System

Figure 14: 30 Bus System Generator Reactive Reserves

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

One of the advantages of 3D is its ability to show the
relationships between variables. For example, in studying
the voltage security of a system one is often interested in
knowing both the location and magnitude of any low
system voltages, and also the current reactive power
output and the reactive reserves of the generators and
capacitors. Such a situation is illustrated in Figure 14
where the height of each generator cylinder is
proportional to the maximum reactive capacity of the
generator; the darker region on the lower portion of the
cylinder is proportional to the current reactive power
output, while the lighter top portion represents the
reactive power reserves. The bus voltage values are
indicated using a contour, with only voltage values below
0.98 shaded.
Figure 15 illustrates how the 3D environment could
be used to show available ATC and generation reserves.
ATC measures the ability of an energy market participant
to transact power with other market participants given
the limited capacity of the transmission system. However
to be meaningful there must also be sufficient generation
reserves. ATC values do not convey there reserves,
because ATCs are purely transmission quantities. In
Figure 15 the ATC values for imports to a particular area
(Illinois Power in this example) are then shown using the
contour while the height of the area is used to convey the
generation reserves. Finally, Figure 16 shows how the
3D environment can be used to combine the PTDF from
Figure 9 with cylinders showing the heavily loaded
transmission lines. This immediately allows market
participants to know whether their transaction is likely to
run into grid congestion.

7. Conclusion
Restructuring in the electricity industry is resulting in
a need for innovative new methods for representing large
amounts of system data. This paper has presented an
overview of several new visualization techniques that
could be quite useful for the representation of this data.
Animation, contouring, data aggregation and virtual
environments are techniques that should prove to be
quite useful.
Nevertheless, significant challenges
remain. The key challenges are the problem of
visualizing not just the current system state but also the
potentially large number of contingency states, and the
problem of visualizing not just the impact of a single
proposed power transfer but of a large number of such
transactions.

Figure 16: 3D View of Figure 9 with Heavily Loaded
Lines Highlighted

8. Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge support of
NSF through its grants NSF EEC 98-13305 and EEC 9615792, the University of Illinois Power Affiliates
program, and PSERC (Power System Engineering
Research Center).

9. References
[1] Final Report of the U.S. Department of Energy’s
Power Outage Study Team,
March 2000,
http://www.policy.energy.gov/electricity/postfinal.pdf.
[2]http://www.midwestiso.org/whoweare.htm
Figure 15: Visualizing ATC and Generation Reserves

[3] P.M. Mahadev, R.D. Christie, “Minimizing User Interaction
in Energy Management Systems: Task Adaptive Visualization,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 11, No. 3, pp.
1607-1612, August 1996.
[4] L.D. Christie, “Toward a Higher Level of User Interaction
in the Energy Management Task,” Proceedings of the IEEE

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics,
San Antonio, TX, October 2-5, 1994.
[5] P.R. D’Amour, W.R. Block, "Modern User Interface
Revolutionizes Supervisory Systems," IEEE Computer
Applications in Power, January 1994, pp34-39.
[6] K. Ghoshal, L.D. Douglas, "GUI Display Guidelines
Driving Winning SCADA Projects," IEEE Computer
Applications in Power, April 1994, pp. 39-42.
[7] G.P. de Azevedo, C.S. de Souza, B. Feijo, “Enhancing the
Human-Computer Interface of Power System Applications,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 646653, May 1996.
[8] P.M. Mahadev, R.D. Christie, “Envisioning Power System
Data: Concepts and a Prototype System State Representation,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 8, No. 3, pp. 10841090, August 1993.
[9] M.D. Anderson, H.J. Pottinger, C.M. Schroeder, R. Adapa,
“Advanced Graphics Zoom in on Operations,” IEEE Computer
Applications in Power, pp. 25-28, April 1993.
[10] http://www.powerworld.com
[11] T.J. Overbye, P.W. Sauer, C.M. Marzinzik, and G. Gross,
“A User-Friendly Simulation Program for Teaching Power
System Operations,” IEEE Trans. on Power Sys., vol. PWRS10, pp. 1725-1733, November, 1995.
[12] T.J. Overbye, G. Gross, M.J. Laufenberg and P.W. Sauer,
"Visualizing Power System Operations in the Restructured

Environment," IEEE Computer Applications in Power, pp. 5358, January 1997.
[13] T.J. Overbye, P.W. Sauer, G. Gross, M.J. Laufenberg and
J.D. Weber, “A simulation tool for analysis of alternative
paradigms for the new electricity business,” Proc. 20th HICSS,
pp. V634-V640, Maui, HI, Jan. 1997.
[14] J.D. Weber, T.J. Overbye, "Power System Visualization
through Contour Plots," Proc. of North American Power
Symposium, Laramie, WY, October 13-14, 1997.
[15] J.D. Weber, T.J. Overbye, “Voltage Contours for Power
System Visualization,” to appear, IEEE Trans. on Power
Systems.
[16]F.C. Schweppe, M.C. Caramanis, R.D. Tabors and R.E.
Bohn, Spot Pricing of Electricity, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Boston, 1988.
[17] T.J. Overbye, D. R. Hale, T. Leckey, J.D. Weber,
“Assessment of Transmission Constraint Costs: Northeast U.S.
Case Study,” IEEE PES 2000 Winter Meeting, Singapore,
January 23-27, 2000, pp. .
[18] T.J. Overbye, R.P. Klump, J.D. Weber, “A Virtual Environment for Interactive Visualization of Power System
Economic and Security Information,” PES 1999 Summer
Meeting, Edmonton, Canada, pp. 682-687, July 1999.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

