Grand Challenge Award 2008: Support for Diverse Analytic Techniques nSpace2 and GeoTime Visual Analytics
Lynn Chien, Annie Tat, Pascale Proulx, Adeel Khamisa, William Wright*
Oculus Info Inc.
ABSTRACT
GeoTime and nSpace2 are interactive visual analytics tools that
were used to examine and interpret all four of the 2008 VAST
Challenge datasets. GeoTime excels in visualizing event patterns
in time and space, or in time and any abstract landscape, while
nSpace2 is a web-based analytical tool designed to support every
step of the analytical process. nSpace2 is an integrating analytic
environment.
This paper highlights the VAST analytical
experience with these tools that contributed to the success of these
tools and this team for the third consecutive year.
CR Categories: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces & Presentations]:
User Interfaces – Graphical User Interfaces (GUI); I.3.6
[Methodology and Techniques]: Interaction Techniques.

nSpace2 allows analysts to share TRIST and Sandbox files in a
web environment. Multiple Sandboxes can be made and opened
in different browser windows so the analyst can interact with
different facets of information at the same time, as shown in
Figure 2. The Sandbox is an integrating analytic tool. Results
from each of the quite different mini-challenges were combined in
the Sandbox environment.
The Sandbox is a flexible and expressive thinking environment
where ideas are unrestricted and thoughts can flow freely and be
recorded by pointing and typing anywhere [3]. The Pasteboard
sits at the bottom panel of the browser and relevant information
such as entities, evidence and an analyst’s hypotheses can be
copied to it and then transferred to other Sandboxes to be
assembled according to a different perspective for example.

Additional Keywords: visual analytics, human information
interaction, geo-spatial information systems, temporal analysis.
1

OVERVIEW

GeoTime and nSpace2 are analytical visualization applications
that facilitate massive data analysis. Both applications were
developed in collaboration with analysts and are being used and
evaluated on a day-to-day basis. The tools were used for first
analyzing all four Mini Challenges and then the Grand Challenge.
1.1
nSpace2
nSpace2 is the web version of nSpace, an environment
supporting the whole analytical workflow. It has two main
components: TRIST, focused on information triage, and the
Sandbox [3], for evidence marshaling and analytical sensemaking. nSpace2 (still in beta) is revolutionary in terms of what it
can do on the web; however, it currently has only a subset of the
capabilities that its parent nSpace has. Nevertheless, its core initial
capabilities and in particular its strength in supporting multiple
analysts on related projects were definitively key to this team's
analytical process.
1.2
GeoTime
GeoTime supports the visualization and analysis of entities and
events over time and geography within a fused 3D space.
GeoTime supports the extension Configurable Spaces [2] that
extends GeoTime's X, Y, T coordinate space for temporal analysis
to any arbitrary diagrammatic workspace by replacing a
geographic map with a diagram.
2

ANALYTICAL PROCESS

2.1
Sharing Insights from Mini Challenges
Two junior and two experienced analysts worked on the VAST
2008 Challenge. Analysts working on the Mini Challenges
summarized and shared all of their material using nSpace2,
making it available to the analyst working on the Grand
Challenge.
* email: {lynn.chien, annie.tat, pascale.proulx, adeel.khamisa,
bill.wright}@oculusinfo.com

Figure 1. Using two different browser windows to analyse different
aspects of the analysis. Results from different analytic tasks can
be combined in one or more Sandboxes.

2.2

Assembling and Making Sense of Gathered Data

The Sandbox supports put-this-there cognition, allowing the
analyst to re-organize and rearrange gathered data in a way that
makes sense to her. A minimum of buttons and no dialog boxes or
forms are used to create, edit, place, arrange, re-arrange, group,
emphasize, highlight and compare [3], which makes it easier to
stay focused on the analysis.
Once the Grand Challenge analyst finished looking through the
analyses for the Mini Challenges, she created new Sandboxes
corresponding to how she wanted to combine the evidence and
conclusions from the various sources. She ended up with the
following Sandboxes: Key Players and their Relationships, Key
Players’ Activities and Timeline of Key Events. Using the nSpace
web pasteboard, she copied and transferred all relevant data into
her new Sandboxes. The analyst re-organized and rearranged this
saved data using various methods provided by the Sandbox [3].
2.3

Marshaling Evidence and Hypothesis Generation

The Sandbox supports analysts in the development and
assessment of meaningful hypotheses, which are captured as

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

199

assertions. Evidence gathered from other Sandboxes, including
observations, notes, events, ideas, and concepts, can be dragged
into assertions from the right as supporting or from the left as
refuting evidence for these hypotheses. The weight of the
evidence can be changed or adjusted when needed.
The analyst hypothesized many possibilities of how the challenges
may link together and placed them as assertions in yet another
Sandbox in a new browser window. Using the evidence and notes
she gathered from the mini-challenges, she evaluated her
hypotheses and then brainstormed ideas for how to prove them.
2.4

Cross-Referencing by Layering the Datasets

GeoTime helps the analyst see patterns of events, relationships,
and interactions over time within a geospatial (or any conceptual
or diagrammatic) context [1] and was used to analyze all of the
mini challenges. Users can import multiple datasets in different
layers so information can be combined or filtered depending on
the needs of the analysis so commonalities across datasets can be
detected easily.
The analyst began to connect the Mini Challenges by combining
the migrant data in Challenge 2 and the cell phone data in
Challenge 3. One of the patterns discovered was that the calls by
the entities of interest are concentrated in the network towers
closest to the three major points from which the migrations were
being launched. That observation was captured in a GeoTime
report that was imported into the Sandbox to be used as further
evidence in the various hypotheses.
2.5

Leveraging the Synergy between GeoTime and
nSpace2

Figure 2. Portion of a Sandbox used to tie two different
observations from two different Challenges to find new
observations.

GeoTime and nSpace2 provide complementary support for
analysis. nSpace2 supports uploading images and files directly
from the desktop and important documents and findings made
from any application can be easily uploaded and used to support
current investigations and for further analysis. Work can be shared
by multiple analysts in real-time so new observations can be
timely passed to another analyst for verification or support.
Observations and hypotheses generated from analysis conducted
in GeoTime for the Mini Challenges were captured in GeoTime
reports, which are 2D annotated snapshots that were augmented
and combined with additional evidence and placed into assertions
in Sandboxes. The analyst working on the Grand Challenge used
these observations as evidence to help develop the initial
hypotheses, and with her additional finding from layering the
datasets, was able to prove that the migration and cell data are

200

indeed linked. That led her to form the new hypothesis that the
high-level Paraiso members are organizing the illegal migrations
out of the island, as seen in Figure 2.
2.6

Creating Social Networks and Structuring
Information Hierarchically
Information in the Sandbox is represented by icons and text
descriptions. Links can be drawn and labelled between objects to
represent their relationships so that a social network can be easily
formed. Information can also be organized in a hierarchical
manner.
By using Shortcuts, multiple Sandboxes can be
hyperlinked so that information is displayed in consumable
segments. When analysts need to drill down on a point, they can
use a Shortcut to open a Sandbox that contains the details.
When the analyst began analyzing the main entities of the
challenges and their relationships, a social network diagram
emerged showing strong connections between the Vidro and
Catalano family, and fewer connections with the Tafoya family,
allowing an assertion to be made that there are three major
families in the movement. The analyst did not provide a detailed
profile for each character but made shortcuts to a Sandbox that
contains their profiles in case users wanted to know more about
the individuals.
3

LESSONS LEARNED

Analysts were able to use both nSpace2 and GeoTime hand-inhand to perform the analysis for the VAST challenges. GeoTime
was more effective for the data distributed by the VAST contest
committee this year. The tool easily compiled and visualized the
migrant data in Challenge # 2 and the RFID data of Challenge #4.
The GeoTime extension, Configurable Spaces, was effectively
utilized for detecting patterns and factions in Challenge #1 and #3.
Capturing the results of the analysis is not as strong in GeoTime
as in nSpace, however, but that part of the workflow was easily
pursued in nSpace2. Currently the reporting aspects are being
enhanced for GeoTime, such as implementing the ability to
construct narratives and stories [4]. The browser-based nSpace2
proved to be useful in a team-oriented analytical environment as
analysts were able to share and edit the analyses as they worked.
The data was not as a good fit for the type of information triage
nSpace is good at and many aspects of the analysis require manual
layout, which has advantages, but could be made more efficient.
Automatic ways to extract social networks and work with
geographical data are currently under development for nSpace2.
4

CONCLUSION

nSpace2 and GeoTime proved to be powerful systems that
enabled collaboration of multiple analysts to discover more
insights in a variety of analytical problems. The 2008 VAST
Challenge helped us test the new nSpace2 technology against realworld data and allowed us to find ways to better enhance
collaboration across multiple analysts and applications.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

Kapler, Thomas, and William Wright, GeoTime Information
Visualization, IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, 2004.
Kapler, T., R. Eccles, R. Harper, W. Wright, Configurable Spaces:
Temporal Analysis in Diagrammatic Contexts, paper accepted for
IEEE VAST 2008.
Wright, William, D. Schroh, P. Proulx, A. Skaburskis and B. Cort,
The Sandbox for Analysis – Concepts and Methods, paper accepted
for ACM CHI 2006.
Eccles, R., Kapler, T., Harper, R., Wright, W., Stories in GeoTime.
Information Visualization 7, 3-17, 2007.

