Interactive Poster: Visual Analytic Techniques for CO2 Emissions and
Concentrations in the United States
Nathan Andrysco∗

Bedˇrich Beneˇs†

Kevin Gurney‡

Department of Computer Science

Department of Computer Graphics Technology

Department of Atmospheric Sciences

Purdue University

A BSTRACT
Climate Change has emerged as one of the grand global challenges facing humanity. The dominant anthropogenic greenhouse
gas that seems to be contributing to the climate change problem,
carbon dioxide (CO2 ), has a complex cycle through the atmosphere,
oceans and biosphere. The combustion of fossil fuels (power production, transportation, etc.) remains the largest source of anthropogenic CO2 to the Earth’s atmosphere. Up until very recently,
the quantification of fossil fuel CO2 was understood only at coarse
space and time scales. A recent research effort has greatly improved
this space/time quantification resulting in source data at a resolution
of less than 10 km2 /hr at the surface of North America. By providing visual tools to examine this new, high resolution CO2 data, we
can better understand the way that CO2 is transmitted within the
atmosphere and how it is exchanged with other components of the
Earth System. We have developed interactive visual analytic tools,
which allows for easy data manipulation, analysis, and extraction.
The visualization system is aimed for a wide range of users which
include researchers and political leaders. The goal is to help assist
these people in analyzing data and enabling new policy options in
mitigation of fossil fuel CO2 emissions in the U.S.
Keywords:
Visual Analytics, CO2 , Multivariate and SpatioTemporal Data, Volume Visualization, GIS, Interactive Visualization
Index Terms: I.3.8 [Computer Graphics]: Applications—
1

I NTRODUCTION

Environmental change is a topic that is of the utmost importance
since it impacts how we live our everyday life and how our future
will be affected by our present day environmental choices. Anthropogenic climate change is driven by the emission of greenhouse
gases into the Earth’s atmosphere, with the foremost being carbon
dioxide. CO2 naturally exists in the earth’s atmosphere and is essential to life. However, it is the combustion of fossil fuels since
the onset of the industrial revolution that has perturbed the natural
background biogeochemical cycle and has driven a rise in the atmospheric CO2 . The combustion of fossil fuel forms the basis of
industrial economies and can be found in everything from electricity production, transportation, and heating.
Visualization of CO2 is a problem that has not been extensively
addressed by the scientific visualization community, most likely
due to the difficulty of obtaining accurate data and the complexity
and scale that is inherent in environmental data [3]. CO2 is measured in the earth’s atmosphere at roughly 100 isolated points leaving little opportunity to visualize atmospheric CO2 in anything but
∗ e-mail:

nandrysc@purdue.edu

† e-mail:bbenes@purdue.edu
‡ e-mail:kgurney@purdue.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

rudimentary ways. Almost all of these measurements are at the
surface, leaving the majority of the atmosphere devoid of any CO2
observation. Recently, a new data product has been constructed
that quantifies this most important source of CO2 emissions for the
United States. This research effort, called the Vulcan Project [2], is
a NASA/DOE funded effort to quantify North American fossil fuel
carbon dioxide emissions at space and time scales much finer than
has been achieved in the past.
Our visualization system has been created in conjunction with
the researchers responsible for constructing the Vulcan fossil
fuel CO2 emissions inventory. CO2 researchers have used atmospheric visualization programs for their previous research, but these
programs are severely lacking in user interactivity and options for
visualization. By using our visualization system we can easily show
interesting aspects of the data that were previously very difficult to
isolate.
The visualizations produced in this study were sent to various media outlets. The work has been featured in the New York
Times [1], Wired, Scientific American, Popular Science, as well as
numerous blogs and local newspapers. The YouTube video generated over 100,000 hits in the first week after the initial press release.
2

CO2 DATA

The Vulcan project has achieved the quantification of the United
States fossil fuel CO2 emissions at the scale of individual factories,
powerplants, roadways and neighborhoods. These CO2 emissions
are then run through the Regional Atmospheric Modelling System
(RAMS). RAMS advects the emissions throughout the atmosphere
and outputs CO2 concentrations at various heights over the U.S.
These concentrations are output as a 3D scalar field and are for the
months of May through August 2002 at three hour time intervals.
The data has a resolution of about 40 km2 along the surface and
has 45 atmospheric layers with uniform differences in sigma coordinates.
3

CO2 V ISUALIZATION

3.1 Background Map
The use of a background map is very important in our study. First,
it gives the user spatial landmarks, which helps convey the information to the viewing public, and in particular, policy makers. The
background map also provides us with anchor points with which we
can map all other data sets to, which is needed in this study since
three different map projection systems are used with the various
data.
3.2 Histogram
Visualizing CO2 concentrations purely at different atmospheric layers, without any regard to latitude/longitude position, brings important insight about the CO2 transportation. To eliminate latitude and
longitude from consideration we project each geographic point to
a single line using its CO2 concentration. Which particular horizontal line we project to is determined by which atmospheric level
the CO2 value was taken. The position on the x-axis is determined

173

by the CO2 concentration, with low concentrations mapped to the
left. We connect the projected latitude/longitude points with colored lines, which are colored based on the density of points with
similar CO2 concentration. Red indicates there are many CO2 concentrations at the given height level in the atmosphere, with blue
indicating few CO2 concentrations.

Figure 3: Isosurfaces extracted using marching cubes. Note
how CO2 is traveling from the United States in the first image and
into Mexico and across the Atlantic Ocean in the second image.

b)

a)

Figure 1: a) A histogram for the entire U.S. in early May. b) A histogram for late August. Notice how the CO2 values have shifted to
the right.

3.3 Two Dimensional Visualization
CO2 researchers are most comfortable with using 2D slices of data
corresponding to various atmospheric heights above sea level since
the extreme complexity of atmospheric flow makes 3D visualizations difficult. We provide the ability to display 2D slices using
two visualization techniques with interactive controls. Our first 2D
visualization technique is done by using a color map and blending/shading capabilities to create a composed image of CO2 values.
The second technique is Marching Squares and allows for multiple
iso-contour values. The later is important for showing areas with
higher than critical values of CO2 and its evolution up into the atmosphere. Examples of both can be seen in Figure 2.

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

f)

Figure 2: 2D slices of CO2 concentrations at different periods of the
day, a) Morning, b) Noon, c) Evening. Note, high CO2 concentrations
are located at areas with high population or heavy industrial activity.
Iso-contours depicting CO2 concentrations at different atmospheric
heights, a) layer nearest surface (35 m), b) 750 m, c) 2500 m

3.4 Three Dimensional Visualization
We provide CO2 researchers with the ability to render the data in
3D. Marching cubes is provided with interactive controls for colors,
illumination of the isosurface, and isovalue selection. The use of
marching cubes allows CO2 researchers to easily see phenomena
such as CO2 transportation and weather fronts, which had previously been difficult to extract using their prior visualization methods. Further description of these phenomena and images can be
found in the next section.
4

R ESULTS

AND

D ISCUSSION

A number of features are evident in the surface 2D visualizations.
Most notable is the diurnal cycle of the emissions field itself. The
surface concentrations are a close reflection of the surface emissions but modified by the diurnal cycle of the boundary layer. In

174

simple terms, this boundary layer is generally dominated by heightened stability at night and early morning and increased vertical mixing during the afternoon and early evening. Hence, the height of the
boundary layer is generally smaller at night and morning than the
daytime and evening.

The Vulcan emissions have a less-straightforward temporal
structure due to the mix of activities driving the emissions over
a 24 hour period. The mobile sector has a rush hour structure.
Power production exhibits a complicated temporal structure due to
the tradeoff power companies make with baseload and peak power
demand. Broadly speaking there are greater emissions during the
day and less emissions at night.
The other broad feature immediately noticeable in the visualization is the broad maxima over populated or industrially-intensive
locations. This is driven by the surface sources.
The 3D simulation allows one to get a glimpse of the transport of
these source region CO2 through larger scale dynamics. A number
of features are notable. First, the summertime transport of air in
Southern California southward over the tropical Pacific and Mexico. The transport over much of the upper tier of the continental
portion of the U.S. is also noticeable. The geostrophic flow from
west to east is evident with CO2 moving off of the East coast out
over the North Atlantic. The summertime influence of Gulf air is
evident as well with some of the CO2 washing out over the gulf
probably due to lower-level mixing in summer thunderstorm activity.
This same thunderstorm activity is likely responsible for the
middle- and late-summer elevated parcels of CO2 rich air evident
in the marching cubes visualization in Figure 3. These detached
parcels are likely the result of surface air transported rapidly to
thunderstorm outflow regions, where they remain in coherent form.
Frontal systems are evident in the upper tier of the continental
U.S. as large wedge-shaped features likely denoting fronts of warm
air climb up low-level wedges of polar air outbreaks. Some of the
cyclonic motion can be discerned as well.
The histogram visualizations in Figure 1 show a number of interesting features. Near the surface, the spread of concentration is
evidence of both the spectrum of source function strength and perhaps spatial variability in the boundary layer height. This spread
shows the diurnal cycle as well. The convergence of value just
above the surface likely denotes the boundary layer lid. Above
this lid, there appears to be irregular spreading and compression
of the vertical profile traces. This is likely due to the penetration of
synoptic events that smear CO2 rich air above the source locations
downwind which weakens the horizontal gradients by eliminating
the influence of the surface source function.
R EFERENCES
[1] Breath
of
a
nation
animated
co2
map,
2008.
http://dotearth.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/04/07/breath-of-a-nationanimated-co2-map/.
[2] Vulcan project, 2008. http://www.purdue.edu/eas/carbon/vulcan.html.
[3] T. Ostromsky, W. Owczarz, and Z. Zlatev. Computational challenges
in large-scale air pollution modelling. In ICS ’01: Proceedings of
the 15th international conference on Supercomputing, pages 407–418,
New York, NY, USA, 2001. ACM Press.

