Using SocialAction to Uncover Structure in Social Networks over Time
Adam Perer
Human-Computer Interaction Lab & Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland
ABSTRACT
I describe how SocialAction was used to find insights in an
evolving social structure VAST Challenge 2008’s Mini-Challenge
3. This analysis and SocialAction were given the award, “Cell
Phone Mini Challenge Award: Time Visualizations of Cell Phone
Activity”.
KEYWORDS: VAST Challenge, SocialAction.
1

THE INITIAL COMPLEXITY

SocialAction, a tool that integrates statistics and visualization to
improve exploratory data analysis [1,2], was used for this
challenge. This document describes a brief summary of the
analysis performed with SocialAction on the VAST Challenge
data set. The data from the cell phone logs was used to infer a
social network. A node was created for each unique cell phone,
and an edge was created for each phone call. This results in
multiple edges between nodes if multiple phone calls between the
two parties existed. This generates a complex social network of
400 nodes and 9834 edges when all 10 days worth of activities are
loaded. The social network visualization (not pictured) uses a
force-directed layout. The nodes are colored according to their
degree centrality on a red-black-green spectrum. Red nodes have
the most neighbors, black nodes have an average number, and
green nodes have fewer neighbors. SocialAction also provides a
tabular, sortable, color-coded ranking list that is coordinated with
the visualization (not pictured). Very little information seems to
be evident from network visualizations of this size. However, it is
clear that there are a few individuals who are much more active
with their cell phones than the rest of the network.
Since the mini-challenge was concerned with how the social
structure changes over 10 days, we can also use SocialAction to
display a timeline of the networks evolution over time. This
results in the following interactive visualization displayed in
Figure 1. This visualization is a stacked histogram, similar to
NameVoyager [3]. Each node in the network is assigned a stack,
with a unique color. The thickness of each stack is according to
the node’s degree (the greater the number of phone calls
initiated/received, the greater the thickness) at the time on the
horizontal axis. Each day’s activities have been binned into 10
daily cumulative value representing June1-10, 2006. Similar to
the network visualization, this visualization is quite complex and
hard to interpret. However, it is clear that there are a few
individuals very active until June 8, and other individuals active
beginning June 8. But who are these people?
2

IDENTIFYING THE CATALANOS AND VIDROS

VAST Intelligence suggests that there is medium confidence that
Ferdinando Catalano is the node identified as 200. For the rest of
my analysis, I assume this information is true. Since there were
other clues about Ferdinando’s close contacts, I decided to

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

examine his immediate neighbors.
Using SocialAction, I
extracted the ego-network of Ferdinando and his neighbors. This
ego-network is shown in Figure 2.
Among Ferdinando’s contacts, Ferdinando shares the most phone
calls with Node 5, colored black. Due to this phenomenon, I
assume that Node 5 is his brother Estaban, in accordance with
statements from VAST intelligence (“We believe Ferdinando
would call brother Estaban most frequently”). The next step was
tracking down the Vidro brothers. VAST intelligence claims
“David Vidro coordinates high-level Paraiso activities and
communications”. I therefore assume that he would be involved
in the most calls among the people in the Paraiso movement. I
also assume that most of the Paraiso movement would be closely
connected in the phone logs, since it’s a small organization. To
approximate the Paraiso social network, I use SocialAction to
extract another subnetwork: Ferdinando’s contacts, and his
contact’s contacts. This subnetwork is shown in Figure 3.

213

The most active node in this subgraph is Node 1. Since this node
has a structure similar to a coordinator, this node is assumed to be
David Vidro.
This choice also makes sense because, when
referring to Ferdinando’s ego-network shown in Figure 2, the only
node connected to two still unidentified nodes is Node 1. This fits
my opinion that David Vidro would naturally be in contact with

his two brothers, Juan and Jorge. With this assumption, I assume
nodes 2 and 3 to be either Juan or Jorge. There was no further
evidence to determine which was which.
Now that the
Catalano/Vidro social structure has been defined, we can examine
how it changes over the course of the 10 days.
3

THE CHANGING NETWORK

In order to view how the structure changes over time, we once
again use the timeline view of SocialAction. In Figure 4, I present
a simplified timeline, using only the nodes in the Paraiso
subnetwork of Figure 3. From this visualization, it is evident that
the Vidros and Catalanos were very active until June 8. One June
8, all 5 individuals are very quiet, with more activity on June 9,
and even more on June 10. However, on June 10, each of them is
taking part in phone calls. In the bottom right portion of the
visualization, it is clear that an individual (Node 306) becomes
very active starting on June 8.
In SocialAction, the TimeLine visualization is interactive. In
Figure 6, I illustrate this by showing the TimeLine with only the
Vidro and Catalanos. This illustrates the change in activity even
more dramatically among the identified individuals. This also
makes it quite clear that David Vidro is probably no longer
coordinating Paraiso activities on a daily basis over the phone, as
his degree in the later days is minimal.
Now that we have an overview, it is also useful to coordinate this
view with the actual network visualizations. SocialAction allows
you to view networks at specific points in time (not pictured).
Each of these network visualization’s nodes have been ranked
according to their degree centrality, so the most-connected nodes
are red and less-connected nodes are green. These visualizations
are consistent with the Timeline visualization, as Ferdinando,
David, Juan, Jorge, and Estaban are all very active until June 8.
The June 8 network visualization shows a very disconnected
network, except for node 308. The communication levels of
Ferdinando, David, Juan, Jorge and Estaban do increase and they
are all part of phone calls on June 10. However, none of these
individuals are talking to each other.
In summary, the combination of the timeline overviews and daily
network visualizations provide insight into how the social
structure of the Catalanos and Vidros changed over the course of
10 days.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

214

Adam Perer, Ben Shneiderman: Balancing Systematic and Flexible
Exploration of Social Networks. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics (InfoVis 2006). 12(5): 693-700. Baltimore,
United States. (2006).
Adam Perer and Ben Shneiderman. Integrating Statistics and
Visualization: Case Studies of Gaining Clarity During Exploratory
Data Analysis. (CHI 2008). 265-274. Florence, Italy. (2008).
Wattenberg, Martin. Baby Names, Visualization, and Social Data
Analysis. IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization. (InfoVis
2005).
Minneapolis,
Minnesota,
USA.
(2005).

