Migrant Boat Mini Challenge Award: Analysis Summary
A Geo-Temporal Analysis of the Migrant Boat Dataset
1

Benjamin Holland

Lisa Kuchy

2

3

Jason Dalton

SPADAC, Inc.
1

ABSTRACT

ben.holland@spadac.com
2
lisa.kuchy@spadac.com
3
jason.dalton@spadac.com

The SPADAC team used various visual analytics tools and
methods to find geo-temporal patterns of migration from a
Caribbean island from 2005-2007. In this paper, we describe the
tools and methods used in the analysis. These methods included
generating temporal variograms, dendrograms, and proportionally
weighted migration maps, using tools such as the R statistical
software package and Signature Analyst™. We found that there is
a significant positive space-time correlation with the boat
encounters (especially the landings), with a migratory shift further
away from the point of departure over time.
KEYWORDS: visual analytics, geo-temporal analysis.
INDEX TERMS: G.1.1 [Numerical Analysis]: Interpolation—
Interpolation-Formulas;
G.1.2
[Numerical
Analysis]:
Approximation—Nonlinear Approximation; H.3.3 [Information
Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and Retrieval—
Clustering; I.2.1 [Artificial Intelligence]: Applications and Expert
Systems—Cartography
1.

A variogram, which is a commonly used visualization tool in
geostatistics, was used to visualize the overall extent of spacetime clustering of the boat landings (Figure 1) and interdictions. It
shows to what extent a set of points becomes more or less similar
in time as they get farther away in space. This can indicate
whether there is a significant space-time relationship, and to what
extent. We can infer from the variogram in Figure 1 that there is a
significant positive space-time relationship. In other words,
landings that are close in space tend to be close in time.
The temporal variograms were created using the “GeoR”
package in R. R is a free software environment for statistical
computing and graphics originally written by Robert Gentleman
and Ross Ihaka at the Statistics Department of the University of
Auckland in 1997 and is now supported by a development team.
2.2

Geo-temporal patterns by region

2.2.1 Dendrograms

INTRODUCTION

Geospatial patterns of a particular dataset can be analyzed using
various methods and models to understand the full extent of any
spatial trends. The analysis becomes “geo-temporal” when
temporal as well as spatial information about the data is available.
This type of analysis involves finding correlations between the
spatial and temporal components, where and when those
correlations are found, and to what extent. In this challenge, boat
landings and interdictions from a fictional island, Isla del Sueño,
were analyzed over a three year period.
2.

GEO-TEMPORAL VISUALIZATION

2.1 Overall Geo-temporal Correlation
Initially, we used Google Earth to view the overall geotemporal trends. We were able to dynamically view the boat
encounters over different time frames by using the timeline slider
bar feature, which enabled us to view animations depicting the
migrations. The encounters were separated into interdictions and
landings to investigate existing trends within the two groups.
Figure 1: Temporal variogram of boat landings, 2005-2007

Figure 2: Temporally sequenced geospatial dendrogram of boat
landings, 2005-2007

Next, we created a temporally sequenced geospatial
dendrogram (which shows clusters of points with time stamps in
geographic space) to analyze local clusters of landings (Figure 2)
and interdictions by year. In contrast with the variogram, which
shows overall trends, here we are most interested in local (yearly,
and by geographic region) patterns of space-time clustering.
The time stamps are indices which correspond to a given time.
In this case, an index of 1 corresponds with 01/01/05 while last
index corresponds with 12/31/2007. By examining the time
stamps on each set of nodes, we were able to discern whether a
noticeably large proportion of values in a given time period are in

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

217

a given geographic region. For example, under the spatial cluster
of Northern Cancun, the majority of index values for the
individual nodes were greater than 300, which means that most of
the landings in that region took place in 2007.
The dendrogram was created in SPADAC’s Signature Analyst
using a hierarchical clustering algorithm. Signature Analyst, a
commercial software product created by SPADAC Inc. in 2002, is
a geospatial predictive modelling tool that utilizes deductive
modelling and empirically-based pattern discovery methods for
geospatial data. The dendrograms in Signature Analyst are
typically generated after a predictive model is performed on a
dataset. The descriptive color coded “space” and “time” boxes
below the dendrogram in Figure 2 were designed specifically for
this project to help decipher where and when the geospatial
clustering was occurring. Soon after the conclusion of the VAST
challenge, it was decided that the boxes will be built into the
Signature Analyst software for future use since it was highly
beneficial for this project.
2.2.2

moving window and performing inverse distance weighted
interpolation (with a power of 1.5) on those sampled points.
Inverse distance weighted was chosen over other geospatial

Proportionally Weighted Migration Maps

Another visual analytics tool that was used to find local geotemporal patterns in the data is a proportional symbol migration
map (Figure 3). The thickness of the arrows is proportional to the
number of encounters in a given area. This enabled us to
coherently visualize the magnitude of the number of encounters in
comparison with where they occurred. Besides answering the
questions of “where” and “when”, this tool also addresses “how
much” or “how many”. The map in figure 3 indicates that the
majority of landings in 2006 occurred near Cancun and the
Florida Keys.
The migration maps were created in PowerPoint using Google
Earth generated maps. Given more time, we would have
automated the process of drawing arrows with varying thicknesses
using customized scripting in ArcGIS rather than manually
drawing and calculating/manipulating the relative thickness of the
arrows.

Figure 4: Interpolated map of landing success rate over the three
year period

interpolation methods (nearest neighbour and ordinary kriging)
because it produced the overall lowest cross validation error.
We performed the interpolation (and created the map) using
ArcGIS 9.2. ArcGIS is a geographic information system software
product line, which has capabilities to perform spatial analyses as
well as manage and visualize spatial data.
3.

CONCLUSIONS

The SPADAC team used a number of visual analytics tools and
various geo-temporal analysis methods to turn the data that was
provided into useful knowledge about the scenario.
Given the use of external data, we would have used Signature
Analyst to create a geospatial assessment of future migrant
encounters. As opposed to a density surface which describes only
where the past encounters took place, a geospatial assessment
exploits information available in the surrounding environment
[e.g., ocean currents, levels of commercial and recreational boat
traffic, coast guard patrols, and proximity to major cities and
borders] by empirically comparing the selected layers to the past
events, and projecting the resulting “signature” onto the specified
geographical area of interest. The geospatial assessment would
show where future encounters are most likely to occur.
Figure 3: Geographic Patterns of Migration (Landings) from Isla
del Sueño, 2006

2.3

Geospatial patterns of successful landings

Figure 4 shows a continuous surface of landing success rates
around Florida. The pattern in the map indicates that there is a
south to north trend of increasing landing success. It was created
by sampling success rates (the number of landings divided by the
total number of encounters) across the region using a 40x40 km

218

4.

REFERENCES

1. “The R Project for Statistical Computing.” Department of
Science and Mathematics, University of Auckland. June 2008.
http://www.r-project.org/
2. “Predictive Analytics.” SPADAC Inc. June 2008.
http://www.spadac.com
3. “ArcGIS: The Complete Enterprise GIS.” ESRI. June 2008.
http://www.esri.com

