Grand Challenge Award: Data Integration
Visualization and Collaboration in the VAST 2008 Challenge
*

Donald Pellegrino
Drexel University

Chris Weaver

†

Penn State University

Chi-Chun Pan

Anthony Robinson

Michael Stryker

Junyan Luo

Penn State University

Penn State University

Penn State University

Penn State University

Prasenjit Mitra

Chaomei Chen

Ian Turton

Alan MacEachren

Penn State University

Drexel University
Penn State University Penn State University
ABSTRACT
responsibility for separate mini-challenges. Specific responsibility
was also assigned for the Grand Challenge and the data
The VAST 2008 Challenge consisted of four heterogeneous
integration that it required.
synthetic data sets each organized into separate mini-challenges.
The first of the four data sets was in Wikipedia Page History
The Grand Challenge required integrating the raw data from these
Format. The data was in plain text and did not include the links to
four data sets as well as integrating results and findings from team
the historic versions of the pages. Additionally the final version of
members working on specific mini-challenges. Modeling the
the page was not included. Although a Wikipedia formatted page
problem with a semantic network provided a means for
was included in the collection the history did not apply to that
integrating both the raw data and the subjective findings.
particular page. This left the analyst to make sense of the list of
changes without reference to the content or full context of the
KEYWORDS: Visual analytics, investigative analysis, intelligence
change itself. To address this mini-challenge a customized
analysis, information visualization, geovisualization, data
Improvise [1] visualization was created and is shown in Figure 1.
integration.
This customized system used multiple coordinated views for
exploratory analysis. This system was supplemented by a custom
INDEX TERMS: E.1 [Data]: Data Structures—Graphs and
implementation of algorithms for visual analysis of controversy as
networks; H.5.3 [Information Systems]: Information Interfaces
described by Brandes and Lerner in [2]. A k-Means clustering was
and Presentation—Group and Organization Interfaces
performed on the results of Brandes and Lerner’s algorithm.
These clusters were then analyzed and compared with the
1
INTRODUCTION
Improvise views to develop high-level hypotheses. The
The 2008 VAST Challenge introduced a new format with four
assessments were written to the project’s Wiki page and shared
mini-challenges in addition to a Grand Challenge, all using
with the rest of the team. Additional details on the team’s
synthetic data sets constructed to represent real world problems.
approach to the Wiki mini-challenge are given in [3].
The mini-challenges were self-contained problems that could be
The second mini-challenge data set was provided in XML
worked on independently. The Grand Challenge however required
format and included synthetic data on Coast Guard interdictions
integrating all of the mini-challenge data and providing a higheras well as landings of migrant vessels. As with the wiki minilevel assessment of the data. The heterogeneous nature of the
challenge data this set was analyzed using both data immersion
mini-challenge data sets gave each of them unique properties that
and computational techniques. A customized, map-based
could be exploited by customized visualizations. Making sense of
Improvise visualization was created to interactively explore
the full scenario required aggregating the data and findings in a
geographic, temporal, and other patterns in the data and is shown
way that facilitated making connections across the miniin Figure 2. This proved to be an extremely useful approach to
challenges. Modeling the problem as a semantic network provided
answering the questions in this mini-challenge as they required
a representation that preserved the properties of the original data
macroscopic overviews of the full data with various amounts of
while supporting the addition of mini-challenge subjective
temporal and spatial binning. These assessments were written to
findings necessary to build the aggregate high-level assessment.
the project’s Wiki page. This data set was also transformed into a
customized Google Earth KML file which provided another view
2
METHODOLOGY
of the macroscopic patterns.
To address the challenge a team of researchers was brought
A structured file formatted using comma separated values was
together from the North-East Visualization and Analytics Center
provided to report cell phone calls placed on an island during a ten
(NEVAC), a Regional Visualization and Analytics Center
day period. Although names of the owners of the phones were not
coordinated from Penn State in State College, PA and Drexel
provided the challenge instructions provided hints to the phone
University in Philadelphia, PA. The team immediately recognized
identifiers that might be involved in the primary story line. Again
the need for a Computer Supported Collaborative Work
a customized Improvise visualization was created and is shown in
Environment. To meet this need an Adobe Connect system was
Figure 3. This was supplemented by computational approaches.
used to support synchronous collaboration and a Wiki instance
The final mini-challenge data set contained locations of RFID
was created to support asynchronous collaboration. A Wiki
badges over the time immediately before and immediately after an
environment was selected to create familiarity with the Wiki data
explosion occurring inside a building. The customized Improvise
that was provided as part of the challenge and to simulate
visualization created for this mini-challenge was particularly
experiences that might be encountered by professional analysts
sophisticated as many derived variables, such as velocity were
working with Intellipedia. Team members took individual
calculated and added to the visualization shown in Figure 4. The
values and relationships for these variables were examined closely
using the interactive features of the tool.
*
e-mail: don@drexel.edu
The challenge data package included additional supplementary
†
e-mail: cweaver@psu.edu
material such as a Wikipedia page on the “Paraiso Manifesto.”
These additional unstructured data sources functioned as a fifth
data set.
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

197

Integration of the data and findings was done by using an
associative network as the fundamental data structure. This
provided the greatest degree of abstraction while preserving the
critical connectedness between the different types of data. A
transform was created for each of the four mini-challenge data
sets. The transforms created nodes in the network to represent the
entities from the source data and edges to represent their
connectedness. The hypotheses and assumptions captured in the
Wiki were represented as derived nodes and edges in the network.
These constructs helped to assign higher-level meaning to the data
making the model a semantic network rather than simply a set of
associations. By combining higher-level constructs such as
hypotheses with the raw data, analysis results became more
useful. The top panel of Figure 5 shows Cleveland Jimenez as
both a suspect and a casualty. The bottom panel of Figure 5 shows
the result of analyzing the network with Pajek revealing how two
RFID badges may be related through passenger rosters.
3

REFLECTIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

Although the data sets in the 2008 VAST Challenge were
significantly different from earlier years there were some
similarities in the methodology applied here and the approach
used by the South-East Regional Visualization and Analytics
Center (SRVAC) team in 2007 [4]. The SRVAC team used a
divide-and-conquer approach by assigning subsets of the reports
to be read by individual team members. In the 2008 challenge the
mini-challenge data sets provided a natural way to decompose the
problem. The mini-challenge specific tools provided exploration
and data immersion for the structured data sets. The effect of the
divide-and-conquer approach is to distribute the subjective
knowledge across the team. Stasko et al describing Jigsaw in [5]
state that “Trial use of the system also suggest the need for better
tools to help analysts organize their thoughts and document the
models and plans they are constructing.” This issue is partially
addressed by explicitly capturing the analyst’s notes in the Wiki
environment. It is notable that the Stories module for GeoTime
described in [6] provides a similar means for organizing such
thoughts. The methodology described here builds on the Wiki and
Stories shared discursive approaches by modeling the hypotheses
formulated by team members during work on the mini-challenges
into a unified semantic network. Modeling the hypotheses in the
semantic network could also be viewed as an extension to the
Analysis of Competing Hypothesis tabular structure described by
Heuer in [7]. The semantic network model has the advantage of

198

contextualizing the hypotheses and evidence with the rest of the
data and providing a data structure that can facilitate data analysis.
There are a number of limitations to the methodology described
here. A customized visualization was developed for each minichallenge data set. While Improvise provided a framework for
quickly creating customized visualizations the tool requires
training and experience to develop proficiency. This could be a
limiting factor for situations where the data diversity is much
wider and expert designers are unavailable. Construction of the
semantic network required writing custom transforms for each of
the mini-challenge data sets. Addition of the nodes and edges
representing the hypotheses and other assumptions was a manual
processes. Tighter integration of the semantic network, the visual
analysis applications and other tools, the Wiki, and report writing
may increase usability and is an opportunity for future research.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is supported by the National Visualization and
Analytics Center, a U.S. Department of Homeland Security
program operated by the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
(PNNL). PNNL is a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science
laboratory.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Weaver, "Building Highly-Coordinated Visualizations in
Improvise," in IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, Austin,
TX, 2004, pp. 159-166.
[2] U. Brandes and J. Lerner, "Visual analysis of controversy in usergenerated encyclopedias," Inf Visualization, vol. 7, pp. 34-48, 2008.
[3] C.-C. Pan, D. Pellegrino, C. Weaver, and P. Mitra, "VAST 2008 Wiki
Editors Mini Challenge - Identifying Social Networks using Wiki.viz," in
IEEE VAST '08 Columbus, OH, 2008, p. DVD.
[4] C. Görg, Z. Liu, N. Parekh, K. Singhal, and J. Stasko, "Jigsaw meets
Blue Iguanodon - The VAST 2007 Contest," in IEEE VAST '07
Sacramento, CA, 2007, pp. 235-236.
[5] J. Stasko, C. Görg, Z. Liu, and K. Singhal, "Jigsaw: Supporting
Investigative Analysis through Interactive Visualization," in IEEE VAST
'07 Sacramento, CA, 2007, pp. 131-138.
[6] R. Eccles, T. Kapler, R. Harper, and W. Wright, "Stories in GeoTime,"
Inf Visualization, vol. 7, pp. 3-17, 2008.
[7] R. J. Heuer, Jr., "Analysis of Competing Hypotheses," in Psychology
of Intelligence Analysis: Central Intelligence Agency, 1999, pp. 95-110.

