Evacuation Traces Mini Challenge Award: Innovative Trace Visualization
Staining for Information Discovery
Dennis J Bouvier*

Britain Oates

†

Southern Illinois University Edwardsville

ABSTRACT
Staining is a technique for categorizing time-varying spatial data;
that is, data of things moving through space over time. In
Staining, a stain is applied in either time or space, and the objects
which move through the stain become marked. This technique and
a research prototype demonstrating the technique were developed
in response to the VAST 2008 Contest Mini-challenge:
Evacuation Traces.
KEYWORDS: Movement data, visual analytics, exploratory data
analysis, visualization, interactive displays.
INDEX TERMS: H.5.2. [User Interfaces]: Graphical User Interfaces
1

INTRODUCTION

In this paper, we present a new technique for analysis of time
varying spatial data. We call this approach “staining”. The
example data used in this presentation is that of the VAST 2008
Mini-Challenge: “Evacuation Traces” [1]. The Evacuation Traces
data is fictitious data representing the positions of people in a
building during a time before and after an explosion. The
challenge of the data is to determine as much information about
the explosion as possible from the positions of the people during
that time.
For the example application, the spatial data is represented on a
map of the building. As shown in Figure 1, the people are
represented by circles and the walls of the building are black. The
application begins with the spatial data represented at the initial
time point in the data and no stains in place. The analyst can apply
a stain in time or space, or just animate the data.
2

Figure 1: The map portion of the application showing people in their
initial locations.

with the stain color in the spatial representation. As shown in
Figure 2, the analyst has applied a stain to a portion of the map
and during the course of the animation; five people have
encountered that stain and are listed to the right of the map (below
the “staining tools”).

STAINING

The staining technique provides a mechanism of data analysis by
allowing the analyst to place stains in time and space. As the
people move through these stains, they become stained. The
analyst can then change the time viewed while the stains remain
in place. This allows the analyst to move people to their position
at the beginning time in the data while they are stained according
to their ending locations.
2.1
Spatial Staining
To apply a stain in space, the analyst selects a color and a brush,
and applies the stain to the map. As people encounter the stain
they are added to the “Stained People” list, shown to the right of
the map in the application window. These people are also marked
*djb@acm.org
†boates@siue.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

Figure 2. The building map with a red stain (gray area) applied in
the middle of the map shown and a list of people who have
encountered the stain, including those who have left the stain area;
for example: 21. Ramon Katalanow, whose position on the map is
indicated by the hovering mouse pointer.

Spatial stains can be added to, or removed from, the map at any
point in the time animation. Stains of the same color can be

219

applied to the map in different locations. Also, stains of different
colors can be added to the map simultaneously.
The stained list can be inverted. In this case, those people
stained are removed from the list and those not stained are added
to the list. In this way, the analyst can easily determine who did
not visit a particular place.
2.2
Temporal Staining
Staining in time is similar to staining in space in that the analyst
applies the stain and the objects that move (in this case: people)
become stained automatically. Staining in time is different in that
the time stain is applied immediately based on whether or not an
object/person moved between the stained time interval.
To apply a stain in the time domain, the analyst selects an
interval of time from the time bar in the application by dragging
the pointer on the time line. As shown in Figure 3, the selected
time interval becomes highlighted and the people who move

It is easy to determine who has visited this site by staining the
general location and then animating. Appling the stain at the
beginning of the time data and removing it at the blast time will
stain only those people who travelled to the area of interest during
the time before the blast.
This technique identifies a small number of people. Only one of
these people survive the blast and exhibits suspicious behavior by
leaving the area, then returning to it, before exiting the building.
The path of this suspicious person leads us to believe we have
found the location for the device.
3.1.2
Identify potential suspects or witnesses.
Using the same technique as above, it is easy to stain those people
in the area of the blast before the blast occurs. This list of people
is the list of suspects and witnesses.
3.1.3

Identify any suspects or witnesses who manage to
escape the building.
Again, using the same staining technique above, a list of suspects
and witnesses is found. After creating this list, the analyst simply
advances the animation to the end of the time and finds that only
one person on the witnesses and suspects list manages to escape
the building
3.1.4
Identify any causalities.
For this task, we assume that people who do not exit the building
are casualties. To identify this list of people, the analyst places
stains at each of the exits. Then as the analyst allows the
animation to play from beginning to end, each person who exits
the building is stained. Inverting this list creates a list of people
who did not exit the building

during that time interval become stained with the time-stain color.
Figure 3: A time interval selected for time staining (shaded area
on the time line) and the list of people who move during that
interval (partial map shown). Those who have moved are listed
(at the bottom) and highlighted on the map.

As with the spatial staining, the time stain list can be inverted,
giving the analyst an easy way to determine people who did not
move during some time interval.
3

DISCUSSION

The staining technique and research prototype application proved
useful in answering the questions of the VAST 2008 Evacuation
Traces Mini-Challenge. An analyst experienced with the tool is
able to complete the four tasks of the challenge with the tool in
less than two minutes.
3.1

Staining in the VAST 2008 Contest Evacuation
Traces Mini-Challenge Tasks
The following subsections discuss the application of the staining
technique to the four tasks of the VAST 2008 Contest Evacuation
Traces Mini-Challenge.
3.1.1
Where was the device set-off?
The device location is found by manipulating the time and
observing the movement of people. Initially, there are between
five and 15 of the 81 people in motion at some reasonable interval
of time. At a particular time, nearly everyone is in motion and
most are heading for an exit. Shortly after most people are
moving, there are some people who stop. It is suspected that this
would be near the blast site.

220

3.2
Staining in General
The staining technique is not only useful in the analysis of
evacuation data and could be used to analyze time-varying spatial
data from other problem domains. In particular, the staining
technique is useful when the questions are about who, or what,
has been in a particular location at a particular time.
4

CONCLUSION

The technique of staining for the analysis of time-varying spatial
data is presented. The technique was successfully employed for
the analysis of the Evacuation Traces Mini-Challenge of the
VAST 2008 Contest.
The staining technique was found useful to addressing the tasks
of the VAST Contest. It is also thought that the technique would
be useful to other time-varying data where comparable analysis
questions are asked.
REFERENCES
[1]

Plaisant, C., Grinstein, G., Scholtz, J., Whiting, M., O'Connell, T.,
Laskowski, S., Chien, L., Tat, A., Wright, W., Gorg, C., Liu, Z.,
Parekh, N., Singhal, K., Stasko, J. Evaluating Visual Analytics: The
2007 Visual Analytics Science and Technology Symposium Contest,
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 28, 2, 12-21 (2008).

