Evacuation Trace Mini Challenge Award: Tool Integration
Analysis of Movements with Geospatial Visual Analytics Toolkit
Natalia Andrienko, Gennady Andrienko
Fraunhofer Institute IAIS (Intelligent Analysis and Information Systems), Sankt Augustin, Germany
ABSTRACT

3

The Geospatial Visual Analytics Toolkit intended for exploratory
analysis of spatial and spatio-temporal data has been recently
enriched with specific visual and computational techniques
supporting analysis of data about movement. We applied these
and other techniques to the data and tasks of Mini Challenge 4,
where it was necessary to analyze tracks of moving people.

We started with an overview of the temporal development of the
situation by means of an animated map and STC. We found that
all but a few people present in the building were staying in their
rooms without movement till approximately moment 372. At this
moment, a few more people started moving, and in the following
moments the number of moving people continuously increased. It
was hard to ascertain the exact moment of the evacuation start by
means of only visual techniques. We used the function for
computing path lengths by specified time intervals. The results
were visualized by means of time graph and time histogram. We
found that the first significant change of the number of moving
people occurred in interval [372,373] (Figure 1). Hence, 372
could be taken as the moment of evacuation start; consequently,
the explosion occurred before that, i.e. latest at moment 371.

CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.1.2 [User/Machine
Systems]: Human information processing – Visual Analytics;
I.6.9 [Visualization]: information visualization.
Additional Keywords: Movement data, spatio-temporal data,
aggregation, scalable visualization, geovisualization.
1

INTRODUCTION

ANALYTICAL PROCESS

The Geospatial Visual Analytics Toolkit includes a large number
of tools for exploratory analysis of spatial and spatio-temporal
data. It combines visual techniques (various methods for
cartographic representation, scatterplot, histogram, parallel
coordinates, time graph, time histogram, table view, etc.),
interactive facilities (brushing, querying, filtering, classifying,
manipulating visualization parameters), data transformation tools
(computation of derived attributes, aggregation, summarization
and others), and some methods of data mining. Recently we have
developed a number of new techniques specifically oriented to
movement data, i.e. sequences of recorded positions of discrete
moving entities. We were very interested to test these new
techniques by responding to Mini Challenge 4, where tracks of
moving people needed to be analyzed.
2

OVERVIEW OF THE ANALYTICAL TOOLS

A map display with controlled animation and a space-time cube
(STC) are traditionally used for visualization of movement data;
see a review in [1]. They proved very useful in our exploration of
the evacuation traces. The animation is done by means of an
interactive time filter, which affects not only the map but all
currently open views. We also applied traditional interactive
techniques such as brushing, interactive grouping and
classification, attribute-based filtering in Dynamic Query style,
and spatial filtering by “spatial window”, i.e. a selected
rectangular area in space.
Besides these traditional tools, we used some of our new
methods including spatial clustering of trajectories [2][3],
dynamic aggregation of movement data by predefined areas (in
particular, by grid cells), computation of derived attributes of
trajectories (in particular, path lengths for selected time intervals),
and automated detection of possible interactions between moving
objects. The dynamic aggregation techniques are described in our
regular paper in the VAST’08 proceedings.
http://geoanalytics.net/and andrienko@geoanalytics.net

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
October 21 - 23, Columbus, Ohio, USA
978-1-4244-2935-6/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE

Figure 1. The time graph and time histogram visualize path lengths
by 1-unit time intervals from [365,366] to [380,381].

Our search for the probable place of the explosion was based on
the premise that it should be in the area where people were most
seriously affected and could not move or stopped moving soon
after the explosion. We set the time filter to the interval [372,837].
The approximate area was easily identifiable on the map (by
containing very short tracks) and in the STC (as a base of a bunch
of long vertical lines signifying constant positions of people).
To determine the position of the explosion more precisely, we
set the time filter to the interval [1,371] and considered all
movements that occurred before the explosion in the identified
area. The map showed us that only Ramon Katalanow (N21)
moved within this area and left it shortly before the explosion.
We considered and refuted the hypothesis that the bomb could
be set off by one of the affected people (casualties). All but one
casualty were able to move for a short time after the explosion,
which means that the explosion could not happen exactly in the
location of one of these people. The only person who did not
move after the explosion (as well as before it) had an isolated
position with respect to all other casualties. The explosion could
not occur in this position as there was an unaffected person

205

between it and the positions of the other casualties. Only one
casualty moved before the explosion, but this was outside of the
explosion-affected area and on its periphery whereas the bomb
was, most probably, set off somewhere in the middle of the area.
The only remaining possibility was that N21 set the bomb and
left the area; hence, the bomb was in one of the cells passed by
N21. The most probable location should be close to the positions
of the casualties who stopped moving earlier than others. These
were N18 and N50, located in one room (they could not get out of
this room after the explosion). N21 visited this room before the
explosion, but it is not very probable that he put the bomb inside it
because N18 and N50 could see this. He could rather put it in the
corridor near the room. We used a suitable technique to compute
the amounts of time N21 spent in each of the cells he passed. The
computation is done for the subset of movement data currently
selected by means of all active filters; the results are automatically
updated when the selection changes (we call this technique
“dynamic aggregation”). We visualized the computed variable
“Max duration of stay” (Figure 2). Using the time filter and map
interaction, we found that N21 spent 14 time units in the cell
67×31 in front of the door of the room of N18 and N50 before
starting to move out of the area; in each of the following cells he
spent only from 6 to 8 time units. We concluded that the cell
67×31 is the most probable location of the bomb.

join the other survivors but moved to a separate place. We think
that N28 might cause the secondary incident.

Figure 3. Tracks of supposed casualties (pink) and survivors (green
and dark gray); gray horizontal lines signify interactions.

We also explored the fate of the other people who did not arrive
to any of the main safe places and found plausible explanations.
4

Figure 2. The graduated circles portray the computed maximum
durations of staying in grid cells by people who passed them.

Then we analyzed the process of the evacuation. On the map,
we found four major destination areas near the outer walls of the
buildings, which we interpreted as exits or safe places. The traces
of people who did not reach any of these areas were well
detectable by the positions of the squares marking the ends of the
traces. We detected a group of 5 people who stopped moving
between moments 581 and 621 closely to each other. These could
not be direct victims of the explosion that happened before
moment 372: first, quite much time passed since that, second,
many people successfully reached a safe place after moving
through the area where these 5 persons stopped. Hence, it is very
probable that some secondary incident happened in that area
between moment 550, when the last “successful” person left it,
and moment 581, when the first of the 5 persons stopped.
We were interested if there were contacts (interactions) between
the survivors and the supposed victims of the secondary incident
in the explored area. We used the computational technique that
finds positions in different trajectories such that the spatial and
temporal distances between them are within given thresholds. We
took 1 as the spatial threshold and 0 as the temporal threshold.
The STC in Figure 3 shows the movements and interactions that
occurred in the area before and shortly after the possible time of
the incident. The interactions are shown by gray lines connecting
corresponding points from two trajectories. We see that some
survivors interacted with one of the casualties (N60); moreover, in
the course of one of the interactions N60 changed the direction of
movement to the opposite. This was an interaction with N28,
whose behavior after leaving the area was suspicious: N28 did not

206

EVALUATION

The specific techniques we designed for visualization and analysis
of movement data proved to be appropriate to the data and tasks
of Mini Challenge 4. The possibility to use them together with
more generic techniques available in our toolkit was beneficial.
We observed that the visual and interactive tools were first of
all useful for getting overviews and generating hypotheses. The
computations were often used for achieving higher precision e.g.
in determining the moment of evacuation start, the moments when
casualties stopped moving, or the cell in which the suspect spent
more time than in the others. We also found that it would be very
hard to detect and analyze possible interactions between moving
objects without the use of computational extraction. Clustering, on
the opposite, was not very expedient because the dataset was quite
small and the clusters were easily identifiable visually.
Among the visual tools, the map display controlled (animated)
through the time filter was used more intensively than STC. Most
often we used STC for cross-validating patterns detected with the
map. STC was generally more usable and useful when we looked
at subsets of tracks resulting from filtering rather than the whole
set. The only type of analysis where STC proved to be superior to
the map was the analysis of interactions. We also found that STC
is often superior to the map in presenting findings as it explicitly
includes time, which is absent in a static snapshot from the map.
Acknowledgement: the work has been done within the ongoing
EU-funded project GeoPKDD (http://www.geopkdd.eu).
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

Andrienko, N., Andrienko, G., & Gatalsky, P.: Exploratory SpatioTemporal Visualization: an Analytical Review. Journal of Visual
Languages and Computing, 14 (6), 2003, 503-541
Andrienko, G., Andrienko, N., & Wrobel, S.: Visual Analytics Tools
for Analysis of Movement Data, ACM SIGKDD Explorations, 9(2),
2007, 38-46
Rinzivillo, S., Pedreschi, D., Nanni, M., Giannotti, F., Andrienko,
N., & Andrienko, G.: Visually–driven analysis of movement data by
progressive clustering, Information Visualization, 7(3/4), 2008.

