2012 Ninth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Mouth Image Controlled Web Page
Yuan-Fei Cheng
Department of Information Management
Meiho University, Ping Tung, Taiwan
x00002070@email.meiho.edu.tw
Abstract

reasonable because usually one person is sit in front of
the computer and the distance is usually short.
The traditional web page hyper link is controlled by
computer mouse click or screen touched, this method is
controlled by mouth opening and mouth closing. The
mouth opening and mouth closing are like the binary
signal, the binary signal is captured by the computer web
camera. The web camera captures the mouth image and
this computer differentiates the mouth opening or the
mouth closing. The mouth opening can be assumed to
represent the binary signal 1 and the mouth closing can
be assumed to represent the binary signal 0. Different
web page hyper link has its particular binary signal,
Different binary signal captured from the mouth can
trigger different web page hyper link and the web page is
then switched.
This web page switching method uses the techniques
of Java Applet and Java Script. The Java Applet is used
to capture the mouth image and obtain the binary signal
and the Java Script is used to trigger the web page hyper
link. The whole system will be discussed in the
followings.

This paper introduces a particular mouth image
controlled hyper-link method that is used in web page
switching. The traditional switching method is done by
computer mouse click or screen touched. This method is
not convenient compared to the traditional method, but
can used by the handicapped people, who are not able to
use the computer mouse or touch the computer screen to
switch the web pages.
Keywords: Image controlled, Hyper-link, Web page

1. Introduction
Image motion analysis has been used in many
human machine interfaces, such as hand gesture
identification [1-3]. People can use the hand gesture to
control family electric appliance, such as TV. In this
paper, a particular mouth image controlled method is
presented. The traditional web page is switched by
computer mouse click or screen touched, but this method
is switched by mouth image. This method is not
convenient compared to the traditional method, but can
used by the handicapped people, who are not able to use
the computer mouse or touch screen controller to switch
the web pages.
Before finding the mouth image, face image has to
be detected first. Face detection method has been
proposed by many researchers [4-8], they try to find the
face location in the image. However, finding the face
image is not a simple job, different background and
different lighting condition must to be considered. Most
of all, Different race has to be considered. Asian people
is yellow, European people is white and African people
is back. A face detection method for all races is not easy.
In this paper, the mouth image is not detected but
located in specific area and the face image is not
considered. Since the face image is not considered, some
basic assumptions have to be made. First, a single person
is assumed in front of the computer. Second, the face
occupies the whole image. The two assumptions are
978-0-7695-4778-7/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2012.16

2. Mouth image controlled system
The mouth image controlled system consists of two
parts: (1) Web page contents (2) Java Applet. Web page
contents are the ordinary web pages with the hyper links
and Java Scripts inside. The Java Scripts will be called
by Java Applet to trigger the hyper links inside the web
pages. The hyper links in the web pages will be
represented by alternate color changed text or icons to
show the binary code. The people who watch the web
page will open their mouth or close their mouth
according to the hyper link symbols.
The Java Applet, which is embedded in the web
page, is used to capture the mouth image by the web
camera. The Java Applet analyzes the mouth image,
judges the openings or closings of the mouth, and obtains
the binary code. After the Java Applet gets the valid
binary code, it will trigger the Java Scripts in the web
page to do the hyper links and the web page is switched.
13

Since this code is for a non-synchronized system, it
is designed like a 1-D bar code. It has 1 in the beginning
and in the end. When the code is showing continuously,
it will have “11”, which means the boundary.

3. Why the mouth?
In this human machine interface, the mouth image is
the most easily to be obtained in face compared to eyes
or face appearance, and the most importantly, the mouth
image will show binary signals by openings or closings
more easily compared to other organs, such as eyes.
The mouth occupies a large area in face, and it gives
the benefits for image processing. When the mouth is
open, it is the darkest area in face except the nose holes.
However, the mouth is bigger than the nose holes.
To find the face image is not an easy job, different
background and different lighting condition must to be
considered. However, the mouth opening area is still the
darkest among most of the conditions. That’s the reason
why the mouth image is chosen.

Table 1: Binary signal code
No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

4. Locating the mouth
Because of the difficulties of finding different
people’s face in different background and different
lighting conditions, the mouth image is not to be detected
but to be located. Since the face image is not considered,
some basic assumptions have to be made. First, a single
person is assumed in front of the computer. Second, the
face occupies the whole image. The two assumptions are
reasonable because usually one person is sit in front of
the computer and the distance is usually short.
First, a square area is located as shown in Figure 1.
The size and location is depending on the web camera
and is set up approximately. Second, try to sit in front of
the computer and let your mouth image is in this area.
Most of the people sit in front of the same computer
could locate their mouth in this area easily.

code
101
1001
10001
10101
100001
101001
100101
1000001
1000101
1001001
1010001
1010101

length
3
4
5
5
6
6
6
7
7
7
7
7

6. Signal showing on web page
In order to teach the user what’s the time to open the
mouth or to close the mouth. The signal must be shown
on screen. The signal can be done by alternated color
changed text or icons. For example, as shown in Figure 2,
when the red icon is shown, the mouth should be open.
When the black icon is shown, the mouth should be close.
The other color is only used for preparing the mouth
motion.

Figure 1: The mouth is located in green square.
Figure 2: Signals shown on web page.

5. Binary signal code
7. Web page design

The binary signal code as shown in Table 1 is used
in this system. Every code can be used in different hyper
links of the web page. 1 represents the mouth is open and
0 represents the mouth is close. The items are not many
because this is a non-synchronized system. This kind of
system cannot show you the signal and read the signal
from you simultaneously. It is possible to be
simultaneously. All you have to do is showing the signal
according to a specific computer time and read the signal
according to the same time.

An example of web page is shown in Figure 3. It is a
web page with 3 frames. Top frame has a web page
with a Java Applet embedded. The Java Applet is used
to capture the mouth image and obtain the binary code.
Left frame has a web page with a menu on it. Main
frame shows the contents of each menu. Because top
frame is used to capture the mouth image, it cannot be
switched. However, the other parts can be switched.

14

According to the experiences, one second is enough
for the user to issue one signal, that is, open his mouth. If
there are 12 hyperlinks in web page, the longest time to
switch the web page is 7 seconds according to the binary
code length in Table 1.

10. Synchronized or non-synchronized
The synchronized system means the signal showing
by the hyper link has the same timing when the signal is
read by the Java Applet. In the example of this paper, the
hyper link shows its own signal independently. The Java
Applet doesn’t know the timing, that is, the time when it
starts the code. That’s the reason why the binary code is
like a 1-D barcode, with boundaries at the beginning and
the end.
The maximum number for hyper links is only 12
with the code length less and equal to 7 in the nonsynchronized system. However, if this system is
synchronized, the code with length of 7 will have 127
choices in theory.
To accomplish a synchronized system is not a
difficult job in the web page design. In a synchronized
web page, every hyper link icon must show the signal
according to a specific computer time and the Java
Applet to read the signal according to the same computer
time. Since the hyper link icon has to know the computer
time, it cannot be designed by ordinary GIF graphs. The
best way to design the hyper link icon in the
synchronized system is also by Java Applet.

Figure 3: Mouth Image controlled web page.

8. Binary code from the mouth
The binary code is issued by the mouth. When the
mouth is open, it represents 1. When the mouth is close,
it represents 0. Two different situations are shown in Fig.
4. When the mouth is open, it is usually dark. If the dark
area occupies a certain percent of the green rectangle, it
represents the mouth is open and the signal is 1.
After a certain period of time, the Java Applet
receives the binary code from the user. If the code is
valid, it will issue a command to Java Scripts in every
web page of different frames. Every web page will then
decide which hyper link matches this code. If the code
matches, a hyper link is triggered and the web page is
switched.

Conclusions
This paper introduces a particular mouth image
controlled hyper-link method that is used in web page
switching. The traditional switching method is by
computer mouse click or screen touched. This method
use the Java Applet to capture the mouth image and
determine the mouth is open or not. If the mouth is open,
it represents signal 1, otherwise, signal 0.
The user produces a binary code by opening or
closing his mouth when he observes the alternated
changed color in hyper links of the web page. After the
Java Applet reads the binary code, it judges the validity.
If the binary code is valid, the Java Applet will issue a
command to every web page of different frames. The
Java Scripts in every web page will receive the command
and match every hyper link. If the binary code for a
specific hyper link is matched, The Java Script will
trigger the hyper link and the web page is switched.
This method is not convenient compared to the
traditional method, but can used by the handicapped
people, who are not able to use the computer mouse or
touch the computer screen to switch the web pages.

Figure 4: Images with mouth closing and opening.

9. The comparison with traditional method
The traditional method for web page hyper link is by
mouse click or screen touched. The mouth image
controlled method is not convenient compared to other
methods. However, this method is not to substitute the
traditional method, but to provide another option for
some specific circumstances, for example, the
handicapped people, who are not able to use the
computer mouse or to touch the computer screen.

15

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

Cheng-Chang Lien and Chung-Lin Huang, “Model-based
articulated hand motion tracking for gesture recognition”,
Image and Vision Computing, Vol. 16, pp. 121-134,
1998
Feng-Sheng Chen, Chih-Ming Fu, and Chung-Lin Huang,
“Hand gesture recognition using a real-time tracking
method and hidden Markov models”, Image and Vision
Computing, Vol. 21, pp. 745-758, 2003
J. P. Wachs, H. Stern, and Y. Edan, “Cluster Labeling
and Parameter Estimation for the Automated Setup of a
Hand-Gesture Recognition System”, IEEE Trans. On
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 932944, November 2005
J. Yang, D. Zhang, A. Frangi, and J. Yangn, “Twodimensional PCA: A new approach to appearance-based
face representation and recognition, “IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence”, vol. 26,
pp. 131-137, 2005
P. Viola and M. Jones, “Robust Real-Time Face
Detection”, International Journal of Computer Vision,
Vol. 57, Issue 2, pp. 137-154, 2004
S. L. Phung, A. Bouzerdoum, and D. Chai. Skin
segmentation using color pixel classification: Analysis
and comparison. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 27(1):148-154, 2005
C. Liu, “Gabor-based kernel PCA with fractional power
polynomial models for face recognition”, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, vol. 26, pp. 572-581, 2004
J. T. Chien and C. C. Wu, “Discriminant waveletfaces
and nearest feature classifiers for face recognition”, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, vol. 24, pp. 1644-1649, 2002

16

