MonkEllipse: Visualizing the History of
Information Visualization
Tzu-Wei Hsu, Lee Inman, Dave McColgin, Kevin Stamper
{thsu, lee, davemail, kstamper} @cc.gatech.edu

Georgia Institute of Technology
ABSTRACT
2
In this paper, we describe the process and result of creating a
visualization to capture the past 10 years of history in the field
of Information Visualization, as part of the annual InfoVis
Conference Contest. We began with an XML file containing
data provided by the contest organizers, scrubbed and
augmented the data, and created a database to hold the
information. We designed a visualization and implemented it
using Flash MX 2004 Professional with ActionScript 2.0, PHP,
and PostgreSQL. The resulting visualization provides an
overview of the field of Information Visualization, and allows
users to see the connections between areas of the field,
particular researchers, and documents.
CR Categories: K.2 [History of Computing]: People; H.5.2
[Information Interfaces and Presentation (HCI)]: User Interfaces
--- Graphical User Interfaces (GUI); H.5.4 [Information
Interfaces and Presentation (HCI)]: Hypertext/Hypermedia --Navigation
Keywords: information visualization, history, text arc,
document, text, articles, contributors, research areas, InfoVis
conference
1

INTRODUCTION

The field of information visualization is rich with many
different research areas. Our visualization attempts to
characterize the field by displaying the titles of published
articles from the past 10 years of the InfoVis conference and
linking these articles to their authors, research areas, and
references so that a user of the visualization can explore and
discover relationships between articles, authors, research areas,
and references in an intuitive and interactive manner.
Our design was inspired by the TextArc application,
authored by W. Bradford Paley. The visualization displays
article titles and research areas. Articles are listed around the
form of an ellipse, and the center of the ellipse is filled with
research areas. Users can search by keywords to highlight
applicable articles, or browse the articles inside the
visualization. By clicking on articles, users can see relationships
between articles, research areas, and contributors.

APPLICATION

Our visualization was built in Macromedia Flash MX 2004
Professional, using ActionScript 2.0. It accesses the PostgreSQL
database using PHP. PERL scripting was also used extensively
to find additional content for the database, to develop
categories, and classify authors and papers.
2.1 Visual Design
Our design orders the papers in chronological order along an
ellipse. The derived topics/research areas are scattered in the
center and are presented based on the number of documents that
fall within each research area. For example, a research area with
more documents appears in a larger font than a research area
with fewer documents. This layout helps to characterize the
research areas by emphasizing those research areas with the
most articles. The advantage of this importance-by-size view
gives users an overview of the most important research areas
within the field.
Each document is clickable, as is each research area. If a
user clicks on a paper title, all other papers referenced by that
paper are highlighted, as well as all research areas to which the
paper applies. When the user clicks on a particular research
area, all papers associated with that research area are
highlighted.
Once the user has clicked on a research area and sees the
resulting highlighting on all papers within that research area, a
list of authors contributing to that research area appears. The list
is scrollable, with the authors sorted by their total contributions
to the field. Thus, the research areas and authors are bridged,
giving the user insight into both dimensions of a paper. This
bridge serves to illustrate where a particular author/researcher
fits within the research areas being studied by the user.
When the user clicks on a document, the pane below the
ellipse shows the paper’s title, abstract, authors, year, and a link
to the entry in the ACM Digital Library, so that the user can
find more information and access the entire paper.
2.2 Programming
We used PHP as middleware between Flash MX 2004
Professional and our PostgreSQL database. The PHP component
takes query values from Flash and transforms them into
PostgreSQL queries that can retrieve data from the database.
The PHP then formats the query results back into a format Flash
can use. In Flash, we used an ellipse equation to display the
article titles around the outside of the ellipse.

3

ANALYSIS PROCESS AND TASKS

The overall goal of our visualization is to provide an overview
of the field while still allowing users to discover interesting
relationships within the data. This set of tasks was chosen from
the list of contest tasks because of their wide appeal across a
broad range of audiences. Students new to the field as well as
established researchers can benefit from a visualization that
addresses this set of tasks.
3.1 Overview of InfoVis
Through visual design, the system provides a static overview of
the field of Information Visualization in one screen. Our goal
for this particular task was to minimize the number of 'modes'
needed to gain an overview of the field. Our approach of
displaying articles, year indicators, and research areas on one
screen, and allowing interaction between elements, produced a
display that could statically show chronology, evolution, and the
names and relative influence of our derived research areas.

Fig. 1 InfoVis documents from the past 10 years are arranged
chronologically in an ellipse with research areas displayed at the
center and year indicators for context.

3.2 Research Areas and their Evolution
MonkEllipse allows users to explore the evolution of different
research areas. When a user clicks on a research area, articles
belonging to the topic are highlighted. Having the entire 10 year
history in one view takes advantage of our ability to see clusters
and trends in data. Visually following the ellipse clockwise,
trends in research can be observed in the density of highlighted
articles through the years.
3.3 Authors/Researchers in the Field
The task of discovering where a particular author/researcher fits
within the field is difficult, as there are many contributors across
a variety of topics. As our system stands now, searching an
author’s name is the simplest way to find him. The results of
this search return all articles where the researcher was an author,
was referenced, or was mentioned in the abstract. This method
gives an idea of how long this particular researcher has been
involved in the field. Clicking on a highlighted article reveals
the research area(s) into which the article fits, helping to reveal
the author’s involvement in that research area. The user can also
click on a topic to see which researchers are involved in that
particular research area.
3.4 Search

The ever-present search box allows partial word matching,
highlighting relevant authors and research areas.
3.5 Document Details
This lower pane of MonkEllipse provides the document’s basic
information as well as a direct link to the selected document in
the ACM Digital Library, which allows the user to first
determine if this article warrants further exploration by
providing the article's abstract.
4

SYSTEM CRITIQUE

There are several tasks for which our system is not optimal. One
issue is the scale of the dataset and number of articles being
referenced. Currently, with 614 articles, it is impossible to see
the name of each article in a readable font size. We have
compensated for this by increasing the font size of the article in
focus, and by displaying the title currently in focus below the
ellipse as well. However, if the dataset were significantly larger,
the system would have increased difficulty supporting the
amount of information necessary to display on the screen.
Additionally, the system does not adequately support direct
walk from one article to another. While the user can go from
one article to its reference and then on to that article’s
references, the user ultimately loses the original context. One
potential solution is to allow the user to retain highlighting from
previous queries, but the system would run out of highlighting
colors after a certain number of steps in the walk. Also, the
additional highlight colors would be hard to track and would
potentially make the screen cluttered and confusing.
The system in its current implementation can handle
linking from an article to its references, but not the reverse
operation, determining articles that reference one particular
article. This would be a useful task because it would illustrate
the influence of a seminal paper over the course of time.
5

CONCLUSION

Our system visualizes the past ten years of the field of InfoVis
and enables users to explore and learn about the field. The
visualization characterizes the different research areas and
illustrates the documents that relate to each research area using a
chronological listing. It also illustrates where a particular
author/researcher fits within the different research areas, even if
the author touches on multiple research areas in his or her work.
Finally, the visualization illustrates the relationships between
researchers,
including
coauthoring,
referencing,
and
contributions to the same field at similar times.
REFERENCES
1. Franklin, D., and Makar, J. Flash MX 2004 ActionScript.
Macromedia Press: Berkeley, CA, 2004.
2. Paley, W. B. TextArc: Showing Word Frequency and Distribution in
Text, poster presented at InfoVis ’02.
3. Spence, R. Information Visualization.
Wesley/ACM Press: Essex, England, 2001.

Pearson

Addison

4. Stasko, John. "Text and Documents 2" College of Management,
Georgia Institute of Technology. 18 Mar. 2004

