Understanding Eight Years of InfoVis Conferences using PaperLens
Bongshin Lee*

Mary Czerwinski†

George Robertson‡

Benjamin B. Bederson§

University of Maryland
Microsoft Research

Microsoft Research

Microsoft Research

University of Maryland

ABSTRACT
(a)

We present PaperLens, a visualization that reveals connections,
trends, and activity throughout the InfoVis conference community
for the last 8 years. It tightly couples views across papers, authors,
and references. This paper describes how we analyzed the data,
the strengths and weaknesses of PaperLens, and interesting
patterns and relationships we have discovered using PaperLens.

(c)

(d)
(e)

1 INTRODUCTION
Information Visualization has been studied extensively over the
last 10 years to help people explore and understand data. From
1995 to 2002, 315 authors published 155 papers in the InfoVis
symposium. Interfaces for visualizing search results for a digital
library, such as Envision [2], exist, but we do not yet have a
visualization system that allows researchers in our field to
understand how researchers, topics, and outside research sources
interact and influence research activity in general. In order to
address this issue, we have developed a visualization called
PaperLens that supports the discovery and identification of major
research topics, relationships between members of the
community, and trends over time (Figure 1).
2 DATA ANALYSIS
2.1 Topic Clustering
We used technology developed internally at Microsoft Research
to cluster the papers in the InfoVis proceedings. The clustering
software was originally developed for site administrators to help
build and maintain category hierarchies for documents. The textclustering component suggests a hierarchically organized set of
categories when no such structure exists. In order to cluster, we
used the titles, references and keywords (if available) in the
clustering process, weighting the titles more heavily to get a better
clustering result. A standard list of stop words, months of the
year, journal and proceeding titles and version and page numbers
were removed from influencing the cluster results. Five clusters
emerged from using this tool:
x
General (58 papers)
x
Dynamic Queries (28)
x
Graph Visualization (19)
x
Focus + Context Techniques (16)
x
Tree Visualization (31)

*email: bongshin@cs.umd.edu
email: marycz@microsoft.com
‡
email: ggr@microsoft.com
§
email: bederson@cs.umd.edu
†

(f)
(b)

Figure 1. PaperLens: (a) Popularity of Topic (b) Paper List
(c) Selected Authors (d) Author List
(e) Degrees of Separation Links
(f) Year by Year Top 10 Cited Papers/Authors.

2.2 Co-authorship Analysis
A co-author collaboration graph is often used to find the
relationship between authors and the center of the community, i.e,
the author that has the shortest average path length to all other
authors in the graph [3]. However, the graph among InfoVis
authors is too fragmented to give any useful insights. S. F. Roth,
the center of the graph, has published 5 papers with 13 co-authors
and has only 19 related colleagues among 315 possible
individuals. We instead decided to display all of the related
colleagues when an author is selected by the user. We compute
the shortest path length between two authors on demand and call
it degrees of separation.
2.3 Reference Citation Counts
One of the interesting questions we wanted to answer was “Which
papers/authors are most often referenced?” because this is one
important metric indicating influential papers/authors. In addition
to counting the number of references overall, we computed them
by year and by topic to show their trends.
3 STRENGTHS
3.1 Evolution of Topics
We can easily capture trends of the topics because we organized
papers by their topic and signified the most popular topic each
year by a small star above the relevant column in the popularity of
topic view (Figure 1a). For example, the topic of Graph
Visualization has grown in popularity quite recently and was most
popular in 2001, while the topic of Dynamic Queries has
exhibited a steady increase over the last 8 years.

3.2 Easy Access to Papers/Authors
PaperLens enables users to get a list of papers by year, by topic,
or by authors. It also provides a way to search for specific
papers/authors. By clicking on a year, a fisheye technique helps
to reveal the individual paper titles for that year by topic. By
selecting a topic in the display, the list of all papers in that area is
shown in the paper list (Figure 1b). When the user selects authors
from the authors list, they are shown in the selected authors area
(Figure 1c) and added to the From combo-box in the degrees of
separation links view (Figure 1e). Once authors are added to the
selected authors area, all of the papers by them are also shown in
the paper list and are highlighted in the popularity of topic view,
matched to the author by color coding. When two or more
selected authors wrote a paper together, we used black and
showed the number of authors from the selected authors on the
paper. The user can iterate through each author’s papers by
clicking on the author name or by clicking on them in the paper
list.
When the user selects a paper by single click, its authors are
automatically picked from the author list (Figure 1d) and added to
the selected authors area. A double-click takes the user to the
ACM Portal with a link to the paper.
3.3 Most Frequently Published Authors
We show the number of papers published by an author in the
author list (Figure 1d). Users can sort the author list by # of
papers and immediately see who has published most. By
selecting a topic in the popularity of topic view, a column having
the number of papers in that topic is added to the author list. Now
users can see who has published most in each topic.
3.4 Relationships between Authors
The degrees of separation links view plays an important role in
showing the relationships between authors in the InfoVis
community. Once an author is selected from the From combobox, we display all of the related colleagues to the selected
authors in the To combo-box (Figure 1e) with the corresponding
degrees of separation. Once an author is selected from the To
combo-box, we display the shortest path between two authors in
our dataset through their degrees of separation links. For
example, S. K. Card and Allison Woodruff are connected
indirectly to each other by 3 papers and two co-authors, Chris
Olston and J. Mackinlay.
3.5 Most Frequently Referenced Papers/Authors
The top 10 overall most frequently cited references, which may or
may not be from the InfoVis proceedings, are viewable in the
Overall list (Figure 1f). One can also see the detailed information
for each of the top 10 papers and how it was referenced over time
by hovering on an individual paper (Figure 2a). It is easy to see
that the most frequently cited paper by InfoVis authors to date is
the Cone Trees paper by Robertson et al., which was published in
the CHI proceedings (Figure 2a). In fact, we distinguished the
most influential source of cited papers (by number of citations)
with the color green and the important InfoVis papers with blue.
It can immediately be seen that CHI publications have been the
main source of inspiration for the InfoVis community to date and
that, in the top 10 papers most frequently cited papers, there is
only one InfoVis publication.
PaperLens also shows frequently cited authors that either have
or have not published in InfoVis. Selecting an author from the
year by year top 10 cited authors view (Figure 1f) shows not only
any papers selected authors have published in InfoVis, but also
those papers that have referenced them via orange highlighting in

the popularity of topic area. The user can immediately discover
which areas were most influenced by the selected author.
When the user selects a topic from the popularity of topic view,
the year by year top 10 citations area is filtered to only show the
frequent citations for that topic area. For instance, for Graph
Visualization, Peter Eades, who first introduced the spring model
to graph drawing, was the #1 most frequently cited author (Figure
2b), but he has not published in InfoVis as of yet. In this way,
PaperLens allows the user to quickly discover the most influential
researchers in a particular topic area, in addition to gaining easy
access to their papers and colleagues.

(b)
(a)
Figure 2. (a) Cone Trees paper is the most referenced paper by all
InfoVis papers and (b) Peter Eades is the most frequently cited
author for the Graph Visualization topic.

4 WEAKNESSES
As is often the case with powerful and new visualization tools,
PaperLens requires some learning time. The users need to learn
how to decode the various color mappings and highlighting. They
are also required to understand how views are coupled because all
views can be used for both input and output.
5 CONCLUSIONS
Using PaperLens, we have discovered many interesting patterns
and relationships, which could not have been revealed using
existing tools. For example, CHI was the most influential source
of references used by InfoVis authors to date. George Robertson,
and George Furnas, both influential in the InfoVis proceedings,
have only published once or never, respectively, at InfoVis.
PaperLens’ power comes from its tightly coupled views across
papers, authors, and references. The ability to query by time and
topic has enabled novel views that we have found to be very
beneficial in our explorations of this domain. As future work we
are examining ways to scale the visualization to a larger dataset of
documents with many other kinds of metadata.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
PaperLens was built using Piccolo.NET, a port of Piccolo.Java [1].
We would like to thank Aaron Clamage who ported .NET
versions of Piccolo.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

Benjamin B. Bederson, Jesse Grosjean, and Jon Meyer. “Toolkit
Design for Interactive Structured Graphics”, IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, 2004, pp. 535-546
Lucy Terry Nowell, Robert K. France, and Deborah Hix. “Exploring
Search Results with Envision”, Proceedings of CHI, 1997, pp. 14-15.
Alan F. Smeaton, Gary Keogh, Cathal Gurrin, Kieran McDonald,
Tom Sødring, “Analysis of papers from twenty-five years of SIGIR
conferences: what have we been doing for the last quarter of a
century?”, ACM SIGIR Forum, 2003, pp. 49-53.

