Visual Browsing of Remote and Distributed Data
Parthasarathy Krishnaswamy∗

Stephen G Eick†

Robert L Grossman‡

National Center for Data Mining
University of Illinois at Chicago
851 S. Morgan Street
Chicago, IL, USA

A BSTRACT
Data repositories around the world hold many thousands of data
sets. Finding information from these data sets is greatly facilitated
by being able to quickly and efﬁciently browse remote data sets. In
this note, we introduce the Iconic Remote Visual Data Exploration
tool(IRVDX), which is a visual data mining tool used for exploring
the features of remote and distributed data without the necessity of
downloading the entire data set. IRVDX employs three kinds of visualizations: one provides a reduced representation of the data sets,
which we call Dataset Icons. These icons show the important statistical characteristics of data sets and help to identify relevant data
sets from distributed repositories. Another one is called the Remote Dataset Visual Browser that provides visualizations to browse
remote data without downloading the complete data set to identify
its content. The ﬁnal one provides visualizations to show the degree of similarity between two data sets and to visually determine
whether a join of two remote data sets will be meaningful.

Figure 1: Dataset Icons for the UCI KDD Archive.

CR Categories: H.1.2 [Models and Principles]: User/Machine
Systems—Human information processing; H.2.8 [Database Management]: Database Applications—Data mining; H.3.4 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Systems and Software—Distributed
systems;

To address these problems we have developed a tool called
IRVDX for distributed visual data browsing. It addresses three major questions:

Keywords: visual data mining, information visualization, visual
data exploration, distributed data

• How to identify remote and distributed data sets that may be
relevant to an analysis problem?

1

• How to browse remote data without ﬁrst downloading the
complete data set?

I NTRODUCTION

Data repositories around the world contain many tens of thousands
of datasets and are growing exponentially. It is difﬁcult now and
in the future it may not be possible, even with high performance
networks, to consolidate the data into a single repository for a data
mining analysis. The reasons for this are:
• Time and effort. it is not practical to download all relevant
data.
• Size. some datasets are too big to move.
• Legal. it may be against the law to combine certain datasets
when the result will violate privacy laws.
• Complexity. the structure of some repositories may be too
complex to be moved.
• Data Revisions. many datasets are constantly updated and
downloading a snapshot could bias an analysis.
∗ e-mail:

babuk@microsoft.com
eick@cs.uic.edu
‡ e-mail: grossman@uic.edu
† e-mail:

• How to identify columns in distributed data sets that can be
used to fuse the data sets in order to extract additional insights?
In IRVDX we introduce the concept of Dataset Icons to identify
relevant datasets from remote distributed repositories. A Dataset
Icon is a reduced representation of a dataset that shows summary
and statistical characteristics of the data set that are important for
data mining. A Dataset Icon provides a succinct visual summary
of a remote dataset. Our ﬁrst Dataset Icon, shown in Figure 1, represents a data set using modiﬁed box plots thumbnails. The icon
shows the number of attributes in the dataset (columns), type of attribute (continuous or categorical), distribution of attributes in the
dataset, and size of dataset. Our users, data miners, tend to be familiar with this representation and easily understand it.
The next problem for a scientist after he or she ﬁnds a dataset
that looks relevant is to browse the data. Figure 2 shows our remote
dataset browser. Users click on the icon to pull up our browser. The
intent is to provide a simple remote browsing capability to help the
scientist avoid pulling over irrelevant data.
The visualization in Figure 2 consists of two panes. The top
pane summarizes the statistical distributions of the attributes. The
summary information includes the name of the column, number of
attributes, number or records, and size of the dataset. The lower

Figure 2: Remote Dataset Browser.

pane shows the most frequent values, ranges, and a few other statistics. By looking at the display a data miner should be able to decide
if the full dataset would be appropriate for further analysis.
Finally, Figure 3 shows the relationships between columns in two
datasets. The relationships are calculated by comparing data types
and using the statistical distributions to suggest columns that may
be related. We currently use a simple pseudo metric based on the
inter-quartiles of the distribution to determine similarity.
2

Figure 3: Relationship between data sets.

for performance. Our visualizations are implemented using SVG
graphics for portability and run in essentially any browser.
Although we have not done a CHI-style formal user study, our
users, data miner, ﬁnd that our interface is signiﬁcantly better than
the textual descriptions of datasets and text-based searches that are
commonly used by data repositories. Our experience is that it is
much easier and faster to navigate through large repositories using
dataset icons than textual dataset descriptions.
If network conditions permit, we will demo IRVDX live at InfoVis 2004 conference in Texas.

R ELATED W ORK
R EFERENCES

Related work for this research is concentrated in the ﬁelds of information visualization and visual data mining. Papers [8] and
[4] present well-known classiﬁcations of information visualization
techniques based on the data types and visualization techniques.
We mainly used 2-dimensional visualization techniques. There
are other notable techniques for information visualization currently
available [5],[7],[6]. Our notion of interaction and direct manipulation follows [1].
Iconic visualizations are also studied extensively in many ﬁelds.
The paper [10] describes the use of icons as symbolic parametric objects to visualize feature attributes. Our approach is to use
Dataset Icons as a tiny representation of the statistical and data mining characteristics of a data set. Our approach also makes use of
some of the Visual Scalability techiniques presented in [3].
Existing visual data mining research [9] focuses on improved
techniques for understanding various classes of data and on understanding aspects of the underlying data mining models. This research work focuses more on distributed and remote data sets and
on the information about a data set, where we provide visualizations
to ﬁgure out which data sets are relevant for a particular analysis.
3

C ONCLUSION

We have implemented IRVDX and have it running at the National
Center for Data Mining. We have created a meta-data repository
where we store statistical properties of the datasets and other metadata necessary to produce our icons. The images are pre-computed

[1] C. Ahlberg and Ben Shneiderman. Visual information seeking: Tight
coupling of dynamic query ﬁlters with starﬁeld displays. In Proceedings of Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 313–317, 1994.
[2] Stephen G. Eick. Visual discovery and analysis. IEEE Transactions
on Computer Graphics and Visualization, 6(1):44–59, 2000.
[3] Stephen G. Eick and A. F. Karr. Visual scalability. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 11(1):22–43, 2002.
[4] Daniel A. Keim. Information visualization and visual data mining.
IEEE Transactions On Visualization And Computer Graphics, 8(1):1–
8, 2002.
[5] L. Nowell, S. Havre, B. Hetzle, and P. Whitney. Theme river: Visualizing thematic changes in large document collections. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1):9–20, 2002.
[6] R. M. Pickett and G. G. Grinstein. Iconographic displays for visualizing multidimensional data. In Proceedings of IEEE Conference on
Systems, Management, and Cybernetics, pages 514–519. IEEE, 1998.
[7] Ben Shneiderman. Tree visualization with treemaps: A 2d spaceﬁlling approach. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 11(1):92–99, 1992.
[8] Ben Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for
information visualizations. In Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, pages 336–343. IEEE, 1996.
[9] Ben Shneiderman. Inventing discovery tools: combining information
visualization with data mining. Information Visualization, 1(1):5–12,
2002.
[10] Th. van Walsum, F.H. Post, D. Silver, and F.J. Post. Feature extraction
and iconic visualization. IEEE Transactions On Visualization And
Computer Graphics, 2(2):111–119, 1996.

