RankSpiral: Toward Enhancing Search Results Visualizations
Anselm Spoerri1
School of Communication, Information & Library Studies, Rutgers University
4 Huntington Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA
ABSTRACT
This paper addresses the problem of how to enable users to
visually explore and compare large sets of documents that have
been retrieved by different search engines or queries. The RankSpiral enables users to rapidly scan large numbers of documents
and their titles in a single screen. It uses a spiral mapping that
maximizes information density and minimizes occlusions. It
solves the labeling problem by exploiting the structure of the
special spiral mapping used. Focus+Context interactions enable
users to examine document clusters or groupings in more detail.
CR Categories: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]
Information Search and Retrieval - information filtering. H.5.2
[Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g., HCI)] User
Interfaces - graphical user interfaces (GUI).
Keywords: Information visualization, meta searching, visual
search tools, document visualization.
1. INTRODUCTION
Users searching the Internet face the problem of how to explore
the many documents being retrieved or how to compare the
documents found by different search engines. Search results tend
to be presented as a ranked list, which has the advantage that
users know where to start their search for relevant documents.
However, only a small subset of documents is visible in a single
screen. Most users only look at the first screen of search results
[10]. Individual search engines only index 20% of the Internet [8]
and therefore return different documents for the same query. Meta
search engines address this limitation by combining the results by
different engines. The automatic and effective fusion of different
search engine results can be difficult [1]. Research has shown that
documents found by multiple retrieval methods are more likely to
be relevant [9]. Further, users may want to examine the top documents only found by a specific engine, since users may prefer
some engines more than others. This paper addresses how to
support users in the task of exploring large sets of search results.
2. RELATED WORK
Sparkler [6] combines a bull’s eye layout with star plots, where a
document is plotted on each star spoke based on its rankings by
the different queries or search engines. Users need to examine
individual document icons to be able to determine how many and
which retrieval methods found them. NIRVE [4] contains a
“Document Spiral” tool, which places the highest ranked document in the center. Subsequent document icons are placed and
spaced along the spiral proportional to their relative document
score. However, the placement of documents icons can lead to

1

aspoerri@scils.rutgers.edu

spurious perceptual groupings and the display space is not
optimally used. Torres et al. [12] use a similar spiral layout to
display images based their similarity with the query. Carlis et al.
[2] display the periodic data along an Archimedean spiral. Serial
attributes are highlighted along the spiral axis and periodic ones
along a ray emanating from the center. Several meta search
engines visualize the retrieved documents. Kartoo [7] creates a 2D map of the highest ranked documents and also displays the key
terms. Grokker [5] uses nested circles or rectangles to visualize a
hierarchical grouping of the search results. MetaSpider [3] uses a
self-organizing 2-D map approach to organize the documents.
3. RankSpiral
The RankSpiral is part of the MetaCrystal toolset that enables
users to control how to combine and filter the documents retrieved
by different search methods [11]. MetaCrystal’s design is guided
by the fact that documents found by multiple retrieval methods
are more likely to be relevant [9]. Implemented in Flash using
ActionScript, all its tools incorporate a “bull’s eye” layout so that
users can use the distance from a display’s center as a visual cue
of a document’s potential relevance. All tools support Details-onDemand to give users an immediate sense of a document’s content; Focus+Context interactions enable users to examine document clusters in more detail without losing a sense of context.
Search engines commonly display their results as ranked lists,
which can only show a limited number of document titles in a
single screen. The RankSpiral overcomes this limitation by
placing all the retrieved documents sequentially along an
expanding spiral based on their decreasing total tanking score (see
Figure 1). The total ranking score of a document is equal to the
sum of the number of engines that retrieved it and the normalized
average of its rankings by the different engines that found it. This
causes documents retrieved by multiple methods to cluster toward
the center and documents found by the same number of engines to
be mapped into in the same concentric ring. The RankSpiral
differs from a standard spiral mapping, because it places consecutive documents adjacent to each other so that they do not overlap.
Specifically, they share a tangent that passes through the display
center (see Figure 1). Thus, documents with the same total
ranking score will not be mapped to the same location, but instead
form a circular segment. A large jump in the total relevance score
between consecutive documents causes a visual gap in the spiral.
Shape, color and orientation coding are used to indicate which
engines retrieved a document. Within in each concentric ring, size
coding is used to visualize the relative ranking of the documents
found by the same number engines. Documents with high (low)
rankings by the different engines cluster are mapped toward
(furthest away from) the center in their respective rings and the
size of their icons is set the largest (smallest) value. This creates a
subtle visual hierarchy and has these benefits: 1) more documents
can be tightly placed along the spiral; 2) users can easily identify
the top documents found by a specific number of engines.

Same Ranking Score
Radial
Distance
Shared
Tangent

Greater Rate of Decreasing
Ranking Scores

Figure 1: (Top) RankSpiral
places consecutive document
icons next to each other so that
they do not overlap. Total ranking score of documents increases
to-ward the center. Radial distance
between documents that have the
same angle can be used to display
title fragments. (Right) shows a static
RankSpiral that maximizes information
density and minimizes occlusions, showing here the 388 unique documents amongst
the top 100 documents retrieved by Google,
Teoma, AltaVista, Lycis and MSN. 333 (55) documents were found by single (multiple) engine(s). The top
100+ documents are selected and their titles are allowed to
extend across the remaining unselected and dimmed documents.
The RankSpiral solves the labeling problem by exploiting the
structure of the spiral mapping used. For each document, the
radial distance to the icon that has the same angle as the document
in question can be computed (see Figure 1). This distance is used
to display titles in such way as to not occlude any document
icons. If users modify the focus area, the radial distances are
recomputed and the visible portion of the titles is updated
accordingly. If a document is selected, its title is allowed to
extend across the unselected icons (see Figure 1). Thus, users can
create a two-layered display, where the selected documents have
longer title fragments and the unselected documents are dimmed
and reduced in size. Users can rotate the spiral to read the titles
displayed at different angles. They can dynamically highlight and
magnify specific groupings of document titles. The RankSpiral is
well suited to display skewed document distributions, such as
meta search results, where most documents are found by a single
method and few are found by several engines. Thus, the limited
space of the spiral’s center area is sufficient to display the few
documents retrieved by many search engines.
In conclusion, the RankSpiral aims to enable users to rapidly
explore many more documents than they normally would by
offering them a high information density display that presents the
search results in a compact and structured way. The next step is to
conduct a formal evaluation and compare the RankSpiral with
single and multi column displays that have comparable
information densities and support focus+context interactions.

4. References
[1] Callan. J. (2000). Distributed information retrieval. In Croft W. (Ed),
Advances in Information Retrieval. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
[2] Carlis, J.V., and Konstan, J.A. Interactive Visualization of Serial
Periodic Data, Proceedings of ACM UIST’98.
[3] Chen H., Fan H., Chau M. and Zeng D. MetaSpider: (2001). MetaSearching and Categorization on the Web. JASIS, Volume 52 (13).
[4] Cugini, J., Piatko, C. & Laskowski, S. (1996). Interactive 3D Visualization for Document Retrieval. Proc. of Workshop on New
Paradigms in Information Visualization & Manipulation, CIKM '96.
[5] Grokker – www.groxis.com
[6] Havre, S., Hetzler, E., Perrine K., Jurrus E., and Miller N. (2001).
Interactive Visualization of Multiple Query Results. Proc. IEEE
Information Visualization Symp. 2001.
[7] Kartoo – www.kartoo.com
[8] Lawrence, S., & Giles, C.L. (1999). Accessibility of information on
the Web. Nature, 400, 107–109.
[9] Saracevic, T. and Kantor, P. (1988). A study of information seeking
and retrieving. III. Searchers, searches and overlap. JASIS. 39, 3.
[10] Silverstein, C., Henzinger, M., Marais, J. & Moricz, M. (1998).
Analysis of a very large Alta Vista query log. Technical Report 1998014, COMPAQ Systems Research Center, Palo Alto, Ca, USA.
[11] Spoerri, A. (2004) MetaCrystal: A Visual Interface for Meta
Searching. Proceedings of ACM CHI 2004.
[12] Torres, R., Silva, C., Medeiros, C. &. Rocha, H. (2003). Visual
Structures for Image Browsing CIKM’03, November 3–8, 2003, New
Orleans, Louisiana, USA.

