BinX: Dynamic Exploration of Time Series Datasets
Across Aggregation Levels
Lior Berry∗

Tamara Munzner†

University of British Columbia

University of British Columbia

A BSTRACT
Many ﬁelds of study produce time series datasets, and both the size
and number of theses datasets are increasing rapidly due to the improvement of data accumulation methods such as small, cheap sensors and routine logging of events. Humans often fail to comprehend the structure of a long time series dataset because of the overwhelming amount of data and the range of different time scales at
which there may be meaningful patterns. BinX is an interactive tool
that provides dynamic visualization and manipulation of long time
series datasets. The dataset is visualized through user controlled
aggregation, augmented by various information visualization techniques.

as a line graph at a controllable aggregation level, along with a
choice of scale for the time axis and the ability to show other miscellaneous information on the binned data. The component was designed to expose a clean public API so that it can be integrated as a
black box into applications. The rest of this section contains a short
description of its functionality and the visualization techniques it
incorporates.

CR Categories:
I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and Techniques—
Interaction techniques
Keywords: time series, aggregation, detail, overview, marking
1

I NTRODUCTION

BinX was developed to provide dynamic visualization and manipulation of long time series datasets. It assists a human in gaining
better understanding of the data and underlying patterns, without
requiring many views or applying complex transformations. The
dataset is handled using the aggregation technique of binning. Aggregation has been shown to be an effective method for dealing with
large data sets [1]. Still, it can often be misleading, disorienting or
limited by the display size. BinX alleviates these problems.
Data: The example time series dataset that we show here comprises the daily exchange rates of several currencies sampled daily
over a period of 15 years, so the size is slightly beyond 5000 data
points. Despite its medium size, it cannot ﬁt the screen in a single
view.
Tasks: The primary task that BinX was designed to support is
the analysis of a single currency exchange rate behavior over time.
The secondary task is comparing two currencies to detect correlations. These tasks build on several subtasks: obtaining a global
view for aggregation at different levels of detail, detecting time periods with interesting features that should be explored further, ﬁnding
global and local minimma and maxima, and monitoring a speciﬁc
period at different levels of detail.
2

DYNAMIC T IME S ERIES V ISUALIZATION C OMPONENT

The modular dynamic time series visualization component, or
DTVC, is the cardinal building block in the BinX system. A DTVC,
as shown in Figure 1, presents one or two time series datasets drawn
∗ e-mail:

berry@cs.ubc.ca

† e-mail:tmm@cs.ubc.ca

Figure 1: A dynamic time series visualization component, or DTVC, is dynamically controlled through the menu (F). Several visual cues are visible: A) bin
period highlight, B) trapeze timelines, C) bin value, D) bin minima, maxima
and standard deviation, and E) aggregation level control.

Aggregation and Time Scale Controls The main way to
control the DTVC is by dynamically changing the aggregation
level; that is, changing the number of the bins used to process the
data. The lower section of the DTVC is a horizontal axis that shows
the entire range of time for the currently loaded time series dataset,
with labelled vertical “timelines” that act as tick marks to demarcate bin boundaries. When the user chooses to use a small number
of bins for higher level overview, the changing upper section will
narrow, as in Figures 1 and 2 Top. The anchoring timelines always continue to the upper section for a trapeze-like effect, where
the width of the trapeze and the inward or outward slant of the lines
connecting the top and bottom DTVC sections shows the aggregation level. Figure 2 Bottom shows that the trapeze widens when the
user chooses to see more lower level details by increasing the number of bins. At low levels of aggregation, lines slant outward and
many end outside the window, giving a visual indication that more
bins could be seen by panning left or right. The number of bins
corresponds to the time scale, as shown by the horizontal spacing
between timelines, is also controllable.
Animation and Navigation We always provide smooth transitions to help the user visually track elements during changes. The
aggregation level changes when the user changes the control knob
or selects a predeﬁned aggregation level (week, month etc.). Selecting a time period to be the focus of attention also triggers a smooth
transition.
Marking Any time period can be marked by dragging out a
rectangular box that remains visible as a colored translucent box, as
in Figure 2 Top. Timeboxes were introduced by Hochheiser [2, 3]
to support querying. With the DTVC, these boxes dynamically update as the aggregation changes, supporting the exploration of large
datasets. The user can also turn on marks that show the minimum
value, the maximum value, and the standard deviation for each bin.
When the mouse is over a bin, the corresponding section of the

bottom scale is highlighted and the full date range information is
shown in a yellow box.
3

B IN X F RAMEWORK

The BinX application, shown in Figure 2, contains two DTVC components that are integrated via the DTVC API with other views
that support exploration of the dataset via several other visualization options. The software was written in Java and is available at
http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~tmm/courses/cpsc533c-04-spr/
projects.html#berry.
Detail and overview The two DTVCs can be independent,
so that each one has a different focus, aggregation level and information display. Another important navigation mode is linked
navigation and marking across the two DTVCs, controllable via a
toggle switch. When linking is selected, navigating or marking in
one DTVC will result in a matching navigation or marking in the
other, but each DTVC can still control its own aggregation level and
information display. The simultaneous highlighting of the binned
period under the mouse in both displays provides useful context, as
shown in Figure 2. The possibility of distinct levels of aggregation
in two linked views allows a ﬂexible detail + overview exploration.
Clustering BinX offers a clustering mechanism that classiﬁes
the time series dataset, as introduced by van Wijk [4]. The classiﬁcation can be dynamically updated as the aggregation level changes,
and classiﬁcation of each bin is shown in the visualization by superimposing a small color-coded box directly on the line graph, as
shown in Figure 2 Bottom. A separate cluster viewer window can
be opened to show a plot of the values of all clusters.
3.1

Scatter Plot View and Brushing

Figure 2 also shows that scatter plot views are available that can
present the direct correlation between two binned currencies, regardless of time. This view is linked to the active DTVC view, so
that changing the aggregation level will update the scatter plot. The
user can also use the marking mechanism to depict correlation only
in selected time periods.

4

D ISCUSSION

The dynamic aggregated “trapeze” view has proved to be very useful when used on the currency data sets. The animated navigation
options and indication of off-screen data that can be easily shown
enable an effective and smooth exploration, focusing on the interesting periods. BinX enables a ﬂexible mix and match of exploration techniques: linked vs. unlinked navigation, displaying one
vs. two currencies, the display of different bin information in each
DTVC, and more. These can be effectively adapted to ﬁt the nature
of the data as well as the user preferences and needs. The marking
mechanism, combined with the aggregation level control, results
in a powerful capability to manipulate long periods. Finally, integrating visual cues on the binned data greatly helps in preventing
false conclusions, because ”noisy” bins can be detected by using
the min/max or standard deviation cues. Finally, clustering assists
in comparing periods.
An early prototype tested a spiral view where changing the size
of the spiral altered the aggregation level. The fundamental problem with this approach was that when the display space is insufﬁcient for all data points, there was no natural visual extension to
the model. In our ﬁnal version, we solve this problem with the
”trapeze” view that provides navigation and cues for off screen data.
Nevertheless, further investigation of how to combine dynamic aggregation level with period length control may better support the
detection of cyclic patterns.
Future Work BinX has not yet been tested with data sets
larger than 50,000 data points. Although we conjecture that the
visualization principles will still hold for larger datasets, further optimization may be required to improve performance. It would also
be interesting to explore whether these techniques are suitable for
use with small display areas by adapting DTVC for handheld use.
5

C ONCLUSION

We have introduced BinX, a visualization tool for dynamic exploration of long time series datasets. Its fundamental navigation
metaphor is to change the number of bins used to create the display
for smooth transitions between levels of aggregation. We integrate
several visual cues in the display to provide information without
clutter, and also provide clustering support and scatterplot views.
Our experiments with analyzing currency exchange rates datasets
have shown the strength of the ﬂexibility to have two dynamic time
series visualization components that can be linked or unlinked in
several ways to accomodate the needs of the user and the nature
of the data. The modular visualization components were designed
to be reusable by any other applications where there is a need for
analyzing time series datasets.
R EFERENCES

Figure 2: Two DTVCs support various exploration techniques. The views are
linked, so marking, navigating and mouseover highlighting in one DTVC will be
reﬂected in the second. The top DTVC shows two currencies as superimposed
line graphs, using a small number of bins for a high level of aggregation. The
bottom DTVC uses a low level of aggregation so that more detailed information
is visible, and it shows the results of clustering the bins by color coded boxes
of red, blue, green, or cyan directly superimposed on the line graph. Other
view windows: A. Scatter plot view, B. Cluster viewer

[1] Mei C. Chuah and Steven F. Roth. Dynamic aggregation with circular visual designs. In Proceedings of Information Visualization, IEEE,
volume 4, pages 124–125, 1998.
[2] H. Hochheiser and B. Shneiderman. Visual speciﬁcation of queries for
ﬁnding patterns in time-series data. In Proc. Discovery Science, 2001.
Univ. Maryland CS Tech. Report CS-TR-4326, UMIACS-TR-2001-25.
[3] H. Hochheiser and B Shneiderman. Visual queries for ﬁnding patterns
in time series data. University of Maryland, Computer Science Dept.
Tech Report #CS-TR-4365, UMIACS-TR-2002-45, May 2002.
[4] J. J. van Wijk and E. R. van Selow. Cluster and calendar-based visualization of time series data. In Proc. IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, pages 4–9, 1999.

