Capstone Address
Visualization as a Medium for Capturing and Sharing Thoughts

Steven Roth
MAYA Viz, Ltd and Carnegie Mellon University

ABSTRACT

BIO

As we work in our offices and labs to push the science of

Steve Roth is Associate Professor in the School of Computer

visualization forward, in Iraq, visualization technology is

Science, Carnegie Mellon University, where he has a joint

saving the lives of civilians and soldiers. The commanding

appointment

general of a 30,000-person division in Iraq credits visualiza­

Robotics

tion-aided thought-sharing for providing his staff and sub­

Viz, Ltd., a company he

ordinate commanders with insight and a level of situational

alization software to enable collaborative analysis and deci­

awareness never achieved in his 30-year career. He boasts

sion-making in information-intensive environments.

in

the

Institutes.

Human-Computer

Interaction

and

Roth is also the President of MAYA
founded in 1998 to create visu­

of never having caused his eight brigade commanders to

Over the past 20 years, his research has focused on

risk their lives to cross a dangerous region to jointly analyze

basic problems of representing, interacting with, and collab­

information and make decisions.

oratively analyzing information using visualization systems.

The general and unit commanders under his leader­

He led the SAGE project at CMU, an approach to the auto­

ship are using a collaborative visualization application

matic design of visualizations and multimedia (text and

called "Command Post of the Future", which is built on the

graphic) explanations of quantitative data. Together with

CoMotion system. CoMotion, a descendent of the 12-year

colleagues at MAYA Design, Inc, Roth created Visage, an

Visage and SAGE research programs, is used to visualize and

"information-centric" visualization system. Visage evolved

interact with data. More importantly, it is used to.visually

into a commercial product called CoMotion, which com­

capture and pool thoughts, interpretations, concerns, and

bines visualization, interactive data exploration, and syn­

plans among distributed teams.

This is an historic depar­

chronous and asynchronous collaborative analysis. Through

ture from the conventional data-centric approach to visuali­

scientific explorations and commercial applications, Roth's

zation. W hile visualization is an excellent tool for expressing

experience

complex data, its most profound power is in helping people

banking, cancer treatment, energy exploration and trans­

with

visualization

has

spanned

investment

get inside each others' heads, to read each other's minds with

portation, and recently, military operations in Baghdad. His

minimal need to verbally communicate, to band together

current interests are in thought visualization, the next step in

into a single, distributed thinking organism.

the natural evolution from graphics to scientific visualization

We've seen this visual pooling of thoughts amplify

to information visualization. Roth has published numerous

thinking and reasoning for different teams of people grap­

papers on visualization, human computer interaction, and

pling with complex problems - whether maintaining security

computer-based instruction, served on editorial and scientific

and rebuilding a war-torn country, collaboratively analyzing

boards, and organized and chaired professional conferences.

business opportunities, or for assisting teams of physicians
and patients treating cancer. In this talk, I'll describe these
experiences and sketch the basic principles and research
challenges that are emerging.

Xlll

