InfoVisExplorer
Jaroslav Tyman, Grant P. Gruetzmacher, John Stasko
College of Computing/GVU Center
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, GA 30332 USA
dabel@cc.gatech.edu, gte133q@mail.gatech.edu, stasko@cc.gatech.edu

ABSTRACT

In this paper we briefly describe 3 tools developed to
visualize the history of information visualization papers.
The visualization consists of a standard 3D scatterplot view
enhanced with “bubbles,” lines, text, and colors aimed at
making comparisons between authors and topics found in
the papers. Three components were developed to translate
and display raw XML data using OpenGL and Cocoa. We
use the visualization tool to perform five tasks and discuss
it’s weaknesses.
Keywords

We decided to categorize the keywords into five categories
based on topics presented in an Information Visualization
class at Georgia Tech: data, HCI, Implementation, Other,
and Techniques.
Visualization

Once both the data file and the topic file are loaded, there
are several ways to modify the visualization.
The
visualization begins merely as an enhanced scatterplot,
influenced by Film Finder[2] and SpotFire, display,
plotting articles according to year, topic category, and
number of elements.

Information Visualization, scatterplot, bubbles, conference
publications, publications, references, links, OpenGL,
evaluation, dynamic query
INTRODUCTION

There are many hundreds of articles published covering
various topics related to information visualization. The
systems described here are entries into the InfoVis 2004
competition. Systems are to support four tasks outlined on
the project website. The system consists of two major
sections: a set of programs to translate, view, and organize
the massive amount of data, and the visualization program.

Figure 2: Topics and topic colors shown, along with bubbles (colors
corresponding to the legend in the top left), reference links (red and
blue), and a complete connected set of authors for the filter (top of
the picture, text in light blue).
Figure 1: InfoVisExplorer interface.

DATA
Our aim was to minimize modifications of the data, even
though we were aware that the data set was incomplete and
contained errors. We used our XMLImport tool to translate
the XML into a Cocoa friendly property list. We then used
InfoVisBrowser to browse the resulting data and group
keywords into topics.

Papers are placed on the topic access according to a
weighted average of the topics that the keywords in the
article fit in. The elements axis maps the sum of the
number of keywords, authors, and references plotted on a
logarithmic scale. The logarithmic scale was necessary in
order to neutralize the effect of a single article with an
element count of over 150, whereas most papers range
below 30 elements.
Along the top plane of the 3D scatterplot is a 2D
scatterplot representing authors.
Authors are plotted
according to the average of the year and number of elements

of their papers. We chose to eliminate the topic axis
mapping for authors in order to facilitate easier viewing
when both authors and articles are visible.
Investigation

Process

To investigate the five tasks, various visualization settings
can be adjusted. The visualization lends itself to a top-tobottom investigation of the data. Starting with all of the
articles, users can dynamically query[1] for years and
authors. The power of the visualization comes with the
display options. Topic colors, the author projection, links
between elements, and adjustable bubbles provide a set of
powerful tools with which to investigate the data set.
Topic colors combined with bubbles allow an easy
categorization of the filtered set. Adjusting the size of the
bubbles is analogous to adjusting the focus on a camer.
Large bubbles lend themselves to a broad view of the data,
while small bubbles allow for a finer grain of evaluation, a
technique similar to volume rendering for aggregate data
[3].
The author projection provides a way of investigating the
latter tasks of the InfoVis contest. The elements within
this projection can also have bubbles displayed around
them, as well as be linked to co-authors or the complete
connected set of co-authors.
The article display provides a complex set of display
options to maintain flexibility in investigating the data.
Visible links can be limited to within the filtered set,
outside the filtered set. Users can also select to display
references from the selected set, or to the selected set. The
combination of these features allowed us to find erroneous
data in the dataset.
Weaknesses

Though potentially powerful, the application is far from
complete. Walking through the data is not as simple as it
should be; one way to ease this would be to auto-center on
selected elements, walk the dataset using the Article
Information window, and show a trace of references through
paper s. We could also build a minimal spanning tree using
the references and provide an easy navigational tool that
way as well. The number of visualization options suggests
some form of automated configuration for common tasks.
Though much could be improved, current work is a solid
foundation for a powerful information visualization tool.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Prof. John Stasko and Georgia Tech for
providing the opportunity to work on this project along
with resources, an education, and advice.
We also thank the sponsors of the InfoVis 2004 contest,
and the many individuals who contributed to the creation
of the datset.
REFERENCES:
1. B. Shneiderman, "Dynamic Queries for Visual
Information Seeking", IEEE Software, Vol. 11, No. 6,
pp. 70-77, 1994.
2. C. Ahlberg, B. Shneiderman (1994), Visual
Information Seeking with the FilmFinder, in
Proceedings of CHI'94: Human Factors in Computing
Systems, page 433.
3. Li Yang, n23tool: a tool for exploring large relational
datasets through 3D dynamic projections, Proceedings
of the ninth international conference on Information and
knowledge management, p.322-327, November 06-11,
2000, McLean, Virginia, United States

Figure 3: Filtered articles in blue reveal references (in red) to articles in the future. Selecting one of the referenced articles reveals an error in
the dataset: The Document Lens is labeled as being published in 1999, however many of the references to it are for a 1993 paper.

