An Associative Information Visualizer
Howard D. White1

Xia Lin2

Jan Buzydlowski3

College of Information Science and Technology, Drexel University

Figure 1. A self-organizing map of keywords associated with the seed term “Information Retrieval”

1 INTRODUCTION
As a continuation of our previous work in the mapping of
terms from the bibliographic records of scholarly and
scientific literatures [1-2], we have created VisualLink, an
associative information visualizer, and applied it to content
from the InfoVis 2004 dataset. A sample page appears as
Figure 1, to be discussed after we state a few of our design
principles:
• Associated terms are those that frequently co-occur.
The terms most worth mapping are those that rank highest
in frequency of co-occurrence.
• Maps should reveal term associations in big full-text or
________
1
e-mail: whitehd@drexel.edu
2
e-mail: xlin @drexel.edu
3
e-mail: sg81qbdh@drexel.edu

bibliographic databases that reflect real-world literatures.
• Both Pathfinder networks (PFNETs) and Kohonen selforganizing maps (SOMs) are useful ways of displaying
top-ranked term associations in two dimensions [3-4].
SOMs show the ranking of associations by the relative
proximity of points standing for terms (the higher the
ranks, the closer the points), while PFNETs explicitly link
pairs of points for terms that most frequently co-occur.
• Users should be able to create maps with a single seed
term or phrase, thereby minimizing the input needed to use
the system.
• Maps should reveal interesting associations hidden in
the database, such as the authors cocited with an author or
the keywords co-occurring with a keyword.
• To maintain users’ momentum, maps should appear
quickly after the seed term is entered.
• Cognitively speaking, SOMs and PFNETs with 25 to
50 term points are about the right size. They limit a global

domain to the semantic neighborhood of the seed. They
portray a rich but not overpowering set of relationships.
• Term labels for 25 data points can be placed in 2-D
space with little or no overlap, which permits the swift
assessment of relationships.
• Users should be able to “cross-map” domains—that is,
to find a seed term’s associations not only with terms of its
own kind but with terms of a different kind. For example, it
should be possible to translate a seed author into associated
keywords or a seed keyword into associated authors.
• Since the mapped terms index bibliographic or full-text
databases, the maps should be capable of serving as live
interfaces for the retrieval of items from the databases.
All of these design principles have been implemented in
VisualLink, which displays data from the bibliographic
records of 615 InfoVis Proceedings papers that appeared in
1995–2002. The records were parsed and manipulated with
the Python programming language. The data extracted were
primary authors, cited authors, cited documents, publication
years, keywords (and later INSPEC keywords), and
stemmed noun phrases from abstracts and titles. The output
was placed in Noah, a specialized database that we created
for real-time “two-by-two” processing of co-occurrences.
2 DISCUSSION
In Figure 1, the left panel is topped by a pull-down menu for
selecting seed-term type. It is here set for Keywords. Other
choices are Authors, Cited Authors, References (i.e., cited
documents), and “Overview,” an option that produces an
interactive subject map of the full Proceedings. The choice
of Keywords has called forth a panel of suggestions, from
which Information Retrieval has been picked. This action
automatically places it as seed in the Search window at top
center of the display. To the right of that window is another
pull-down menu, this one for choosing the type of terms that
the seed term will summon to be mapped. Again, Keywords
has been picked, and the Submit button has generated the
map, a Kohonen SOM that shows the seed term surrounded
by the 24 INSPEC subject terms most closely associated
with it. Other choices from the central menu will lead to
“cross-mappings”: the authors or the documents most
heavily cocited in papers indexed with Information
Retrieval, the stemmed terms that co-occur most heavily in
their titles and abstracts, or a mixture of all of these.
Moreover, users can create other new maps instantly with
terms obtained in the present mapping.
Figure 1’s gray panel at right has a menu for switching
map types from SOMs (“Regions”) to PFNETs (“Links”)
and back. It also includes the window for assembling terms
from the map for retrieval of documents from the underlying
database (here, for test purposes, the ACM Portal). Any
mapped term can be placed in it by point-and-click. The
term(s) will be automatically ANDed with the seed term in a
search, which is executed with the Get It button. In blue
nearby is a count of how many documents a particular
search formulation will retrieve (e.g., 22). The small Add
button allows the user to add to a search any non-mapped
term the database may support.
Partially visible at the base of Figure 1 is a large panel
that rank-orders the top 50 terms co-occurring with the seed
term. With it, users can remap a particular domain after
unwanted terms have been removed or require a seed term to
appear in all combinations of terms when the counts for a
map are obtained, which is a strong contextualizing feature.
Figure 2 shows one “cross-map.” It is a PFNET of the 25

Figure 2. Pathfinder network of cocited authors in IR

most cited author-names in the Information Retrieval set.
The links indicate who has the highest (or tied highest)
cocitation counts among all pairs of that set (the Show
Numbers button puts the counts above the links).
Obviously in IR as construed by InfoVis contributors, G.G.
Robertson is a major influence. Other names will vary in
familiarity to readers literate in the IR domain.
The strength of both SOMs and PFNETs is that they
heighten awareness of vocabularies that will be fruitful in
retrievals and yield insights into term interrelationships. For
example, the SOM algorithm automatically indicates that,
in the InfoVis world, Information Retrieval implies work in
graphical interface design, as shown by terms clustered in
the right half of Figure 1. It implies the Internet, as shown
by terms clustered along the bottom. And it implies
traditional library-related indexing and searching in large
textual and multimedia databases, as shown by terms
clustered at left. Given this presentation, users can
recognize terms they need without having to do lookups in
thesauri or directories. Similarly, Figure 2 highlights
authors who contribute ideas to IR in the InfoVis world.
Some of them may be unknown to persons newly browsing
this domain. Figure 2 invites exploration as to why certain
pairs of authors—e.g., Robertson and Marti Hearst—are
related.
The main weakness of the maps is the generality and
ambiguity of the keywords, authors’ names, or other
vocabulary in them. Even when they are clustered or
linked, it is not readily apparent what the terms in fact
mean or what they will bring forth when used in retrievals.
But this is a weakness of indexing in general; and we do
not think it keeps VisualLink from frequently being
informative.
REFERENCES
[1] Howard D. White, Xia Lin, Jan W. Buzydlowski, Chaomei
Chen.
User-controlled mapping of significant literatures.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 (suppl. 1):
5297-5302, April 6, 2004.
[2] Xia Lin, Howard D. White, Jan Buzydlowski. Real-time author
co-cocitation mapping for online searching.
Information
Processing and Management 39: 689-706, 2003.
[3] Roger W. Schvaneveldt, ed. Pathfinder associative networks:
Studies in knowledge organization. Ablex, Norwood, NJ, 1990.
[4] Teuvo Kohonen. Self-organizing Maps. 2d ed. Springer, New
York, 1997.

