Histographs: Interactive Clustering of Stacked Graphs
Pin Ren, Benjamin Watson
Northwestern University*
ABSTRACT

3 IMAGE-BASED TECHNIQUES AND INTERACTIONS

Visualization systems must intuitively display and allow
interaction with large multivariate data on low-dimensional
displays. One problem often encountered in the process is
occlusion: the ambiguity that occurs when records from different
data sets are mapped to the same display location. For example,
because of occlusion summarizing 1000 graphs by simply
stacking them one over another is pointless. We solve this
problem by adapting the solution to a similar problem in the
Information Murals system [2]: mapping the number of data
elements at a location to display luminance. Inspired by
histograms, which map data frequency to space, we call our
solution histographs. By treating a histograph as a digital image,
we can blur and highlight edges to emphasize data features. We
also support interactive clustering of the data with data zooming
and shape-based selection. We are currently investigating
alternative occlusion blending schemes.

A histograph is in fact a digital image, enabling us to apply image
processing techniques to improve the visualization. For example, a
low pass, blurring filter emphasizes overall trends, while edge
detectors highlight global data features (Figure 4). Moreover, the
histograph itself can be thought of as a composite of hundreds or
thousands of images of graphs. Many alternative compositing
methods are possible, including maxima, minima, and schemes
based on ungraphed data dimensions such as error, uncertainty
and derivative.
User interaction is a key component of our system. In addition
to filtering and compositing the graph stack, the user can zoom in
on interesting graph sub-regions (Figure 3), select data with
similar graphed shape using a lasso interaction (Figure 5), and
reveal graph derivatives by mapping them to pixel hue (Figure 2).
Users can also focus analysis on selected graphs, extracting them
from the stack and visualizing them with their own histograph. In
the process, users can build their own clustering of the data,
improving their understanding of the recorded phenomena.

CR Categories: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation:
User Interfaces; I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image
Generation.
Keywords: information visualization, visualizing large data sets,
data occlusion, digital image processing
1 INTRODUCTION
Visualizing large and multivariate data sets is an ongoing research
effort within the information visualization community. Different
techniques [1, 4] have been developed to address this type of
visualization. The central problem is finding the overall trends and
hidden patterns within these very large data sets, both by visual
inspection and interactive grouping and clustering. When this data
is graphed, many data points are mapped to the same location,
hiding most of the data and greatly reducing the effectiveness of
the visualization. The traditional solution to this occlusion
problem is semi-transparency [5], which makes overlapping data
objects translucent, blending them in depth order. This is effective
if the number of occluding objects at any pixel is limited. Trutschl
et al. [3] reposition occluded points using a smart jittering
algorithm. This repositioning distorts the data and loses
effectiveness when the number of data points exceeds the number
of display pixels. Jearding and Stasko’s overlooked solution in the
Information Mural system [2] permitted large visualizations to be
scaled down to small display sizes by mapping the number of data
points at destination pixels to luminance.

4 RESULTS
In order to test and demonstrate our idea, we used histographs to
visualize a financial dataset containing one month of trading data
for 1800 stocks. Figure 1 shows the histograph visualizing all of
this data, plotted on a time vs. normalized log price graph. Notice
the high-priced outlier, the many low-priced trades on the third
day (August 5), and the daily price and volume discontinuities.
Figure 2 shows the derivative coding, revealing colored vertical
stripes that indicate strong daily price trends. Figures 3 and 4
zoom into the lower price range. In Figure 5, we show the use of
the lasso to select and analyze a stock group that is rising in price.

2 HISTOGRAPHS
Inspired by the classic histograms that map data frequency to
space, we propose histographs, which use the Information Mural
frequency to luminance mapping to merge and summarize graphs.
The result is a two-dimensional data texture that summarizes a
stack of hundreds or thousands of graphs (see Figure 1). Building
on this summary, our system permits users to group and cluster
the graphs interactively, in the process gaining a better
understanding of the graphed phenomena.
*{p-ren,watsonb}@cs.northwestern.edu

Figure 1: Histograph showing all 1800 stocks.

Figure 2: Histograph colored by first derivative. Green is positive
slope, red negative; saturation is slope standard deviation.

Figure 4: Blurred and denoised histograph.

5 FUTURE WORK

Figure 3: Zoomed view at lower price range.

Figure 5: Lasso selects stocks increasing mid-month; colors
indicate NYSE market category.

REFERENCES
[1] Jean-Daniel Fekete and Catherine Plaisant. Interactive information

We are interested in other compositing methods, and have already
experimented with using trade volume to weigh graphs. We are
currently adding features to support interactive clustering,
including methods for selecting and displaying groups of data. We
are quite interesting in making histographs “live”, using them to
visualize data that is changing in real time. For our stock
application, we are adding features for discerning overall patterns
and validating models of those patterns. We will also examine
how histographs might be applied to computer system
performance traces and experimental sensor data.

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

visualization of a million items. Proc. IEEE Info. Visualization, 117124. 2002.
Dean F. Jerding and John Stasko. The information mural: A technique
for displaying and navigating large information spaces. IEEE Trans.
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 4, 3, ,257–271, 1998.
Marjan Ttschl, Georges Grinstein, and Urska Cvek. Intelligently
resolving point occlusion. Proc. IEEE Info. Visualization, 131-136.
Martin Wattenberg. Visualizing the stock market. ACM CHI
Extended Abstracts, 188– 189. 1999.
Shumin Zhai, William Buxton, and Paul Milgram. The partial
occlusion effect: utilizing semi-transparency in 3D human-computer
interaction. ACM Trans. Comp.-Hum. Interact., 3, 3, 254–284, 1996.

