Exploring and Visualizing the History of InfoVis
Daniel A. Keim, Helmut Barro, Christian Panse, J¨orn Schneidewind, Mike Sips
University of Konstanz, Germany
{keim,barro,panse,schneide,sips}@inf.uni-konstanz.de

1

Motivation

The exploration and visualization of large information
spaces is a challenging task. The provided contest data set
for example contains more than 1000 authors of about 600
papers. The basic idea for an effective data exploration is to
include the human in the data exploration process and combine the flexibility, creativity, and general knowledge of the
human with the enormous storage capacity and the computational power of today’s computers. The key concept of our
visualization approach is to visualize the whole dataset to
provide a first overview and to provide rapid, incremental,
and reversible analysis actions. Our techniques follow the
well-known Information Seeking Mantra: overviews first,
zoom and filter, and details on demand. All visualizations,
actions, and details are tightly coupled using the well-known
linking and brushing concepts.

2

Data Cleaning

When processing and visualizing large data sets, data cleaning as part of data pre-processing is a very important step,
since it directly influences the quality of the visualization.
Since there where some inconsistencies in the contest data
set, like ambiguous authors or different formats and spellings
for the conference names, some data cleaning was necessary.
Therefore we wrote some shell scripts, based on regular expressions, to correct these inconsistencies. Additionally we
corrected the spelling of some author names manually. Another problem was, that for several attributes no values were
recorded. An example are the keyword attributes, were for a
lot of publications the keywords were missing. For these
publications we extracted some keywords from their title.
For other missing attributes we set their value to not defined
and handled it as special cases in the visualization step.

3

attribute for the x-axis ordering and the dependent attribute
for the y-axis ordering. Applied to the contest data set, the
idea is to group the 600 papers and their authors together in
a first overview. The papers are displayed in groups belonging to the publication year. Each paper is represented by a
colored icon (rectangle). The color represents the thematic
theme of each paper. Our results show that this technique
is very useful to get insight in the development of research
topics over time as well as over the number and research areas of each authors publications. To show the connection
and collaborations of authors we used a graph drawing approach. If we assume, that the authors are the nodes of the
graph and edges represent paper collaborations, the goal is
to find strong connected components (SCC) in order to identify groups of authors, which published most papers together.
Then we employed a spring embedder to find an appropriate
graph layout for the computed SCC’s. To visualize all coauthors for a single author over time, we used a technique
which is based on Interrings [Yang et al. 2002],

Overall Concept

To find solutions for the 3 contest tasks, we applied different
visualization approaches. One technique we used, is adapted
from a popular visualization tool for movie data sets, called
FilmFinder [Ahlberg and Shneiderman 1994]. We applied
a similar technique to the contest database and called our
technique PaperFinder. The basic idea is to use a two dimensional layout, e.g. the euclidian plane and use the time

4

Overview of the 10 years of InfoVis

To show the overview over InfoVis we displayed the number
of publications belonging to each conference over time, using the PaperFinder. Additionally we visualized an ranking
of authors, depending on their number of publications over
the years. The colors represent the research topics, so that it
is easy to see how the research areas developed. To show the
publications for a single author and his co-authors, we applied the Interring technique and the PaperFinder technique.

4.1

TASK 1: Static Overview of 10 years of Infovis

To get an overview on the last 10 years of InfoVis, we used
the PaperFinder. To see the development of topics over the
years, we placed the time attribute on the x-axis and the
number of co-authors on the y-axis. The color represents
the paper categories as shown in the legend. We definied 5
categories to which we assigned all publications, depending
on their keywords. The categories are Information Visualization, HCI, Data Analysis, Computer Graphics and Graph
Drawing. Figure 2 shows the development of these categories and the number of publications per conference over
the last years.

4.3

TASK 3: The people in InfoVis

To visualize the information about the people contained in
the contest data set, we used the PaperFinder and the Interrings to visualize the 30 authors with most publications. As
shown in Figure 1, B. Shneiderman has the highest number of publications (more then 18), followed by S. K. Card
(12), J. D. Mackinlay (10) and D. A. Keim (10). The colors show the categories to which the publications belong. To
show the publications of a single author we used the interring
technique. The examples in Figure 3 show the co-authors of
Daniel A. Keim (left) and George Robertson (right). Each
co-author is represented by a different color. As shown in
the right figure, G. Robertson wrote most of his papers together with S. K.Card and J. D. Mackinlay. In Figure 4 the
co-authors of publications from G. Robertson and their research topics are visualized using PaperFinder.
Figure 1: Top 30 authors, based on number of publications

4.2

TASK 2: Characterize the research areas
and their evolution

Figure 2 shows how the research areas developed over time.
For example, it turns out that the number of papers submitted
under HCI topic decreased while the number of Visualization papers increased. It is easy to see, that there were more
and more publications from other research topics than visualization, published at the InfoVis Conference (more yellow,
green boxes). For last years InfoVis, most keywords were
missing in the database (white rectangles).

Figure 3: Interring showing co-authors of D. A. Keim (left)
and G. Robertson (right) over the years

Figure 4: Co-authors of G. Robertson and their publication
topics over the years

References
Figure 2: Complete Overview of publications per conference, Conferences are ranked by number of publications,
color represents research topic

A HLBERG , C., AND S HNEIDERMAN , B. 1994. Visual information seeking
using the filmfinder. In ACM CHI’94 Conference Companion, 433–434.
YANG , J., WARD , O. M., AND RUNDENSTEINER , E. A. 2002. Interring:
An interactive tool for visually navigating and manipulating hierarchical structures. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, 77.

