Information Visualization Research: Citation and Co-Citation Highlights
Chaomei Chen*
Drexel University
Abstract

2 Tasks

An overview of the entry is given. The techniques used to prepare
the InfoVis contest entry are outlined. The strengths and
weaknesses are briefly discussed.

Three visualizations are provided for task 1 – the overview task.
The first one is a 3-dimensional VRML scene, the second one is a
network view generated in a typical graph drawing manner in
CiteSpace, and the third one is a timezone view by CiteSpace as
well.

Keywords: citation analysis, co-citation analysis, domain
visualization

1 Overview
The entry addresses the first task with three different
visualizations generated by a recent Java visualization application
CiteSpace [1] and an earlier VRML scene generator developed
under the GSA framework [2-4]; both tools have been developed
by the author.
Both tools extract citation and co-citation patterns from the
contest dataset and present the patterns in a three-dimensional
model in VRML and a two-dimensional model in CiteSpace. A
citation is an instance of the reference to an article. A co-citation
involves citations of two papers together in subsequent
publications. Co-citations have been used as a clustering
mechanism in citation analysis.
In order to identify emergent themes in the history of the
literature, terms are extracted from title, abstract, and keyword list
of citing articles in CiteSpace. Sharp increases of popularity of
terms are identified as a sign of a surge of interest or the birth of a
new thematic thread. Surged terms are embedded in a typical cocitation network of articles as indicators of such themes.
CiteSpace supports two related views: a timezone view and a
traditional node-and-link view. In the timezone view, the network
is superimposed on a time zone grid so that items of a given year
are restricted to corresponding time zones only. It is particularly
useful for tasks such as identifying the chronological sequence of
thematic surges. The node-and-link view, on the other hand, uses
widely known spring embedder layout. It is useful if the network
consists of a number of distinct clusters. The citation tree-ring
feature provides an intuitive way to identify highly cited papers –
papers that have large tree-rings. The color pattern of a tree-ring
can also tell us the citation distribution of the underlying paper.
CiteSpace provides a variety of analysis facilities for users to
analyze a dataset in several ways. For example, CiteSpace allows
the analyst to divide the entire time interval into time slices and
merge individual networks.
The major advantage of the VRML models is their animation
feature, which can vividly replay the history of an evolving field.
The complex chronological relationships among a large amount of
papers can be relatively straightforward to understand in the
animated visualization. Questions such as which areas appeared
first in the field can be easily answered by such animations.
Detailed descriptions of the two systems can be found in the
references.
-------------------------------------------*

e-mail: chaomei.chen@cis.drexel.edu

The most obvious insight is that the field has two prominent
pioneer papers: the cone tree paper by Robertson et al. and the
fisheye view paper by Furnas. The first overview shows that
InfoVis symposium papers tend to appear in the second specialty
identified by Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of co-citation
patterns, whereas the largest specialty appears to be formed by
papers outside the symposium, especially papers published prior
to the beginning of the symposium series. The second and the
third views from CiteSpace demonstrate the advantages of
including surged terms, which helps us to identify the nature of
emergent themes in the history and papers that were associated
with these themes.
Two visualizations are provided for task 2 – the evolution task.
The first one is a 3-dimensional animated visualization,
chronologically showing the growth of the bibliographic network
in accordance to the sequence of publication and citation events
(See Figure 1). The timezone view identifies various themes.

Figure 1. Animated visualization of the growth of the field.
Figure 2 shows a TimeZone view. Surged terms trailblaze
emerging themes across time zones, followed by articles that were
referenced in association with such themes, i.e. by terms-to-article
citations.

Figure 2. Surged terms pointing to the key references
associated with thematic trends.
Tasks 3 and 4 are briefly addressed. An interesting observation is
the absence of distinct clusters. In our experience, we typically
observe a number of clusters in a field. In part, the lack of clusters
may be due to the nature of the dataset, i.e. all citers are limited to
one single symposium series. If other sources such as graph
drawing were included, it is likely that more clusters may emerge.

Note
I include all images in the same standard form because the
submission webpage didn’t seem to allow multiple entry
submissions. Only one video clip is in the submission pack, as it
appears that the submission webpage has overwritten previous
ones.
Additional
video
clips
are
available
at:
http://www.pages.drexel.edu/iv04contest/citespace-gui.avi
http://www.pages.drexel.edu/iv04contest/citespace-display.avi
A video file of the VRML scene is 65Mb after compression. I’d
be happy to supply the video via other means upon request (e.g.
put it on a CDROM).

References
[1] Chen, C. 2004. Searching for intellectual turning points:
Progressive
Knowledge
Domain
Visualization.
In
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America (PNAS) 101, Suppl. 1, 5303-5310.
[2] Chen, C., AND Morris, S. 2003. Visualizing evolving
networks: Minimum spanning trees versus Pathfinder
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization (InfoVis’03). Oct 19-24, 2003.
Seattle, Washington. IEEE Computer Society. pp. 67-74.
[3] Chen, C., AND Kuljis, J. 2003. The rising landscape: A visual
exploration of superstring revolutions in physics. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science and Technology
54, 5, 435-446.
[4] Chen, C., AND Paul, R. J. 2001. Visualizing a knowledge
domain’s intellectual structure. IEEE Computer 34, 3, 65-71.

