Between Art and Architecture: The Interactive Skin
Jules Moloney
University of Melbourne
{jmoloney@unimelb.edu.au}

Abstract
There are two current approaches to the realisation of
interactive building ‘skins’: in architecture so called
intelligent facades are being designed with an
environmental science agenda; while in a parallel line of
inquiry, artists are experimenting with media facades. It
is proposed here that there is common ground between
reactive environmental facades and data driven screens,
in that both involve the design of kinetic process.
Selected examples from kinetic and generative art
provide useful precursors for such an approach and
these provide the background to a framework for the
design of interactive building skins. The aim is to locate
the design parameters for practice where the art /
architectural skin is a process based system, rather than
a static object.
Introduction
This paper begins with an outline of intelligent facades
in architecture - environmental control systems that use
automated louvers and other devices to maintain internal
temperature, lighting levels and air quality. This is
followed by a summary of collaborations between artists
and architects in which various forms of data driven
media screens have been integrated into architectural
cladding. Outside architecture, examples from kinetic art
of the 1960’s and generative process from contemporary
electronic art, provide useful background for the design
of interactive building skins. From the pragmatic to the
ephemeral, this range of precedent is engaged here to
inform art and architecture practice in which the role is
to design kinetic systems. The objective of this paper is
to outline the sphere of design activity for such an
approach. That is, where does the design occur when the
building skin is a process based system, rather than a
static object?
Intelligent Facades
The use of environmental control systems which react to
change in external conditions has a history at least as
long as the invention of the rheostat. In the last twenty
years advances in electronic control systems have
progressed to where a building can be described as
intelligent rather than responsive. A recent overview
defines the basic criteria by which a building can be so
considered [1].These are (a) input system, (b) a
processing system which analyses this input, (c) an

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

output system which reacts to the analysis of the input,
(d) this response occurs with a consideration of time (e)
learning ability (although earlier definitions of
intelligence often do not include this last criteria).
However, a survey of intelligent facades resulted in the
declaration that a truly responsive, adaptive and
controllable intelligent skin has yet to be found [2]. Most
systems, while they may be able to consider a range of
factors simultaneously and interpolate a response, fail on
the criteria that they can learn from previous data. The
idea that buildings should be some sort of intelligent
entity separate from users, has not surprisingly being
subject to debate. There are a few examples that break
the closed system of sensor / controller/output to include
the user in the monitoring and decision making process.
The control system of the GSW headquarters building in
Berlin makes recommendations to users about the
selection of natural or mechanical ventilation by means
of green or red lights on the window transoms. The user
can decide to accept or override the recommendation
from the control system, thus enabling a level of
interaction. Such examples suggest a transition from the
idea of the intelligent façade in terms of an autonomous
machine, to that in which the user engages with and is
part of the decision making.
In terms of material form, most environmental control
systems are based on mechanically operated louvers or
fins of varying materials, profiles and proportions. There
are two general design approaches: either to embed the
kinetic component or fin within the composition of the
façade thus minimizing aesthetic impact; or to articulate
the shading or ventilation elements as a separate
prosthetic device which serves the building. In either
approach seldom are the mechanics of the device
articulated with any great aesthetic attention, perhaps
reflecting the typical separation between architect and
environmental engineering consultants. A notable
exception that seldom finds its way into surveys of
intelligent facades, is the Arab institute in Paris designed
by Jean Nouvel in 1988. The southern wall is protected
from the sun by a 60 meter wall composed of multiple
panels composed of variously dimensioned metallic
diaphragms. These operate like a series of camera lenses,
shrinking and widening in response to sensors, to control
the penetration of sun light into the building. Even when
at rest the tectonic quality and detail of this wall is
stunning, while the dappled light which results generates
seductive internal spatial qualities. This iconic building
sets a precedent for the integration of functional

performance and aesthetic effect that has yet to be
surpassed.

skin integrated into the constructional logic of the whole,
and has a tectonic quality over and above its display
function.

Media Screens
The development of intelligent facades is driven by an
environmental performance agenda, which arguably
continues the functionally determinative trajectory of
architecture as a built form of design science. According
to recent critique, the continuing dominance of this
agenda results in such facades being socially inert,
despite the potential inherent in such kinetic systems [3].
This is deemed important due to the recognition of the
social failure of much modern architecture based on
machine metaphors, particularly in relation to
engendering a collective cultural identity. In contrast to
intelligent facades, media screens have been described
by the same author as enabling a valuable form of social
interaction and engagement. In a similar vein, Anders
suggests the needs of contemporary society have
extended beyond that of a communal physical reality [4].
Media screens can be seen as early manifestations of
architecture adapting to an information rich society and
adding to its sphere of practice by mediating between
physical and information space.
As would be expected at these early stages the majority
of such media screens take the form of large scale
computer displays, utilizing data projection or video
walls on the facades of buildings. More recently lightemitting diodes (LED’s) have been utilized to turn whole
buildings into a computer controllable image. The
Chanel building in Tokyo by American architect Peter
Marino is a 56 meter high tower that lights up Ginza
each dusk to dawn with 700,000 embedded LED’s [5].
The interactive system consists of over 6 kilometers of
control cables, 3 master control computers, and 65,000
micro computers. An innovative system of canvas roll
blinds and state-changing electronic privacy glass allows
office workers to see out by day but provides a black
background for the display at night.
A more low tech, but highly effective approach is the
‘BIX’, a 900 sq. m. light installation set behind the
double curved acrylic surface of the Kunsthaus in Graz,
Austria [6]. Made up of standard circular fluorescent
lamps, these act as large scale pixels, each individually
controlled by a central computer to enable the generation
of low resolution imagery. Regardless of the time of day,
or content, the tectonic quality of the BIX wall is
engaging beyond that achieved by standard video screen
technologies. This approach has subsequently been
applied at a larger scale in Berlin where a façade on the
Potsdamer Platz has been transformed by 1800 ordinary
fluorescent lamps integrated into the ventilated glass
façade [7].The external envelope is transformed into a
low resolution media screen, with the large grid pattern
attuned to the architectural scale of the façade and
surrounding context. Rather then been perceived as
applied surface or screen, the display reads as building

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The degree to which such screens can be considered
interactive is debatable as they are predominately a one
way media display, be it information or public art. More
interactive examples of media screens can be found at
smaller scales in internal environments. There have been
various projects which use mobile phone technology to
enable users to interact with content and more recently
infra red combined with image tracking technology have
enabled a literal ‘hands on’ approach. The New Zealand
pavilion for the 2005 world expo in Japan showcased a
rear projection screen system linked to an infra red
camera which tracks the hands of users interacting with
content [8]. Dozens of hands can be tracked at anyone
time, with individual hand shapes being recorded to
enable subsequent interaction. An example of
interactivity operating in the urban realm and at a slower
time scale, is the D-tower, an art piece commissioned by
the city of Doetinchem in the Netherlands [9]. The Dtower consists of three parts: a website (accessible to
everybody), a questionnaire (accessible to a hundred
different people each year) and a 12 meter tower
reminiscent of a jelly fish. All three parts are
interactively related to each other, with the tower being
internally lit with a mix of red green and blue light.
Updated each night, the mix of color reflects responses
to the questionnaires, which are intended to gauge the
mood of the town in relation to a variety of issues. The
tower is expected to stay in place for decades and has
already added to a sense of social cohesiveness in this
small provincial centre.
A primary problem with light based media walls is they
are only marginally effective in daylight. The Agesis
Hyposurface is an example of an alternate approach, in
which imagery is created through physical movement of
architectural surface [10]. Made up of triangulated metal
plates driven by a bed of pneumatic pistons, dynamic
‘terrains’ are generated in real time. In this way imagery
on a computer can be transferred to a three dimensional
relief, the triangulated plates acting as pixels. At present
the mechanical requirements of the Hyposurface are such
that the prototype has yet to make its way to into
architecture, but the principle of a mechanically driven
surface will no doubt be adapted in time. At the other
end of the technical spectrum artist Ned Kahn was
commissioned to produce a wind veil for a non-descript
parking building in the small town of Charlotte, USA
[11]. Kahn designed an eighty by fifteen meter skin
made up of thousands of 75 mm square aluminum discs,
each individually pivoted in a cable grid. Any small wind
eddy is picked up by the reflective disks generating an
effect not unlike the quality of metallic fluid. This skin
as installed is reactive only to wind, but suggests
possibilities for low tech systems that have passive
energy sources.

Precedent from the Kinetic and Generative Arts
Compared to existing precedent in architecture, the range
of visual art works that may inform the sphere of design
activity for the interactive skin is vast. The approach
taken here is to use critique from within the field to map
out the range of approaches: for the kinetic arts the
writing of pioneering artist George Rickey analyses work
before the widespread availability of computers; while
Dorin provides a valuable taxonomy of physical process,
which he argues underpins the generative electronic arts.

(pitch, roll, fall, rise, yaw, shear), vibrating springs, and
the non periodic movement of a pendulum, as examples
of a vocabulary of ‘form in motion’. These are small in
number and surprisingly simple, “scarcely more” than
the twelve tones of western music [14]. Continuing his
analogy, this vocabulary is arranged as sequences over
time in a similar manner to musical composition. Rickey
differentiates kinetic art though, in terms of its openness
to chance “introduced by the movement of the observer,
which the artist prepares for but does not predetermine,
or by incorporating in the object itself, some factor of
fortuitousness” [15].

Kinetic Art before the Advent of the Computer
Designing Process in the Electronic Arts
Aesthetic outcomes generated by movement can be
traced as far back as ancient wind chimes, but the term
kinetic art came into being in the twentieth century, with
Duchamp’s 1920 work ‘Rotating Glass Plates’ generally
acknowledged as the first exhibited work in which the
aesthetic is based on physical movement. Other early
experiments include Gabo’s ‘Kinetic Sculpture’ (1922)
and Moholy Nagy’s ‘Light Space Modulator’ (1930).
Anthony Calder dominated the pre war period with a
series of suspended compositions, while the most prolific
period for kinetic art was during the 1950’s and 1960’s.
In addition to the continuing popularity of Calder,
prominent artists include Schoeffer, Takis, Lye and
George Rickey. Rickey trained as a painter in Paris
before returning to America in 1949 where he started
producing steel sculpture based on a system of
meticulously engineered counterweights and bearings,
activated by air currents and the pull of gravity. He
would continue to refine his work for the next fifty three
years, while at the same time teaching and writing in
various professorial appointments in the United States.
Rickey’s essay ‘Morphology of Movement: A study of
Kinetic Art ‘, is one of the few attempts at a formal
discussion [12]. This provides a useful overview of six
general directions for the period up until 1963. These
directions are: (a) experimentation with optical
phenomena, such as moiré effects; (b) transformation
based either on movement of the art work such as the
phenomena of wheel spokes in motion, or through
motion of the observer such as effected by polyphonic
painting; (c) works where the surveyor physically
interacts with the work; (d) machines where motorized
gears and pulleys cause ‘orchestrated’ movement; (e)
light play based on colored light, shadow and reflection;
(f) ““movement itself’ usually with economy of means
and self effacing mechanics” [13].
Rickey’s bias is towards the final category, with a
particular dislike of the banal use of machinery in which
repetitive motion generates for him, “a more emphatic
stasis” then lack of motion. He argues true kinetic works
are those where the capacity for motion is designed, and
is intrinsic. Rickey continues this formal analysis of
kinetic art by articulating a ‘vocabulary’ of movement.
He describes the classic movements of a ship at sea

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

A key factor in Rickey’s argument for a sophisticated
kinetic art was the capacity for a work to accommodate
chance, either through making the work open to
interaction with environmental forces and / or the
anticipated but non-predetermined interaction with users.
Arguably this approach requires the artist to design a
process rather than an object. In a similar desire for
indeterminacy the design of process underpins a
contemporary form of electronic art described as genetic
or evolutionary [16]. Often the artworks are an extension
of computer science research into artificial life and are
exhibited as screen based works in which synthetic
creatures interact and evolve within a simulated
environment. In some the audience interacts with the
artwork thus adding to the range of evolutionary forces.
An example of this approach relevant to architecture is
the ‘Future Garden’ proposal by Jon McCormack,
planned as part of Federation Square in Melbourne,
Australia [17]. The work consisted of large scale planes
of glass set into the square, underneath which were
proposed a lattice of LED’s. Patterns of light are
generated by a programming technique known as cellular
automata, in which simple rules form complex patterns
and behaviors over time. Visitors to the square would be
able to interact with the artificial garden by touching or
shadowing the glass, and would notice seasonal changes
on subsequent visits. Unfortunately McCormack’s
proposal was not realized, but suggests a precedent for
the application of cellular automata (CA) to architecture
that is relevant to this discussion. Control systems, for
example could utilize CA to create self organizing
shading and ventilation which responds to environmental
and user input.
The connection between kinetic art that interacts with
physical process and the simulation of such process to
create electronic art works has been recognized by
McCormack’s colleague Alan Dorin, who has written
extensively on process in the arts. Dorin distinguishes
three different types of process via the example of the
painter, the playwright and the gardener: the painter
engages with process in terms of color mixing and
application technique but the process is fixed in the final
artifact; the production of a play produces a repetitive
process in which the outcome follows a closed script but

is open to nuance in its performance; and the garden in
which there is no script but an ongoing process
according to natural laws and the ‘pruning’ of the
gardener [18]. Dorin goes on to distinguish between
physical process and abstract process: physical process
are those “that depend for their path on the properties of
matter” ; abstract process “involve the manipulation of
symbols” [19]. While an abstract process can notate
physical process, for example music notation, many
electronic artists manipulate code to produce artworks
which are synthetic and do not correspond to any
material properties.
Where might we position the design of the interactive
skin in relation to fixed, repetitive and ongoing process?
Traditionally architecture has fallen between the fixity of
painting and the repetitive experience of theatre. Process
is used to create a fixed artifact, but the experience of a
building is affected by nuances of light, moisture and
occupancy. We may experience subtle changes each time
we visit, but essentially the same script is played out
despite our ability to wander and pause. By contrast the
interactive skin may be more like the process of the
garden. As environmental conditions and user needs
change over the course of day / night and seasonal cycles
the range of experience may be relatively dramatic. The
design of the interactive skin involves the design of a
process and for architecture this primarily relates to the
physical properties of matter. For this reason Dorin’s
other writing on the classification of physical process
may be valuable in relation to the aims of this paper.
Dorin proposes a taxonomy in which he classifies
physical process as a “step towards understanding the
relationship between physical processes and time-based
art” [20].He proposes five - pulse, stream, increase,
decrease, complex. These categories are more that of
syntax, then the vocabulary of movement explored by
Rickey. For Dorin movement is the outcome of a
process, and the types of process can be described by
these five types. Pulse is a “repeating sequence of
events” such as the regular pumping of a heart. The
spacing between events in a pulse can be of such a scale
that it perceived as uniform stream. These occur at the
limits of visual perception – a revolving sphere may be
rotate so fast that it appears motionless or so slow that
process is not apparent. Increase and decrease are
relatively self evident forms of process, characterized by
forever higher or lower intensity, in which the nature of
the change is constant. The final category is complex
process, which “forever change into new forms without
reiteration”. Compared to the regular beat of a pulse, or
the smooth change of accelerating or de-accelerating
intensity, a complex process “will be different to all
future and past states of that system” [21].
Towards a Design Framework
Precedent and critique of intelligent facades and media
screens suggests a more integrated approach is required

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

for the design of what we term interactive building skins.
The responsibility of architecture to utilise advances in
science to construct buildings, which have better
environmental performance and which can accommodate
changing user needs, must of course be addressed.
Ideally, these objectives can be realised in conjunction
with a wider definition of performance criteria. This
definition would include the recognition that architecture
has a responsibility to engender social engagement and
cultural identity. The transition of the traditionally static
building envelope to an interactive skin, presents an
opportunity for architecture to forge a new form of
engagement with contemporary culture. The
transformational capacity of the intelligent facade and
the media screen dictate this should be undertaken in
terms of the design of a process, rather an artifact. Here
precedent from the kinetic arts and the process based
approach of some electronic art, may be a useful
precedent for the outline of taxonomy for the design of
the interactive skin.
This paper concludes with an overview of where the
design decisions occur when considering the design of
process for interactive building skins. The objective is to
identify the factors to be considered, rather then the
prescription for any particular design approach.
Arguably the scope of design decisions occur around
three interconnected questions: (1) choice of input or
sampling; (2) the manner in which these samples are
processed by the control system; (3) the tectonic, or
constructional logic and appearance of the skin.
1. Sampling
(a) Cultural……………………………….Environmental
(b) Local…………….…………………………Global
What data will constitute the physical and “virtual space
events” of the interactive skin and how will these be
captured or sampled? Architecture has a long tradition as
a form of public art and there exists an opportunity to
sample a range of cultural inputs as well as
environmental stimuli. Environmental input would
necessarily be related to the local, while cultural input
could sample both the global and the local.
2. Control
(a) Top-Down……..………………………Bottom-Up
(b) Micro (time) ..……………..…………Macro (time)
(c) Physical……………………………………Abstract
(Pulse, stream, increase, decrease, complex)

If there is some form of mediation between input and
resultant affect, how might this meet aesthetic as well as
performative criteria? There may be an opportunity for
auto-poesies in which the aesthetic is to a degree,
emergent. Alternatively the personal aesthetic of the
designer may be embedded in a similar manner to, for
example, such proportional systems as used by Palladio
or Le Corbusier. Thus the control system would be

located within the spectrum of top-down, in which
particular criteria are ‘directed’ and bottom-up
approaches where parameters are set for the evolution of
behavior.
Artists and architects considering the design of
interactive skins need to consider foremost that the
design of process is a temporal art. The temporal scale
would range from the micro to the macro in relation to
human visual acuity and memory. Input may be directly
streamed to output at the micro level of real time
response, while simultaneously be processed to create
macro scale trends that emerge over a longer period.
Dorin’s differentiation between physical and abstract
process is useful, given the sampled data could relate to
physical or the abstract and the mediated output could be
also be manifest via physical movement or abstract
devices such as the media screen. When the control
system is related to physical process Alan’s taxonomy of
pulse / stream / increase, decrease / complex should be
considered. This classification can be interpreted as
providing a type of formal syntax for the design of
physical process.

based on a tectonic approach in which the aesthetic is
largely based on fabrication methods, articulation of
joints, and materials. As evidenced by the Arab Institute
façade, this attitude to engendering aesthetics can be
extended to environmental control systems. Similarly the
example of the BIX electronic skin indicates the tectonic
design of electronic displays can in itself be important.
The interactive skin can be manifest in either physical or
electronic form and both require detailed design in terms
of their physical appearance as well as their
performance. We can make a broad distinction between
passive systems with minimal ‘mechanics’, such as the
wind walls of Ned Kahn and more complex energy
dependent systems such as the Agesis Hyposurface.
Finally, if Alan’s taxonomy applied to control systems
can be seen as the syntax, the range of movement
possible with physical systems can, as discussed in
relation to Rickey’s morphology of kinetic art, be
considered a vocabulary of movement. Here the number
of discrete actions need to be considered in relation to
the chosen tectonic.
Further Work:

3. Tectonics
(a) Passive…………………………….……… Active
(b) Physical………..……..………………Electronic
(Vocabulary: Move……Rotate……Scale)

This paper provides a framework for the design of
interactive building skins, which will be further
developed and assessed through project based research
by the author.

What technology is available to implement an interactive
skin? Typically, composition in architectural design is

Figure 1 . Examples of passive and active systems.
(a) A wind wall by artist Ned Kahn. Reflective discs are suspended within a net, capturing wind field effects.
(b) The Agesis Hypersurface. A triangulated panel is activated by pneumatic pistons (see inset in the top-right)
enabling data input from a computer.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

References:
1. Anshuman, S. ‘Responsiveness and Social Expression;
Seeking Human Embodiment in Intelligent Façades’.
Proceedings of the 2005 Annual Conference of the
Association for Computer Aided Design In Architecture,
Savannah (Georgia) 13-16 October 2005, pp. 12-23.

18. Dorin, A.,’Generative Processes and the Electronic
Arts.’ Organised Sound 6(1):47-53, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, 2001.
19. Dorin [10 ] p.50

2. Wigginton, M. and Harris, J. ‘Intelligent Skins’.
Oxford, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2002.

20. Dorin, A., Classification of Physical Processes for
Virtual Kinetic Art, in Proceedings of First Iteration,
Dorin & McCormack (eds), CEMA, 1999, pp68-79

3. Anshuman [1] p.14

21. Dorin [12 ] p.72

4. Anders, P. ‘Cybrid Principles: Guidelines for Merging
Physical and Cyber Spaces’. International Journal of
Architectural Computing, vol. 3 - no. 3, 2005, pp. 391406
5. Information on line,
http://www.interactivearchitecture.org/peter-marinotokyo-chanel.html, accessed 01.05.06.
6. Information on line, http://www.bix.at/, accessed
01.05.06.
7. Information on line,
http://www.europaconcorsi.com/db/pub/scheda.php?id=9
782, accessed 01.05.06.
8. Information on line,
http://www.hitlabnz.org/route.php?r=newsview&news_id=33, accessed 01.05.06.
9. Information on line,
http://lab.v2.nl/projects/dtower.html, accessed 01.05.06.
10. Information on line,
http://www.sial.rmit.edu.au/Projects/Aegis_Hyposurface.
php, accessed 01.05.06.
11. Information on line, http://nedkahn.com/wind.html,
accessed 01.05.06.
12. Rickey, G.W., The Morphology of Movement: A
Study of Kinetic Art, Art Journal, Vol.22, No.4, 1963,
pp. 220-231.
13. Rickey [16 ] p.223
14. Rickey [16 ] p.225
15. Rickey [16 ] p.228
16. Wilson, S., ‘Information Arts: Intersections of Art,
Science and Technology’, Cambridge, Mass : MIT Press,
2002.
17. Information on line,
http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~jonmc/projects/fg.html,
accessed 01.05.06.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

