Metabolic network visualization using constraint planar graph drawing
algorithm
Romain Bourqui, David Auber
LaBRI, Universit´e Bordeaux I
351 Cours de la lib´eration
33405 Talence CEDEX, France
david.auber@labri.fr, bourqui@labri.fr

Vincent Lacroix
BAOBAB Team, Inria Rhˆone-Alpes, Projet HELIX
´
Laboratoire de Biom´etrie et Biologie Evolutive
UMR5558 CNRS
UniversitLyon 1, 43 bd 11 nov,
69622, Villeurbanne CEDEX - France
lacroix@biomserv.univ-lyon1.fr

Fabien Jourdan
UMR1089 X´enobiotiques INRA-ENVT,
180 chemin de Tournefeuille - St-Martin-du-Touch,
BP 3,31931 Toulouse CEDEX - France
Fabien.Jourdan@toulouse.inra.fr
Abstract
A metabolic network is a set of interconnected
metabolic pathways (subnetworks).
Until recently,
metabolic studies were dedicated to a single pathway, but
current researches now consider the entire network. As
matter stands, existing visualization tools cannot be used
to undertake these global studies since they have been designed to probe metabolic pathways. For the purpose of
making it feasible, this paper presents a graph drawing algorithm for the whole metabolic network.
Our collaboration with biologists led us to introduce
drawing constraints which take into account the decomposition of the network into metabolic pathways as well
as biochemical textbook drawing conventions. These constraints raise numerous graph drawing problems which are
solved by first recursively decomposing the network then
applying suitable graph drawing algorithms. Finally, we
present an application that illustrates the advantage of this
representation when visualizing groups of reactions which
span several metabolic pathways.

1

Introduction

Metabolism corresponds to the set of molecular transformations or energy transfers that occur in the cell or
in a living organism. This process is either degradation
(catabolism) or synthesis (anabolism) of molecules [17].
A classical way to study metabolism consists in focusing
on small subsets of biochemical reactions which are called
metabolic pathways. For instance, if a biologist studies the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

set of reactions responsible for the conversion of glucose
into fat, he will refer to the pathway represented on figure 1. The main limit of this approach is that metabolic
pathways are considered as disjoint processes. This assumption is clearly not verified since most metabolites are
shared among several pathways. In a ’Systems Biology’
perspective, metabolism is analyzed globally, that is, by
integrating all the metabolic pathways into a single network. The benefit of this approach is to enable to study
the crosstalk between pathways and, in particular, it facilitates the discovery of alternative pathways. In practice,
to achieve these global studies, the network is modeled by
a graph and analyzed with graph algorithms (for relevant
examples see [6, 15]).
During a metabolic study, biologists like to refer to reference pathway representations like the ones shown in figure 1 or 3. These pathways have a number of interesting
advantages in the way the information is presented but their
major drawback is that they have been drawn manually and
therefore cannot be easily updated. Thus, in addition to the
objective of drawing the whole network, a graph drawing
algorithm is also motivated by both the regular updates applied to each metabolic network and by the variability between the metabolic networks of different organisms. A
general way to create a metabolic network consists in first
automatically generate it (according to genetic and bibliographic information) and then manually validate it. Thus,
the version of the graph associated to the metabolic network of an organism is very likely to evolve. Moreover,

work. Previous works [7] and our collaboration with biologists revealed that it is essential to take into account
the biochemical textbook drawing conventions (see figure
1). Moreover, since the metabolic pathway information is
valuable during a metabolic study (even global), this information was used during the computation. That is, a constraint was defined such that nodes belonging to the same
pathways have to be drawn close to each other.
This algorithm was implemented in the Tulip graph visualization framework [1], and was used for a specific
global analysis task. This task comes from a study by
Lacroix et al. who developed an algorithm that identify
n occurrences (connected small subgraphs) of a given motif (defined as a set of reaction types) into the network [11].
Our method was used to visualize the n occurrences in
the whole network thereby enabling to formulate biological hypotheses that could not be formulated at the pathway
level.
We will first describe the metabolic network and how it
could be modeled. Then we will present our algorithm and
finally show how it was successfully applied to the occurrence visualization task.

Figure 1: Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis metabolic pathways as they are provided on KEGG [8] website. This representation is manually drawn, following textbook drawing
conventions. Note that the round rectangular nodes specify
other pathways since this pathway is only a small part of
the whole metabolic network.

2 Material
Modeling the metabolic network consists in choosing
which biological bodies will be associated to nodes and
how edges will represent biochemical reactions. It is necessary to do this model description before introducing the
graph drawing algorithm, since it will constraint the representation. For instance, a model may imply that some
nodes have a high degree, thus complicating a planarization process.

metabolic studies are usually carried out for several organisms. For instance, the BioCyc Database1 contains information on 150 different metabolic networks [9]. The main
focus is on microorganisms [4, 10], but some are dedicated
to plants and mammals [16]2 . Finally, the cross-species
variability can be important. As an example, the whole
photosynthesis pathway occurs in plants but not in mammals.
Since metabolic studies have been focusing on the notion of pathway, existing visualization tools and graph
drawing algorithms are mainly dedicated to pathway visualization [3, 7]. As already mentioned, using such tools
does not enable to study cascades of reactions that span
several pathways. Moreover, directly applying these algorithms to network visualization is not possible since they
would disregard the hierarchical pathway structure of the
network. Therefore, new drawing algorithms are needed.
To provide a suitable representation we propose a graph
drawing algorithm that can be applied to the whole net-

2.1 Bipartite graph modeling
A metabolic network is a set of biochemical reactions,
that is, reactions that convert one or more compounds into
one or more other compounds. Different models could be
used (for a detailed discussion, see [18]). In the one we
chose3 , their are two kinds of nodes : reactions and compounds (see figure 2) and there is an edge between a reaction and a compound if the compound is consumed or
produced by the reaction. This graph is generally called
the ”bipartite graph” since its set of nodes can be split into
two subsets where the elements are not linked (no link between reactions and no link between compounds). Thus
the network is modeled by a graph G = (V, E) such that
V = (R, S) where V = R ⊕ S and E = {(u, v)|u ∈
R, v ∈ S}.
A metabolic reaction may be reversible, meaning that it
can occur in both directions. In some cases, one direction
is clearly preferred (due to thermodynamical constraints)

1 http://biocyc.org/
2 Note that rat (Rattus Norvegicus) and mouse (Mus musculus) which
are relevant models for biological studies are still not referenced. When
they are described, our method will be able to provide a drawing.

3 The discussion of this choice is out of the scope of this paper. But
the main motivation is due to the use of this model in many textbook
drawings.

2

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

3 Drawing algorithm
The aesthetic constraints inherited from textbook drawing have to be taken into account when designing a
metabolic network drawing algorithm. In a first section, we
will describe these conventions, then we will present the
algorithm. Finally we will discuss the various approaches
which led us to this method.

3.1 Drawing constraints related to metabolism
specificity
Figure 1 and figure 3 present two manually drawn representations. A precise analysis of these representations led
to identify the so-called ”textbook drawing conventions”
(for a detailed description see [3, 7]). It is important to
note that the representation choices generally correspond
to a biological reality. Cyclic degradation processes, for
instance the Krebs cycle, are emphasized by using a circular representation. Reaction cascades are also considered
as canonical representation bodies.
Textbook representations also follow aesthetic criteria
that are often used by the graph drawing community [2].
The most important one is that the number of edge-edge
crossing is as low as possible. Moreover, edge routing is
designed to maximize the angle between edges going out
of a node (this notion is called the ”angular resolution”).
These constraints were already used at the pathway
level. Since we would like to visualize the whole network while keeping the pathway information we propose
a new constraint. That is, nodes contained in a pathway are
placed as close as possible to each other.

Figure 2: Bipartite graph describing two biochemical reactions.

but in general it seems to be hard to assess which one is
the main direction. Indeed, the information available in
databases on this subject is often contradictory. Thus, we
choose to consider all reactions as reversible and model the
graph with non-oriented edges.

2.2

Metabolic pathways

A metabolic pathway is a subset of the metabolic network, that is a graph P = (Vp , Ep ) where Vp ⊂ V and
Ep ⊂ E. Thus, for a given metabolic network G, a set
of n metabolic pathways is defined as : PG = {Pi | 0 <
i ≤ n}. Note that two metabolic pathways may share some
nodes. In classical representations these shared nodes are
duplicated. That is, for each occurrence of this compound
(or reaction) in a pathway, a node is created. This solution
is not suitable for global analysis since it could lead to erroneous conclusions. For instance, a reaction cascade shared
by two pathways will be represented twice, in different areas of the drawing. Thus, users may think that two similar
cascades occur in the network while it is not the case. This
is the reason why we chose not to duplicate nodes even if
this raises graph drawing problems (see section 3).

3.2 Our method
The algorithm we use has two main phases : first,
a multi-scale clustering is performed creating a quotient
graph4 , and second, clusters and quotient graph are drawn
using three drawing algorithms. In the next section, we
will first explain our clustering algorithm and then, we will
present the drawing algorithms we use.
3.2.1 Multi-scale clustering
One of the main problem is that metabolic pathways often
share nodes. For instance see 4 where the yellow, the blue
and the green region respectively represent pathways p1 ,
p2 and p3 , one can see an overlap between p1 and p2 (one
node) and between p2 and p3 (four nodes). Since we chose
not to duplicate nodes and since vertices of a pathway
have to be drawn next to each other, our algorithm will
have to decide whether a node will be embedded next to a
pathway or next to another. For example, the shared node
between p1 and p2 could be drawn near p1 or near p2 .
This will be achieved by a two-step process. The first step

Figure 3: Boehringer poster representing the whole
metabolic network.

4 Strictly speaking, the quotient graph is built by considering isolated
nodes as singletons.

3

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

p2

p1

chosen as our independent set.
Let PN ind = PG /Pind . For all the pathways in PN ind ,
we will exclude nodes that are shared with at least one
other pathway in PG . We denote this reduced set by PN ind .

p3

p5
a

p4

We clusterize elements in Pind and in PN ind into
metanodes, i.e., we replace each subgraph induced by an
element of Pind or PN ind by a node representing it (see
figure 4.b). We call this first graph G1 .

b

For all the pathways in Pind and in PN ind , we search
for the longest independent cycles5 (on figure 4.c, longest
independent cycles of each element of Pind and PN ind
are highlighted in red). These cycles are clusterized into
metanodes yielding a multi-scale graph called G2 .
Second pass : detection of cycles and paths
The next step of the algorithm consists in computing the
longest independent cycles6 in G2 , excluding metanodes.
At each iteration, we clusterize the longest cycle into a
metanode and exclude it for the next search. We then compute the longest paths of nodes of degree less than or equal
to two.
In figure 4.d, one can see the two new metanodes, the
left one is a path and the other one is a cycle. The result of
this clustering is the quotient graph that will be the input of
the drawing algorithm.

d

c

e

Figure 4: Algorithm overview : (a) a network where each
pathway is depicted by a color, (b) clustering according
to metabolic pathways overlapping, (c) cyles detection in
metanodes, (d) cycles and paths detection, (e) final representation

3.2.2 Drawing algorithms
To draw the metabolic network, we use three drawing algorithms : one for the quotient graph and two for the metanodes.
Drawing metanodes
To draw subgraphs represented by metanodes, we use a
recursive drawing algorithm. This algorithm draws all the
subgraphs from the most nested to the least nested. According to our clustering method, a subgraph is either a
cycle or an acyclic graph. In the first case, we use a circular drawing algorithm (see figure 5), in the second case, we
use the hierarchical drawing algorithm presented in [1].

consists in computing the independent set and the second
one in detecting cycles and paths.
First pass : computation of the independent set
First of all, the algorithm searches for the subset
Pind = {p1 , ..., pind }, ind≥1, Pind ⊆ PG such that 1.
i=ind
the pathways of Pind are independent and 2.
i=1 |pi |
is maximized. For instance,in figure 4.a, {p1 , p3 } is
the independent set that maximizes this sum among all
possible independent sets of pathways ({p1 }, {p2 }, {p3 },
{p4 }, {p5 }, {p1 , p3 }, {p1 , p4 }, {p1 , p5 }, {p2 , p4 } and
{p4 , p5 }).
The problem of finding the maximal independent set is
known to be NP-Hard, problem that can be reduced to the
coloration problem. To find a solution, we use the Welsh
and Powel heuristic [19]. Figure 6.b shows a coloration of
pathways obtained with this method. Then, for each color
class C, pi ∈C |pi | is computed, and the maximum one is

Drawing quotient graph
We want a drawing that optimizes the angular resolution
and the number of bends to obtain a better visibility. The
Mixed-Model algorithm of C. Gutwenger and P. Mutzel [5]
is a trade-off between all these aesthetic criteria. Moreover,
5 This problem is also NP-Complete but if the computation time is
greater than a threshold, we stop the algorithm and consider that the maximal cycle we have already found as the longest one.
6 Cycles C and C are independent iff C and C do not share any
1
2
1
2
node.

4

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

drawings produced by this algorithm are similar to manually drawn metabolic networks (see figure 1).
To use the Mixed-Model algorithm, we need to make modifications on the quotient graph. Indeed, it can only be applied on planar graphs, therefore, we have to planarize (i.e.
make it planar) the quotient graph. This problem is wellknown and is NP-Hard [13]. Many techniques exist, either
by augmentation or by deletion of edges (or nodes). For a
survey on this subject, one can refer to [12]. The drawback
of an augmentation based technique is that it may add up
to |V |4 nodes, thus the drawing becomes difficult to understand. That is why we use our own heuristic : vertices of
higher degree are removed one by one until the graph becomes planar. All removed nodes are then re-inserted. Removed edges are re-added one by one as long as the graph
is planar.
The obtained planar subgraph of the quotient graph is
drawn by the Mixed-Model algorithm [5]. To summarize,
this algorithm has two steps :

Figure 5: E. coli metabolic network using our method.
Drawings on the right are zoom in views where cycles are
emphasized.

• The first step builds an ordered partition of the set of
nodes. This partition is called shelling ordering. The
principle is to remove successively nodes that are on
the external face of the graph.

constraints. The first one enables duplication of nodes and
the second one doesn’t search for maximum independent
set of pathways.
The first technique consists in clusterizing each pathway
into a metanode and in linking metanodes if their corresponding pathways are not independent. With this method
we have to make (k-1) duplications of a vertex belonging
to k different pathways. In figure 6.b, nodes highlighted in
red have been duplicated. We then compute the longest independent cycles within each metanode (see figure 6.c) and
the longest paths in the quotient graph. Advantages of this
method are that all reactions and substrates of each pathway can be drawn next to each other, and that we can see
in the drawing if any two pathways are independent or not
just by looking at the edges. Figure 7 shows that the quotient graph contains a greater number of edges than the one
obtained by our algorithm. This implies a large number
of edge-edge crossing7 and thus makes this representation
very hard to understand.
The second technique is like our method, but we did not
compute the maximum independent set of pathways (see
figure 8.b). The interest of this method is that no vertex is
included in a metanode if it also belongs to another pathway. This to see, if two pathways share reactions or substrates, which are these reactions or substrates. The problem of this method is that the resulting drawing can have
no pathways entirely drawn in a small region, moreover,
the quotient graph has a greater number of vertices and
metanodes, and a greater number of edges than with the
method we use, so that the final drawing is more difficult

• The second one is the ”recomposition” of the graph
according to the shelling ordering. To guarantee there
is neither edge-edge crossing nor node-edge overlapping, the ordering is traversed in reverse order.
As described in 3.1, if a vertex is in a pathway, it has to
be drawn close to other vertices of the pathway. Taking
into account such a constraint in the Mixed-Model algorithm can be done during the decomposition phase. Let
SO = {V1 , V2 , ..., Vr } be the shelling ordering, when a
vertex n is added into a set Vi , 1 ≤ i < r, we prioritary add
vertices which have a constraint with n into the next Vj , j
> i. Those nodes will be more likely to be drawn next to
each other.
The last step of our drawing algorithm is to draw edges
removed during the planarization step. These edges are
routed on the external face, using an orthogonal drawing
with three bends per edge. Figure 5 shows the drawing
obtained by our algorithm on Escherichia coli (E. coli).
This is an organism which has been widely studied, its
metabolism is composed of 165 pathways, 1062 substrates
and reactions (i.e. nodes) and 1263 links (i.e. edges)
between them.

3.3

Discussion

In the previous section, we proposed an algorithm
which respects all constraints described in section 3.1. In
the following, we discuss two other techniques we have experimented. In both of them, we have removed one of the

7 using

5

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

a 2D representation

p2

p1

p3

p5

p4

a

duplicated nodes
c

b

Figure 7: Dependence graph of E. coli metabolic network,
164 metanodes and 1065 edges

Cyc visualization tool9 . On these drawings we highlighted
an occurrence shared by Valine Biosynthesis and Alanine
Biosynthesis.
The main limit of this way of visualizing the results is
that we need several views to be able to see the occurrence.
This method can be used for a single occurrence, but it becomes very heavy when the number of occurrences to examine is large. In the context of an exploratory analysis
of the metabolic network, several types of search are performed (exact and approximate search) and several motifs
are searched for, therefore leading to a very large number
of occurrences to examine.
In contrary to classical approaches, the method we propose enables to visualize each occurrence in a single view
even if it spans several metabolic pathways. The view corresponds to the whole network in which all the reactions
belonging to the occurrence are highlighted (see left part of
figure 11). The occurrence can then be interpreted as a biological process embedded in a large context, the metabolic
network. The way this process is linked to the rest of the
network is now explicit.
Furthermore, several occurrences may be colored at the
same time, therefore enabling the biologist to see, at a
glance, the repartition of the occurrences in the network.

d

Figure 6: From figure a to figure b the decomposition
process duplicates nodes shared by two pathways. The
drawing process (c to d) corresponds to the one we use.

to understand (see figure 9).
An enzyme [14] is a protein that catalyzes the conversion of substrates into products. Thus in the metabolic
network, each reaction node can be associated to an enzyme. Our case study is based on the hypothesis that a
given sequence of enzymes could occur in different parts
of the network. To identify these patterns (motifs), Lacroix
et al. provided a search algorithm and applied it to the
metabolic network of E. Coli8 [11]. Their results show
that occurrences of a motif may span two or more pathways. For instance, Figure 10 shows that for the motif {1.1.1.86, 4.2.1.9, 2.6.1.42, 2.6.1.66}, an occurrence is
shared by two metabolic pathways. Figure 10 is made
of two screen shots of two views provided by the Eco-

4 Conclusion and future works
This article presents a graph drawing algorithm dedicated to the visualization of metabolic networks. This
method is designed to follow textbook drawing conventions by using suitable graph drawing algorithms. Moreover, decomposition of the network into metabolic pathways is used as a backbone for the representation. Indeed

8 Escherichia coli (E. Coli) belongs to the family of Enterobacteriaceae, and is present in the lower intestine of humans and warm-blooded
animals. E. Coli has been studied intensively by geneticists because of its
small genome size, normal lack of pathogenicity, and ease of growth in
the laboratory.

9 http://biocyc.org/ECOLI/class-subs-instances?object=Pathways

6

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

p2

p1

p3

p5
a

p4

b

Figure 9: E. coli metabolic network using a clustering excluding shared vertices

d

c

e

Figure 8: Decomposition and drawing process where
shared vertices are excluded (a to b).

Figure 10: Metabolic pathways as they are provided on the
Biocyc website (compounds are nodes and reactions are
hyperedges between nodes). The occurrence of the motif
{1.1.1.86, 4.2.1.9, 2.6.1.42, 2.6.1.66} is composed of four
reactions belonging to two different pathways.

this notion is central in biological studies on metabolic networks.
The result of a global study on the metabolic network
of E. Coli is visualized using our method. In contrast with
current visualization tools, our overall representation allows to visually detect reaction cascades shared by different metabolic pathways.
In the near future, we plan to improve the routing of
edges at the end of the quotient graph drawing. Moreover, a
dedicated navigation method will be designed, for instance
by using ”focus plus context” methods.

References
[1] David Auber. Graph Drawing Software, chapter Tulip- A Huge Graph Visualization Framework.
Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[2] Giuseppe Di Battista, Peter Eades, Roberto Tamassia,
and Ioannis G. Tollis. Graph Drawing: Algorithms
for the Visualization of Graphs. Prentice Hall, 1999.

Acknowledgments

[3] Moritz Becker and Isabel Rojas. A graph layout algorithm for drawing metabolic pathways. Bioinformatics, 17:461–467, 2001.

The authors would like to thank Marie-France Sagot10
for initiating this collaboration and Ludovic Cottret11 for
his work on extracting from BioCyc the data used in this
paper.

[4] Ron Caspi, Hartmut Foerster, Carol Fulcher, Rebecca
Hopkinson, John Ingraham, Pallavi Kaipa, Markus
Krummenacker, Suzanne Paley, John Pick, Seung Y.

10 sagot@biomserv.univ-lyon1.fr
11 cottret@biomserv.univ-lyon1.fr

7

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[11] V. Lacroix, C. G. Fernandes, and M.-F. Sagot. Reaction motifs in metabolic networks. In Proceedings of 5th Workshop on Algorithms for BioInformatics (WABI’05), Lecture Notes in BioInformatics, subseries Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume
3692, pages 178–191, 2005.
[12] Annegret Liebers. Planarizing graphs - a survey and
annotated bibliography. Journal of Graph Algorithms
and Applications, 5(1):1–74, 2001.
[13] P.C. Lui and R.C. Geldmacher. On the deletion of
nonplanar edges of a graph. In Proceeding on the
10th conf. on Comb., Graph Theory, and Comp.,
pages 727–738, 1977.

Figure 11:
Visualization of the metabolic network where the occurrences of the motif
{1.1.1.86, 4.2.1.9, 2.6.1.42, 2.6.1.66} are highlighted.
The right part corresponds to the occurrence shown on
figure 10

[14] Nomenclature Committee of the International
Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.
Enzyme Nomenclature. Academic Press, 1992.
[15] T. Pfeiffer, T. Dandekar, F. Moldenhauer, and
S. Schuster. Topological analysis of metabolic networks. application to the metabolism of mycoplasma
pneumoniae. In BTK2000: Animating the Cellular
Map, pages 229–234, 2000.

Rhee, Christophe Tissier, Peifen Zhang, and Peter D. Karp. Metacyc: a multiorganism database of
metabolic pathways and enzymes. Nucleic Acids Research, 34:D511–D516, 2006.
[5] C. Gutwenger and P. Mutzel. Planar polyline drawings with good angular resolution. In Graph Drawing
’98 (Proc.), Springer-Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 1547, pages 167–182, 1998.

[16] P. Romero, J. Wagg, M.L. Green, D. Kaiser,
M. Krummenacker, and P.D. Karp. Computational
prediction of human metabolic pathways from the
complete human genome. Genome Biology, pages
1–17, 2004.

[6] H. Jeong, B. Tombor, R. Albert, Z. Oltvai, and
A. Barabasi.
The large-scale organization of
metabolic networks. Nature, 407:651, 2000.

[17] Jack G. Salway. Metabolism at a Glance. Blackwell
Science Ltd, 2003.
[18] Jacques van Helden, Lorenz Wernisch, David Gilbert,
and Shoshana Wodak. Graph-based analysis of
metabolic networks. Ernst Schering Research Foundation Workshop, 38:245–274, 2002.

[7] Fabien Jourdan and Guy Melanc¸on. A tool for
metabolic and regulatory pathways visual analysis. In
Visualization and Data Analysis, VDA, pages 46–55,
Santa Clara Convention Center, January 2003. SPIE.
http://vw.indiana.edu/vda2003/.

[19] Welsh and Powell. An upper bound to the chromatic
number of a graph and its application to timetabling
problems. The Computer journal, 10:85–86, 1967.

[8] Minoru Kanehisa. Post-genome Informatics. Oxford
University Press, 2000.
[9] P.D. Karp, C.A. Ouzounis, C. Moore-Kochlacs,
L. Goldovsky, P. Kaipa, D. Ahren, S. Tsoka,
N. Darzentas, V. Kunin, and N. Lopez-Bigas. Expansion of the biocyc collection of pathway/genome
databases to 160 genomes. Nucleic Acids Research,
19:6083–89, 2005.
[10] I.M. Keseler, J. Collado-Vides, S. Gama-Castro, J. Ingraham, S. Paley, I.T. Paulsen, M. Peralta-Gil, and
P.D. Karp. Ecocyc: A comprehensive database resource for escherichia coli. Nucleic Acids Research,
33:D334–D337, 2005.
8

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

