Reviewing Data Visualization: an Analytical Taxonomical Study
Jos´e F. Rodrigues Jr., Agma J. M. Traina, Maria Cristina F. de Oliveira, Caetano Traina Jr.
Computer Science Department
Computer and Mathematical Sciences Institute
University of S˜ao Paulo at S˜ao Carlos
Caixa Posta 668
13560-970 S˜ao Carlos, SP, Brazil
{junio, agma, cristina, caetano}@icmc.usp.br

Abstract
This paper presents an analytical taxonomy that can suitably describe, rather than simply classify, techniques for
data presentation. Unlike previous works, we do not consider particular aspects of visualization techniques, but
their mechanisms and foundational vision perception. Instead of just adjusting visualization research to a classiﬁcation system, our aim is to better understand its process. For
doing so, we depart from elementary concepts to reach a
model that can describe how visualization techniques work
and how they convey meaning.

1

Introduction

The large volume of data sets produced in all kinds of human activities motivates the quest for more efﬁcient ways to
explore and understand information. The beneﬁts of such
understanding reﬂect in business advantages, more accurate
diagnosis, ﬁner engineering and more reﬁned conclusions in
a general sense. Computer graphics aided techniques have
been researched and implemented in order to provide improved mechanisms for exploring stored data. These efforts
are generically known as (data) Visualization, which provides faster and user-friendlier mechanisms for data analysis, because the user draws on his/her comprehension immediately as graphical information comes up to his/her vision.
Several classiﬁcation schemes have been proposed for
visualization techniques, each one focusing on some aspect
of the visualization process. However, many questions remain unanswered. What are the building blocks of a visual
exploration scene? How interaction mechanisms relate to
these facts? These are core issues for implementing and
evaluating visualization systems. In this work, we discuss
these issues and analytically ﬁnd answers to them based on
the very mechanisms of the visualization techniques and on

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

visual perception theory.
In this paper we discuss the subjective nature of visualization by proposing a discrete model that can better explain how visualization scenes are composed and formed,
and how their constituent parts contribute to visual comprehension. We revisit visual analysis proposing a perspective
where visualization scenes are considered as a set of components each of which passive of discrete consideration. This
discussion is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews former taxonomies from the literature, section 3 presents the
basic components of visualization techniques, used as elements for our proposed taxonomy. Section 4 delineates the
descriptive taxonomy itself, while section 5 explains how
interaction techniques ﬁt into the proposed framework. Finally, Section 6 presents a brief discussion and concludes
the paper.

2

Related Work

One of the most referenced taxonomies for Visualization,
and well suited to academic purposes, is the one proposed by Keim [13]. It maps visualization techniques
within a three dimensional space deﬁned by the following discrete axes: the data type to be visualized (one,
two, multi-dimensional, text/web, hierarchies/graphs and
algorithm/software), the visualization technique (standard
2D/3D, geometrical, iconic, dense pixel and stacked), and
the interaction/distortion technique applied (standard, projection, ﬁltering, zoom, distortion and link & brush). This
taxonomy is suitable to quickly reference and categorize visualization techniques, but it is not adequate to explain their
mechanisms.
A simpler taxonomy was earlier presented by Schneiderman [27]. It delineates a pair wise system based on a set of
data types to be explored, and on a set of exploratory tasks
to be carried out by the analyst. This taxonomy, known

as task (overview, zoom, ﬁlter, details-on-demand, relate,
history and extract) by data type (one, two, three, multidimensional, tree and network) taxonomy, was pioneer in
analytically delineating visualization techniques. The effort
provides a good idea of what a given technique is and how
it can be used.
Another interesting classiﬁcation is presented by Chi
[4], a quite analytical approach, which details visualization
techniques through various properties related to a speciﬁc
visualization model. The taxonomy embraces data, abstraction, transformation and mapping tasks, presentation and interaction. It determines a complete and extensive descriptive system for analytical purposes.
Tory and M¨ooller [29] deﬁne Scientiﬁc Visualization
and Information Visualization, respectively, as continuous
([one, two, three, multi-dimensional] versus [scalar, vector, tense, multi-variate]) and discrete (two, three, multidimensional and graph & tree) classes, according to the intuitive perception of their visual modeling. Wiss and Carr
[34] describe a cognitive based taxonomy that considers attention, abstraction and (interaction) affordance in order to
discus 3-D techniques. Unlike a classiﬁcation system, this
taxonomy can be seen as a guide to “dissect” the subjective
nature of visualization techniques.
In the following discussion we also analyze visualization
techniques according to a classiﬁcation scheme but, differently, we concentrate on basic characteristics common to
every visually informative scene. We beneﬁt from empirical observations of how data translates to space, that is, how
it is spatialized and we consider characteristics proposed in
visual perception theory (position, shape and color), which
determines how pre-attentive features can stimulate our visual system.

3

Figure 1. Taxonomy model based on spatialization and visual stimuli. The central rectangle represents visualization scenes. Around
the visualization scene are its components:
spatialization(position), shape and color together with their possible classes.
and Information visualization based on whether the spatialization mechanism is given or chosen, respectively. We considered these arguments to analyze spatialization and veriﬁed that visualization techniques can be grouped based on
how they are mapped into the visual/spatial domain.

3.2

Semiotic theory is the study of signs and how they convey
meaning. According to semiotic theory, the visual process
is comprised of two phases, the parallel extraction of lowlevel properties (called pre-attentive processing) followed
by a sequential goal-oriented slower phase. Pre-attentive
processing plays a crucial role in promoting visualization’s
major gain, that is, improved and faster data comprehension
[30].
Speciﬁcally, pre-attentive processing refers to what can
be visually identiﬁed prior to conscious attention. Essentially, it determines which visual objects are instantly and
effortlessly brought to our attention. The work described
by Ware [32] identiﬁes the categories of visual features that
are pre-attentively processed. Position (2D position, stereoscopic depth, convex/concave shading), Shape (line orientation, length, width and line collinearity, size, curvature,
spatial grouping, added marks, numerosity) and Color (hue,
saturation) are considered and, according to Pylyshyn et al
[21], specialized areas of the brain exist to process each of
them (Figure 2). Actually this is true for everything we see,
for what we can ask three questions: where is it? what is its
shape? and what color is it?

Components of Visualization Techniques

Visualization can be understood as data represented visually. That is, it takes advantage of spatialization to
allow data to be visually/spatially perceived and it relies on visual stimuli to represent data itens or data attributes/characteristics. Based on these facts an overview
of our taxonomy model is presented in Figure 1, which depicts its basic components and their possible classes, further
detailed in this text.

3.1

Spatialization

Spatialization of data refers to its transformation from a raw
format that is difﬁcult to interpret into a visible spatial format. In fact, Rohrer et al. [25] state that visualizing the nonvisual requires mapping the abstract into a physical form,
and Rhyne et al. [23] differentiate Scientiﬁc visualization

4

0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Proposed Taxonomy

Visualizing data demands a maximization of just noticeable
differences. To satisfy this need, visualizations rely on pre2

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)

Pre-attentive Visual Stimuli

pixel oriented techniques in general [12].

Figure 2. Pre-attentive visual stimuli.
attentive stimuli - characteristics inherent to visual/spatial
entities. Therefore, the data must ﬁrst be mapped to the
spatial domain (spatialized) in order to be pre-attentively
perceived. Our taxonomy thus focuses on the spatialization
process and on the pre-attentive stimuli that are employed
by visualization techniques.

4.1

Figure 4. (a) Pixel Bar Charts. Position: manufacturers mapped in horizontal sequence and
clients (pixels) mapped according to a patterned positioning; shape: correspondence
(size); color: continuous correspondence. (b)
Pie chart. Position: each slice maps a different pizza ingredient; shape: correspondence
(size); color: discrete differentiation.

Spatialization

In this section we identify a set of procedures for data spatialization: Structure exposition, Projection, Patterned positioning and Reproduction. In the following section we
present the pre-attentive stimuli that complete the requisites
to describe a data visualization.
• Structure exposition: data can embed intrinsic structures,
such as hierarchies or relationship networks (graph-like),
that embody a considerable part of the data signiﬁcance.
This class comprises visualization techniques that rely on
methods to adjust data presentation so that the underlying data structure can be visually perceived. Examples are
the TreeMap technique [28], illustrated in Figure 3(a), and
force directed graph layouts [8], such as the one illustrated
in Figure 3(b);

Notice that the simple approach of Patterned positioning restricts the presentation of data, which is tipically depicted
with shape and size encoding, as in Figures 4(a), 4(b) and
10(c). Keim’s pixel-oriented techniques are an exception, in
that they use just color, and no shape encoding, to present
the data items, which are positioned according to elaborated
patterned sequences [14].

Figure 5. 3D functional plotting. Position:
referential (axes); shape: math surface displays relationship among points; meaningful axes and labels; color: continuous correspondence. (b) Star Coordinates 2D projection of 8-dimensional data. Position: referential; shape: meaningful axes and labels; color:
discrete differentiation.

Figure 3. (a) TreeMap structure exposition.
Position: hierarchical arrangement; shape:
correspondence (size proportionality); color:
discrete differentiation. (b) Force directed
structure exposition.
Position: relational
arrangement; shape: meaningful (arrowed)
lines; color: discrete differentiation.

• Projection: stands for a data display modeled by the representation of functional variables. That is, the position of a
data item is deﬁned by either a well-known or an implicit
mathematical function. In a projection, the information
given is magnitude and not order, as in a patterned spatialization. Examples are Parallel Coordinates (one projection
per data dimension), Star Coordinates [11] and conventional
graph plots, as illustrated in Figure 5;
• Reproduction: data positioning is known beforehand and
is determined by the spatialization of the system from where
data were collected, as exempliﬁed in Figures 6(a) and 6(b).

• Patterned: this is the simplest positioning procedure,
with the set of individual data items arranged sequentially
(ordered or not) according to one or more directions, linear,
circular or according to speciﬁc patterns.
Patterned techniques tend to fully populate the projection
area and sometimes are referred to as dense pixel displays.
Examples include Pixel Bar Charts [15], showed in Figure
4(a), pie charts (circular disposition), depicted in 4(b) and
3
Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

property. Without an explicit referential, information is perceived locally through individual inter-positioning of elements and/or globally through a scene overview. For instance, TreeMap (Figure 3(a)) presents the hierarchy of the
data items, and a graph layout (Figure 3(b)) presents network information.
• Patterned → Correspondence: the position of an item,
either discrete or continuous, determines its corresponding
characteristic without demanding a reference. For example,
see Figure 10(b) where each of the four line positions maps
one data attribute. Other examples are Parallel Coordinates
and Table Lens [22], techniques that deﬁne an horizontal
sequence for placing data attributes;
• Projection → Referential: this is the most obvious relation between spatialization and positional pre-attention.
Projections have a supporting function whose intervals deﬁne referential scales suited to analogical comprehension.
• Reproduction → Referential: the position of an element,
discrete or continuous, is given relative to an explicit reference, such as a geographical map (Figure 6(b)), a meaningful shape (Figure 7(a)) or a set of axes (Figure 7(b));

In reproduction, the data inherits positioning from its original source. Usually, speciﬁc algorithms [6] are required to
identify the data positioning based on its implicit physical
structure; other algorithms are used to simplify intractable
volumes and/or to derive other features later represented for
example as color, glyphs or streamlines.

Figure 6. (a) Rendered dataset. Position: referential (surface shape as reference); shape:
meaningful object; color: continuous correspondence. (b) Geographical map. Position:
referential (background map as reference);
shape: meaningful airport and road identiﬁers; color discrete differentiation. (b) reproduced with permission granted by S.G. Eick.

Reproduction can be seen as a special case of projection where no explicit projection function is given - compare
Figures 5(a) and 6(a). Instead, the data positioning derives
from the observed phenomenon and it is part of the data.
Therefore, projection and reproduction are characterized by
considerably different methodologies that confer them distinct classiﬁcations, namely, explicit projection and implicit
projection (rendering).

4.2

Figure 7. (a) Position: referential (globe as reference); shape: relationship (curved lines),
proportional correspondence (pillars size)
and meaning (globe); color: discrete correspondence. (b) Position: referential (parallelepiped as reference); shape: meaning
(chemical molecules); color: continuous correspondence. Images reproduced with permission

Pre-attentive Stimuli

In this section we analyze well-known visualization techniques in order to empirically identify how attributes Position, Shape and Color are used to express information.
4.2.1

granted by S.G. Eick.

Position

We observe that spatialization based on Reproduction
can yield all the three kinds of positional pre-attention:
arrangement, correspondence or referential. This is a consequence of the image characteristics being predetermined
from the source being reproduced, which may bear any of
these characteristics naturally. However, the most common
occurrence is referential pre-attention, to which we limit our
exposition.

Position is the primary component for pre-attention perception in visualization scenes and it is strictly related to
the spatialization process. So, while spatialization is the
cornerstone for enabling visual data analysis (as it maps
data to the visual/spatial domain), it also dictates the mechanism for pre-attentive positional perception. Thus, positional pre-attention occurs in the form of Arrangement,
Correspondence and Referential, explained in the following paragraphs. These classes derive, respectively, from
spatializations Structure Exposition, Patterned and Projection/Reproduction.
• Structure Exposition → Arrangement: speciﬁc arrangements can depict structure, hierarchy or some other global

4.2.2

We argued so far that a limited number of spatialization
procedures is at the core of visualization techniques, and
4

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Shape

either discrete or continuous, is data dependent or user input
dependent;
• Correspondence: discrete or continuous, as observed in
Figures 7(a) and (b). In the discrete case each noticeable
color maps one informative feature, usually a class, a level,
a stratum or some predeﬁned correspondence. In the continuous case, the variation of tones maps a set of continuous
data values.

that these spatialization procedures dictate the positional
pre-attentive stimulus. Nevertheless, after spatializing the
data one still needs to choose their shape and color, other
pre-attentive stimuli. In this and the following sections we
investigate how shape and color contribute to visual perception. In particular, the Shape stimulus embraces the largest
number of possibilities to express information: Differentiation, Correspondence, Meaning and/or Relationship.
• Differentiation: the shape displayed discriminates the
items for further interpretation, as in Figures 8(a), 9(a) and
10(a);
• Correspondence: discrete (Figure 8(a)) or continuous
(Figure 8(b)), each noticeable shape corresponds to one informative feature. Proportion (variable sizing) is the most
used variation for this practice;
• Meaning: the shape displayed carries meaning, such as
an arrow, a face or a complex shape (e.g. text), whose comprehension may depend on user’s knowledge and previous
experience, as depicted in Figures 7(b) and 8(b);
• Relationship: shapes, such as lines, contours or surfaces,
denote the relationship between a set of data items, e.g., in
Parallel Coordinates, 3D plots and paths in general, illustrated in Figures 5(a) and 7(a).

Figure 9. (a) Position: correspondence for attribute order and attribute values; shape: line
size correspondence (all columns) and differentiation (in the 5th column shape indicates
selection); color: discrete differentiation. (b)
Position: referential (window as a Euclidean
plane) and correspondence through the circular positioning of the inner sticks of each
glyph; shape: differentiation determined by
the contour around each glyph and proportional correspondence for the inner sticks;
color: discrete differentiation. (b) created with
XmdvTool [31].

4.3
Figure 8. (a) Position: referential (axes as reference); shape: discrete correspondence and
differentiation (square); color: discrete correspondence. (b) Position: referential (axes
as reference); shape: continuous correspondence (size and curvature); color: discrete
differentiation.

4.2.3

In the process of creating a visualization, it is possible to
subdivide the available space into disjoint regions and, then,
apply another spatialization process to each subspace. Figure 10(a), for example, shows a grid in which star glyphs
are spatialized. Similarly, Figure 10(b) shows a focused star
glyph in which sticks are positioned according to a different
spatialization procedure. Figure 10(c) demonstrates the relative positioning of the glyphs in the star glyph and, ﬁnally,
Figure 10(d) shows a focused stick that represents the magnitude of the third attribute of the (hypothetical) jth item.
A similar approach is applied in techniques such as Dimensional Stacking [17], Worlds-within-Worlds [7], Circle Segments [1], Pixel Bar Charts [15] and the so-called
iconic techniques in general. Multiple spatialization cycles
allow improved space utilization and result in more complex visualization techniques. Moreover, they deﬁne hybrid
approaches for composing visualizations that allow for the
vast number of techniques found in visualization literature.
In such compositions, pre-attention occurs as a function of
the visualization focus. Such understanding, coupled with

Color

After applying a spatialization procedure, which leads to
positional clues for perceiving information, and after choosing a shape to convey additional meaning, color is the third
pre-attentive stimulus to be considered. Color conveys information by Differentiation and/or Correspondence of data
items:
• Differentiation: colors have no speciﬁc data correspondence, they just depict equality (or inequality) of some data
characteristic, as it may be observed in the visualizations
depicted in Figures 9(a) and 9(b). The coloring of the items,
5
Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Hybridism and Subspace Visualizations

Figure 10. Two spatialization cycles applied in generating a visualization. (a) Projection of star
glyphs. (b) Star glyph focused. (c) Arrangement within a glyph. (d) Attribute information as a proportional shape.

• View transformation: this interaction adds physical touch
to the visualization scene, whose shape (size) and position
can be changed through scale, rotation, translation and/or
zoom, not necessarily all of them, as in the FastmapDB tool
[2];
• Filtering: a user is allowed to visually select a subset
of items that, through pre-attentive factors such as color
(brushing) and shape (selection contour), will be promptly
differentiated for user perception. Detailed studies are presented by Martin and Ward [19];
• Details-on-demand: detailed information about the data
that generated a particular visual entity can be retrieved at
any moment and presented in the scene. As an example
we refer to the interaction (not the presentation) of Table
Lens visualization, which permits to retrieve the data that
originated a given graphical item and present it in textual
(shape) form;
• Distortion: allows visualizations to be projected so that
different perspectives (positions) can be observed and deﬁned simultaneously. Classical examples are the Perspective Wall [18] and Fish-eye Views [26].
The well-known Link & Brush (co-plots) technique does
not satisfy our conditions. It is an application dependent
automation that can be implemented only when brushing
and multiple visualization techniques share a visualization
environment.

our taxonomical system, can provide additional guidance
on new thoughts for data visualization.

5

Interaction Techniques

Interaction is an important component for visualization
techniques but, differently from former works, we do not
incorporate interaction to our taxonomy. In fact, we chose
to handle visualization and interaction as disjoint concepts.
However, interaction and visual applications present a notable synergy. Therefore, we must clarify the role of interaction techniques in the visualization scene. We deﬁne two
conditions for identifying an interaction technique:
1. An interaction technique must enable a user to deﬁne/redeﬁne the visualization by modifying the characteristics of pre-attentive stimuli;
2. An interaction technique, with appropriate adaptations,
must be applicable to any visualization technique.
The ﬁrst condition arises from the direct assumption that
interaction techniques alter the state of a computational application. In the case of a visualization scene, its basic
components (the pre-attentive stimuli) must be altered. The
second condition arises from the need of having interaction
techniques that are well deﬁned, which directs us towards
generality. An interaction technique, then, must be applicable to any visualization technique, even if not efﬁciently.
We identify the following interaction paradigms:
• Parametric: the visualization is redeﬁned, visually (e.g.,
scrollbar) or textually (e.g., type-in), by modifying position,
shape or color parameters. One could mention as examples, the hierarchical Parallel Coordinates (visual) mechanism described by Fua et al [9] and Keim’s [12] querydependent pixel displays that conform to a textual query
system;

6

We illustrate the proposed taxonomy in Table 1, which
shows the categorization of some well-known visualization
techniques. In proposing this taxonomy we focused on generalizing the rationale of how visualization scenes are engendered and how they are presented to our cognitive system. Such a general characterization results in a taxonomy
that does not rely on speciﬁc details on how techniques op6

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Conclusions

Table 1. Examples of spatialization-pre-attention analysis
Visualization Technique

Spatialization→Position

Shape

Color (usual)

Prospective Interaction

Chernoff Faces [3]

Projection→Referential,
Patterned→Correspondence

Correspondence,
Differentiation

-

Filtering

Dimensional Stacking [17]

Projection→Referential

-

Differentiation

Filtering

Parallel Coordinates [10]

Projection→Referential,

Relationship

Differentiation

Filtering

Patterned→Correspondence
Scatter Plots [5]

Projection→Referential

-

Differentiation

Filtering

Star Coordinates [11]

Projection→Referential,
Patterned→Correspondence

-

Differentiation

View transformation,
Details-on-demand

Stick Figures [20]

Projection→Referential,
Patterned→Correspondence

Differentiation,
Correspondence

Differentiation

Filtering

Worlds-within-Worlds [7]

Projection→Referential

-

-

View transformation

Bar Chart

Projection→Referential

Correspondence

Correspondence

Filtering, Parametric

Pixel Bar Charts [15]

Projection→Referential,
Patterned→Correspondence

Correspondence

Correspondence

Filtering, Parametric

Circle Segments [1]

Patterned→Correspondence

-

Correspondence

Details-on-demand

Keim’s Pixel Oriented [12]

Patterned→Correspondence

-

Differentiation

Filtering, Parametric

Pie Chart

Patterned→Correspondence

Correspondence

Correspondence

Filtering, Parametric

Table Lens [22]

Patterned→Correspondence,
Projection→Referential

Correspondence

Differentiation

Filtering,
Details-on-demand

Cone Tree [24]

Structure Exposition→Arrangement

Relationship

Differentiation

View transformation,
Details-on-demand

Hyperbolic Tree [16]

Structure Exposition→Arrangement

Relationship

Differentiation

View transformation,

Treemaps [28]

Structure Exposition→Arrangement

Correspondence

Differentiation

Filtering,
Details-on-demand

Geographical Maps

Reproduction→Referential

Differentiation,
Correspondence

Differentiation

Filtering,
Details-on-demand

Vector Visualization

Reproduction→Referential

Meaning,
Correspondence

Differentiation,
Correspondence

View transformation

Direct Volume Rendering
[33]

Reproduction→Referential

Meaning

Differentiation,
Correspondence

View transformation

Details-on-demand

diffused within the taxonomical structure.

erate. Rather, it considers their fundamental constituent
parts: how they perform spatialization and how they employ pre-attentive stimuli to convey meaning. Our claim is
that such an approach is required to gain a general understanding of the visualization process.

Our approach results in an extensible taxonomy that can
accommodate new techniques as, in fact, any technique will
rely on common foundational basis. We see this taxonomy
as a starting point for fomenting further discussions and
thoughts on how visualization techniques operate and how
we can improve our understanding of them. Hopefully,
it can contribute to give us better grounds for design,
evaluation and implementation of techniques in the future.

Existing taxonomies categorize techniques based on diverse and detailed information on how techniques perform a visual mapping. This diversity and detailing (refer to Section 2) include, e.g., axes arrangement (“stacked
techniques”), speciﬁc representational patterns (“iconic and
pixel-oriented techniques”), predisposition of representativeness (“network and tree techniques”), dimensionality (“2D/3D techniques”) and interaction (“static/dynamic
techniques”). Although such approaches can suitably describe the set of available techniques, they lack analytical
power because the core constituents of the techniques are

Aknowledgements This work has been supported by
FAPESP (S˜ao Paulo State Research Foundation), CNPq
(Brazilian National Research Foundation) and CAPES
(Brazilian Committee for Graduate Studies).
7

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

References

176, New Orleans, LO, USA, 1991.
[19] A.R. Martin and M.O. Ward. High dimensional brushing
for interactive exploration of multivariate data. In 6th IEEE
Visualization, pages 271–278, Atlanta, GA, USA, 1995.
[20] R.M. Pickett and G.G. Grinstein. Iconographic displays for
visualizing multidimensional data. In IEEE Conf. Systems,
Man and Cybernetics, volume 1, pages 514–519, Piscataway, NJ, 1988. IEEE Press.
[21] Z. Pylyshyn, J. Burkell, B. Fisher, C. Sears, W. Schmidt, and
L. Trick. Multiple parallel access in visual attention. Canadian Journal of Experimental Psychology, 48(2):260–283,
1994.
[22] R. Rao and S.K. Card. The table lens: Merging graphical
and symbolic representation in an interactive focus+context
visualization for tabular information. In Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 318–322, 1994.
[23] Theresa-Marie Rhyne, Melanie Tory, Tamara Munzner, Matt
Ward, Chris Johnson, and David H. Laidlaw. Information
and scientiﬁc visualization: Separate but equal or happy together at last. In IEEE Visualization 03, pages 611–614,
2003.
[24] G. Robertson, S. Card, and J. Mackinlay. Cone-trees: Animated 3d visualization of hierarquical information. In ACM
SIGCHI Intl. Conf. Human Factors in Computing, pages
189–194, New York - NY, 1991. ACM Press.
[25] R.M. Rohrer, D.S. Ebert, and J.L. Sibert. The shape of shakespeare: Visualizing text using implicit surfaces. In IEEE
Symp. Information Visualization, pages 121–128, North Carolina, USA, 1998.
[26] M. Sarkar and M. Brown. Graphical ﬁsheye views. Communications of the ACM, 37(12):73–84, 1994.
[27] B. Schneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy of information visualizations. In IEEE Symp. Visual
Languages, pages 336–343. IEEE CS Press, 1996.
[28] B. Shneiderman. Tree visualization with treemaps: A 2d
space-ﬁlling approach. ACM Trans. on Graphics, 11(1):92–
99, 1992.
[29] M. Tory and T. M¨ooller. Rethinking visualization: A highlevel taxonomy. In IEEE Information Visualization, pages
151–158, 2004.
[30] A. Triesman. Preattentive processing in vision. Computer
Vision, Graphics and Image Processing, 31:156–177, 1985.
[31] M.O. Ward. Xmdvtool: Integrating multiple methods for visualizing multivariate data. In IEEE Visualization 94, pages
326–333. IEEE Society, 1994.
[32] C. Ware. Information Visualization: Perception for design.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
[33] J. Wilhelms and A. Van Gelder. A coherent projection approach for direct volume rendering. Computer Graphics,
25(4):275–284, August 1991.
[34] U. Wiss and D. Carr. A cognitive classiﬁcation framework
for 3-dimensional information visualization. Technical Report 1998:04, Lulea, University of Technology: Computer
Science and Electrical Engineering / Software Engineering,
January 20th 1998.

[1] M. Ankerst and D.A. Keim. Circle segments: A technique
for visually exploring large multidimensional data sets, hot
topic session. In IEEE Visualization 96, San Francisco, CA,
1996.
[2] A.J.M. Traina C. Traina Jr. and C. Faloutsos. Fastmapdb
user’s manual, September 1999.
[3] H. Chernoff. The use of faces to represent points in kdimensional space graphically. J. of the American Statistical
Association, 68(342):361 – 368, 1973.
[4] Ed H. Chi. A taxonomy of visualization techniques using
the data state reference model. In IEEE Symp. Information
Visualization, pages 69–75, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 2000.
[5] W.S. Cleveland. Visualizing Data. Hobart Press, Summit,
NJ, 1993.
[6] T.T. Elvins. A survey of algorithms for volume visualization.
Computer Graphics, 15:194–201, August 1992.
[7] S. Feiner and C. Beshers. Worlds within worlds: Metaphors
for exploring n-dimensional virtual worlds. In Conf. User
Interface Software and Technology, pages 76–83, Snowbird,
Utah, 1990.
[8] T.M.J. Fruchterman and E.M. Reingold. Graph drawing by
force-directed placement. Software Practice and Experience,
21((1 1)):1129–1164, November 1991.
[9] Ying-Huey Fua, M.O. Ward, and A. Rundensteiner. Hierarchical parallel coordinates for exploration of large datasets.
In IEEE Visualization 99, pages 43–50, 1999.
[10] A. Inselberg and B. Dimsdale. Parallel coordinates: A tool
for visualizing multidimensional geometry. In IEEE Visualization 90, volume 1, pages 361–370. IEEE CS Press, 1990.
[11] E. Kandogan. Visualizing multi-dimensional clusters, trends,
and outliers using star coordinates. In 7th ACM SIGKDD
Intl. Conf. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages
107 – 116, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2001. ACM Press.
[12] D.A. Keim. Designing pixel-oriented visualization techniques: Theory and applications. IEEE Trans. Visualisation
and Computer Graphics, 6(1):59–78, January-March 2000.
[13] D.A. Keim. Information visualization and visual data mining. IEEE Trans. Visualization and Computer Graphics,
8(1):1–8, 2002.
[14] D.A. Keim, M. Ankerst, and H. Kriegel. Recursive pattern:
A technique for visualizing very large amounts of data. In 6th
IEEE Visualization95, pages 279–286, Atlanta, GA, 1995.
[15] D.A. Keim, Ming C. Hao, U. Dayal, M. Hsu, and J. Ladisch.
Pixel bar charts: A new technique for visualizing large multiattribute data sets without aggregation. In IEEE Symp. Information Visualization, pages 113–122, 2001.
[16] J. Lamping and R. Rao P. Pirolli. A focus+context technique
based on hyperbolic geometry for visualizing large hierarchies. In ACM SIGCHI Conf. Human Factors in Computing,
pages 401–408, 1995.
[17] J. LeBlanc, M.O. Ward, and N. Wittels. Exploring ndimensional databases. In IEEE Visualization 90, pages 230–
237, San Francisco, CA, 1990.
[18] J.D. Mackinlay, G.G. Robertson, and S.K. Card. The perspective wall: detail and context smoothly integrated. In
Conf. Human Factors and Computing Systems, pages 173 –

8
Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

