Overcoming some of the issues in maintaining large urban area 3D models via a
web browser
1

John Counsell1, Steve Smith1, Andrew Richman2
University of the West of England, Bristol, 2The Environment Agency for England and Wales.
{John.Counsell@uwe.ac.uk, [Steve Smith] gostudio@btinternet.com,
andrew.richman@environment-agency.gov.uk}
Abstract

This paper discusses recent work, in the VEPs Interreg
project, that has been examining how to optimise
operator based digital 3D modelling, of urban and rural
environments, where the increasing availability of highly
accurate LiDAR scanning offers appropriate remote
sensed data. From this data bare earth digital terrain
models (DTMs) can be processed semi-automatically,
then draped with aerial imagery. Although both the
resulting DTMs and geo-referenced aerial photography
are of increasing detail and availability, buildings and
similar structures are difficult to automatically extract at
a level of detail that provides a credible sense of
presence at street level. The LiDAR data itself is
currently not captured often or extensively enough or at
a sufficient level of detail that it could be relied on to
keep VR analogues of real places up to date through an
automated process alone, without additional modelling.
Significant costs in modelling and updating urban
settings to convey presence thus remain, be it through a
combination of photogrammetry, CAD drawings and
manual editing. It is argued that these costs are likely to
limit large area 3D modelling to either broad brush
overviews (as provided by Google Earth) or to credible
presence models in those few locations where the high
cost is justifiable, but in which, once the primary
purpose of the model has been served, acceptance of the
continuing cost of maintenance to reflect change is
unlikely. Where updating of high presence models does
happen this paper puts forward the view that currently,
due to cost, it is likely to be piecemeal and take place
over a long period of time. The paper describes one
approach to reducing these costs by empowering
heterogeneous groups of people to share the tasks of
digitising and updating buildings that convey a credible
sense of presence.

1. Introduction
This paper discusses recent work in the VEPs
Interreg project [1] that has been examining how to
optimise operator based digital 3D modelling of urban
and rural environments, where the increasing availability
of highly accurate Light Detection and Ranging

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

(LiDAR) laser based scanning offers appropriate remote
sensed data. The increasing availability of highly
accurate LiDAR data (the basis for the VEPs project
described later) offers opportunities to automate the
process. The automation process was described in
Richman et al 2005 ‘Remote Sensing, LIDAR,
automated data capture and the VEPS project’ [2]. The
extent of this automation depends on the precision of the
intervals at which the data is captured. Much of the data
can both effectively produce accurate and useful bare
earth digital terrain models and also provide accurate
height information for the extrusion of simple building
block models (where the building outline may be
determined from a variety of data sources). As yet
however it is not high enough resolution to effectively
identify and extract immediately recognizable building
form that conveys a credible sense of presence at street
level, including the roof profile(s) as silhouetted against
the sky. A credible sense of presence in this context is
measured by whether such a scene at street level would
be readily recognized by the majority of users, since this
is the viewpoint from which many planning based visual
impact judgements are to be made.
This poses the question as to what can be done in the
meantime to make best use of the bare earth DTMs and
simple building block models that are increasingly
available. the goal is to simplify the process and reduce
the costs of creating and updating large area urban and
rural modelling that conveys a credible sense of presence
and is acceptably up to date. While the background
buildings may still usefully be automatically extruded up
as blocks, it is held that the foreground buildings will
require more detail than much of the available data can
currently provide for automation. Foreground buildings
that lack relief, windows, doors, porches, gutters,
downpipes and other detail are not usually found to
convey credible presence, although this can be achieved
by applied bitmaps rather than necessarily through
modelling or scanning.
Operator engagement in the process at present
appears unavoidable. Commercial companies such as
Bluesky in the UK offer to create ‘"real world" models
of entire cities’ [3], however this requires expert
operators accustomed to photo-grammetry practice. This
paper examines a possible approach to reducing that

expertise and hence the cost. De-skilling the task until it
can be readily achieved by members of the public is in
fact one of the primary goals of the VEPs project.

2. Conventional large area Urban Models
With conventional physical or even digital large area
urban models the costs of creation are high. Traditional
architectural physical models can cost several hundred
thousand pounds to create depending on their level of
detail. The resources required to keep them up to date are
commensurate. This has been the basis for justifying the
cost of digital models. Although cheaper, the as existing
and as proposed Tower of London 3ds Max based
Models created at UWE, Bristol in 1996 cost almost one
hundred thousand pounds. Arguably a significant
proportion of the cost was because the data available was
not in suitable form for such modelling [4]. However few
organisations have the good fortune to be able to gain
feed back from a previous modelling process to respecify the nature and the content of subsequent survey
data to optimise a planned large urban area 3D modelling
process. In addition to keep such a model, in this case
containing some 90 complex building forms, up to date
in conventional CAD or 3D modelling programmes
requires substantial resources and expert knowledge and
thus is as daunting as the task of keeping a similar
physical relief model up to date.
Subsequent work [5] at UWE, Bristol, from 1997 to
2003, focused on large area urban modelling using
conventional CAD and GIS techniques to generate and
update the models. From this it became swiftly apparent
that continued management of the model to keep it up to
date as an accurate reflection of changes on the ground
was a major data management problem. Piecing in new
CAD models received from architectural practices to
visualise them in context as part of the planning
negotiation process often took staff at Bristol City
several days of work for each instance. Because the
Bristol 3ds Max based model was so complex and so
proprietary the Bristol City staff operated as a specialist
visualisation bureau service. Therefore it was argued that
the cost of keeping CAD based large area urban models
up to date and in continued use justified attempting to
establish a greater breadth of applications for the same
model to both justify and to spread the costs more
widely, and/or a broadening of access to the model so
that such wider uses might occur spontaneously.
It was suggested that broader access requires lower
access costs for interaction and updating with the ease of
collaboration and distribution offered by the Web. The
work then went on to review the potential for
collaborative group-work maintenance of such models
and suggested techniques for data entry, data
management and generation of appropriate levels of
detail models from a single overall spatial database. It
was suggested that one means of reducing the total cost
of use of such models was to broaden their appeal and
thus spread the cost of initial creation and subsequent
amendment and use across a wider range of applications.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Mitchell [6] defined designing a building or
development as fundamentally a collaborative,
interdisciplinary, geographically distributed multimedia
activity. It was suggested that when this collaborative
digital multimedia activity is integrated and disseminated
on-line, and encompasses a large enough urban area, it
could provide the context and constraints for future
development and serve to inform and engage the public.
Similarly Smith [7] argued for a broader VR (Virtual
Reality) across the Web based involvement in this
modelling and planning activity so that it 'should be both
usable and attractive to the public, the planner, the
private sector and the political representatives involved
in the planning process. A system should offer
collaborative group interaction, with groups deciding and
acting together to plan an environment for the good of
the whole'. These considerations led staff at UWE,
Bristol to start afresh from the original source data, to
explore the use of a collaborative spatial database (GIS)
based approach within which to integrate models and
interventions from various sources and from which to
generate an overall navigable interactive whole. This
process in due course led to the work currently being
undertaken by UWE, Bristol within the VEPs project.

3. VEPS
VEPs, the ‘Virtual Environmental Planning system’,
is an Interreg IIIB funded European project focused on
the North West Europe region, commenced in 2005 it
runs until December 2007. The project brings together
partners from the UK, Germany and France, with skills
in geographic visualisation and spatial planning. VEPs
has received additional support from the UK government
as a potential contribution to its e-Planning programme.
VEPs aims to develop a common and transferable web
based visualisation system that enables citizens to view,
analyse, interact with and respond to proposed changes,
to collaborate and comment together and pose and test
their own alternative solutions. To increase participation
it is considered essential that it be free at the point of use,
so it will make use of the web and open source tools. The
project is beginning to test this system in different
demonstration case studies. The project is thus expected
to improve future public participation procedures on
planning strategies and development proposals by
making planning information more accessible and easier
to understand for the general public, while at the same
time facilitating the decision-making structures of
planning authorities. The current approach is to use an
interactive three-dimensional VR visualisation intended
to enable the viewer to grasp highly complex information
without the need for training, because users can see and
experience both the visual impacts of the planned
development and judge the environmental impact in
associated (GIS based) simulations. A process of
iterative testing by user groups and iterative refinement
is being undertaken to ensure that the final outcome
meets user needs, based on the Experience and

Application Research (EAR) Methodology advocated by
ISTAG. [8]

4. Opportunities and limitations of LiDAR
The most widespread current use of LiDAR in
England and Wales) is undertaken by the Environment
Agency primarily for flood analysis. In practice it has
been found that such analysis is effective currently based
on a grid at 2m centres, so the majority of this LiDAR
coverage is captured and stored at this level of detail.
Data is available for limited areas, such as London, at
significantly higher resolutions (upto 0.25m grid
spacing). The Intermap Nextmap dataset which provides
a complete coverage of the UK captured using SAR
(Radar) technology is in a 5m grid.
Commercial LiDAR data has been captured for
London at higher levels of detail. For example Infoterra
has used LiDAR to capture “a comprehensive data set at
1m horizontal intervals with a vertical accuracy of +/-15
cm” in London [9]. GeoInformation Group states that it
now has a highly detailed surface model for the entire
160 square kilometre area of Central London that has
been captured using LiDAR “a surface model of the
ground at 2m horizontal intervals with vertical
measurement accuracy better than +/- 15 cm” [10]. There
are thus clearly commercial drivers for obtaining (and
presumably in due course updating the resolution of)
data for London that may not apply consistently
elsewhere, and will probably not apply in the near future
to urban fringe and rural areas.
Using the 5m grid UK coverage or at the more
widely available LiDAR based 2m grid levels of detail it
is difficult to identify and extract an accurate outline of a
building. It is equally uncertain that 3 coplanar points
will fall within the pitch of a roof, so that if an outline of
the roof plane were available the roof pitch could be
automatically established. It is almost certain that
chimneys, dormers and other fine detail that is so
significant in creating credible urban skylines will only
be captured intermittently. Although potentially with the
instruments and aircraft positioning already available the
data can in principle be captured at a level of detail of
25cm in the X and Y axes and 15cm in Z. At this level
of detail the full morphology of buildings can be
captured, and updated to detect and to show change as
often as the scanning takes place. However it will take a
long time or a significant shift in the allocation of
resources for data at this level of detail to become a
comprehensive coverage for the UK.. Thus where
updating of high presence models does happen this paper
puts forward the view that due to cost it is often likely to
be piecemeal, and to take place over a long period,
during which
software, bandwidth, standards and
available detail may change significantly.

4.1 LiDAR DTMs in fusion with other data
Companies such as GetMapping [11] provide 25cm
resolution geo-referenced aerial photography for the UK,

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

and for certain cities these are also available at 12.5cm
resolution. An increasing number of commercial
software tools enable both aerial and satellite imagery
and also vector building ‘footprint’, road and boundary
data to be draped onto DTMs. From oblique aerial
viewpoints these are useful and informative, and
potentially a credible substitute for some uses of
conventional mapping. However a number of fairly
skilled users of similar data from Google Earth (where
the DTM is currently coarse compared to those described
above – perhaps a 58m grid) have commented [12] how
dissatisfied they are with the loss of apparent building
form (largely provided by cast shadows in the aerial
imagery) as they rotate the model closer to street level
viewpoints. Nevertheless a combination of aerial
imagery, (in conjunction with building footprints from
mapping or survey) and rectified photos of building
elevations could provide the basis for forming street
scenes with a similar level of credible presence to those
‘"real world" models of entire cities’ currently provided
by skilled operators.
This places increasing importance on developing an
‘urban data fusion’ of different data and media types that
can then interchangeably support an integrated 3D urban
model. ‘Data, once collected, is often not in a form
usable outside the organization and is also often not
easily found when others are searching for data. There is
no “Google for data” yet.....due to... the magnitude of the
problem of a fully interoperable geospatial data
infrastructure.’[13] Emphasis needs to be placed on
standards such as those discussed in our paper ‘Remote
Sensing, LIDAR, automated data capture and the VEPS
project’ referred to above. 3D models of proposed
changes then need to comply with these standards as
they emerge.

5. Free at the point of use
The VEPs project initial workshops identified
among other requirements that effective collaborative
use of such a system for public participation requires
both the system and the information to be free at the
point of use. To this end the project partners are trying to
achieve appropriate functionality using non-proprietary
and open source software in so far as is practicable, in
order to meet this goal. This does not preclude the use of
proprietary software that can be made free at the point of
use by large groups of the public. Also although the
project is seeking to provide appropriate information to
the public without ‘dumbing it down’ it is not the goal of
the project to enable unhindered copying of data and its
use for any purpose desired.
In this light a distinction can be made between
proprietary data and free access. The generation of DTM
models from LiDAR still requires specialist expertise to
process and so may remain proprietary. Thus the
workflow to produce these base models is not intended
currently to be something that the public engage in.
Similarly it is seen as a goal that in so far as possible the
broad context of buildings trees and other landscape in

an area surrounding the neighbourhood of concern will
be generated from LiDAR or similar data by operator
assisted or in due course complete automation, and may
remain proprietary. Similarly many proposals for change
may emanate from design consultancies such as
Architects, and be produced using specialist CAD
software. However for free delivery at the point of use
the partners have been exploring existing 3D web
browser standards such as VRML and X3D [14], and
emerging urban data standards such as CityGML[15] and
IFCs[16]. Translation is necessary in both respects but
need not be part of the public workflow.
However the project also has the goal of enabling
members of the public to ‘what-if’ and to explore for
themselves. This is seen as a requirement that simple and
easy to use modelling tools should be available that
encourage the public to explore alternatives within a
wider context model that as defined above may remain
proprietary. Within the neighbourhood the public should
be free to amend the 3D form, and this entails the ability
to delete part or the entire local context model and
replace it with alternatives. Work is currently proceeding
to address this with the provision of tools that distinguish
between zoned modelling which is explorable but not
amendable and zones that are ‘unlocked’ for exploration
and what if amendment.

6. Web tools for digitisation from imagery
Software companies such as Skyline produce
proprietry software tools that integrate DTM data with
draped aerial imagery and incorporate vector mapping.
Using these tools they can swiftly generate block
extrusion models of large urban areas. However they
have also implemented tools that allow digitisation
through a proprietary plug-in that can be web based.
Using their digitisation tool operators trace the outline of
the eaves level of a building, and then extrude it down to
meet the visible ground plane in an oblique aerial image.
The software then rapidly ‘cookie-cuts’ and orthocorrects the aerial image to extract the elevational bitmap
and apply it to the geometry. In addition they have a
further extension to the software that allows operators to
carry out these functions in the context of point cloud
data. “The Point Cloud extension allows you to add and
edit a pre-processed point cloud model at any point in the
3D Terrain. These models are created from a list of
points in a 3D area that are collected by various 3D
scanners.” Skyline Software Systems Inc. 2006 [17].
These tools are optimized to serving an interactive and
potentially web based task of creating 3D modelling of
what exists (or existed - if data of appropriate quality is
available). Nevertheless in range and scope of
functionality they show what might be used in a
collaborative manner by a group to ease the task of
maintaining and updating a large area urban model.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

6.1 Web tools for new modelling within VEPs
In contrast the VEPs project is focused on easing the
task of creating and comparing 3D modelling of what
does not exist, within an existing context. Because of this
distinction tools are needed that allow modelling to be
created in the context of the varying height of the DTM.
While it is useful to be able to trace round existing aerial
imagery and even to elevate modelling with bitmaps, this
is not enough to meet the need. It is important to be able
to freely if simply model in context using as referents the
shape of the terrain and the form of adjacent buildings
structure and landscape to be retained. These modelling
tools should ideally be open source and deploy VRML,
X3D and similar emerging open standards. These
standards require plug-ins or extensions to current web
browsers to operate at present. In examining the
available plug-ins those for VRML have been available
the longest and are the most developed. Digitisation of
new modelling in context requires a particular scripting
behaviour of VRML, the touch sensor. This is now
described in X3D as the "PointingDeviceSensor"
component, of which the touch sensor is a particular
‘node’. “Pointing-device sensors detect user pointing
events such as the user clicking on a piece of geometry
(i.e., TouchSensor)…. As the user moves the bearing
over the TouchSensor node's geometry, the point of
intersection (if any) between the bearing and the
geometry is determined…. hitPoint_changed events
contain the 3D point on the surface of the underlying
geometry, given in the TouchSensor node's coordinate
system.”[18] Although a number of current and
emerging browser plug-ins provide either the VRML or
X3D functionality all of those tested with the exception
of the Cortona VRML plug-in lacked sufficient precision
to calculate the accurate location of the cursor in relation
to the existing contextual geometry. Thus currently only
the Cortona plug-in has been found to adequately enable
accurate digitisation for interactive modelling (at VRML
97 single-bit precision.1) The functionality for the ‘whatif’ modelling toolset is currently written therefore using
the Cortona Software Development Kit.
This current 3D e-Planner prototype toolset is
undergoing user evaluation following the EAR
methodology. At present it consists of a DTM with
draped aerial imagery and vector mapping. It has the
capacity to provide two zones, an inner neighbourhood
where users can interact and model, and an outer
contextual zone that is interactively navigable but
‘locked’. Modelling created by one user can be shared
with another across the web and viewed in context. The
recipient can save the modelling of another and modify
and then upload it.
1

“Precision - VRML97 provides only single-precision floating
point values. This is insufficient to represent data on a
planetary scale down to around 10 m resolution or beyond.
GeoVRML provides solutions to extend this precision and
enable sub-millimeter positional accuracies.”
http://www.geovrml.org/download/1.0/geovrml1_0.pdf

The prototype VEPs ePlanner interface
The Castle is an imported CAD model, other
buildings are digitised in the scene

elevations, which may in fact prove more effective at
conveying the ‘uncertainty’ of the proposal and thus
encouraging the exploration of alternatives and a free
debate.
A library of CAD derived VRML components
(including complete buildings with bitmap surfaces and
groups of buildings as zip files) is in development that
can be positioned in the scene, and these can currently be
scaled, moved in any axis, and rotated. Consequently
proposed buildings derived from CAD and provided by
design consultancies or developers can be uploaded and
viewed in the same context.
Because the DTM has draped imagery the users can
in principle digitise 3D building form from the footprint
on the aerial photograph, but cookie cutting elevations is
not a primary focus of these tools. Some exploration has
also taken place of how best to show point cloud data in
the context of the model for use in more accurately
visually checking or digitising heights, but this feature
has yet to be implemented.

Within the interactive modelling zone (which can be
an entire neighbourhood or scene) users can both digitise
around the aerial imagery or digitise new buildings in
context. Tools have been created to enable users to elect
to share their modelling with others. Users, whether the
originator or other members of the public with whom the
originator has shared the modelling, can interactively
modify the elevational height of a selected building and
adjust the slope or form of its roof, but not yet move the
building or adjust its plan form (this is in development).

Selected building is transparent to the right

Digitising new buildings over the imagery
Users can adjust the colour or transparency of a
selected building, change them to wireline, or add
rectified images (perhaps taken by digital camera or
camera-phone) to a single selected elevation or all
elevations. There is perhaps a presumption therefore that
photos of existing and perhaps nearby buildings will
provide the template elevations for the proposed. It is
suggested here that often what is desired by the public is
that new buildings should reflect their neighbours, and
that this is a presumption implicitly reinforced in the
zoned 3D masterplanning that takes place, particularly in
France and Germany. However this does not preclude
the use of scanned or photographed sketch drawings for

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Within the limitations of the web browser and plugin (cast shadows are not readily achievable in VRML for
example2) it is possible to create scenes that offer a high
sense of presence as defined at the start of this paper.
The currently developed tools for web based digitisation
are not nearly as flexible as those in CAD, so some
building forms are not easy to achieve. There is also a
need for a compromise between simplicity and ease of
use and the provision of more powerful but more
complex features. However open source 3D CAD
modelling tools exist[19] and effort will be made during
the life of this project to look at how to define an
interface for the ready integration of data from such
sources. There are also precedents for more sophisticated
modelling using web browsers. These include the Virtual
2

In the development of X3D “we are nearing the Grail of
absolutely realistic 3D simulation, although we are not yet able
to have things such as a shadow following a character” Richard
Trigaux of http://www.shedrupling.org in web3d.org message
board discussion June 8th 2004.
http://www.web3d.org/message_boards/viewtopic.php?t=24&

Context doctoral thesis work of M.C Stellingwerff [20]
and VR Sketchpad by Ellen Yi-Luen Do [21]. These will
be explored to determine the extent to which unskilled
users can readily learn and adopt the techniques that they
have developed.

Conclusion
This paper has described one approach to reducing
the cost of large area urban modelling by empowering
heterogeneous groups of people to share the tasks of
digitising and updating buildings that convey a credible
sense of presence. It recognises the increasing
availability of detailed 3D bare earth terrain models,
aerial photography and the increasing availability of
simple building block data sets. It seeks to find remedies
through a public participative process in creating and
updating local detailed building data sets, since these
often do not exist where they are needed for public
participative debate on planning proposals. The
generation of 3D urban models containing such detailed
building street scenes currently involves high production
costs, which limit their use and availability for change
updates. The VEPs project aims to provide tools that
allow citizens to become more involved in the planning
process. It is suggested that one way of achieving this
increased participation is by empowering citizens to take
responsibility for the editing and updating of their own
neighbourhoods in 3D form and proposing their own
“what if” scenarios for their future development.

Acknowledgements
The project work presented in this paper is cofinanced Through the INTERREG IIIB North West
Europe
programme.

References
[1] www.veps3d.org Virtual Environmental Planning system
,funded Dec 2004 to 2007, by INTERREG IIIB NWE-ENO (a
Community Initiative Programme funded by the European
Regional Development Fund www.nweurope.org )
[2] Richman, A. Hamilton, A. Arayici, Y. Counsell, J.
Tkhelidze, B. (2005) ‘Remote Sensing, LIDAR, automated
data capture and the VEPS project’ in proceedings of IV05 9th
Intl Conference on Information Visualisation London, edited
by Banissi et al, published by the IEEE Computer Soc. Los
Alamitos California.
[3] http://www.bluesky-world.com/buildingmodels.html
[4] Counsell, J. Worthing, D. (1999) ‘Issues arising from
Computer Based Recording of Heritage Sites ', Vol 17, No 4.
Structural Survey Journal, 1999.pp 200-211.
[5] Counsell, J. (2000) ‘The management and visualisation of
3-dimensional models using a spatial database’ in The
International Journal of IT in Architecture, Engineering and
Construction (IT-AEC) - formerly Computer-Integrated Design
& construction, CIDAC - Special Issue on Visualisation in

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Architecture, Engineering and Construction - Volume 2 Issue 4
Nov 2000. pp 225-235.
[6] Mitchell, W.J. (1995) 'Virtual Design Studio', ed
Wojtowicz, J. Published by Hong Kong University Press.
[7] Smith, A. (1998) 'Metaworlds and Virtual Space - Towards
the Collaborative Virtual Design Studio' in Proceedings of the
International Journal of Design Computing DCNET'98, on-line
at www.arch.usyd.edu.au/kcdc/journal/vol1/dcnet/
[8] ISTAG Report on Experience and Application Research
“Involving Users in the Development of Ambient Intelligence”
http://www.cordis.lu/ist/istag.htm
[9] www.infoterra.co.uk/press/London Heights.doc press
release 3rd November 2005
[10] Geoinformation Group City Heights Lidar based
modelling press release of April 2006.
http://spatialnews.geocomm.com/dailynews/2006/apr/05/news2
.html
[11] http://www2.getmapping.com/home.asp
[12] spontaneous comments offered by a group of final year
students urged to use Google Earth as a means of exploring
remote locations in which to site design project work at UWE.
[13] earth observation magazine Home > Archives > 2004 >
October Geotechnology And Society - Geotechnology for Civil
society by Allan Doyle http://www.eogeo.org/
[14] www.web3d.org/x3d/
[15] http://www.citygml.org/
[16] http://www.iai-international.org/index.html
[17] Skyline Terrabuilder and Terraexplorer.
http://www.skylinesoft.com/corporate/technology/technology_
TerraExplorer-Extensions.asp
[18] The PointingDeviceSensor is defined in the emerging
standard for X3D at
http://www.web3d.org/x3d/specifications/ISO-IEC-19775X3DAbstractSpecification_+_Amendment1_to_Part1/Part01/c
omponents/pointingsensor.html
[19] Blender is open source software for 3D modeling,
animation, rendering, post-production, interactive creation and
playback. Available for all major operating systems under the
GNU General Public License.
http://www.blender3d.org/cms/Home.2.0.html
The Irrlicht Engine is a cross-platform high performance
realtime 3D engine written in C++. It is a powerful high level
API for creating complete 3D and 2D applications like games
or scientific visualizations. engine is licensed under the zlib
licence. http://irrlicht.sourceforge.net/
[20] Stellingwerff M.C. (2005) Virtual Context - investigating
the characteristics and opportunities of digital visualisation
media for situated approaches to architectural design in an
urban environment. Doctoral Thesis at Technische Universiteit
Eindhoven on line at
http://www.bk.tudelft.nl/users/stelling/internet/thesis/stellingwe
rff_thesis.pdf
[21] Yi-Luen Do, E. ‘VR Sketchpad - Create Instant 3D
Worlds by Sketching on a Transparent Window’ in
CAAD Futures 2001, Bauke de Vries, Jos P. van Leeuwen,
Henri H. Achten (eds). July, 2001, Eindhoven, the Netherlands,
Kluwer Academic Publishers
http://depts.washington.edu/dmachine/PAPER/CF01V/vrsk.ht
ml

