Is it Now Time to Establish Visualization Science as a Scientific Discipline?
Remo Burkhard
ETH Zurich, burkhard@arch.ethz.ch

Abstract
It is now time to establish Visualization Science as a
scientific discipline. The proposed deadline to achieve this
is 2010. Today, research areas in visualization are
isolated. What is missing is the big picture and mutual
agendas. To establish Visualization Science as a discipline,
researchers need to agree on the origins and areas of
visualization research; then on the long-term (e.g., 2020)
research goals. The benefit of an established discipline is
more impact, both in teaching (curricula) and research
(e.g., Framework Programmes of the European Union).
This article aims to start the discussion on a synthesis
through extended definitions and a big picture. It provides
an example for a sharp and extended definition of a field
that today is vaguely defined: Information Architecture.
Finally, it proposes a draft of the big picture of the fields,
the Visualization Science Fingerprint, thus a step towards
an established Visualization Science.

1. Introduction: Why does Visualization
Science not exist yet?
Visual representations help for different tasks. Examples
are the analysis and exploration of information, or the
communication of knowledge to different stakeholders.
Therefore researchers are investigating in many and
different fields associated with visualization. They have
diverse backgrounds, such as psychology, computer
science, architecture, design, art or philosophy. However, a
general discipline called Visualization Science is not
existing. Why? Because a big picture, shared frameworks,
models, definitions, and goals are missing. The reasons for
this situation are manifold: First, the research fields are
often specialized and isolated. And only few researchers
investigate the big picture, syntheses, and synergies.
Second, the specialized fields are often competing against
each other rather than learning from each other. Third,
innovation happens both in universities and the industry.
The borders and responsibilities between research and
practice are close and the roles are not clearly defined. The
consequence are sometimes misunderstanding, mistrust,
and destructive competition where some practitioners
believe they are scientists and vice versa. This leads to a

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

battle over new terms, for similar or identical research
topics. This can be fruitful to establish new discussions
among researchers, but the problem of this semantic
explosion is that non-visualization experts, such as a
manager, get confused.
If for example a Swiss manager has accepted that for the
communication of his strategy PowerPoint and Excel could
be complemented with other formats she will be confronted
with questions such as: Should I engage a researcher from
the ETH Zurich or a practitioner from the Swiss Creativity
Industry? Should I engage someone in the area Knowledge
Visualization, Interaction Design, Information Design,
Information Visualization, Graphic Design, Storytelling,
Infoaestethics, Web design, Virtual Reality, or Information
Architecture? If she decides to ask one proponent about the
differences of these fields the confusion might get even
bigger, because the researchers themselves can not clearly
answer what the differences are and sometimes claim to be
the one and only expert for all functions, be it interactive
exploration, visual perception, visual design, or
interfunctional communication. The result of this confusion
is that she will stick to her bar charts and PowerPoint.
If we want to overcome this situation, we should start to
clean up and elaborate a clearly defined scientific discipline
and call it Visualization Science.
The main benefit of establishing a Visualization Science
is that non-visualization experts can learn to understand the
depth of the field by understanding the big picture, which
until today has not happened. The results are more attention
and a better understanding on the individual potentials. The
consequences for researchers and visualization experts are
more research funds and more contracts for visualization
companies. The author believes that it is the job of the
researcher to explain what the benefits of using individual
visualization techniques are. Just developing methods and
tools is not enough. But to explain the benefits we need to
be able to also explain the big picture of the visualization
fields.
A further benefit of an established discipline is more
impact, in teaching and research. Examples for benefits in
teaching are: The theoretical foundation allows to establish
visual basics in the primary school, the overview of the
field inspires teachers to use different visualization

techniques as didactic elements in the teaching of all
disciplines and sciences, an established discipline leads to
bachelor and master studies in visualization science
(similar to chemistry or architecture) and to visualization
science faculties, new post-graduate programms such as a
master of visualization (similar to an MBA program).
Examples for benefits in research are: More research funds
(e.g., in national research programmes or the Framework
Programmes of the European Union), more publicity and
reputation for visualization research, thus a broader
acceptance, and the possibility to get Nobel prizes in
visualization science.
The first step towards Visualization Science is a
semantic implosion, that means to identify important fields
and terms and cluster them. The second step is to elaborate
sharp and extended definitions of the key research fields.
Sharp, because the definitions are often vague. Extended,
because one sentence long definitions are too short and
only statements about research goals, origins, application
areas, and concise descriptions of the differences to related
fields clarify whether the field is new or just a scientific
marketing term. Such extended definitions would allow to
create syntheses, which serve as foundation for overviews
and a big picture of the current and past visualization
research. This article starts the discussion by providing an
example for a sharp and extended definition: Information
Architecture. Thus an example of a field that currently is
only vaguely defined. Finally, it proposes a draft for the
structure of the missing big picture, the Visualization
Science Fingerprint.
Next, related work structuring visual representations is
being discussed.

2. Related Literature: The Big Picture is Still
missing
This section presents an overview of classifications of
visual representations.
Functional classifications focus on the intended use of
visual representations. Keller and Keller [11] and Bowman
[2] communicate example-based visual solutions. Keller
and Keller’s investigations are conducted in the domain of
scientific visualization; Bowman’s analysis is performed in
the domain of non-interactive, static visual communication.
Further examples are Harris [10] and Nielson et al. [14].
Structural classifications focus on the form rather than
on its content; proponents are Bertin [1], Rankin [15], and
Lohse et al. [12]. Bertin [1] developed a semiology of
graphic representation methods and was among the first to
systemize visual strategies to apply visual representations
to reduce complexity and improve the transfer of
knowledge. Bertin [1] has suggested that there are two
forms of data: data values (entities) and data structures
(relations). Rankin [15] presents a classification of graph
types, and distinguishes major categories such as:

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

rectilinear cartesian coordinate graphs, polar coordinate
graphs, bar graphs, line graphs, matrix diagrams, tri-linear
charts, response surface, topographic charts, and
conversion scales. Lohse et al. [12] focus on how people
classify
visual
representations
into
meaningful,
hierarchically structured categories. In contrast to previous
classifications, their work is based on experimental data
rather than on the author's intuition to classify visual
representations. In an empirical experiment, a group of 16
individuals tested visual similarities among sixty different
visual representations. Ten categories were introduced to
describe qualities of these representations: (1) Spatial/nonspatial, (2) Non-temporal/temporal, (3) Hard to
understand/easy to understand, (4) Concrete/abstract, (5)
Continuous/discrete, (6) Attractive/unattractive, (7)
Emphasizes
the
whole/emphasizes
parts,
(8)
Nonnumeric/numeric, (9) Static structure/dynamic process,
(10) Conveys a lot of information/conveys little
information. Users were asked to sort these 60 visual
representations into groups of similar items. As a result,
eleven categories of visual representations emerged. These
are graphs, tables, graphical tables, time charts, networks,
structure diagrams, process diagrams, maps, cartograms,
icons, and pictures.
Further taxonomies were developed by proponents
related to Information Visualization. Their main interest is
to classify visualization methods in the field of information
visualization: Sheiderman [17] proposes a task by data type
taxonomy of information visualization with seven data
types (one-, two-, three-dimensional data, temporal and
multi-dimensional data, tree and network data) and seven
tasks (overview, zoom, filter, details-on-demand, relate,
history, and extracts). Card et al. [6] constructed a dataoriented taxonomy for information visualization
techniques, which is based on Card and MacKinlay [5].
This taxonomy divides the field of visualization into
several subcategories: Scientific Visualization, GIS, Multidimensional Plots, Multi-dimensional Tables, Information
Landscapes and Spaces, Node and Link, Trees, and Text
Transforms. Burkhard [4] analyzed the visualization types
architects use to transfer knowledge and proposed seven
visualization types: Sketch, Diagram, Image, Map, Object,
Interactive Visualization, Stories.
In conclusion, the taxonomies and classifications aim to
structure the variety of existing or novel visual
representations. But there is no systematic research that
structures the research areas in visualization. The big
picture is still missing.

3. To Do: Sharp and Extended Definitions of
the Visualization Fields
In order to create a big picture of disparate visualization
fields it is needed to elaborate sharp and extended
definitions of the relevant research fields. Based on a set of

sharp and extended definitions a synthesis can be
undertaken, which would serve as a building block to
visualization science. This section provides an example for
such a sharp and extended definition: Information
Architecture.

3.1 Definition of Information Architecture
Information Architecture designs structures to organize,
visualize, and access information in digital and physical
environments.
Design means inventing, implementing, and evaluating
value creating solutions; organize means creating
classifications and relations to make the information more
usable; visualize means using different visual
representation techniques for social, emotional, and
cognitive functions and includes simulation and exploration
techniques, access means to identify, retrieve, and filter
information to use the information; digital environments
mean information repositories and virtual environments,
physical environments mean a physical space or intelligent
object.

3.2 Origins of Information Architecture
Origins date back to the Library of Alexandria in the 3rd
century BC, where the librarian Callimachus created a
Catalogue for the effective organization and retrieval of
information. Similar to the Dewey Decimal System
invented by Melvil Dewey in the years around 1870. The
Dewey Decimal System provides a dynamic structure for
the organization of library collections and today is a widely
used library classification system, due to its logical and
consistent organization system. In 1975, Richard Saul
Wurman introduced the word "Information Architect" for a
person who structures information to make it more
understandable. In 1976 he organized a conference which
was called the "The Architecture of Information". Later he
wrote two important books [22, 23]. At a similar time,
certain web and interaction designers called themselves
information architects which led to various important books
such as the book by Rosenfeld and Morville [13] in 1998.
In 1999, Schmitt [16] used the term in a book on the basis
and future of Computer Aided Architecture Design
(CAAD). This book was a cornerstone for architects who
investigated virtual architecture, Information Architecture
or architectures for information. At leading universities
researchers began to design and model spatial structures
and connect them to data [8]. Therefore, Information
Architecture has three roots: Based on the concept of
Wurman, information architects concentrate more on
communication tasks and try to make information more
understandable, thus are close to information design. Based
on the concept of Rosenfeld and Morville information
architects create interactive websites, thus are close to
interaction design and human computer interaction

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

research. Based on the concept of Schmitt, information
architects create interactive spatial structures, thus are close
to CAAD, simulation, and basic research.

3.3 Application areas in Information Architecture
The main application areas of Information Architecture
are: (1) Design of value creating interfaces for information
systems. (2) Design of virtual environments, buildings,
structures. (3) Simulation of virtual and physical
environments, buildings, structures, processes, and
products for planning and evaluation purposes. (4)
Integration of information carriers such as displays in
products or buildings. (5) Management of all information
associated with a building or product. These application
areas can be extended.

3.4 Distinctions of Information Architecture to
Related Fields
To understand Information Architecture it is important
to distinguish it from related fields such as Information
Design, Information Visualization, and Knowledge
Visualization.
What is the difference between Information Architecture
and Information Design? Information design is the visual
design and presentation of information. Information
Architecture is the structuring of information, before the
actual information design. The works from Tufte [18-20]
and Bertin [1], cornerstones in the documentation of the
history of information design, both concentrate more on
printed media. In contrast, information architects focus
more on digital technologies [8, 13, 16, 21]. Tufte points to
the limitations of displaying complex information on digital
screens. As a consequence, Tufte offers only few strategies
and examples for exploiting novel digital technologies to
make information more clear. This is not solely but still the
territory of information architects and information
visualization researchers. A field that is very close to
Information Design is the vaguely defined field "Visual
Communication". The term is strongly associated with art
schools, and describes a variety of graphic design
challenges, such as the design of a corporate identity and
logo, the design of signs and signalizations (i.e. in an
airport), the graphic design and careful choice of
typographical elements, or the design of a novel visual
language for a poster series, marketing flyer, or the design
of a book. Thus it can be seen as a synonym for
information design.
What is the difference between Information Architecture
and Information Visualization? Information visualization is
defined as "... the use of computer-supported, interactive,
visual representations of abstract data to amplify
cognition" [6]. The goals seem close to the goals of
information architects. A starting point for the analysis of
differences is the researchers' educational background.

Information visualization researchers are mostly computer
scientists who specialize in visualization, computer
graphics, user interfaces, or human computer interaction.
Therefore information visualization applications are often
analytical, technical environments with filtering techniques,
often aiming at visualizing multivariate data. However,
sometimes they lack aesthetic and emotional qualities of
the user interface. Information architects like Wurman and
Schmitt have a background in architecture. They are more
concerned about the structuring of information and the
design of visual approaches as interface to digital
information systems. Information Architecture applications
are often appealing, spatial, interactive structures in time
used for exploratory tasks. However, often they lack
interactive filtering and data manipulation techniques.
Concluding, distinguishing the field can be achieved by
understanding the educational background, motivation, and
goals, such as visualizing data to improve analytical and
exploratory tasks versus structuring data to improve
understanding and access data.
What is the difference between Information Architecture
and Knowledge Visualization? The research field
Knowledge Visualization [3, 4, 7, 9] concentrates on the
use of complementary visualizations in knowledge-intense
processes, where knowledge has to be created or to be
reconstructed by each individual. Knowledge Visualization
research aims (1) to identify the related fields which
investigate visual methods for the transfer and creation of
knowledge, (2) to integrate their insights in theoretical
frameworks and models, (3) thus to serve as a mediator
among isolated fields, (4) to relate these insights to
predominant problems in different domains, such as in
business and science, (5) and finally to invent novel visual
approaches, where no suitable visualization technique
could have been identified. To do so, Knowledge
Visualization researchers also investigate in analysis, and
problem-solving methods and often have a background in
business consulting and psychology. Therefore Knowledge
Visualization investigates more on the use of visualization
techniques to facilitate communication in knowledgeintense process and to support the creation of new
knowledge by using visual techniques in knowledge-intense
processes and situations. It creates visualizations that
trigger people to explicate, share or develop knowledge in
teams. It creates visualizations for contents that constantly
change, such as a process or complex project. Information
Architecture in contrast, concentrates more on structuring
existing information or offering new visual interfaces to
access these existing information.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

4. Synthesis: Fields and Goals
The previous section presented an example for a sharp
and extended definition. Based on additional and similar
definitions it would be possible to create a synthesis. The
synthesis would allow to create the big picture.

4.1 Towards a Fingerprint of Visualization
Science
The visualization universe is very complex and multidimensional. It is unlikely that one diagram or taxonomy
can explain the universe in the whole depth. However, it
must be possible to illustrate the fields in a big picture that
gives the basic order to the field. A first attempt is Figure 1.
It presents a structure helping organize visualization
research fields. Each bar represents a cluster of similar
original research fields and a date where it approximately
started and is described with one or a set of terms that link
to the names of specific research fields. Each field is also
assessed to give a rough idea on whether the field is more
theoretical or more practical oriented, because this gets
often mixed up and leads to confusions. In a future
interactive version, clicking on a bar would link to the
sharp and extended definition, such as presented for
Information Architecture, and related resources. The goal
of Figure 1 is to discuss now in the community (1) whether
this approach should be elaborated, or (2) whether an other
approach should be chosen.

4.2 Towards a Long-Term Research Agenda in
Visualization Science
If researchers think that Figure 1 is helpful and should
be elaborated the discussion on the long-term research
goals should be initiated.
A potential roadmap to such research goals are a set of
questions, that need to be discussed together: (1) What is
new? (Originality Perspective) (2) When does it add value?
(Situation Perspective)? (3) Which "pain" does it solve and
why does it need to be solved? (Pain Perspective) (4) Who
is using the visualization and can they use it properly?
(User perspective) (5) How is it embedded in a process and
what are future consequences? (Process Perspective) (6)
What is the cost/benefit ratio? (Value perspective)
Answers to these six questions help to reveal the longterm value of the field and to identify similar fields.These
formalized goals would help to consolidate them to generic
research topics. Such a bottom-up definition approach is
challenging and time-consuming but might be a solution to
define the field and establish a Visualization Science that is
based on today's research and that agrees on future research
goals and directions.

Figure 1: Draft for the Visualization Science Fingerprint. The bars represent original clusters of research.
The shadow points to the research focus, that is either theoretical, practical, or a bridge.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

5. Conclusion
This article claims that it is now time to establish
Visualization Science as a scientific discipline to
overcome the situation (1) where research in
specialized fields is excellent but not connected and
coordinated to other fields and (2) where for the
average non-expert user visualization means Excel
diagrams, clip arts, and mind maps. The benefit of an
established discipline Visualization Science is more
impact, both in teaching, research, and business. To
establish Visualization Science as a discipline, it is
proposed that researchers need to agree on the origins
and areas of visualization research; then on the longterm (e.g., 2020) research goals. This article started the
discussion on a synthesis by providing a sharp and
extended definition of Information Architecture. It then
proposed a draft of the missing big picture, the
Visualization Science Fingerprint, as a step towards an
established Visualization Science.

References
[1] Bertin, J., Sémiologie Graphique, 2nd ed., Paris,
Gauthier-Villars, 1967.
[2] Bowman, W. J., Graphic communication, New
York, Wiley, 1968.
[3] Burkhard, R., Knowledge Visualization - The Use
of Complementary Visual Representations for the
Transfer of Knowledge. A Model, a Framework,
and Four New Approaches, ETH Zurich, Zurich,
PhD Thesis, 2005.
[4] Burkhard, R., "Towards a Framework and a
Model for Knowledge Visualization: Synergies
between Information and Knowledge
Visualization", in Knowledge and information
visualization: Searching for synergies. LNCS
3426, Tergan, S.-O. and Keller, T., Eds.,
Heidelberg Springer-Verlag, 2005.
[5] Card, S. K. and Mackinlay, J. D., "The Structure
of the Information Visualization Design Space",
in Proceedings of Proceedings of IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization (InfoVis
'97), Phoenix, Arizona, 1997, pp. 92-99 Color
Plate 125.
[6] Card, S. K., Mackinlay, J. D., and Shneiderman,
B., "Readings in Information Visualization: Using
Vision to think". San Francisco (CA): Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1999.
[7] Chen, C., Mapping Scientific Frontiers: The
Quest for Knowledge Visualization, London,
Springer, 2003.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[8] Engeli, M., bits and spaces: architecture and
computing for physical, virtual, hybrid realms,
Basel, Boston, Berlin, Birkhäuser, 2001.
[9] Eppler, M. and Burkhard, R., "Knowledge
Visualization", in Encyclopedia of Knowledge
Management, Schwartz, D., Ed. New York Idea
Press, 2005.
[10] Harris, Information graphics : a comprehensive
illustrated reference, Atlanta, GA, Management
Graphics, 1996.
[11] Keller, P. R. and Keller, M. M., Visual Cues.
Practical Data Visualization, Los Alamitos, CA,
IEEE-Computer Society Press, 1993.
[12] Lohse, G., Biolsi, K., Walker, N., and Luerer, H.,
"A Classification of Visual Representations."
Communications of the ACM, vol. 37, no. 12,
1994, pp. 36-49.
[13] Louis Rosenfeld, P. M., Information Architecture
for the World Wide Web, O'Reilly & Associates,
1998.
[14] Nielson, G. M., Hagen, H., and Muller, H.,
"Scientific Visualization: Overviews,
Methodologies, Techniques". Los Alamitos, CA:
IEEE Computer Society Press, 1997.
[15] Rankin, R. A., "A taxonomy of graph types",
Information Design Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, 1990,
pp. 147-159.
[16] Schmitt, G., Information Architecture; Basis and
Future of CAAD, Basel, Birkhäuser, 1999.
[17] Shneiderman, B., "The eyes have it: A task by
data type taxonomy for information
visualizations", in Proceedings of IEEE Visual
Languages, Los Alamos, CA, 1996, pp. 336-343.
[18] Tufte, E., The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information, Cheshire, Graphics Press, 1983.
[19] Tufte, E. R., Envisioning Information, Cheshire
(CT), Graphics Press, 1990.
[20] Tufte, E. R., Visual Explanations: Images and
Quantities, Evidence and Narrative, Cheshire
(CT), Graphics Press, 1997.
[21] Vande Moere, A., Mieusset, K. H., and Gross, M.,
"Visualizing Abstract Information using Motion
Properties of Data-Driven Particles", in
Proceedings of Conference on Visualization and
Data Analysis 2004, IS&T/SPIE Symposium on
Electronic Imaging 2004, San Jose (CA), 18-22
January 2004 2004.
[22] Wurman, R. S., Information Architects, Zurich,
Graphis Inc, 1996.
[23] Wurman, R. S., Information Anxiety 2, QUE
Books, 2000.

