Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Dynamic Design: Adaptive Real Time 3D Characters
Mark Chavez
Nanyang Technological University
School of Art, Design and Media
31 Nanyang Link, Level 4, Room 19, Singapore 637718
MChavez@NTU.edu.sg

Abstract
Creating design that relates to the dynamic nature of a
conversation is what this project explores. As a focus of intent the exploration pursues the interaction that people have
with reactive visually dynamic web based agents. This is in
an attempt to expand on the concept on Human Computer
Interfaces by creating design speciﬁc, emotive and responsive. The current focus is on a single real-time 3-D character with the design concept encompassing elements of conversational artiﬁcial intelligence.

1. Introduction
The challenge of creating artifacts that adapt according
to the interaction of the viewer, changing the emotive quality of the design as the human interacting with it changes
in detectable emotive response is the aim of this research.
Focusing on the interplay between the user, interaction and
design; and seeking to develop agents that have an innate
though artiﬁcial intelligence that is closely related to their
visual design is also primary. The result being the creation
of a contemporary set of artifacts in the form of virtual 3-D
characterizations that have an innate though simulated intelligence, an interactive ability that is contained by design
parameters and dynamic environments suited to the function of the artifact.
Extensive research has been explored involving Agency
Theory[4]. Research already undertaken has involved belief, desire and intention studies (BDI) involving human
characteristics in agents[3]. A formalism based on a
branching model of time, in which belief, desire and intention accessible worlds are themselves branching time
structures[1].
The purpose of this research is not to revise these Agency
Theories but to implement them into contemporary artifacts e.g. 3-D characters in dynamic environmental designs.
These spaces as such are virtual environments where the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

agent therein detects and interacts with the human viewing
it in a way that is emergent upon the interaction that the
human initiates. This is initially set up as a conversational
game.

2. Current Research
In the process of creating an intelligent real-time 3d artiﬁcial agent for live interface from interaction via the internet, certain problems focused around the agents physical design and personal affability become evident. These
problems persist along side other problems related to technology; in particular, using design to coaxing the user to
easily download and install the 3-D player software. Along
with these marketing and technical issues creating a dynamic method to handle the way that agent responds to the
content that is being discussed must be addressed.
The agent or virtual character must be able to respond
to the user in a way that suggests emotive response that is
copacetic with topics discussed in the conversation. The
agent must have a wide range of issues to available within
its database to draw upon during a conversation that are topical and current. Tackling problems like the characters ability to speak in multiple languages and cultural contexts also
must be addressed. This would make the characters, generally speaking more accessible. The primary goal is to make
agents that have a familiarity and charm that the visitor to
the site is readily accustomed to seeing.
In the current pipeline used for conversational agents the
design is limited to 3d characters (see Figure 1). In this existing structure the characters are accessible via the internet
and have interactions with people on a world wide basis.
The content of their discourse is recorded in a log ﬁle. The
ﬁle is then checked for content and topic relevance in relation to the characters design. These topics are determined
by interactions with the user. Changes are made to the both
and uploaded for further reﬁnement.

Figure 2. Virtual Girl

3. Goals and Methods

Figure 1. The Current Pipeline

2.1. Artiﬁcial Comedy
The content this phase of my work consists of the creation of detailed 3d characters that are interfaced with artiﬁcial intelligence and brought to life via animation synthesis techniques. Designed with current popular motifs in
mind, my focus is in the interplay between simulated and
real. Having created the character Nadia (see Figure 2) for
view on the internet in Windows XP based browsers (best if
viewed with Internet Explorer) the character has interacted
with tens of thousands of people in the past half year on the
site http://CLONE3D.com. The current display is a stand
alone version that does not require internet access. The
work attempts to deﬁne artiﬁcial personalities in cyberspace
contrasting them with the intelligence of the person viewing
the piece. Given the particular interaction the character will
provide information or chide the user with witticisms. The
content also includes prerecorded audio in the form of automatically lip-synced vocalizations.
In terms of design the agents forms are modeled in a
non-photo realistic stylized manner. By doing so the normal tendency to associate the characters/agents with bizarre
monstrous creations is avoided, e.g. The Uncanny Valley
Effect.[2] The lighting models are relatively naturalistic and
use standard lighting techniques. The behavioral models
are designed to emulate human gestures however they are
stylized to reﬂect animation conventions. The primary goal
in favoring this design style is to bring the audience into
friendly discourse with the characters.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Focusing on virtual characters, the interaction that a user
has with the agent is captured in the form of a dialog based
log ﬁle. This ﬁle is then analyzed and evaluated in terms of
content explored and requests made by the user. The results
are applied to the design and actions of the character. Developing the 3d characters spontaneous animated response
in a way that coincides with the given discourse.
Thus far having concentrated on creating a conversational 3D avatar based character the focus has been on setting up a character whose visual narrative ﬁts it’s cognitive
design. Here is a list of elements that have been addressed:
• An animation synthesis technique is in place allowing
the animation to be created from numerous cycles resulting in a non-repetitive look to the character’s motion
• Motion derived from key-framed animation and motion capture with the ability to blend the two, an animation systhesis technique is in place
• A straight forward automated lip-sync and TTS speech
methodology is working via analyzed audio ﬁles and
Sapi4.0 and Sapi5.0 as well as Sapi5.0 compliant TTS
technologies
• A method to extract, edit and organize a knowledge
base from existing AIML databases has been created
• Output to Mobile PC and Symbion mobile phone platforms is in place
• The ability to analyze data from the interaction of the
characters with clients via the world wide web is in
place

4. Future Directions
Living in Singapore and pursuing artistic academic research at technological university provides a unique opportunity to achieve dynamically adaptive intelligent artifacts
that are developed and fully functional. Although my current work focuses on characters, along side of this development I plan to devise methods to create imagery that reacts
to emotive changes in the human interacting undergoes during the interactivity session.
This kind of tool set will initially focus on background
sets and expanded character emotive reactions. Another
venue for this technology is in real world artifacts, bring
the virtual into the physical. These items could range from
toys to practical objects.
Ultimately it would be interesting to explore these techniques in non-objective, reactive spaces such as a multi
panel or immersive gallery setting that would involve expand from characters to abstractions of design and audio.
This would involve creating scene templates that ﬂavor the
experience as per the concept of the work. It would also involve methods to detect the human interfacing with it such
as motion and audio sensing.
Moving forward from this approach would be creating
methods to manipulate the human viewing the piece with
emotive suggestions and haptic interfaces; thereby suggesting a visual and auditory solution that would steer the content of the artwork to a place that would be interesting to
explore. In the case of conversational avatar based artiﬁcial
intelligence, with the focus on visual and cognitive design,
the following issues must be addressed:
• Methods to embed and exploit conversational and behavioral artiﬁcial intelligence in art objects and artistic
installations
• Dynamic design sensitive methods to handle the way
the agent responds to a given content suggesting a contextual emotive response within the art work, e.g. audio, color, geometric and volumetric changes
• A shared topic sensitive database that draws upon data
gathered by other agents in the ﬁeld
• The agent must have culturally sensitive communication skills
• Real-time, hyper-real and stylized design libraries;
how the agents appearance relates to their response and
query database
• Methods must be implemented that explore unique
venues and methods for gathering data through interaction

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 3. The Future Pipeline
• Detection techniques for identifying the human emotive response to the artwork

5. Conclusion
Because of certain market forces, the design inherent to
computer generated characters supports the repetition and
emulation of particular archetypes. These archetypes appeal to a spectrum of people that gravitate toward the hosting media, e.g. feature animated ﬁlms with redundant hero
types clad in motif speciﬁc design; video games with sexually potent male and female characters. These characters are mostly one dimensional. This project explores this
archetype and expands it by creating characters that though
are hyper real are also intelligent in a way that only a machine can be. This is part of the challenge of creating a noncommercial intelligent emotive character. I am also led to
consider as part of the artists craft, the visual and the technological design. Both are integral to the work. Where one
suggests the other must deliver. From any stimulus that a
character might receive from a Human Computer Interface a
visual must follow or precede, creating a kind of sociological dance that involves the human with the virtual character.
Therein lies the challenge of working with and expanding
this medium.

5.1. Theme: The HCI Experience
A computer generated pseudo/theatrical event, responsive to random nonverbal and verbal input with the result
being: A meta-narrative that dissolves the idea of intimate
discourse; providing a spontaneous ability to shift from
spectator to creator. Looking beyond questions such as
archetypal adventures and interactivity in real-time games
to a more immanent notion of discourse as gesture. This is

based on the formation of experience and subjectivity that
results as a reaction to interactivity of artiﬁcial intelligence
within a contextual ﬁeld.

5.2. Theuth the Inventor
Here Plato expresses a double sense of wonder and risk
in his story about the invention of reading-of writing and
literacy. In the Phaedrus, Socrates tells a story:
They say that there dwelt at Naucratis in
Egypt one of the old gods of that country, to
whom the bird they call Ibis was sacred, and the
name of the god himself was Theuth. Among his
inventions were number and calculation... and,
above all, writing... To [the king, Thamus] came
Theuth and exhibited his inventions... when it
came to writing, Theuth declared: There is an accomplishment, my lord the kind, which will improve both the wisdom and the memory of the
Egyptians. I have discovered a sure receipt for
memory and wisdom. Theuth, my paragon of inventors, replied the king, the discoverer of an art
is not the best judge of the good or harm which
will accrue to those who practice it... Those
who acquire [writing] will cease to exercise their
memory and become forgetful... What you have
discovered is a receipt for recollection, not for
memory... (Phaedrus, 95-96)

Acknowledgments
Special thanks goes to Richard Wallace and the ALICE Foundation’s A.L.I.C.E. (Artiﬁcial Linguistic Internet
Computer Entity) AIML software, an award-winning Open
Source Natural Language Artiﬁcial Intelligence chat robot.
1

Special thanks to Jack Wiley and Chris Shaw of Haptek
Inc. for use of their Generation 4 Player and Automated
Personalities Tool Set. 2 .

References
[1] E. A. Author, Emerson and Halpern. Sometimes’ and ‘not
never’ revisited: on branching time versus linear time temporal logic. Journal of the ACM, 1(33):151–178, 1986.
[2] M. MORI. The Buddha in the Robot. Tuttle Publishing, August 1982.
[3] A. S. Rao and M. P. Georgeff. A model-theoretic approach to
the veriﬁcation of situated reasoning systems. In Proceedings
of the Thirteenth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (IJCAI-93), pages 318–324, 1993.
1 http://www.alicebot.org/
2 http://www.haptek.com/

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

[4] N. Seel. Agent Theories and Architectures. PhD thesis, Surrey
University, Guildford, UK, 1989.

