An Investigation into the Subjective Experience of Icons: A Pilot Study
Martha G.R. Skogen
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU)
{martha.rice.skogen@ntnu.no}
Abstract
In electronic applications, the graphical user
interface (“GUI”) contains information on many levels of
visualization. The user interacts with the computer by
manipulation of graphic elements on the screen, the
smallest unit being the icon.
This paper describes a pilot test conducted with eight
students at the Norwegian University of Science and
Technology (NTNU). The hypothesis is that simpler, less
visually complicated icons will be understood (thus
picked up) first. The more immediately communicative an
icon is, the faster the response, hence, the lesser the
cognitive load. An unconventional test method was used:
students were asked to place user-interface icons from
daily computer-use (e.g. “HOME”) on a dual-axis
matrix, based on their immediate reaction. Through the
pilot test, I attempted to discover the relationship between
1) visual interpretation of icons and 2) the speed in which
they are understood.
Results showed that there is a consistency in how the
icons were interpreted visually. The results also
demonstrated a relationship between an icon’s design
and the order in which it was picked up. Future studies
will target these issues more specifically.

1. Introduction
1.1. Visual Interpretation of Icons
User-interface design has changed and grown
dramatically in the past 20 years. We know that it is
important to design interfaces well, and there are many
authors who help us do this [2, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16 etc.].
Only one factor of user-interface design, an icon’s small
size is deceiving — they are extremely important carriers
of symbolic information.
Of the authors mentioned above, it is Mullet who best
describes the general factors which need to be controlled
in icon design: visual syntax, and visual semantics, and
most important for this paper: an icon’s communicability
[12]. Some authors teach us how to design icons through
correct use of metaphor, color and conventions, but there
is little information on how to design the appropriate
amount of iconographic visual information. This is
especially true in today’s technology, which no longer

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

sets constraints on how we design icons. Early icon
design was extremely limited by the amount of visual
information that could be portrayed: screen resolutions
were low and colors were minimal. Today however, the
iconographic visualization can range from a few pixels
per design to photorealistic images. There are many
parameters of visual design which can be employed in
icon design (color, contrast, shading, perspective, degree
of detail, etc.), with varying levels of success. These
parameters can overlap and mix in confusing ways.
Despite the authors’ effort and best intentions, there
are still examples of users being confused by the iconic
imagery in user-interfaces. Although it can be
inconvenient for some user groups to misinterpret icons,
it is absolutely critical for other user groups. For example,
in highly-technical surgical applications, the margin for
error must be reduced to an absolute minimum. The
design of iconography for this user group must be strictly
controlled, with systematic user testing to support
fundamental design decisions.
This pilot study attempted to measure how different
people experience the same visual stimuli. I intended to
learn more about the relationship between what people
see when they view icons, how they interpret them, and
how quickly they understand them. I measured users’
subjective experience of computer-interface icons along
two axes. I hoped to learn about the appropriate amount
of visual information by asking the question: How much
visual information is not enough, and how much is too
much? In addition, I hoped to highlight the important
design parameters in which icons must be tested.
The hypothesis is that simpler, less complicated visual
information will be understood more quickly than
intricately detailed information. Multiple design
parameters means more complication. For my purposes,
less might not be more, but less might be easier. A subhypothesis is that icons which are highly detailed and/or
photorealistic might also be understood quickly, because
they come closer to a one-to-one visual representation.

1.2. Rate of Icon Comprehension
Interpretation of visual information takes time, and
how well icons communicate is a crucial factor in good
user-interface design. I am particularly interested in how
much time it takes to understand visual information,
particularly at the iconographic level.

An icon’s communicability — its success — is the
time it takes for the viewer to visually interpret and
understand the icon. The longer it takes to understand an
icon (or any other type of visual information), the
greater the confusion and heavier the cognitive load. But
how often is this iconographic communicability tested
by software designers, and to what degree of reliability?
The software industry needs to establish a rigorous
testing methodology to understand the factors involved
in iconography. The more complicated the potential for
designing icons becomes, the more tempting it is to do
so. We need to develop a method for grading the visual
complexity of iconographic information with its rate of
understandability (communicability).

2. Methodology
Iconography relies upon conventions and/or coded
visual language for common understanding. I attempted
to chart viewers’ reactions to icons based on two main
criteria: 1) amount of visual information in the icon’s
graphic design, and 2) the icon’s recognizability — its
adherence to a well-known and familiar design
archetype. It was extremely difficult to separate these
factors from each other, which is why the dual-axis
matrix was chosen. Although challenging for analysis
purposes, both factors could be tested simultaneously by
using a dual-matrix scale.
For this pilot study, the graphic design of the icons
was graded from Simple to Complicated. The
recognizability parameter was defined as the icon’s
adherence to an archetype: Familiar-Unfamiliar. I
documented the sequence in which they were touched or
picked up as an indicator of their communicability. It
was presumed that those icons which were understood
quickly were touched first.

2.1. Scaling of the Icons
The icons represented well-known computer tasks,
which regular users encounter on a daily basis. After
combing the internet to find real-world examples of
eight similar themes, I ranked the icons according to
their individual visual complexity. This was much more
difficult than expected, due to the huge variety of
examples and designs. Multiple parameters compounded
in the icons’ design and made them more complicated:
perspective, color, shading, detail, tonal value,
saturation, realism, contrast, etc. The scaling of icons
became of paramount importance. This was partially
resolved by my development of a continuous scale to
show the icons relative to each other. I decided to rank
all icons based upon six parameters (five graphic design
and one archetype): perspective, color, shading, contrast,
detail and archetypality.
Pictured below is the scale showing how I ranked
one icon (TRASH) according to the parameters involved
in each icon’s design. The parameters are my
interpretation of each example’s visual design and
adherence to the archetype. Smaller numbers refer to an
icon’s simpler visual design as well as its closer
adherence to the icons’ archetypal elements (again
defined by me). Each category was ranked using the
same parameters and criteria. Each student was
presented with eight categories of eight icons, all within
the same theme, and based on the same visual metaphor.
For example, all DOCUMENT icons showed a piece of
paper, all MOUSE icons showed the computer mouse
itself. The categories were (in order of presentation
during the test):
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.

Document (warm-up)
Mouse
Mail
Home

v.
vi.
vii.
viii.

Print
Book
Trash
PC (computer)

Martha’s icon scale (with TRASH illustrated):
Simple

1

Graphic design parameters:
Perspective
2D flat
Color
B/W
Shading
none
Contrast
high
Detail
minimal
Archetypality parameter:
Is it archetypal?
yes

2

4

5

6

7

2D flat
blue/white
none
high
slight

slight 3D
grey tones
subtle
medium
detailed

exaggerated
monochrome
subtle
medium
detailed

3D
quiet
subtle
low
detailed

3D
bright
subtle
high
high degree

3D
realistic
advanced
low
high degree

3D
realistic
advanced
medium
photorealistic

yes

yes

skewed

no

no

somewhat

no

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Comp.

3

8

2.2. Pilot Study Format
Upon arrival, the students were introduced to the test
with a brief explanation. I explained the purpose of dualaxis matrix, and emphasized that the student simply react
while placing the icons. All students received similar (but
not identical) introductions.
The dual-axis matrix is an analysis method often used
in marketing research and early product design
evaluation. More specific than a single-axis continuous
axis, it can be used to plot out two characteristics
simultaneously. Using this method in user-interface
research is highly unusual, but it served as a sufficient
measure of an individual’s subjective interpretation of a
visual stimulus. It was also necessary to use a paper-based
prototype at the time of the test (the computer version is
currently under development but not yet complete).
After the introduction, students were presented with
eight series of 4 cm square blocks with eight versions of a
single icon category (e.g. PRINT) mounted upon each
one. These blocks were chosen because they are easier to
pick up quickly than flimsy pieces of paper. They also
hold up better during a long day of testing.

Example of one icon block (HOME)
For each participant, I did not define the words on
the axes, nor impose any opinions on how the terms
should be interpreted. It was up to the student to
determine the semantic meaning of the words: SimpleComplicated on the X axis (“Enkel – Komplisert” in
Norwegian) and Familiar-Unfamiliar on the Y axis
(“Kjent – Ukjent”). Both the Norwegian and English
versions were visible on the matrix.
In this study, it is presumed that the pickup sequence
was a strong indicator of which icons were understood
first: the earlier the icon was picked up, the faster it was
understood... Since I was unable to time the responses
accurately (in milliseconds), I relied upon this sequence,
the pickup order, to reflect each icon’s rate of
communicability. In order to achieve the most immediate
response, I reminded the students to simply react and not
spend time thinking about where to place the icon.
The students were asked to place the icons on the
dual-matrix chart as quickly as possible. To change
categories, the students turned around to read the poster

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

on the back wall. This gave us about 20 seconds to
change the tray of icons. When they returned to meet the
next test, they started it immediately. During the breaks
between participants, we arranged the icons consistently
on the trays (we used photos of the original layout for
each tray).
Seven students participated, six of them from the
Department of Computer and Information Science, and
one from the Department of Product Design, all at
NTNU. The students were all 2nd year university students,
aged between 20-22 years old, with minimum 8 years of
computer use. All were native Norwegian speakers, and
conversation during the test was conducted in Norwegian.
Each test subject was paid in the form of home-made
chocolate chip cookies.

3. Results
3.1. Visual Interpretation
The first category (DOCUMENT) was intended to be
a warm-up. The test proceeded well, with the average
time usage for each category at approximately 40
seconds. In the post-test interview, we asked each
participant’s dominant handedness: 4 right and 3 left (one
person used their non-dominant hand to pull pieces off
the tray).
The strategies varied widely. Some students seemed
afraid to put icons in the Unfamiliar area of the scale
(nearest their body), even though during the post-test
interview, a few said “I’ve never seen that icon before”.
Although the range of strategies varied between students,
the results were surprisingly consistent. An example of
one student’s result of TRASH is shown below:

An example of one completed category (TRASH)
Student responses were mapped, totaled, and
analyzed in a very light statistical manner. The plot below
shows the combined result of the students’ placement of

the icons on the matrix (the matrix was broken into
quadrants and coded). This shows that there is a strong
relationship between the two axes (Simple-Complicated
and Familiar-Unfamiliar). The lower-ranked icons
(according to my scale) were consistently placed in the
Simple and Familiar area of the matrix, represented by the
lower left area of the figure below. This figure shows that
the two axes of visual interpretation are highly related to
each other.

due to the multiple of visual parameters used in those
icons, or to my incorrect ranking, or both.

Total student responses for pickup order and visual
interpretation axes of one category (TRASH)

3.3. Combined Results

Total student responses for visual interpretation of one
category (TRASH)
Although the plot shows all student responses for only
one category (TRASH), the trend was similar for all other
categories. Pickup order is not accounted for here (see
next figure).

3.2. Rate of Comprehension
Since I could not accurately control for millisecond
reaction times, I used the pickup sequence as an indicator
of time. I recorded the sequence by noting the numbers
written on the back edge of the icon block; this number
was visible only to us. I presumed the pickup sequence to
be a function of the icon’s communicability, reflecting its
clarity and rate of comprehension.
The plot below shows a clear relationship between
how fast the icons were picked up (the pickup order) and
the visual interpretation. The more Simple and Familiar
the icon, the earlier it was picked up and placed on the
matrix. This plot relates the visual complexity to when the
users touched the icons. Again, this plot shows TRASH
only, but similar trends were seen in other categories.
So, are lower-ranked icons picked up prior to the
higher-ranked icons? The answer is yes, but there seems
to be an inconsistency around my ranking of 5-6-7.
Although the pickup order was consistent with the
extremes (1, 2 & 8), the order in which 5-6-7 were
interpreted was not line with my ranking. This could be

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Finally, I wanted to determine if there was an overall
relationship between the pickup order and the visual
interpretation (i.e. the result of the combined SimpleFamiliar axes) for all icons, across all categories, over all
student responses. The plot below reflects a strong overall
relationship between the visual interpretation (with both
axes taken into account) and the order in which icons
were picked up. It shows the averaged sum across all tests
conducted, in all icon categories, accounting for both
visual interpretation and speed of understanding (pickup
order). The plot shows that the order in which the icons
were picked up was strongly related to the visual design
of the icon.

Total student responses for pickup order and visual
interpretation all icons, all categories, all participants

In general, these results showed a demonstrative
relationship between the visual design, pickup order,
placement, and the scaled ranking that I’d assigned. There
is a clear trend that the earlier-picked icons have a lower
ranked average ranking than those picked later. The
pickup order (a reflection of time) is related to the criteria
that I’d used to rank the visual design of each icon. The
results were partially predicted by the hypothesis.

4. Weaknesses of the Pilot Test
The primary weakness of this pilot test is that it tests
many parameters simultaneously. Because the parameters
were tightly interrelated, they were difficult to separate
and analyze afterwards. In addition, some of those
parameters
were
completely
subjective
and
unconstrained. There was also a fundamental error of the
medium: the icons were meant to be seen in the context of
a user-interface, whereas I used physical paper-based
blocks. In addition, the matrix was subject to wide
interpretation and inconsistency between students. Some
students were intimidated by the corners of the chart,
which reflects the inability of the pilot test to measure
clear, decisive choices. Some students piled up their
choices in a tower formation, some did not. The strategies
for placing the icon blocks were very diverse.
Regarding the semantic interpretation of the words
on the matrix, only one student asked me to define them. I
told him to interpret them himself. I later realized this
could be a major confounding factor when his responses
were dramatically different from the others. When asked
what his strategy had been, he explained that he’d
pretended he’d never seen any of the icons before, and
reacted accordingly. He was the only student to do this. I
then considered imposing a definition upon the remaining
test-takers, but decided against it. From the post-test
interviews, I learned that none of the remaining students
took the same approach.
Despite the potential for variation in semantic
intepretation, the test was able to measure a consistent
response of how the students judged density of visual
information. They put similar icons in similar placement
relative to each other. The speed of their responses was
not accurate enough however, and it remains to be seen if
the first touched is actually the first understood. The
question then arises: did this pilot test actually target the
true cognitive response to visual information? Did this
test really give us reason to believe that simplicity in
visual design might result in enhanced speed of
understanding, at least at the iconographic level? More
research remains to be done on multiple issues, in a much
more controlled, issue-specific manner.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

5. Discussion and Future Work
In some respects, this pilot study highlights the
obvious: people seem to react faster to simpler, more
familiar visual information. Although we cannot extract
conclusions from the initial pilot study performed here,
the test did highlight the issue for further research.
It is important that we develop a methodology and
system of analysis for designing the appropriate type of
icon for the appropriate user interface. In other words,
icons that can be used in entertainment applications are
very likely inappropriate for neurosurgical tools. This
study attempts to identify factors which can be targeted in
future studies.
From the pilot test we can see that people react
quickly to various parameters of design. Art and graphic
design which teach us that high contrast makes certain
designs “jump out” more than others. Saturated colors
have the same effect. From this study it appears that
people react faster to familiar and/or bright and/or simple
images. This was stated directly by some students (my
translation):
x “I took the familiar ones first”
x “Color and contrast mean simplicity to me”
x “If it is colorful then it is complicated”
x “I took the easiest first”
x “If I understand what it is, then it is familiar”
x “I started with the Familiarity then went across
the Simple-Complicated axis”
There seem to be many issues at work in peoples’
subjective experience of icons. This small pilot study
showed an overall trend that complicated information
takes longer to digest, especially when dissociated from
the symbol’s archetypal elements. This is a powerful
design issue that must be researched in detail, with solid
methodology and analytical results
An interesting phenomenon was unveiled by the
highly detailed and archetypal icon of HOME. Two
versions are shown below:

(from pixelgirlpresents.com)

Martha’s #1:
Archetypal

Martha’s #6
High degree of detail with
strong elements of archetype

The number 6 icon was consistently picked up early in the
sequence. Perhaps this was due to its very realistic
imagery and its prominent adherence to an archetype. The

primary archetypal element in the HOME icon is the
inverted V-shape for the roof. The number 7 and 8 icons
in this category were equally detailed, but differed
dramatically from the archetype. From this pilot test, we
can say that an image’s adherence to an archetype is
extremely important (perhaps at least as important) as the
amount of detail and complexity of its visual design. The
first step is to systematically determine the archetypal
elements for commonly-used icons. How necessary that
archetype is for an icon’s communicability will be tested
in a more controlled, targeted, computer-based version.
Future studies will follow up the sub-hypothesis that
there may be a relationship between rate of understanding
and how photorealistic an icon is. This will involve a
more intricate and consistent ranking system. It is also
imperative to correct the error of media — the userinterface icons must be presented in their appropriate
context (a user-interface). The computer context will also
accommodate precise temporal data collection:
milliseconds can be recorded in online tests. Future
studies will also attempt to target the test issues more
specifically, so it is easier to isolate and interpret the
results. All upcoming studies will investigate the
fundamental (and often forgotten) factors involved in the
interpretation of visual information.
Designers need to be concerned about clarity of
information in all software design, especially in
applications
for
specialized
medical/surgical
communities. This includes all levels of information
visualization, from icons to the user interface in general.
Although small, icons are hardly insignificant. They are
just one aspect in which designers need to create images
with high communicability, with solid research to support
their design decisions. Effectiveness can only be tested
rigorously and thoroughly, even at the smallest level.
Although this pilot study was an initial attempt to test the
target issues, it served to highlight the need for
methodological research into the basic principles of
interpretation of visual information.

6. Acknowledgements
I am indebted to Kjetil Lønne Nilsen for his help in
collecting the icons and assisting with the user test. I also
wish to express my gratitude to the kind students from
NTNU/IDI who participated in the study. Thank you all.

7. References
[1] Apple Computer. Macintosh Human Interface
Guidelines Addison-Wesley, 1992.
[2] Arlov, L. GUI Design for Dummies. IDG Books
Worldwide. 1997.
[3] Card, Stuart K. and Thomas P. Moran, Allen Newell.
The Psychology of Human-Computer Interaction.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc., 1983.
[4] Chatty, S. Sire, etc. Revisiting Visual Interface
Programming: Creating GUI Tools for Designers and
Programmers. Proceedings of the ACM UIST. ACM
Press, October 2004. Pages 267-276.
[5] Dreyfus, Henry. Symbol Sourcebook: An Authoritative
Guide to International Graphic Symbols. Wiley, 1984.
[6] Hofmann, Armin & Dorothea. Individual interview
conducted at their home in Luzern, Switz. April 8, 2005
[7] Isaacs, Ellen and Alan Walendowski. Designing From
Both Sides of the Screen. New Riders Publishing, 2002.
[8] Itten, Johannes. The Art of Color.
John Wiley & Sons, 1961.
[9] Maeda, John. URL: http://simplicity.media.mit.edu.
[10] Marcus, Aaron. Graphic Design for Electronic
Documents and User Interfaces. ACM Press, 1992.
[11] Marcus, Aaron. “Globalization of User-Interface Design
for the Web”. Proceedings. Conference on Human
Factors and the Web (#5), June 3 1999.
[12] Mullett, Kevin and D. Sano. Designing Visual
Interfaces. Prentice Hall, 1995.
[13] Nielsen, Jakob. Designing Web Usability. New Rider
Publishing, 2000.
[14] Petterson, Rune. Information Design — An
Introduction. John Benjamins Publishing Co., 2002[15] Resnick, Elizabeth. Design for Communication.
Wiley, 2003.
[16] Schneiderman, Ben. Designing the User-Interface —
Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction.
Addison Wesley Longman Inc., 1998.
[17] Thiel. Philip. Visual Awareness and Design. University of
Washington Press. 1981.
[18] Tufte, E. Envisioning Information. Graphics Press. 1990.
[19] White, Alex W. The Elements of Graphic Design.
Allworth Press, 2002.
[20] Wong, Wucius. Principles of Two-Dimensional Design.

John Wiley & Sons, 1972.

[21] You Are Here: Design of information

Exhibition at the Design Museum, London.
May 3, 2005.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

