Long live the new video flesh [after videodrome]
Envisioning mutable surfaces for architecture
Nancy Diniz, César Branco
Bartlett Graduate School UCL, Augmented Architectures
{n.diniz@ucl.ac.uk, cesar.branco@gmail.com}
Abstract
This paper describes a system of a dynamic and
interactive environment taking inspiration in the 1983 film
by David Cronenberg entitled “Videodrome”. The movie
thereby provides a metaphor for proposing an embodied
interface merging video from a physical realm into digital
form in real time through an “emotion detector”. The main
challenge is to detect emotional states of the physical reality
and translate them into the digital dimension in real time.
The main objective of the project is to test possibilities to
turn it into an emotive mutable and permanent membrane
for an architectural surface in a near future. This paper also
seeks out to reflect on the growing interest in integrating
media elements into architecture and how these new
emerging principles are creating non traditional materialrealities.

metamorphosis that is going on inside his head. The movie is
a metaphor for the power of TV and its manipulative dangers
and irresistible charm. With our experiment we want to
create digital systems that are extended into social space
creating the potential for architecture of reciprocity, reacting
to and with the activity and emotions of people. Demonstrate
a potential means of achieving a more spatial and temporal
interactivity.

KeywordsReal time video mapping and 3D
rendering, Interactive dynamic surfaces.

1. Introduction
The parallelism between our project and the movie
Videodrome is very simple and the scope of this paper
doesn’t cover the highly compelling questions that the movie
raises, deep philosophical ones – where the issues of
metaphysics, psychology and technology meet. What turned
Videodrome into a cult movie therefore so fascinating and
inspiring is its thematic and aesthetic avant-garde. Themes
like
antropo-morhophosis
or
human/technological
hybridization in a decade when virtual reality was barely
talked about. This paper has no intention to fully
comprehend or translate the movie complexity into
something original. It merely takes the idea implicit in the
movie where a human being evolves into something new. In
the movie, the main character transforms its body into a new
“flesh” becoming a physical embodiment of the

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 1. Upper image from the movie
“Videodrome” and below images from the
installation “Long live the new video flesh”.

2. Architecture in transition from a static
medium to a time-based medium
There is growing interest in integrating media elements
into architecture. In the near future, new technological
systems especially as far as display technology is concerned
will enable the integration of display screen elements over
the full area of architectural surfaces.
We will review some recent projects which in our opinion
are representative of the current stage of investigation into
new surfaces in architecture. In recent years a number of
projects have changed the perception of the architecture
wall. Experiences have been exploring the concept of
dynamic skins where the structure of the walls not only
divide the inside from the outside but becomes a link of
communication between the architecture itself and its
surroundings.

2.1 Interactive Hyper Surfaces
"Liquid architecture is an architecture that breathes,
pulses, leaps from one form and lands as another. Liquid
architecture is an architecture whose form is contingent on
the interests of the beholder; it is an architecture that opens
to welcome me and closes to defend me; it is architecture
without doors or hallways, where the next room is always
where I need to be it and what I need it to be."[1].
2.1.1. Aegis Hyposurface [1999-2001]
This project by dECOI architects, is perhaps the world’s
first interactive wall; it was developed for a competition for
an interactive art-work for the foyer of The Birmingham
Hippodrome Theatre in 1999. The brief simply asked for a
piece which would in some way portray on the exterior that
which was happening on the interior - that it be a dynamic
and interactive art work. The piece is a triangle metallic
surface that has potential to deform physically in response to
electronic stimuli from the environment (movement, sound,
light, etc). Driven by a bed of 896 pneumatic pistons, the
effects are generated as real-time calculations.
This project has potential for information to literally
translate into form, it offers an entirely new medium,
digitally dynamic yet materially tactile. Any digital input
(microphone, keyboard, movement sensor) can trigger any
physical output (a wave or pattern or word.) In this Aegis
has potential beyond that of a screen to being a fully
'architectural' (ie social, physical) interface, where activity
(sound, movement, etc) translates into form!

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 2. Aegis Hyposurface.
2.1.1. BIX [2003]
“BIX” is a permanent light- and media installation for
the Kunsthaus Graz in Austria set up in 2003 by
realities:united architects from Berlin. It is a quite low-tech
method using a matrix of 930 fluorescent lamps integrated
into the eastern acrylic glass facade of the biomorphic
building structure. Each ring of light functions as a pixel
centrally controlled by a computer. Through the possibility
to individually adjust the lamps’ brightness at an infinite
variability with 20 frames/second images, films and
animations can be displayed - the Kunsthaus' skin is
transformed into a giant low resolution computer display.

Figure 3. BIX - light and media façade for the
Kunsthaus in Graz 2003.
2.1.2. SPOTS
The second project, “SPOTS” yet again by
realities:united architects is one of the largest light and
media installations in the world and is integrated into the
facade of Potsdamer Platz 10. SPOTS in some respects is a
continuation of the BIX media facade project for the
Kunsthaus Graz in Austria. The approach behind this is to
get closer to the phenomenon of the media facade from the
perspective of architecture. SPOTS is like an open air gallery
featuring the work of several artists. Two of the works

shown in SPOTS engage directly with people or with its
surroundings: “33QPM” and “Sensor”
Lozano-Hemmer, a Mexican Canadian media artist
created “33QPM”, as the name suggests, 33QPM will
display 33 questions each minute. If no question has been
typed in at the terminal, the computer generates the
questions itself from a virtually limitless source of sentence
fragments, combining human curiosity with purely
mechanical, often meaningless strings of words. The
software can generate 55 billions questions in German,
English and Spanish. It would take 3,000 years to output all
the possible question combinations. Lozano-Hemmer:
“33QPM is a project that represents mechanical irony.
Inexhaustible grammatical algorithms make a romantic and
hopeless attempt to ask questions that have never been asked
before. The words are combined electronically and form
random links between totally disparate levels of experience.”
Another work shown was “Sensor”, a work by Carsten
Nicolai. “Sensor” connects with the movement, density and
frequency of the cityscape and visualizes the ongoing
changes by means of environmental sensors in the facade.
The sensors monitor Potsdamer Platz, responding directly to
environmental influences such as visitor traffic, time of day,
brightness and noise level, as well as noise over time. The
different information received and forwarded by the sensors
is translated into light signals by the software and determine
the interaction of the light gradients, which move over the
facade like complex wave patterns. The result is light
modulations that turn the facade into a mirror image of the
city.

2.1.3. Not so white walls [2004]
The third project, “Not so white walls” by Dario Buzzini
deals with a wallpaper surface embedded with interactive
qualities. Users can display text and images by using a heatsensitive ink and a resistor matrix to present large-scale
pixilated data. The wallpaper works like a low resolution and
low refresh rate display, giving you the possibility to change
patterns and contents on your walls. For example you can
read your emails or SMS, but also view the images taken
with your mobile phone camera. The function is that of
decorating our home environments in a new and constantly
changing way. But very importantly, when powered-off it
becomes a plain grey wall, using the technology invisibly
and effectively.

Figure 5. “Not so white walls” interactive wallpaper
2004.
2.1.4. ICE [2002]
Klein Dytham Architects and Toshio Iwai developed the
ICE (Interactive Communicative Experience) for the
Bloomberg Headquarters in Tokyo. The intention is to
translate stock-exchange data into formats that anyone can
understand. Here direct experience plays a major role –
information processing that can be experienced physically. A
captivating metapgor was used: a grenn icicle, which is
suspended freely from the ceiling that acts as a data
collector.
A 5 x 3.5m interactive wall suspended from a ceiling
running FTSE and NASDAQ data flow accross it like ticker
tape. When the stock goes up it swells and equally shrinks
when stocks drop. Infrared sensors detect peoples presence
at a distance of half a meter and asks them to participate.
The sensors register the visitors touch and movements of the
body and convert them into optical and acoustic signals. By
means of graphics programs and sound synthesizers, the
inputs are projected back immediately. The visitor casts an
electronic shadow on the wall with the help of LEDs and
loudspeakers.

Figure 4. SPOTS, Berlin 2005.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

3. Our project:”Long live the new video flesh”
3.1. Conceptual outline

Figure 6. ICE at Bloomberg, Tokyo.

2.2 Evaluation
We can see through these projects that the development
of digital technologies makes buildings with enormous
potential to communicate with people. It is not so much
about the PLACE or space anymore but more about the
TIME. We can criticize that so, far nothing new, this
technology is being used in the advertising industry for
years. However, the potential in this technology is to turn
buildings into new urban transmitters. Even if some are
taking the shape of public art or installations, nevertheless
here the building body becomes an input - output device and
the sensory skin is the mediator between environmental
conditions – both external and internal - and the synthetic
entity of the body itself. The skin becomes the “deep
programmable hyper-surface” [2].
But what if the building’s façade could physically
change? What if the building could respond, in real time, to
the movement of people, the weather, or the whims of
bystanders or behind-the-scenes artists? Digital designers
and architects have begun working together to move beyond
the façade and give buildings living skins. These are groundbreaking projects because they break the traditional static
program of architecture raising the level of time awareness
in architecture.
Buildings benefit from this kind of electro mechanic
kinetic flesh, respond to the outside environment, and not
only as a big display made of lights, but as moving
representation of the environment outside. They effectively
create a relationship with the spectator.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

The concept of our project as mentioned before takes
inspiration in David Cronberg’s movie Videodrome. The
objectives are to design and complete an installation so as to
test and experience real time interaction with a transformed
video image of yourself. It deals with creating a user
experience with a real time human digital dimension affected
by the presence and actions of the user. Furthermore and
more importantly it seeks to create reciprocity between
human emotions and digital/physical space. As human
bodies communicate through a sensory skin we want that
digital translation to captures those qualities as well. In our
experiment we want translate “human topology” into a
human digital one, establishing therefore a state of
continuous processing. This notion is very close to Kas
Oosterhuis theories about E-motive architecture [3]. He
argues that architecture is based on the notion that buildings
feed on information, process information and transmit
information in a different form. Buildings are seen as inputoutput devices. E-motive buildings are seen as push-and-pull
instruments.
We intended to create a software prototype of a dynamic
surface; a surface to be deformed according to live video
coming from a web camera.
This surface is now made of 3D pixels, boxes that change
size. These boxes form the “flesh” representing the filmed
spectator, absorbing her, and giving her back as digital flesh.
All this transfer from moving human dimension to moving
video dimension is rendered in real time creating an
“interface-skin”.

3.2. Design description
The goal was to create a real time tri-dimensional video
wall that renders in 3D the live footage coming from a web
camera. The system captures video, resizes it, and renders
each pixel as a box, constantly growing or shrinking
according to the colour of each pixel. Lighter pixels make
the boxes grow; darker pixels make the boxes shrink.
The way emotions are translated and mapped into the
digital representation is very simple. The webcam captures
the facial features and maps them into a matrix using a
computer vision-based face motion capture module. Facial
components of interest refer to elements characterizing facial
expressions such as mouth and eyes.
In this experiment not much variation was programmed and
the results are intentionally very obvious. For instance happy
face = bright background colours or sad face = dark
background colours. Another behaviour programmed was a
corruption of the geometries like a wave affect or explosion

or rotation of the surface when the facial expression was
dubious.
This interactive installation was presented at WIP [work in
Progress] in Lisbon, Portugal in February 2005 and ran only
one night.
This work is a sort of software simulation for a larger
scale physically reconfigurable electro mechanical surface
project to be applied in architecture (currently being
developed).

3.3. The challenges
The system needed to be fast enough to provide a
rewarding experience for the user.
The system needed to represent the video footage in 3D
in a way the user could identify him/her to the filmed
environment.

3.4. The software architecture
There are two modules: a video capture module and a 3D
rendering module, that communicate through shared
memory for performance purposes.
The web camera captures video footage at 320x200 pixels
at 15 to 20 frames per second. This frame rate is
unnecessarily high; also the definition is too high for the
current processing power of computers. We decided to
sample the video 2 to 4 times a second and to resize the
video to 100x70 3D pixels.
The module that controls the web camera writes the RGB
values of each of the 100x70 pixels in a chunk of shared
memory that is read by the rendering module to grow/shrink
the boxes twice to four times every second.

3.5. The technology
We used Microsoft DirectX 9 Direct Show module and
software libraries to handle the web cam; Microsoft Visual
C++ to write the code to capture the video and send it to the
display module.
For the display (or rendering) module we used Silicon
Graphics Open GL performance 3D library.

.
Figure 7. Still images from “Long live the new
video flesh”.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

4. From Hypersurfaces to Hyperbodies
Using technology to create metaphorical transactions
between physical and virtual space has received considerable
attention. Our project is included on that wave of interest a
screen based interactive display; however the future
objective is to turn it into an interactive reconfigurable
kinetic structure. New digital concepts have emerged in the
last decade, terms like liquid architectures or hyperarchitectures invaded architecture theoretic discourses “ad
nauseum” and sometimes not living up through the hype.
The projects we reviewed [see section 2] prove that today
architects and researchers are more interested in using tactile
technologies that interact with the built environment. It is
therefore our opinion that a number of moving devices can
respond to new challenges that architecture faces in ways
that visual interfaces fail to. We strongly believe that
interactive devices are an exciting area of research; buildings
will have their own artificial intelligence (way beyond from
merely controlling temperature, and security) and emotional
states and this will influence reconfigurable architecture. A
number of exciting projects are coming up using new
emerging technologies beyond visible screens based
interfaces to bring tactile experience into the design of new
Hyper-Architectures.

5. Conclusions
We believe architecture has to compete with our highly
demanding need for media interactivity. It is therefore
necessary for us to look at how digital technology has
impacted society changing our demands on the built
environment.
Beginning with the premise that architectural elements
will move in response to their environments, conducted
research needs to be carried on, to design, and build fullscale kinetic surfaces. Architects need to explore surface
materials, surface treatments, input sensors, and electrical
circuits through experiments and multiple prototypes. To
developed full-scale systems that responded in real time to
multiple sensors articulating non-linear narratives with non
traditional material realities. How do we structure the
development of these new Architectures to mediate society,
to enhance its perceptual grasp of the new dimensions of
connectivity and what emerging technologies may help to
push this research forward.
In the next few years, emerging practices in interactive
architecture are set to transform the built environment.
Interactive architecture is inevitable due to the emergence of
the distributed power of computation architecture:
architecture will no longer remain static as it has been for
thousands of years. ‘Smart’ design was once regarded as the
preserve of museum exhibits or advertising screens, but
‘multi-mediated’ interactive design has started entering into

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

every domain of public and private life as a spatial medium,
interactive architecture is revolutionizing and reinventing
human relationships, our work, our houses and cities.

References
[1] Novak M, (1991)
[2] Oosterhuis K, (2002) “Architecture goes wild”, 010 publishers,
2002, 253 pages, Paperback , ISBN: 9064504091
[3] Oosterhuis, K (2003) “Hyperbodies: Toward an E-Motive
Architecture”, Basel: Birkhäuser

Bibliography
Bullivant, L (2005) “4dspace: Interactive Architecture”,
Architectural Design, Chichester: Wiley
DeLanda, M (2004) ‘Material Complexity’ Digital Tectonics,
Chichester: Wiley pp.14-21
Frazer JH (1995) “An Evolutionary Architecture”, Architectural
Association, London
Imperial A (2002) “Skin: Surface, Substance, and Design”,
Princeton Architectural
Mitchell W (1999) e-Topia, MIT Press
Mitchell W (1996) City of Bits, MIT Press
Perrella, S (1998) “Hypersurface Theory: Architecture Culture”
Hypersurface Architecture I. A.D - Vol 68 pp 7-15
Zellner, P (1999). “Hybrid Space: New Forms in Digital
Architecture”. New York: Rizzoli
http://www.bix.at/
http://www.spots-berlin.com/
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Videodrome
http://www.oosterhuis.nl/

