Combining query and visual search for knowledge mapping
Samuël Driessen, Jan Jacobs, Willem-Olaf Huijsen
Océ-Technologies BV., Océ-Technologies BV., Telematica Instituut
samuel.driessen@oce.com, jan.wm.jacobs@oce.com, wolf.huijsen@telin.nl

Searching through information can be done in two ways:
by querying and browsing. In the literature these
approaches are treated separately. However every search
usually consists of a combination of browsing and
querying. Therefore this paper is about combining
querying and browsing in one search interface.
Our hypothesis is that both strategies can be
combined and users will be better supported in their
search for information. A model is presented how to
combine these approaches and this model is evaluated by
applying it in the knowledge-mapping domain.
We will show that combining both strategies in one
model is possible. Based on our evaluation of the
application of this model we conclude that the users
understand this combination and find it to be helpful.
However several technical issues need to be
addressed in our future research to confirm the
usefulness of this combination.

clear strengths and weaknesses. Can we combine the
strengths and provide better support for the search
process? Our hypothesis is that this combination is an
improvement to supporting information retrieval. Our
research on this topic is done in the context of
knowledge mapping (see section 2.4).
First we will define what we mean by querying and
browsing. As we will explain, browsing can be divided
into browsing supported by presenting the document
space as a visualization and by presenting the query
results as a list. Therefore we will also explain what we
understand information visualization to be. We will also
provide an overview of both approaches to position our
work.
Then we will describe our application domain,
knowledge mapping. How we define knowledge
mapping and which knowledge-mapping application we
use in order to evaluate our hypothesis will be described.
Finally we will evaluate if we proved our hypothesis to
be true and provide future directions.

Keywords--- information visualization, information
retrieval, browsing, querying, geographical document
map

2. Overview

Abstract

2.1. Search strategies

1. Introduction
Extensive research has been and is being done on
information retrieval. There are two basic approaches to
retrieval: querying and browsing. Browsing in general
has low efficiency mainly due to the absence of good
overview functionality. Supporting the browsing process
has not yet been solved in a satisfactory way. On the
other hand, despite progress in e.g. relevancy ranking
and feature extraction, current search tools require lots of
irrelevant information to be actively scanned after the
source is queried. Usually research focuses on one
approach or the other: improving the visualization of
data and the navigation through the data that is
visualized, or, improving the query formulation and
presentation of the query results. Combining the
strengths of both approaches is rarely seen.
Our paper addresses this problem: how to combine
querying and browsing in an application to support users
in their quest for information. Both approaches have
Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

There are many different information needs.
However it’s possible to place them along one
continuum with the following extremes: specific search
versus exploratory search.
The difference between these two is mainly
constituted by the amount of what, how and where
knowledge in the information seeker’s knowledge base.
In short, the more knowledge an information seeker has,
the closer the information need will be to the specific
search extreme. Although both are related to acquiring
information, specific search is more like simple slot
filling whereas exploratory search is conducted when the
slots are hard to fill.
Although it may seem that a search session is either
specific or exploratory, Marchionini [6] points out that in
practice, people apply different mixes of specific and
exploratory search during one search session. Ideally, he
argues, an information system supports both strategies
and allows the user to switch between them without
effort.

Computer
database

Computer-based
model

2.2. Balancing querying and browsing
To support browsing though information collections,
information visualization is used. Information
visualization attempts to provide visual depictions of
very large information spaces. A visual representation
can communicate some kinds of information much more
rapidly and effectively than any other method [3]. It
gives an overview over the information space and
information about the context of information.
Visualization of inherently abstract information is
difficult, and visualization of textually represented
information proves to be especially challenging.
Interactivity seems to be an especially important property
for visualizing abstract information, although it has not
played as large a role within scientific visualization [13].
From a user point-of-view, an interface innovation
using information visualization can be useful and
pleasing for some users, and foreign and cumbersome for
others. In fact, evaluations that have been conducted so
far provide negative evidence as to their usefulness. For
instance, studies compared the Kohonen feature map
overview representation on a browsing task to that of
Yahoo. Conclusion of this research was that the interface
with the underlying Kohonen feature map, the Kohonen
map visualization, was more appropriate for casual
browsing than for search.
However, Baeza Yates and Ribeiro-Neto [1]
suggests that the map display may be more useful if the
system is modified to tightly integrate querying with
browsing.
Ware [14] also gives interesting remarks for our
research. He considered the interfaces between human
memory systems and computer-based memory. He found
a great asymmetry to be evident. As illustrated in Figure
Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Visual iconic store

1, by far the widest channel is the visual pathway from
the computer into the human visual system. The flow of
information across the visualization buffer and into the
iconic memory of the observer is very large – up to tens
of megabytes per second. This is visually analyzed
through the powerful mechanisms of attention and
pattern finding. Working in the other direction, people
can output ideas to a computer by drawing diagrams or
writing text, or by speaking, but these are all relatively
low-bandwidth pathways. The implication of this
asymmetry is that a kind of steerable computing model
must be adopted for the efficient use of visualization.
The user should be able to use low-bandwidth control
actions to nudge a computer-based system so that it
provides complete, well structured, and timely
information. Many systems are already designed with
this in mind.

Frame buffer

Although both querying and browsing strategies can
cover specific search as well as exploratory search it
turns out that querying seems to be more appropriate for
specific search whereas browsing strategies seem to be
more appropriate for exploratory search.
“Recognition” is the keyword in browsing. In
essence, browsing is the process of mapping one’s
mental descriptions of the target to the perceived options
that are presented by the system.
Traditional query systems retrieve results by
comparing the terms in a query formulated by the
information seeker with terms in individual documents.
The documents in the corpus that match the terms
mentioned in the query are then retrieved. This procedure
puts a heavy burden on users to formulate the right
query. And if a user has limited domain knowledge, it
may cause serious cognitive load.
Compared to browsing, one of the main advantages
of querying is that it does not require an intricate link
structure. One only has to construct an inverted file,
which can be done automatically. Since the information
seeker does not have to choose between a limited set of
options, he has complete freedom of choice.

Visual working memory

Verbal working memory

Haptic or verbal
output control

Figure 1 Asymmetry in visual and control bandwidth [14]

2.3. Intermezzo: preliminary observations
Before we describe our application domain, we
make several observations based on the previous.
From retrieval research we learn the following:
1. Ideal information retrieval systems support both
search strategies and allow the user to switch
between them without effort.
2. Information visualization may be more useful if
querying is tightly integrated with browsing
3. By distinguishing between low- and high-bandwidth
channels, Ware provides us with a model to
integrate querying and browsing
However when we look at retrieval applications we
find that almost always one search strategy is chosen
over the other. The different retrieval applications can be
summarized in the following way (Figure 2):
1. Query Æ results Æ present as ranked list.
E.g. Google.1
2. Browse Æ results Æ present as visual map.
E.g. Aquabrowser2, Grokker3, Visual Thesaurus4,
Touchgraph5, work by Chen et al. [2] and Kohonen [11].

1

www.google.com
www.aquabrowser.com
3
www.grokker.com
4
www.visualthesaurus.com
2

3. Query Æ results Æ present as browsable ranked list.
E.g. work by Romijn [10].
4. Query Æ results Æ cluster results Æ present as ranked
list. E.g. Vivisimo/Clusty6, work by Pirolli et al. [18]
(also refer to his earlier work).
results
results

results

results

visual map

browsable
ranked list

cluster results
ranked list

and the asymmetry in information bandwidth in humanmachine interface [2.2].
Looking for information typically involves
sequences of exploratory and specific search acts. (cf.
[6]). The first is of diverging nature (involves browsing)
and should return so many cues (hints in textual format)
as necessary for a more specific query. Often browsing
involves excessive querying which does not utilize the
human high-bandwidth input channel to its full extent.
Keeping overview is also not supported when querying.

ranked list
query

query browse

browse

query
Figure 2 Four different retrieval applications (1-4 from left to right)

All but one of these approaches do not combine
querying and browsing in one search application:
Romijn’s research on supporting browsing through
ranked lists. We did not find an example of combining a
list view of the query results and a visual view in theory
or practice. Therefore our approach will be to combine
these in the following model. We will test this model
using a knowledge mapping application in the following
paragraph. Our model also maps on the model proposed
by Ware. For the low-bandwidth control is based on
mouse-click querying, moving the mouse over the
visualization or typing in queries. The high-bandwidth
channel is addressed by the visualization of the
information.

2.4. Knowledge mapping
Our application domain is knowledge mapping.
Knowledge mapping is defined as the optimization of the
effective and efficient use of the corporate knowledge
base by addressing the question how to best support
finding the knowledge and building insights into the
qualities of this knowledge [9, 15, 16, 17]. Knowledgemapping systems provide support for addressing these
issues, collecting data on the corporate knowledge from
various information systems. Therefore a knowledge
map does not contain knowledge but points to it, as
Cross et al. [17] states. Collecting data can be done
manually, as Wexler [15] states, but also (semi-)automatically. Our focus is on (semi-)automatic knowledgemapping systems. The knowledge-mapping process is
described in detail in [9].

3. Towards a solution: two-click search
The purpose of this section is to devise a new
solution for effective searching in large data volumes,
while reckoning with the different search strategies [2.1]

A first step in improving this is to provide for two
coherent GUI elements: a 1D list for query and query
results and a 2D visualization to support browsing. So
browsing and querying are processes which are not
coupled to two disjunct GUIs but also to combinations of
both. Since the browsing process is explorative
(diverging) in nature its corresponding GUI element
should visualize as much relevant relations as possible.
This is done by showing the similarity or dissimilarity
between concepts by their proximity in a 2D map [12].
So two concepts, which are similar7, are positioned in
each other’s neighborhood. The opposite should also be
true: two concepts, which are dissimilar are positioned
further apart. The same is valid on a larger scale: groups
of similar concepts, clusters, are visualized as
“countries” which are clearly separated from other,
nearby or distant clusters. In this way the browsing
process supports the user by showing related concepts
and concepts familiar to the user, related but unfamiliar
concepts (serendipity) and it gives overview.
Explorative search has to deal with problems as
large amounts of data, absence of structure and the
inability to exactly describe the information one is
looking for. Therefore it is necessary to separate the
finding of the domain’s structure and expressing it by the
cues which are helpful in specifying a good query. This
is the essence of the proposed solution: first the domain
is specified from which a similarity map is derived
followed by the specification of helpful cues in the map.
The first will give a hint for familiar or unfamiliar
similarity while the second will give a hint for query
specification. With two clicks, one for selecting the
domain for which a similarity map will be built, the other
for specifying the textual annotation (individual concept
names, grouped concept names) the search process is
prepared for use. We will provide concrete examples of
this in Section 4.
The essence of the presented solution is that users,
not knowing exactly how to formulate the query
(uncertainty, Anomalous State of Knowledge (Belkin)),
often are able to describe the general domain of their

7
5

www.touchgraph.com
6
vivisimo.com, clusty.com
Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Similarity can be viewed as a mathematical relation defined on a
domain. A domain is a set of values of an independent variable for
which a function is defined (e.g. distance function).

domain selection
cue selection

results

list

query

map

browse

query from list
map steered querying
browsing through map
association from list

Figure 3 Screenshot PhotoPhone+

information need. E.g. the user does not know the name
of a person he wants to find, but he knows that the
person he is searching should have a certain expertise (=
domain specification).
The same uncertainty that restrains the user to
formulate a query is used: it becomes a metric to cluster
items. The ‘uncertainty’, which can always be named
(but not solved directly by a query) is expressed as the
distance between those items and those countries. This
structure helps people either directly or via intermediate
cues (or even by serendipity).

4. Case “PhotoPhone+”
To investigate the usefulness of our solution we
developed and tested a prototype. For this purpose we
selected a currently used local directory tool, called
PhotoPhone (also called Yellow Pages). We extended
this tool to a knowledge-mapping tool. We named the
(extended) tool: PhotoPhone+ (see Figure 3).
PhotoPhone+ is a new office service/tool that helps
people find particular colleagues using known features as
their name, initials or rather vague specifications as
project name or expertise. Used data sources are: a
contact data source (LDAP), project information, an
expertise database and an internal report database.
PhotoPhone+ consists of two parts, a list and a map
view. The list view presents personal info in the
traditional way. This view is typically the final result of a
query search for colleagues presented as a list. (Basic
information retrieval technology is used to do this.) The
map, the second part of PhotoPhone, presents the
information in such a way that it optimizes the search
process by steering the browsing process. How does this
work?
The map consists of clusters of people, grouped
according to their expertises. Two persons having similar
expertise or interests are positioned closer to each other
than another pair, which do not share interests. Related
expertises are grouped in clusters, which have been given
a descriptive name. Persons have a single location on the
Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Figure 4 Model combining query and browse
search with (overlay) interaction sequence

map, expressing their (dis)similarity to all other persons.
This is visualized as the distance between them in the
map. (We use Self-Organising Map technology by
Kohonen to do this: spatial ordering facilitates
expressing similarities as geographic distance [11].)
Following the geography analogy we call items “cities”
and these are grouped into clusters called “countries”.
Four use cases, which demonstrate the interaction of
querying and browsing in PhotoPhone+ may be
identified (see also Figure 4):
• Query from list. The traditional way of searching for
information (e.g. Google). The user interprets results
from a list of results and formulates a new query.
The user is tempted to continue with browsing
because certain locations are highlighted in the map.
For example if a person’s name is entered as a query
the specific spot on the map will “blink”, entering a
“country” name will result in the highlighting of the
country border.
• Map steered querying. A map of the domain space
will direct or persuade the user, by e.g. proximity, to
proceed with a refined query or a mouse event.
Proximity with respect to a particular person spotted
in the map can give rise to new queries. A more
direct link, however, is visible when clicking in an
expertise-“country”: this results in a complete list of
persons with the particular expertise in “guru” order
(top expert first).
• Browsing through map. Viewing the map will spawn
new browse actions within the map (e.g. zoom in,
pan). Here also the user is facilitated to eventually
proceed with clicking on “cities” in a “country” in
order to cross-connect to the list.
• Association from list. By a mouse event or typing a
person’s name or an expertise, one may associate a
person from the list part to other persons with
similar properties in the map. In this way the user is
facilitated to continue his search by browsing.

5. Evaluation of the concept
The purpose of this section is to answer the two
major research questions, stated in the Introduction:
• Can (from a user perspective) querying with results
presented in a list be combined with visual browsing
in a single retrieval concept?
• Do users understand this combination and does it
help them search more efficiently?
Before answering these questions we will first describe
the user test and have a look into ways to evaluate this
concept.
User test
Precision and recall measures have been widely used
for comparing the ranking results of non-interactive
systems, but are less appropriate for assessing interactive
systems [4]. In interactive settings users require only a
few relevant documents and do not care about high recall
to evaluate highly interactive information assess systems,
useful metrics beyond precision and recall include: time
required to learn the system, time required to achieve
goals on benchmark tasks, error rates, and retention of
the use of the interface over time. Nielsen [5] advocates a
more informal evaluation approach (called heuristic
evaluation) in which user interface affordances are
assessed in terms of more general properties and without
concern about statistically significant rules.
Therefore our user test was conducted in a prepared
environment consisting of four A1 sized flipover sheets,
which were attached to the wall. One to introduce the
users to the concept and three following ones for three
PhotoPhone+ instances (each with different domain and
cue selection): projectBrowsing, expertiseBrowsing,
personBrowsing. On a table a laptop computer with an
prototype of PhotoPhone+ was available for some task
assignments.
Co-discovery was also used to evaluate the concept.
This is a technique which is used by pairs of users to do
an initial free exploration (i.e. “think aloud”, so that the
observers can hear it), followed by a walkthrough steered
by certain tasks. In total fifteen first-time users
participated in seven sessions of one hour each. Each
session, conducted by a pair of users, was concluded
with questions, remarks and discussion.
Evaluation
When answering both questions we have to deal with
three important and unfamiliar aspects of our retrieval
concept:
• Specifying a relation (domain and cue) next to the
unfamiliarity in expressing a relation (e.g. proximity
in expertise space) in order to obtain visual cues
about the structure of the expertise space instead of
just a list of query results as a list.
• Expressing similarity as proximity in a twodimensional map. The problem here is the
unfamiliarity of using geometric distance as a cue
for how related concepts are.
Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

•

Combining the list and the map in a single coherent
user interface.

The difficulty to understand these aspects was noticed by
the users. The users gave three reasons for this difficulty,
which we will address below.
Specifying a relation
For users who are familiar with specifying queries the
concept of expressing a relation is rather unusual. The
relation is defined within a domain, which has a more or
less hidden structure. In this domain entities known by
the user can be defined which, after processing, are
helpful in visualizing this hidden structure. This structure
is revealed by the clustering of similar entities
(visualized by the cue “person Ids”). Although people
understood the benefit of a pre-query visualized
structure, it took some time to get used to it and not fall
into the ‘danger’ of endless querying.
Expressing similarity as proximity
As in geography where neighboring regions often
share common landscapes, “neighboring” experts share a
common set of expertises. This means that similarity
between the set of expertises of two different persons is
expressed by proximity. This helps to get an overview
over the domain the user is searching in (in our case the
expertise domain) and facilitates the divergent phase of
the search process. Also the users recognized that
proximity could facilitate “surprise” because a person
was unexpectedly associated with another person based
on their expertise (serendipity).
The generalization powers of the map could also use
this similarity to indicate the success of a person to
acquire comparable knowledge (education). This
indication could be based on the distance between both
the persons that acquired this knowledge successfully
and another person.
Combining list and map
The combination of the list and the map was the
easiest aspect to understand. Some people started with
querying and saw instantaneous results in the map and
were tempted to click on the highlighted “country” or
“city” in the map once a while. Other users associated
with expertise “countries” rather directly. In either way:
clicking in the map changes the list view.
To summarize it was understood that the concept is
complementary to the traditional approach, which
presents a list or a map view. But due to issues not
directly related with the concept, e.g. feature extraction,
further research must be done to exclude the fact that the
remarks made by users truly have nothing to do with our
concept.

6. Conclusions and Recommendations
In general the idea of steering the browsing process
in order to formulate “better” queries has been well
accepted by the users, based on their evaluation. Also the

combination of the interacting list and map view was
well accepted. The specification of a domain-cue pair has
been found a little odd at first sight, but most people
recognized its usefulness after using it for a while. It is
recommended to research the possibility of extending
this domain-and-cue concept to more application areas in
order to discover the potential for a core technology in
knowledge mapping.
Geographic maps However, people think very
differently about the usefulness of geographic maps;
some find it very appealing, others object against it. This
correlates with what was stated in [1]. Some of the latter
did like the Aqua Browser concept8, a relatively new and
more dynamic concept that does not have the long track
record of geographic maps. Reasons for this difference
could be: the unfamiliarity of using geographical maps
for these purposes, the absence of support for
personalized visualization (which type of map?), the
feature extraction which resulted in low quality of the
maps, etc. Because we have good reason to believe that
the quality of the feature extraction biased the user to
find the geographic representation of the maps as nonappealing, this issue should be addressed first. This will
help stipulate if there is dependence between these two
issues or not.
Quality issues Several valid remarks are made
regarding the quality of PhotoPhone+. The cartographic
implementation is poor. Users gave us advice to use real
GIS-tooling for this purpose (map quality, ready made
functionality as zoom, pan). Another issue is that
expertise and other types of information vary in time. For
this reason there is a need for more dynamic behavior of
the map, for instance: dynamics in context (e.g. expertise
decays), growing and shrinking of maps including
dynamics in hierarchy. In order to facilitate recurrent
usage of maps it is essential that successively generated
maps resemble each other to some extent.
Paths and hyper-maps “Paths” can be seen as a
way to add extra information to the map. One of the
ideas was to express the development path of a particular
person’s expertise as a real path covered over time and
using this for e.g. personal career management.
Hyper-maps also add extra information but in this case
the “narrowness” of the 2D map forces the proximity of
certain concepts to be expressed by a separate “line”
(like an airline) when they cannot be positioned close to
each other in the map. Selection of the right map to cover
this relation in a normal distance metric is possible
(hyper-jump).

References
[1]

8

R. Baeza-Yates and B. Ribeiro-Neto.
Information Retrieval. New York. 1999.

www.aquabrowser.com

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Modern

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

H. Chen, A.L. Houston, R.R. Sewell, and B.R. Schatz.
Internet browsing and searching: User evaluations of
category map and concept space techniques. In Journal
of the American Society for Information Science, 49(7):
582-608. 1998.
P.R. Keller and M.M. Keller. Visual clues: Practical Data
Visualization. IEEE Computer Society Press. 1993.
E. Lagergren and P. Over. Comparing interactive
information retrieval systems across sites: The TREC-6
interactive track matrix experiment. In Proc. Of the 21st
Annual Int. ACM SIGIR Conference, pages 164-172,
Melbourne, Australia 1998.
J. Nielsen. Usability Engineering. Boston, Academic
Press. 1993.
G. Marchionini. Information seeking in electronic
environments. Cambridge, USA: Cambridge University
Press. 1995.
S-J. Chang and R.E. Rice. Browsing: A
multidimensional framework. In M. Williams (Ed.),
Annual review of information science and technology,
vol. 28, 231-276. White Plains, NY: Knowledge
Industries. 1993.
M. Liu and M.W. Reed. The relationship between the
learning strategies and learning styles in a Hypermedia
environment. In Computer in Human Behavior, 10 (4),
419-434. 1994.
Willem-Olaf Huijsen, Samuel Driessen and Jan Jacobs.
Explicit conceptualizations for Knowledge Mapping. In
ICEIS 2004 International Conference on Enterprise
Information. 2004.
Onno Romijn and Ruud Janssen, InfoScout: an
interaction concept for exploring information spaces.
(Internal Océ Report 2002).
Teuvo Kohonen. Self-Organizing Maps. Springer; 3
edition. 2000.
Herman Pieter van Berkel, Jan Jacobs and Ruud Janssen.
Research into the usefulness of an information map.
(Internal Océ Report 2003).
Robert Spence. Information Visualisation. ACM Press
Addison Wesley. 2001.
Colin Ware. Information Visualisation. Perception for
Design. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco
2000.
M.N. Wexler. The who, what and why of knowledge
mapping. In Journal of Knowledge Management, Vol 5,
No 3, 249-263. 2001.
E.F. Vail III. Mapping Organisational knowledge. In
Knowledge Management Review, Vol 8, 10-15.
May/June 1999.
R. Cross, A. Parker, L. Prusak and S.P. Borgatti.
“Knowing what we know: supporting knowledge
creation and sharing in social networks”, In
Organizational Dynamics Vol 30, No 2, pp. 100-120.
2001.
P.L. Pirolli, W. Fu, E.H. Chi and A.O. Farahat.
“Information scent and web navigation: Theory, models,
and automated usability evaluation”, In Human
Computer Interaction International 2005. Las Vegas;
NV; USA. July 22-27 2005.

