Changing Visual Practices
Catelijne Coopmans, Jennifer Whyte
Innovation Studies Centre, Tanaka Business School, Imperial College London, UK.
C.Coopmans@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract
In emerging theoretical models of innovation, digital
simulation and prototyping tools are described as new
means of production. However, relatively little is known
about how such digital tools are used in construction
and other industrial contexts, in particular how they are
changing visual practices. In this paper, we present a
study of the changes associated with interactive 3D
technologies between 1990 and 2005 and we situate the
findings in the context of innovation theory. With an
empirical focus on the construction and film/television
industries, our study is based both on the analysis of
articles in trade publications and on interviews with key
stakeholders. The dataset suggests that aspirations for
these technologies are closely linked to their role as
means of production; however, new practices also
develop around the technologies as ends. We highlight
preliminary implications of this study for industry, and
give suggestions for further research in this area.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we focus on how new visualization
technologies – particularly interactive 3D technologies
for simulation, digital prototyping and modelling –
affect the practices of designers, engineers and
managers, both in construction and in other sectors.
There is great excitement about new digital technologies
as integrated project models, simulation and prototyping
tools begin to be used on major construction projects
such as Heathrow Terminal 5, a £4.2bn project to create
a new terminal at Heathrow Airport, London, UK [1];
and on major infrastructure projects such as the Channel
Tunnel Rail Link, which accommodates high-speed rail
services between London and Paris. This excitement is
shared by the research community following sustained
research aimed at developing new visualization
technologies for use in the sector [e.g. 2, 3, 4]. It
suggests that innovative work may increasingly become

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

supported by a digital infrastructure, which alters and
intensifies ways of working, collaborating and
managing [5].
However, several studies have shown that the
availability of new technology by itself does not
immediately or automatically bring about changes in
practices. In relation to visual technologies, for
example, Howell’s [6] study of the early history of the
medical X-ray in the United States shows that the
success of the X-ray as a new form of diagnostic
evidence cannot be understood with reference to
technological factors alone. Although many American
hospitals already had X-ray machines around 1900, it
was not until 1925 that X-ray examinations began to be
carried out routinely. Howell argues that two things had
to happen in order to turn the hospital into a favourable
environment for a massive uptake of X-ray technology:
the professionalization of radiologists as a group of
physicians with special skills that would perform tests
for a fee, and the introduction of bureaucratic structures,
including forms for reporting results.
“In brief,
although the x ray had an immediate and widespread
impact on medical ideas, its incorporation into medical
practice was far slower than the medical literature
would suggest.” (p. 104, italics added)
This raises a number of questions for those who, like
us, are concerned with understanding how new
visualization technologies change visual practices and
hence wider production processes. What are the
mechanisms through which new technologies impact on
ideas and on practice? What are the skills and structures
that may be associated with massive uptake and use of
new digital technologies in production? How do
changing visual practices alter wider production
processes?
Emerging theoretical models of innovation describe
technologies for simulation, prototyping and 3D
modelling as becoming central to innovation processes
and altering them [5]. They build on Rothwell’s work
on ‘fifth generation’ innovation [7], which sees faster
development speed and greater efficiency being
achieved through use of an electronic toolkit that allows

for networking and systems integration. Underlying
these emerging theoretical models of innovation is an
understanding of digital tools as new ‘means of
production’, in the sense that they are becoming an
important and integral part of the infrastructure through
which new products and services are developed and
delivered.
We build on these models, as well as on a number of
studies that have empirically explored the impact of
simulation and prototyping practices within firms, both
with regard to experimentation and problem solving
[e.g. 8, 9] and visual cultures of design more generally
[e.g. 10]. Our main argument in the paper is that in
order to understand changing visual practices, it is
necessary to see the emerging uses of digital models as
both the ‘means’ and the ‘ends’ of production. Before
introducing that argument and the data in which it is
grounded, the next section provides a brief outline of
our approach.

2. Method and Setting
The temporal unfolding of change processes is
particularly difficult for researchers to understand and
requires a contextual approach [11]. It is in the context
of a broader and extended engagement with practice with participation in industry events, interviews with
key participants and reading of the trade press - that we
set out to investigate the mechanisms of change in
visual practices and their impact on wider production
processes.1
Data was collected from the construction sector and,
to a lesser extent, from film and television production.
The latter provides an interesting contrast to
construction as its output is visual, yet non-material.
Practices in film and television production are geared
towards the creation of convincing and exciting visual
effects – a spectacle – rather than something functional
and tangible. As, through the analysis, we became
interested in the uses of visualization technologies as
means and ends of production, we were fascinated by
the different ways in which this plays out in these two
different sectors.
Our approach is multi-method and qualitative. We
started out by analysing trade publications for the period
1991-2005 to ground our understanding of how digital
visualization technologies have been discussed and used
in 1) construction, and 2) film and television production,
over the past fifteen years. We used the online database
1 Our understanding of the emerging relationships between
visualization technologies and practices within leading firms draws on
the second author’s previous work in this area, particularly in relation
to the design, construction, management and use of the built
environment (e.g. [12]).

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

Factiva, which contains over 9,000 articles from
newspapers, journals, magazines, news and radio
transcripts. Our principal search term was ‘virtual
reality’ because this returned most relevant results. We
searched for the occurrence of the term in the headline
or first paragraph of English-language articles appearing
in the “construction and real estate” press and in the
“media” press in the period 1991-2005. This provided a
very crude overview of unfolding ideas and practices
around new visualization tools over the period.
To get a better understanding of these dynamics in
the construction sector, we selected Building for a more
detailed qualitative analysis of coverage of digital
visualization tools over the years. An award-winning
UK professional magazine with a weekly circulation of
25,000, Building offers general news coverage of
construction, including projects, on-site cases, new
products and technology. Using Factiva, we analysed a
more comprehensive set of articles appearing from July
1987 onwards which mention keywords including
‘virtual reality’ (36 finds), ‘visualisation’ (15 finds)
and/or ‘simulation’ (16 finds) in the headline or first
paragraph, whereby we concentrated on changes in the
way digital visualization tools are seen to affect visual
practices in construction.
In addition, to reach a deeper understanding of these
changes, we present two vignettes – one from
film/television production and one from construction –
reflecting on the types of visual practices that are
emerging around the implementation of new
technologies. These illustrative examples are taken from
our interview-based work across a number of leading
firms. Both vignettes involved visits to the firms in
question and interviews with those involved in creating,
using and/or managing digital models, supported by
work from secondary sources.

2.1. Overview of the dataset 1991-2005
Fluctuations in how much the technology is talked
about in the professional press gives an extremely crude
indication of change over time, as shown in Figure 1.
The series a) construction, shows the numbers of
articles on virtual reality per year in the construction
press, with a total of 214 over the period 1 January 1991
to 31 December 2005. The series b) film/television
shows the numbers of articles on virtual reality per year
in the film/television production press, with a total of
733 articles on the topic.
These archival data show that interest in virtual
reality in the construction and real estate trade press
surged and peaked in the mid-1990s. Some journals
offer remarkably more coverage of the topic than others.
The top three for frequency of reporting were UK

publication Building (36 hits); US publication
Engineering News-Record (24 hits) and a UK
publication that was only represented in the database
from 1 January 1997, Building Design (14 hits). This is
in contrast to comparable data from the media trade
press, which is not only at a higher volume, but surges
and peaks earlier in the mid-1990s. Of journals included
in this database, the top three for frequency of reporting
on virtual reality were the UK publication Multimedia
Futures (119 hits) which is represented in the database
from 12 February 1996 until 23 October 1998 when it
was discontinued; the UK publication Screen Digest (86
hits) represented from 1 December 1991 onwards); and
the US publication Hollywood Reporter (51 hits) from 1
March 1991. The peak in reporting is followed by a
much sharper drop than was the case for construction,
and it is worth noting that Multimedia Futures, the
journal with the most entries, is one with a very short
life-span, with it discontinuity exactly located where the
graph starts to drop.

130
120

a) construction

110

b) film/television

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

2005

2004

2003

2002

2001

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

0

Figure 1. Number of articles per year on
virtual reality in the trade media for a)
construction and b) film/television production

3. Dynamics of ideas and practices
In other to evaluate the extent to which new digital
technologies are beginning to be perceived and used as
new means of production, we had to undertake a more
detailed study of articles on this topic in the trade
media. Tables 1 and 2 show our analysis of the content
of articles in Building magazine, in which we have
made a distinction between announcements and reports
on the promise and potential of digital visualization

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

technologies on the one hand (ideas), and evidence of
actual use on the other (practice).2

3.1. Means of production
Our data show that, when it comes to future promise
and potential, there are two main aspects of work which
are believed will be dramatically affected by the use of
digital modelling and visualization systems. The first is
design review, which relates to the ability of the key
parties in the process to engage with emerging designs
in ways that were hitherto impossible. This includes the
evaluation of the performance of a future building by
engineers (in terms of, for example, safety, airflow,
energy use, lighting and crowd movement – see Table 1,
IDEAS quotes 1,2,3), as well as the review of aesthetic
and use quality of a future space by architects and
clients (IDEAS quotes 4,5).
The second aspect expected to benefit from new
digital tools is the planning of the construction process.
Here the focus is not so much on creating a satisfactory
end product (a building or piece of infrastructure) as on
streamlining the way work is organized to achieve
timely, cost-effective and safe delivery. With the help of
new technologies, elements of the process of delivery –
such as logistics on site or a particularly difficult
installation – can be visualized, discussed amongst
relevant team members and changed or tweaked if
necessary before construction starts (see IDEAS quotes
6,7). The properties of digital visualization systems
which are considered crucial in turning such potential
into reality include good quality graphics (which work
on ordinary PCs), object-oriented modelling (which
defines the relationships between various design
components and thus allows for updates to be
automatically ‘translated’ throughout the design), and
the integration of knowledge from various areas of
expertise (including various engineering disciplines,
materials science and behavioural psychology).
Emerging understandings of the potential for
changing visual practices highlight the ability of
designers, managers (and to some degree clients) to
achieve better outcomes by playing with different
options in computer generated environments. Though
the data are much less abundant, we found some
evidence that digital tools are beginning to be used in
such a way. In the area of design review, one of the
most commonly reported uses is the detection of clashes
or design problems before construction starts. For
example, evacuation simulations, whereby exits and
2 As a rule of thumb we chose to interpret statements which include
the words ‘can/could’ or ‘will’ as indicating future potential, whereas
descriptions about applications in past tense were understood as
evidence of use.

escape routes are tested against virtual crowd behaviour
(programmed by behavioural algorithms), sometimes
lead to alterations to an initial design (see Table 1,
PRACTICE quotes 1,2). Increasingly, other aspects of
the performance of, particularly, public buildings like
hospitals – including airflow and lighting – are
evaluated in a similar way (PRACTICE quote 3).
Digital visualizations are also being used for design
review by future users, to elicit comments and
discussion at a stage when plans can still be altered
(PRACTICE quotes 4,5). Evidence of the use of visual
models for the planning of construction sequences and
on-site logistics is scarcer (though see PRACTICE 6
and our vignette, below).
Overall, although we found some indication of
practices associated with the use of digital visual tools
as means of production, this was far outweighed by
coverage on the future potential of such a use.

3.2. Ends of production
There is considerably more excitement associated
with the promise and potential of the use of digital
models as new means of production than with their use
as ends in themselves. Nevertheless, in our data we did
find some examples of the latter. These examples
highlight the benefits to be had from using
visualizations as a controlled way of giving others
access to the finalized design. What is emphasized here
is the potential of using digital tools for presentation,
demonstration/briefing and communication purposes –
in short, for ‘getting the message across’ (see Table 2,
IDEAS quotes 1,2).
Our data suggest that in the period 1991-2005 a
significant proportion of the actual use of digital visual
model was organized around the creation of visual
effects. Sales, marketing, public relations and client
briefing were amongst the earliest application areas to
receive a boost from the implementation of new visual
tools. In the late 1990s, arguably the biggest commercial
success story around the use of virtual reality was in its
use as a sales tool by house builders (see Table 2,
PRACTICE quote 1). For high profile public buildings
such as the Millennium Dome, digital visual models
became a focal point for informing (and gaining support
from) potential sponsors and the media (see PRACTICE
quote 2). An example of less public use, but still with a
strong focus on presentation and demonstration, is the
briefing of own personnel or clients about aspects of the
construction process (PRACTICE quote 3).
Overall, although we found that end-use generated
less excitement in the trade press, much actual use
appeared to be related to practices of briefing,
demonstrating and presenting.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

3.3. Digital tools and visual practices
In sum, though our analysis of trade media we found
indications that digital technologies are changing
practices in the construction sector along the lines
suggested by recent models of innovation – yet we also
found evidence of practices less easily accommodated
within the understanding of digital tools as new means
of production. Such practices are characterized by
making the experience of a simulation or 3D model an
end in itself. Rather than using the process of simulation
or digital prototyping as a way of having people
communicate and collaborate around the design or
delivery of the built environment, the output of such a
process is shown to others as a more or less finalized
result – usually for purposes of instruction, for
consensus building or for winning work or bids.
Whereas theories which understand digital tools as new
means of production emphasize the first, our analysis
suggests that if we want to develop a better insight into
changing visual practices, it is important not to exclude
the second.
When we look at the practices in firms we have
studied, it emerges that how these two modes of use
differ and how they relate is largely dependent on the
industrial context in which digital tools are
implemented. In what follows, we compare and contrast
two such contexts: film/television production (with
particular reference to computer-generated special
effects) and construction. We show that, in the case of
film production, digital models function as means and
as ends of production simultaneously. In construction,
on the other hand, current practices are characterized by
a disassociation between means and ends, whereby
more often than not, different digital models are
developed for the different modes of use.

4. Simultaneous means / ends in practice:
Framestore CFC
At London-based digital special effects and computer
animation studio Framestore CFC, a small team of 2-3
people uses a range of digital tools to ‘capture’ 3D data
which serves as the input for computer generated
animation. Framestore is the biggest post-production
company for film and television outside the United
States, with approximately 480 staff, and often the
challenge for this team is to produce visual elements
(backgrounds, props or animated characters) that can be
integrated with live action. The office in which they
work is full of props and toys, relics of previous projects
and inspiration for ongoing work.

What is produced through this work is not a material
object but rather a purely aesthetic experience, whereby
the virtual model serves simultaneously as the means
and the end of the production process. Whereas in
construction, the virtual model tends to precede the built
environment, in film animation the environment serves
as the starting point for the virtual model, which is then
translated into something that looks convincing on
screen. The creation of special effects is driven by the
importance of evoking the ‘right’ reaction in the
audience, supporting people’s imagination and
persuading them to suspend their disbelief and ‘buy
into’ the experience for the duration of the show. A
feature of work on the cutting edge of film animation is
that the threshold for suspension of disbelief continues
to move upwards. A member of the team describes the
scouting and sourcing of new technologies to produce
more convincing renderings as a central part of his job.
An example of well-known work by the team is the
BBC/Discovery Channel mini-series ‘Walking with
Dinosaurs’ (1999), for which Framestore created the
creatures. The dinosaurs in the programme were
scanned from clay sculptures (maquettes) and then rebuilt in the computer. A set of proprietary software tools
was developed to capture as much of the 3D form and
texture detail as possible. In addition, the Framestore
team collected so-called survey data and reference
information from the live-action shooting to synthesize
the actual and the virtual ecosystem into a credible
depiction of dinosaur life over 65 million years ago.
What is especially interesting in the case of ‘Walking
with Dinosaurs’ and other documentaries is the use of
computer animation as a way of bringing history to life,
portraying creatures whose visual appearance we only
know by approximation. In this context, we find that
what is intended to be an end in itself, namely a credible
and exciting visual experience, sometimes unexpectedly
becomes a means to further understanding. During work
on one of the later programmes in the BBC series on
Prehistoric Life, ‘Walking with Cavemen’ (2003),
Framestore’s animators collaborated with scientists to
inform the creation and animation of the early hominids.
A member of the team relates:
“A world expert on this creature was talking about how it moved,
so that our animator could animate it, once the animator had done it as
told it just looked wrong. It looked like it was doing a squat walk and
parts of the body where hitting each other. So he animated it again
and again, and each time it just looked as if this thing would walk ten
paces and just collapse. It looked excruciatingly painful.”

Out of frustration, the animator departed from the
theory to experiment with alternative movement
sequences for the hominid:

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

“So finally he decided to animate it in the way he thought it should
be animated, in the way that it would move, given its form and
structure. And when the expert came in and took a look at it, initially,
his response was, no, no, no, but then he looked at it and in motion
and went, dong, yes, that’s exactly how it should have walked given
its modelled form, and he amended his science.”

Playing with the visual presentation of the data led to
a re-conceptualization of the scientific knowledge.
So, in the case of Framestore, much of the
prototyping and scanning is directed towards making
the audience see the rendering as a convincing
representation of what, for example dinosaurs or early
humans would have looked like. In this sense, digital
visual models serve simultaneously as means and as
ends, and are shaping practices in the quest to keep up
with increasing expectations (and a never abating
appetite for the ‘new’) on the part of cinema and
television audiences. At times, as the example of the
hominid illustrates, the high-tech visualization also
generated new insights, extending existing scientific
knowledge and theory.

5. Disassociated means and ends in practice:
St Pancras International Terminal
The Channel Tunnel Rail Link (CTRL) project is one
of a number of major international construction projects
in which firms are pioneering new visual practices. We
observe that these practices use visualization as both
means and ends in production processes. However, in
contrast to the previous example, in this industrial
context the two modes of use are often disassociated.
We will take as an example CTRL contract 105: the
transformation of St Pancras Station in London to
accommodate Eurostar high-speed rail services. The
project associated with this contract is a complex and
lengthy one, not least due to the fact that St Pancras
Station is a Grade-1 listed building (built in 1864–1868)
with a number of historic features that need to be
preserved in the midst of new construction. Some of the
work involves the integration of old and new structures,
such as the extension of the original Victorian platforms
by 185m in order to accommodate the longer Eurostar
trains.
One of the key features turning digital technologies
into new means of production is the integration of
various types of data, and the analysis of such clusters
of data in visual form. The work on reinforcement
detailing for the West Deck of the St Pancras extension,
undertaken by construction contractor Laing O’Rourke,
is an illustrates of this. Digital 3D prototypes were built
for each of the elements in the Deck’s superstructure:
connecting beams, columns and slabs. These prototypes
were discussed among relevant members of the

construction team (engineers, foremen and trade hands)
before on-site work began. They helped the team to
collectively arrive at a solution (the use of timber
templates) and generated a number of formal site
queries which saved time on site.
As the means of production, digital technologies
were also used in the integration of new with old. A
digital model of the St Pancras’ Victorian Gothic steel
train shed was made on the basis of copies of original
construction drawings and site photos. This allowed the
engineers of Laing O’Rourke to visualize clashes and
the risks of damage to the old structure associated with
the construction of new structures for the extension
nearby.
A third use of these digital models was in planning
and trialling the construction process. Initially
constructed for the purpose of design review, the
prototypes formed the basis for the generation of socalled ‘visual method statements’ and animated
sequences laying out the order of work to be done. The
ability to generate such sequences is central to what
makes digital prototyping valuable to the organization,
yet it depends crucially on the use of digital
visualizations as an end in itself: “[v]isual method
statements have effectively been used to brief all team
members, carpenter, concreter, steelfixer, surveyor and
technician, on a number of different global and specific
sequences,” (Laing O’Rourke project sheet, 2005).
Here, visual practices revolve not so much around
engagement with particular aspects of the built
environment as around the communication of work to
those responsible for doing it.
A closely related example of the use of digital
technologies to generate preliminary ‘ends’ is in
communications with clients. Clients, and in many cases
regulators, need to be kept involved in the construction
process and need to give approval at crucial stages.
They can only do this when convinced that appropriate
solutions are being arrived at and that work is going
according to plan. Visual representations, which could
be variations on the visual method statements generated
for internal use, have helped Laing O’Rourke secure
approvals quicker, because they give clients a sense of
what is happening without overloading them with detail.
Yet again, it is clear that communication of a status quo,
rather than an exploratory engagement with the built
environment, is the main purpose of such practice.
Our discussion of ongoing work on St Pancras
International Terminal indicates that construction
companies trying to integrate the use of interactive 3D
models with their practices tend to do so by alternating
between their use as means and as ends. Sometimes
there are clear divisions and disassociations between
these two modes of use: models can be archived in

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

separate folders and can develop quite separately, given
the demands for highly realistic presentation versus the
demands for quick decision-making. There are other
times when in practice it is difficult to distinguish
between the use of digital visual models as means and
as ends. Sometimes what starts as a briefing leads to
further changes in the design of a component or
construction sequence.
Conversely, the use of digital models inevitably puts
constraints on the scope for contributions offered in the
course of collaborative work [13]. While for managers
and planners the visual method statement may serve as a
prototype (in the sense that it gives rise to the controlled
exploration of how best to plan construction), for
operatives on site it serves as a visual aid for
communicating what has already been decided. The
question whose visual practices are affected (and when
and how) is intimately related to the question how much
access to and engagement with the digital model is
afforded to different stakeholders.

6. Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we have argued that to understand
changing visual practices, it is necessary to see the
emerging uses of digital models as both the ‘means’ and
the ‘ends’ of production. On the one hand, as emerging
theoretical models of innovation indicate, digital tools
for the creation of simulations, prototypes and 3D
models can be understood as new means for organizing
the design, development and delivery of products and
services [5]. On the other hand, our data suggest they
often become ends in themselves, used as powerful
visual illustrations in support of an argument or decision
rather than a vehicle for discussion. The vignettes
provide an indication of how these two modes of use
differ and relate in two very different industrial
contexts.
One reason why end-use has generated less
excitement in the literature may be that it is considered a
less radical departure from existing ways of designing,
engineering and managing the construction of the built
environment. Yet our study shows significant evidence
of new visual practices emerging around this type of use
in industrial contexts. This resonates with findings of
other scholars indicating that technologies affect
practices not necessarily in the same way as they affect
ideas about practice.
As well as being of theoretical interest to scholars of
innovation and design, understanding the changes in
visual practices as new digital technologies become
more widely used has practical importance for those
making decisions on the purchase of such technologies
and those managing their implementation and use

within organizations.
Value may be found in
unexpected places: in the short term, digital tools may
generate benefits by enhancing on-site and client
communication, even if implementing a fully functional
single model environment remains unfeasible. In
addition, digital visualization technologies are more
likely to gain acceptance and make a difference within
firms when they are deployed in a flexible way:
different use-modes may serve different stages and
stakeholders in the design process.
It is no coincidence that arguments about shifts in
visual culture (and therefore in visual practice) tend to
be made on the basis of comparisons between historical
periods or geographically distant communities [e.g. 14];
it is much more difficult to pinpoint possible indications
of such a shift in our own time, close to home. Without
the benefit of hindsight and lacking the vantage point
afforded by distance, things do not appear so clear-cut
and we find ourselves in the messy and sometimes
contradictory world of emerging practices. We suggest
that it is important to consider such practices, especially
for students of innovation-as-process and those who are
interested in the mechanisms by which new
technologies can change ways of working within the
construction sector. We have used the distinction of
‘means’ versus ‘ends’ as a way of focusing the
discussion on emerging practices, including those not so
much associated with the technology’s potential.
Further research is needed to specify the way in which
the relationship between digital models as means and as
ends unfolds in the visual practices in construction and
other sectors. Based on our research to date we expect
the two to be complementary and mutually reinforcing.

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

References
[1] Harty, Chris, “Innovation in Construction: a Sociology of
Technology Approach”, Building Research and Information,
2005, 33 (6), p. 512-522.
[2] Aouad, G., T. Child, F. Marir, and P. Brandon,
“Developing a Virtual Reality Interface for an Integrated
Project Database Environment”, IEEE International
Conference on Information Visualisation (IV'97), 1997,
London, pp. 192-199.
[3] Anumba, C.J., N.M. Bouchlaghem, J.K. Whyte, and A.
Duke, “Perspectives on a Shared Construction Project Model”,
International Journal of Cooperative Information Systems,
2000, 9 (3), pp. 283-313.
[4] Koo, B. and M. Fischer, “Feasibility Study of 4D CAD in
Commercial Construction”, Journal of Construction
Engineering and Management, 2000, 126 (4), pp. 251-260.
[5] Dodgson, M., D. Gann, and A. Salter, Think, Play Do:
Technology, Innovation, and Organization, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2005.
[6] Howell, J.D., Technology in the Hospital: Transforming
Patient Care in the Early Twentieth Century, Johns Hopkins
University Press, Baltimore, 1995.
[7] Rothwell, R., “Towards the Fifth-generation Innovation
Process”, International Marketing Review, 1994, 11 (1), pp. 731.
[8] Thomke, S.H., “Simulation, Learning, and R&D
Performance: Evidence from Automotive Development”,
Research Policy, 1998, 27 (1), pp. 55-74.
[9] Becker, M.C., P. Salvatore, and F. Zirpoli, “The Impact of
Virtual Simulation Tools on Problem-solving and New
Product Development Organization”, Research Policy, 2005,
34 (9), pp. 1305-1321.
[10] Henderson, K., On Line and On Paper: Visual
Representations, Visual Culture and Computer Graphics in
Design Engineering, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1999.
[11] Pettigrew, A.M., R.W. Woodman, and K.S. Cameron,
“Studying Organizational Change and Development:
Challenges for Future Research”, Academy of Management
Journal, 2001, 44 (4), pp. 697-713.
[12] Whyte, J.K., Virtual Reality and the Built Environment,
Architectural Press, Oxford, 2002. [13] Schrage, M., Serious
Play: How the World's Best Companies Simulate to Innovate,
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 2000.
[14] Crary, J., Techniques of the Observer: On Vision and
Modernity in the Nineteenth Century, MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass., 1993.

Table 1. Excerpts from articles in Building, on use of interactive 3D as the means of production
IDEAS: New technologies, initiatives and potential

PRACTICE: Actual use / practice

Design review (engineering data analysis): simulation of evacuation, airflow etc.
As the means
of production

1) Simulation potential: “egress flow rates can be
checked against factors such as people gradually
slowing down when climbing stairs as they get tired,
parents going against the flow to round up children, or
families grouping together.” (1993)
2) Technique development: “Mott MacDonald is
pioneering virtual reality techniques to examine air
flows and smoke movement in projects such as the
Athens metro, the Heathrow Express and buildings…”
(1996)
3) Integration: “The IES tool is called Virtual
Environment and consists of a suite of modules that
can analyse a multitude of conditions including
airflow, temperature, lighting, solar analysis and
evacuation routes. All these analysis models can then
be integrated into a single model.” (2005)

1) Simulation use: "the maximum egress rate is
about 100 people per minute because people start to
push in from the sides. […] putting in a 40 mmthick barrier outside the doorway, the flow rate
increases by about 35%." (quoted in 1993)
2) Simulation use: “It was clear from the
playback that a blockage was occurring [...]
Alterations were made to the geometry of the
escape route and the simulation revealed that
escape times had been considerably reduced.”
(2000)
3) Design verification: “The model […]
indicated there was a good flow of clean air where
it was most needed around the patient and over the
instruments trolley, and there were no patches of
still air where dust and micro-organisms could
build up.” (2005)
Design review (aesthetic and use quality): discussion of design with end users

4) Accurate feel: “Both designer and client can
benefit […] An observer of any specified height can
walk around the building or "fly through" it, getting a
more accurate feel for the spaces and finishes...”
(1994)
5) Specifying options: “[H]ousebuilders as well as
consumers will soon be able to specify their kitchen
layouts by testing options in three-dimensional
computerised scenes.” (1995)

4) Discussion: "Using virtual reality was more
realistic and allowed us to discuss the design in a
more interactive way. It was a much more
comprehensive process than using drawings. There
were no preset routes.” (quoted in 1997)
5) Feedback: “The model was developed to
allow Amec to show DSS employees the interior
and exterior of their proposed scheme, thereby
enabling them to comment on their future working
environment.” (2001)

Planning of construction projects
6) Research: “An architect's presentation shows a
finished building, but we visualise it as a schedule or
process […] so the building can take shape before
your eyes.” (quote from a researcher, 1994)
7) New software: “will offer contractors the
potential to visualise and analyse the entire
construction sequence, from excavating the
foundations to installing lightning protection on the
completed roof, all on screen.” (2001)

6) Error finding: “Using the 3D model brought
other benefits to the construction manager. It
highlighted obvious programming errors: for
example, where a steel beam had been allocated an
installation date earlier than the two columns that
would support it, the beam would appear floating in
space.” (2001)

Table 2. Excerpts from articles in Building, on use of interactive 3D as the ends of production
Presentation / demonstration / communication

As ends of
production

1) Learning: “Getting the message across to
subcontractors can be much easier with a visualisation
of the project at each stage. The system can also be
used for training operatives. [user quote]: "Within the
model, I could take charge of a crane and someone
else could wear a head-mounted display and be a lorry
driver, so we could learn to work together…" (1996)
2) Presentation: “a software package […] can
generate virtual reality images of shop fronts and
curtain walling. It is aimed at architects, glaziers, shop
fitters and other building services companies and will
enable them to give prospective customers a colour
image of a finished design.” (1998)

Proceedings of the Information Visualization (IV’06)
0-7695-2602-0/06 $20.00 © 2006

IEEE

1) Sales: “3D interactive virtual reality is
helping Bellway Homes North West sell two
apartments a week, on average, since the launch of
its Bridgewater Bank development in Manchester
city centre.” (1996)
2) Sponsorship: “Potential sponsors are shown
virtual reality images of the zones … It is also used
for taking screen grabs, creating short video clips
for the media and giving …own staff a sneak
preview of how the interior will look.” (1998)
3) Stakeholder impacts: “Airport authority
BAA is using modelling software to demonstrate to
the users of Heathrow's Terminal One how work on
extensions will affect their operations.” (1994)

