2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Development of an Interactive Ramachandran Plot in Weave

Shweta Purushe, Sanjay Krishna Anbalagan and Georges Grinstein
Institute for Visualization and Perception Research, Department of Computer Science, University of
Massachusetts Lowell
{shweta_purushe@student.uml.edu, sanjay_anbalagan@student.uml.edu, grinstein@cs.uml.edu}
We
recently
developed
an
interactive
Ramachandran plot enabling the visualization of protein
data imported from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) [9].
In this paper we provide the background to
Ramachandran plots, why they are useful, discuss the
implementation of the plot in Weave and identify future
work.

Abstract
Current software systems having Ramachandran
Plots do not support interactivity with the visualization.
Current web-based Ramachandran Plot tools provide
only primitive analysis and simple report generation
features. In Weave (Web-based Analysis and
Visualization Environment), we have developed an
improved Ramachandran Plot with interactivity that
facilitates better analysis, sequence searching features
and supplementary visualizations. Weave provides
essential features facilitating broader amino acid
analysis, statistical computations and the advantages of
a more general web-based application.
1.

2. Background
Proteins are vital components of our diet and also form
structural components of the human anatomy. Proteins
are polymers of units called amino acids. The structure
of the protein backbone has the following appearance.

Introduction

The conformation of a protein, its domains and folds
is governed by the Phi (φ) and Psi (ψ) angles of the
protein backbone [1, 2]. These angles are the torsional
angles that describe the rotation of a polypeptide
backbone around the two bonds on either side of the Cα
atom [Figure 1]. The Ramachandran Plot is a twodimensional scatter plot of φ and ψ pairs overlaid on a
predicted distribution of the amino acids which constitute
the given polypeptide. For multiple decades this plot has
been used to decipher steric hindrances and constraints in
proteins. It was designed by Ramachandran et al [1] to
study the structure of the protein backbone in terms of
the two aforementioned angles.
We have developed a new web-based interactive
visualization environment, called Weave, which provides
a number of different visualization tools including
histograms, linegraphs, barcharts, scatterplots, radial
visualizations, for example [9]. Weave supports linked
highlighting, data subset generation and selection all
enabling better user involvement and analysis. In
addition, Weave includes an editor that communicates
with several ‘R’ statistical packages and an equation
editor to allow quick mathematical and statistical
calculations on the data being visualized.

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.109

Figure 1: Planar structure of the protein
backbone and the and angles [4]
The psi angle (ψ) defines the limit to which the Cα –
C bond can rotate in 3D space and the phi angle (φ)
defines the limit of rotation of the N – Cα bond [1].
Ramachandran [1] put forth the idea that if the protein
backbone were planar and in the trans configuration, the
overall conformation (shape in 3D space) can be defined
by specifying these ψ and φ angles.
Different secondary structure elements in proteins
have characteristic (φ, ψ) distributions and can be
visualized in the plot [1]. Each dot on the plot represents
a single (φ, ψ) pair for a single amino acid in the peptide
sequence. Theoretically the (φ, ψ) pairs can assume any
values. However due to steric constraints the ψ and φ
angles have particular values permissible within certain

232

concentrated and how they are spread thus indicating the
major secondary protein conformations in the protein [1].
When determining the overall structure of any protein by
any of the methods available such as NMR, X ray
crystallography, or homology modeling, biologists resort
to tools such as the Ramachandran plot to identify those
particular amino acid residues that require special
attention to convert existing unrealistic conformations in
the model to chemically realistic ones [1, 2].

regions [Figure 2]. These three regions are the β sheet,
the α helix and the αL helix. The two axes in the
Ramachandran plot range from 180° to -180° allowing a
clear and convenient distinction between these different
regions. Figure 3 shows the plot for high-resolution data.
The regions of the plot containing the highest
density of the dots are the “allowed” regions of the plot.
These represent low energy areas and highly possible
conformations of the protein. The empty areas of the plot
are those regions which represent forbidden values for
(φ, ψ) pairs and are high energy, unstable conformations
of the protein.

Figure 4: The Ramachandran Plot with contours
[4].

3. Motivations

Figure 2: The three allowed regions of the
Ramachandran plot are those having the
highest density (in grey) [4].

Although Ramachandran plots have been used
extensively to date, they are primitive and lack user
involvement and analysis. The Ramachandran Plot of the
Sirius Visualization Software developed by the San
Diego Computer Center and the RamachandranPlot2
developed by IISc, Bangalore [10], generate reports and
tables respectively. However, they do not provide
interaction and thus hamper complete analysis. STING
Millennium Suite [11] does offer many programs for
protein structure analysis; however linked visualization
and highlighting are not consistently available. Once
plotted, the protein data cannot be interactively explored.
There is also no feature that allows the user to visualize
subsets of the protein sequence within the entire
sequence context. We summarize our motivations below.
•

Figure 3: The Ramachandran plot for high
resolution data [4].

•

Figure 4 shows the contour lines which were
supplemented by Richardson [7 and 8]. He and his
coworkers studied the 98% and 99.98% contour lines
around the three cluster regions to demarcate the exact
limits of the Ramachandran plot.
When a protein is plotted on the Ramachandran plot, on
the basis of their ψ and φ angles, we can identify those
regions of the plot where the amino acids are

•

233

Interaction is extremely important to facilitate
analysis by the user. Any visualization and
analysis tool must allow interaction and
tweaking of the visualization by the user.
Data subset selection is necessary. The user
might be interested only in a particular
conformation within the protein or only a
particular sequence of amino acids at a
particular position.
As part of the analysis certain statistical
computations on the protein dataset might be
necessary. Simple metrics such as amino acid
counts and relative distributions are often
needed.

•

•

highlighting is in the form of a shadowed halo
surrounding each corresponding selected data point
accompanied with a tooltip displaying the given data.

Multiple methods to explore the protein dataset
should be provided. The user may want to
explore or search for certain motifs (amino acid
signatures) in the dataset.
Since most visualization systems, as does
Weave, provide the above requirements for
other visualizations it made sense to integrate
Ramachandran plots in Weave.

Additional supplementary visualizations such as pie
charts or colored histograms could also be used. Weave
provides support for multiple simultaneous linked
visualizations that can be displayed all at the same time.

4.4 Accompanying Statistical Editors

4. Results and Discussion

‘The R Project’, a powerful tool for statistical
computations is integrated with the Ramachandran plot.
The ‘R text editor’ is another tool available in Weave,
which can be used for analysis of the protein dataset.
This editor communicates with several packages of ‘R’.
Scripts for different types of analyses can either be
written or can be pasted in. Weave provides the
flexibility of storing images generated by the ‘R’ text
editor as well.

Although our first prototype was a standalone webbased Ramachandran plot, our goal was to incorporate it
in Weave [9]. Protein data from PDB is available over
the internet, and can be loaded into Weave and
visualized on-the-fly. Weave offers a quick, easy and
comprehensive system for the Ramachandran Plot.

4.1 Interactivity

We successfully used ‘R’ scripts to cluster amino
acids on the basis of their different properties, such as
hydrophilicity and charge.

Interactivity is the strongest and most significant
feature of the Ramachandran plot in Weave. It was
achieved through linked highlighting, subset selection
and tweaking different parts of the plot [Figure6 and 7].
Each of these if discussed below.

4.5 Motif Searching
Using ‘R’ we developed scripts for motif searching
within the protein sequence in the dataset. As seen in
Figure 6, the required sequence can be pasted within the
accompanying motif searcher to find any motif of
interest. The retrieved searches can be highlighted in a
color of choice. Motif searching can be indicative of
antigenic determinants and could provide clues regarding
domain conformations. Fast and thorough searches
throughout the sequences could hint at potential drug
targets.

4.2 Subset Selection
Data subset selection is allowed in the tabular data
as well as in the Ramachandran plot. The selected subset
can be exported to other file formats, visualized
separately, obtained as a separate table and analyzed.
This allows the user to investigate and analyze
particular amino acids relative to the whole protein
sequence. In addition to this, increased transparency of
the non-selected items allows us to focus on the selected
ones within the context of the entire protein sequence.

5. Ramachandran Plot in Weave

As can be seen in Figure 6, the amino acid residues
selected in the Ramachandran plot on the right pop up in
a separate visualization which remains linked to the plot.
This can be done using the popup button on the far righthand bottom of the plot. Each such selection produces a
new visualization.

4.3 Supplementary visualizations
As mentioned earlier Weave provides a variety of
visualization tools that allow the user to extend the
analysis quickly and efficiently. Figure 7 shows the use
of one such visualization, the histogram. The histogram
indicates the counts and relative distributions of the
amino acids within the protein sequence used. These can
be colored according to different variables as desired by
the user. When the cursor is moved over any of the bars,
linked highlighting occurs in the Ramachandran Plot as
well as in any other visualization that is being used. This

Figure 5: Flow of Control while using the
Ramachandran Plot in Weave

234

Figure 6: Ramachandran Plot in Weave shows the plot on the right, the supplementary histogram on the
upper left and motif search on the bottom left.

Figure 7: A pop up panel which can be moved provides additional controls for the Ramachandran Plot
including the mapping of visual attributes to parameters.

Weave’s interface accepts the PDB ID of a given
protein, and calls the RSCB Protein Data Bank.PDB in
turn returns a typical PDB file to Weave, where the file

can be further mined to filter different protein properties
of interest. The Ramachandran plot utilizes the Phi and
Psi angles [9].
235

6. Conclusion
Weave not only provides an interactive
Ramachandran plot but also serves as a rich visualization
environment offering other tools and statistical and
mathematical computational abilities. In contrast to the
other similar systems, Weave enables greater user
involvement and analysis.

[3]

We have described an interactive tool that has the
potential for protein conformations and amino acid
composition –dependent studies.

[5]

Our work focused on developing the technology
required to incorporate a functional Ramachandran Plot
into Weave.

[6]

[4]

[7]

7. Future Work

[8]

We are working on improving data import from the
PDB of all available proteins into Weave. We intend to
add a feature that provides metadata about the protein in
addition to its atom coordinates and amino acid details.
This metadata will include information about the protein,
how and when it was discovered, and its function and
purification techniques.

The
Open
Indicator
Consortium
(OIC):
www.openindicators.org
[10] Gopalakishnan K, Saravanan S, Sarani R, Sekar K.

RPMS: Ramachandran plot for multiple structures
J. Appl. Cryst. (2008). 41, 219-221
[11] Goran Neshich et al .STING Millenium: a webbased suite of programs for comprehensive and
simultaneous analysis of protein structure and
sequence. Nucleic Acids Research 31: 13 Pp 33863392.

Although the motif searching feature is in its
infancy, it holds the potential to become a very powerful
mining tool which could eventually be used to search,
visualize and analyze entire genomes.
We are working on a stronger coupling of the
Ramachandran Plot with the advantages that the ‘R
project’ text editor has to offer. This will be followed by
a user study and evaluation.
Weave is available as an open source project [9].

References

[2]

Richardson, J. 1981. The anatomy and taxonomy of
protein structure. Adv. Protein Chem. 34167–339.
Richardson, J.S. and Richardson, D.C. 1988.
Amino acid preferences for specific locations at the
ends of α helices. Science 240 1648–1652.

[9]

Visualizing biomolecules, proteins in this case, in a
three dimensional space, gives us a better idea of
different domains, motifs and the overall protein
conformation. We will be developing parallel tools for
visualizing proteins in 3D space within the Weave
framework. This will be accompanied with linked
highlighting throughout all current active tools giving an
idea of the 3D spatial orientation of the motif of interest
within the entire protein.

[1]

Composition for Predicting Protein-Protein
Interactions. PLoS ONE, 2009, 4(11): 7813.
T. Hopp, K. Wood. Prediction of protein antigenic
determinants from amino acid sequences. Proc.
Nati. Acad. Sci. USA, Vol. 78, No. 6, pp. 38243828, June 1981
The Mysterious Regions of the Ramachandran Plot
: http://boscoh.com/protein/the-mysterious-regionsof-the-ramachandran-plot
Kabsch.W. and Sander.C. (1983) Dictionary of
protein secondary structure: Pattern recognition of
hydrogen bond and geometrical features.
Biopolymers, 22, 2577-2637
Hooft, R.W.W., Sander.C. and Vriend.G. (1996a)
Verification of protein structures: Side-chain
planarity. J. Appl. Crystallography., 29, 714-716.

Ramachandran.G.N,
Ramakrishnan.C.
and
Sasisekharan.V. (1963) Stereochemistry of
polypeptide chain conformations. J. Mol. Bioi, 7,
95 - 99.
S. Roy, D. Martinez, H. Platero, T. Lane, M.
Werner-Washburne. Exploiting Amino Acid
236

