2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Using Visualization for Exploring Relationships between Concepts in Ontologies
Isabel Cristina Siqueira da Silva

Carla Maria Dal Sasso Freitas

Instituto de Informática
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
Faculdade de Informática
Centro Universitário Ritter dos Reis
Porto Alegre, RS, Brasil
isabels@inf.ufrgs.br

Instituto de Informática
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
Porto Alegre, RS, Brasil
carla@inf.ufrgs.br

However, due to the specificities of the concepts
expressed in an ontology, the analysis of individual
relationships between them is complex. Thus, the ontology
visualization and the quality of interaction provided must be
efficient. Katifori [11] confirms that it is not simple to create
a visualization that will display effectively all this
information and, at the same time, allows the user to perform
easily various operations on the ontology. Then, the
challenge is to define the best way to represent relationships
between categorized concepts, mainly because each concept
can have a number of related attributes.
This work discusses the use of a visualization tool for
exploring relationships between concepts in ontologies. In a
previous work [20] we performed a requirements analysis
based on interviews with experts who work with conceptual
modeling and ontologies in a specific domain, and proposed
a 2.5D ontology visualization tool that aims at systematizing
and transmitting knowledge more efficiently. In this paper
we present our tool and compare it with another one also
used for modeling and visualization of ontologies. The text is
organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews related work.
Section 3 summarizes the requirement analysis and presents
our visualization method, while evaluation and results are
discussed in Section 4. Finally, some conclusions are drawn
in Section 5.

Abstract—Usually, ontologies are represented as static 2D
graphs, being the relationships exhibited as overlapping edges,
which may cause a cognitive overload. On the other hand, 3D
representations can also lead to confusion in terms of
navigation due to occlusion. Moreover, as the ontologies grow,
incorporating new concepts (and their relationships), the
visualization complexity increases either in 2D or in 3D. In this
paper, we discuss a visualization tool for exploring
relationships between ontology concepts. We employ linked
tree structures that capture the hierarchical feature of parts of
the ontology while preserving the different categories of
relationships between concepts. Ontologies are displayed as
trees on a plane, representing only the hierarchical
relationships between concepts, allowing the user to explore
other connections by creating projections of nodes (concepts)
in another plane and linking them according to the
relationships to be analyzed.
Keywords-Visualization; Ontology; Interaction

I.

INTRODUCTION

A large volume of information, originated from many
sources and represented in different formats, is available, and
efficient methods for information retrieval are needed for
allowing networks of cooperation and interoperability
between different systems. Data semantics is the more
traditional approach for data integration because it focuses
on the relationships between data. As such, ontologies define
concepts and ensure interoperability between systems. In his
work, Sowa [21] points out that ontology is the study of
the categories of things that exist or may exist in some
domain, i.e., it is a catalogue of the types of things that are
assumed to exist in a domain of interest D from the
perspective of a person who uses a language L for the
purpose of talking about D.
Gruber [10] states that ontology is a formal and explicit
specification of a conceptualization; the conceptualization
refers to the way people think and the explicit specification
relates concepts and relationships which must be supplied in
accordance with specific and well defined terms. In
computational context, Noy and McGuiness [17] discuss that
ontology share common understanding of the structure of
information among people or software agents. Ontologies
separate domain knowledge from the operational knowledge,
make domain assumptions explicit and enabling reuse of
this.
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.40

II.

RELATED WORKS

Different authors propose alternatives for visualization
and interaction with ontologies.
Katifori [11] discusses different techniques that could be
adapted for ontology representation, such as indented lists,
trees and graphs, zooming, space subdivision (treemaps,
information slices), focus+context and landscapes. Besides
that, tools for ontology visualization and interaction are
discussed. Fluit et al. [8] present the cluster map technique as
a simple and intuitive method for visualizing complex
ontologies.
The OntoSphere tool [4] uses two techniques - 3D and
focus+context – for providing overview and details
according to user needs. Baehrecke [3] and Babaria [2]
proposed the use of treemaps to visualize GO (Gene
Ontologies Consortium). In a treemap, color, size and
grouping are used in order to facilitate user interaction and
information extraction.

317

be ambiguous due to lack of relevant information or by
excess of irrelevant information.
As presented in section 2, many studies have addressed
the importance of ontology visualization in creation,
manipulation and inference processes. Different visualization
methods have been proposed, but there are still many gaps to
be filled in by efficient methods of visualization and
interaction. The solution for these problems may be the use
of different techniques. Information visualization and
concepts of human computer interaction can optimize the
comprehension of ontologies. The searched information can
be placed in focus, distinguishing it from the unnecessary
information and facilitating the understanding of correlated
data.
Our study started with interviews with four users, all
experts in the creation and manipulation of ontologies. Due
to the low number of participants, quantitative measurements
were not taken, but the qualitative notes were found very
interesting, following Nielsen [15]. The following questions
were posed to the experts:

Mostly, researchers use Protégé [16] for the creation and
visualization of ontologies. Protégé’s main visualization for
the ontology hierarchy is a tree view (Class Browser).
However, different visualization techniques have been
proposed: Katifori [12] presents a comparative study of four
visualization techniques available in past versions of
Protégé: Class Browser, Jambalaya (discontinued),
TGVizTab (discontinued) and OntoViz (discontinued). The
information retrieval provided by these tools was also
evaluated.
The works by Samper et al. [18] and Amaral [1] address
semantics aspects. Amaral [1] proposes a semantics-based
framework for visualizing descriptions of concepts in OWL.
The framework aims at allowing users to obtain deep
insights about the meaning of such descriptions, thereby
preventing design errors or misconceptions. Icons and
symbols are used in diagrams to characterize classes that
represent concepts descriptions. One can combine
information visualization techniques, as in the work by
Schevers et al. [19], where the user interacts with the
ontology in the Protégé tool. Classes representing spatial
information (like polygons, points, etc.) are presented in a
second graphical interface that is used to mimic the
functionality of a GIS (Geographic Information System).
Erdmann et al. [6] presents the NeOn Toolkit, an opensource multi-platform ontology engineering environment,
which provides comprehensive support for the ontology
engineering life-cycle. The toolkit is based on the Eclipse
platform, and provides an extensive set of plug-ins (currently
45 plug-ins are available) covering a variety of ontology
engineering activities. Catenazzi et al. [5] presents a study
about tools for ontologies visualization and proposes the
OWLeasyViz tool. It combines textual and graphical
representations for displaying the class hierarchy,
relationships and data properties. Interaction techniques such
as zooming, filtering and search are available. Lanzenberger
et al. [14] discuss the visualization of ontology alignment as
well as solutions for dealing with the complexity of large
ontologies. The techniques are compared in order to point
out their advantages and disadvantages.
Kriglstein and Wallner [13] present Knoocks, a
visualization tool focused on the interconnections within the
ontology and the instances. This tool employs the overview
+ details approach, and was evaluated against another tools,
although three of these tools are not available in Protégé last
versions (TGVizTab, OntoViz and Jambalaya).
III.

1) When an ontology is created, which aspects could be
improved with visualization?
2) After the ontology was created, which information is
searched more often and how this information could be
displayed in order to make understanding more efficient?
3) When and why a visualization is better than another?
From the results of the interviews (more details in [20]),
we reached the following requirements for an ontology
visualization tool:
x Provide overview of the ontology hierarchy, with the
possibility of detailing some parts;
x Avoid presenting the different aspects of an ontology
(classes, description, object properties, data
properties, individuals) together in a unique
visualization;
x Optimize the results from the ontology validation;
x Explore the use of visual attributes such as color,
transparency, and shapes;
x Provide display filters based on different techniques
of focus+context and/or overview+detail, zoom, pan
and rotation of the image;
x Allow rapid and simple inclusion of visual elements
in the visualization, as well as their removal;
x Allow printing the entire ontology in paper sizes
commonly used, such as A4.
These requirements were considered the starting point to
propose our tool described below.
Graphs are the most intuitive form of visualizing the
relationships between concepts of ontologies by their both
hierarchical and relational characteristics. However, the
relationships are displayed as edges, which often overlap and
cause cognitive overload. An interactive graph or tree solves
part of the problem, allowing the user to highlight the
information in focus through selection, but the overlapping
edges are still a problem. We studied the hypothesis of
representing ontologies in a 3D space, allowing the user to

2.5D VISUALIZATION TOOL

Visualization systems should consider two main issues:
the mapping of information to a graphical representation in
order to facilitate its interpretation by the users, and means to
limit the amount of information that users receive, while
keeping them "aware" of the total information space and
reducing cognitive effort. When we analyze an image, we
activate our perceptual mechanisms to identify patterns and
perform segmentation of elements. The user must perceive
the information presented in the display, and the
understanding involves cognitive processes. An image can

318

navigate through in-depth visual representations, rotating,
expanding and selecting the desired items. However, such
views require user immersion and depth perception is
crucial.
Considering these aspects, we propose a visualization
method that fits the requirements pointed out by users as well
the tasks from Katifori [11]. In this study, we have chosen to
focus on visualizing the hierarchy of the ontology and the
relationships between concepts employing multiple
views. For the hierarchy, we employ the 2D hyperbolic tree
which reduces the cognitive overload and the user
disorientation that might happen during the interaction with
the nodes, expanding and contracting it, especially in
ontologies with many concepts (Figure 1a).
However, besides the class hierarchy (relationship "is a"),
users of ontologies need to analyze, in an integrated way, the
other relationships. Thus, we use a third dimension to display
one or more relationships (object properties) selected by the
user in a second view. To view them, we take the plane
where the tree is displayed and perform a 90° rotation around
the X-axis (Figure 1b). The rotated plane, positioned in 3D
as an XZ-plane, displays the hyperbolic tree, and selected
relationships are represented as curved lines in space,
connecting the related concepts, without interfering with the
display of the hierarchical relationship.
Figure 1c shows the proposed 2.5D scheme applied to an
ontology hierarchy/graph. The main aspects of visualization
and interaction are:
x Nodes are displayed with different geometric forms
according with the type (root, sub tree and leaf);
x Edges of hierarchy are displayed with solid lines and
edges of relationships are displayed with dashed
curves where the colors are related to relationships;
x In 2D hyperbolic tree view, the user can choose
which nodes will be in focus on image, hiding the
other nodes;
x Both 2D and 2.5D views can be displayed together,
side by side - the user remains "aware" of the
ontology hierarchy and visualizes one or more
relationships in a separate spatial dimension;
x The user can choose to display one or more
relationships
at
the
same
time
or
hide them;
x In 3D space, the user can choose which levels of
the tree view or hide,
reducing the
cognitive
overload;
x In addition to rotations around the X-axis, rotations
around the axes Y and Z, zoom and pan are also
allowed, providing full 3D navigation;
x The background color can be changed;
x Tooltips are displayed over nodes and edges as
additional information.
x Such usability features aimed at reducing the
cognitive effort of the user in analyzing the image
and, at the same time, add functionality to the tool.

IV. EVALUATION AND RESULTS
In order to evaluate our 2.5D visualization method, we
have chosen to compare it with Ontograf [7], a 2D tool for
visualizing hierarchy and relationships of ontologies.
Ontograf is available on the current version of Protégé
software (4.1).
Ontograf presents seven visualization possibilities:
alphabetical grid, radial and spring graphs, and four
implementations of tree visualization: vertical, horizontal,
directed vertical and horizontal. Figures 2(a) and 2(b) show
two Ontograf visualizations examples.
The four specialists interviewed in the first phase of our
study (as described in Section 3) were invited again to
perform evaluations of our 2.5D visualization and Ontograf.
Moreover, we invited two other specialists in ontology
specification to participate, so we had a sample of 6
specialists.
For the evaluations we used two ontologies: a large
ontology, related to Stratigraphy concepts, and a smaller one,
representing cities’ urban performance. Before the
participants started with the tasks, we shortly introduced
them to the important functionalities of the tools and they
explored the visualization in many ways. After the subjects
had finished their training, we started the evaluation process.
The tools were presented in different order for users. For
each tool, they were asked to perform an analysis based on
four questions that were defined in order to evaluate the
requirements listed in Section 3. The questions are listed
below:
1) Is the initial layout clear?
2) Is it possible to clearly separate the concepts’
hierarchy from the other relationships between these
concepts?
3) Does the possibility of rotating the ontology
representation improve the analysis of relationships?
4) Do the pruning and expansion of the ontology levels
help the understanding of hierarchical relationships?
Three possibilities of answers were defined: Yes;
Partially; No. Figure 3 summarizes the users’ answers for
these questions.
Regarding question (1), the majority of users (67%)
responded that the initial 2.5D layout is clear compared with
Ontograf. Among the reasons for that, users pointed out the
large amount of information displayed at the same time
(nodes overlap) in the image of Ontograf. This is a problem
of scale versus amount of information, and causes user
disorientation. In our 2.5D method, this problem is solved
due the nature of the hyperbolic tree.

319

Figure 1. Ontology visualization. (a) 2D hierarchy visualization; (b) 2.5D Visualization scheme; (c) hierarchy and relationships in 2.5D.

properties of a concept. The use of tooltip texts can help in
the encoding of the displayed information, because they
contain high loads of information, and are presented
selectively as the user explores the visualization of the
ontology.
Users approved different colors for different types of
relationships. According to Ware [22], colors are mainly a
resource for information categorization. Also in accordance
with Ware [22], graphical elements like shapes and location
of elements in the space help the user in mapping the
concepts, and these features are present in our 2.5D method.
Regarding question (3), this functionality is not present in
Ontograf, and the users considered it an important interaction
mode. In our 2.5D method, rotations around the three axes

In relation to question (2), users were divided (50%)
between “Partially” and “No” answers for Ontograf, because
nodes and edges overlapping. Usually, users do not want to
see relationships simultaneously, due to the cognitive
overload it would arise. Thus, the possibility of analyzing the
“is a” (hierarchy) and other relationships in different
dimensions helps the user to understand the ontology.
Another problem indicated in Ontograf is that the user needs
to change the positions of nodes in order to reveal the
relationships occluded by them.
An important positive aspect noticed by users in both
tools is the presence of tooltips when the mouse is over the
nodes or relationships. According to Gurr [9], visual
representations can be constructed in order to express the

320

(X, Y and Z) are possible, and complemented by zoom and
pan. To prevent from user disorientation during the
interaction with the visualization in 3D space, we
implemented the reset functionality, which resets the
visualization to its initial state. Thus, users have more
freedom to interact with the visualization. One of the users
reported that when interacting with the 2.5D view, he did not
feel claustrophobia, which is common in other tools,
including Ontograf.

(a)

(b)
Figure 2. Ontograf views (a) Radial; (b) Alphabetical grid

Finally, in relation to question (4), while 100% of users
answered “Yes”, for the 2.5D view, for Ontograf, most users
(83%) answered “Partially” and “No”. This result is due to
the feature of Ontograf related to the repositioning of nodes
when it is pruned or expanded -this fact causing
disorientation on users. On the other hand, the 2.5D allows
pruning and expansion in two ways: by the hyperbolic tree
functionality of repositioning nodes, and by hiding or
showing levels of the hierarchy.
These results indicate that our studies about the proposed
2.5D visualization of ontology concepts and relationships are
progressing. The use of 2.5D visualization might be a
solution to common problems presented by 2D and 3D
ontology
visualization
tools,
mainly
cognitive
overload and user disorientation. For sure, we need to
perform further studies to find alternatives to display
instances and semantic concepts of ontologies. Icons,
symbols and transparency are being studied in addition to
other information visualization techniques.

Figure 3. Evaluation results.

321

V. 5. CONCLUSIONS

[6]

Ontologies tend to grow, incorporating new concepts and
relationships, therefore increasing the visualization
complexity. Static graphs, commonly used for ontology
representation, are not the best alternative for such
visualizations. Thus, we need efficient visualization and
interaction methods tailored to ontologies. Information
visualization techniques amplify cognition and reduce the
exploration time of data sets, allowing the recognition of
patterns and facilitating inferences about different concepts.
In this work, we have designed a visual and interactive
method for exploring ontologies, improving the process of
insight from such data. For this, we started with the
definition of requirements for visualization and interaction
with ontologies in order to support our approach for helping
users to perform different operations on ontologies more
easily and efficiently.
Our 2.5D visualization tool combines aspects of both 2D
and 3D techniques. During its design we have taken into
account the aspects pointed out by expert users. The main
idea is to provide a representation that is intuitive and allows
efficient analysis of the concepts displayed in the ontology
visualization.
We evaluated the 2.5D visualization proposal by
comparing it with the Ontograf tool, available in the version
4.1 of Protégé. The results of the comparative study
reinforced the importance of usability and functionality in
tools dedicated to ontology visualization.
This study represents an initial step in the development of
an ontology visualization tool. Future work involves the
investigation of alternative ways to display properties and
instances of the ontologies.Acknowledgement
We would like to thank the users that participated in the
interviews and evaluation process.

http://www.neontoolkit.org/images/tutorials/tutorial%20eswc08.pdf.
Falconer,
S.
OntoGraf.
URL:
http://protegewiki.stanford.edu/wiki/OntoGraf. Last access in 2010
october.
[8]
Fluit, C., Sabou, M., Harmelen, F. Ontology-based Information
Visualisation: Towards Semantic Web Applications. International
Symposium of Visualisation of the Semantic Web (VSW'05). 2005.
[9]
Gurr, C. Effective Diagrammatic Communication: Syntatic,
Semantic and Pragmatic Issues, Journal of Visual Languages and
Computing, 10, 317-342, 1999.
[10] Gruber, T. (1996). What is an ontology? [S.l.: s.n.], 1996. Url:
http://www-ksl.stanford.edu/ kst/ what-is-an-ontology.html.
[11] Katifori, A.; Halatsis, C.; Lepouras, G.; Vassilakis, C.;
Giannopoulou, E. Ontology visualization methods - a survey. ACM
Comput. Surv. 39, 4 (Nov. 2007), 10.
[12] Katifori A, Torou E, Vassilakis C, Lepouras G, Halatsis C: Selected
results of a comparative study of four ontology visualization
methods for information retrieval tasks. In: Research Challenges in
Information Science, 2008 RCIS 2008 Second International
Conference on: 2008; 2008: 133-140.
[13] Kriglstein, S. Wallner, G. Development Process and Evaluation of
the Ontology Visualization Tool Knoocks - A case study. In:
International Conference on Information Visualization Theory and
Applications IVAPP, 2011, Vilamoura-Algarve. Proceedings of the
International Conference on Imaging Theory and Applications and
International Conference on Information Visualization Theory and
Applications. Portugal: SciTePress Science and Technology
Publications, 2011. p. 187-197.
[14] Lanzenberger, M., Sampson, J., Rester, M. Visualization in
Ontology Tools. Ontology Visualization: Tools and Techniques for
Visual Representation of Semi-Structured Meta-Data. Journal of
Universal Computer Science, vol. 16, no. 7 (2010), 1036-1054.
[15] Nielsen, J. Usability Inspection Methods. Proceedings of
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’95).
1994. Colorado, USA.
[16] Noy, N., Fergerson, R., Musen, M. The knowledge model of
Protege-2000: Combining interoperability and flexibility. In
Proceedings of 2nd International Conference on Knowledge
Engineering and Knowledge Management (EKAW'2000), JuanlesPins, France, 2000.
[17] Noy, N.; McGuiness, D. Ontology Development 101 – A guide to
creating your first ontology. KSL Technical Report, Standford
University, 2001.
[18] Samper, J., Tomás, V., Carrillo, E., Nascimento, R. Visualization of
ontologies to specify semantic descriptions of services. IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 20(1): p. 130134. 2008.
[19] Schevers, H.A.J., Trinidad, G.; Drogemuller, R.M. Towards
Integrated Assessments for Urban Development. Journal of
Information Technology in Construction (ITcon), Vol. 11, Special
Issue Decision Support Systems for Infrastructure Management, pg.
225-236. Url: http://www.itcon.org/2006/17.
[20] Silva, I.; Freitas, C. Requirements for Interactive Ontology
Visualization - Using Hypertree+2.5D Visualization for Exploring
Relationships between Concepts. In: International Conference on
Information Visualization Theory and Applications IVAPP, 2011,
Vilamoura-Algarve. Proceedings of the International Conference on
Imaging Theory and Applications and International Conference on
Information Visualization Theory and Applications. Portugal :
SciTePress Science and Technology Publications, 2011. p. 242-248.
[21] Sowa, J.F. Guided Tour of Ontology, 2005. Url:
http://www.jfsowa.com/ontology/guided.htm.
[22] Ware, Colin. Visual Thinking for Design. Morgan Kaufmann,
Burlington, MA, 2008.
[7]

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the users that participated in the
interviews and evaluation process.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

Erdmann, M., Peter, H., Holger, L, Studer, R. NeOn – Ontology
Enggenering and Plug-in Development with the NeOn Toolkit. Url:

Amaral, F. Visualizing the semantics (not the syntax) of concept
descriptions. In VI Workshop em Tecnologia da Informação e da
Linguagem Humana (TIL 2008), Vila Velha, ES, 2008.
Babaria, K. Using Treemaps to Visualize Gene Ontologies, Human
Computer Interaction Lab and Institute for Systems Research,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD USA, 2004.
Baehrecke, E. H., Dang, N., Babaria, K. Shneiderman, B.
Visualization and analysis of microarray and gene ontology data
with treemaps. BMC Bioinformatics. 2004.
Bosca, A., Bomino, D., Pellegrino, P. OntoSphere: more than a 3D
ontology visualization tool. In Proceedings of SWAP, the 2nd Italian
Semantic Web Workshop, Trento, Italy, December 14-16, CEUR,
Workshop Proceedings, ISSN 1613-0073, Vol-166, 2005.
Catenazzi, N., Sommaruga, L., Mazza, R. User-friendly ontology
editing and visualization tools: the OWLeasyViz approach.
In: Proceedings of the 13th IEEE International Conference on
Information Visualisation. Barcellona, Spain. 14-17 July 2009. pp.
283-288. IEEE. ISBN: 978-0-7695-3733-7.

322

