2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Optimized work ﬂow through VR and AR
technology on construction sites
Kim Kirchbach
Institute for Technology and Management in Construction (TMB)
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
Karlsruhe, Germany
Kim.Kirchbach@kit.edu

Abstract—The development of a physical building control
center can support project management and -control to optimize
the ﬂow of the complex processes at a construction site. The
concept consists of equipping vehicles with sensors and using
VR and AR-techniques to visualize this realtime information and
allow an optical adaption to current circumstances. The result
will be shown by a more efﬁcient utilization and enhanced cost
effectiveness.
To analyse what is required you always start by clarifying the
relevant object to be presented in VR. The instrument chosen
was interview. The second step is to work out the necessary
way of computing, viewing and manipulating this data. Finally
a hardware setting is designed that would probably fulﬁll the
derived requirements.
The results of the interviews are presented. By processing these
data the information and objects, which shall be visualized within
the use case of a control center as well as in an on-site use case,
are elaborated and also introduced. For these reasons hardware
settings are analyzed and the basis for an implementation is
established.

A planning and control system does not exist. By transferring concepts of the automobile (“digital factory”, [1]) and
manufacturing industry (“multi agent technology”, [2], [3])
this problem can be tackled. The concept is to equip vehicles
with sensors and act by means of software agents in teams.
They are able to swap information among each other and
eventually take further enquiry to a higher control center. The
main objective is to get the involved components in continuous
ﬂow without any latency or downtime. The result is a more
efﬁcient utilization. Using this system, machine drivers shall
be optimally supported. In addition, interferences with costs
and deadlines can be visualized at the control center thus the
construction manager is able to act positive and promptly to
troubles.
For these problems the project “AutoBauLog” (“Autonomous control in construction site logistics”, [4], [5])
can be used. Within the AutoBauLog project a requirements
analysis has been done to identify the speciﬁc needs within the
project’s context. The instrument chosen was interview. The
requirements analysis always starts by clarifying the relevant
object to be presented in VR. The second step is to work
out the required way of computing, viewing and manipulating
this data. Finally a hardware setting is designed that would
probably fulﬁll the derived requirements. [6]

Keywords-virtual reality; augmented reality; control center;
process optimization; construction site; information visualization;
user studies and evaluation;

I. I NTRODUCTION
With the development of a physical building control center,
project management and -control can be supported and the
ﬂow of the complex process at a construction site can be
optimized. The task is to design a Human-computer-interface,
which allows simple and secure handling even at complex
building processes. “Virtual Reality” (VR) offers a good opportunity for doing so. Secondarily “Augmented Reality” (AR)
shall be used to support the construction vehicle driver with
additional information within the construction site. Building
and digging works consist of many parallel processes, so that
a slight accident or interruption can inﬂuence the workﬂow of
a whole chain of building vehicles. This can cause delays, cost
increase and quality may also suffer. To avoid or minimalize
the impact of such an interruption it is necessary to reconsider
the working cycle. It is impossible to foresee problems like
these during the planning phase so that during the execution
phase, tasks like this are handled by a participant, who
is responsible to regain the work ﬂow. Through imperfect
information a reliable base of decision-making is missing,
as a consequence vehicles act inefﬁcient or nonproductive.
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.11

Christoph Runde
Virtual Dimension Center (VDC)
Competence Center for Virtual Reality
Fellbach, Germany
Christoph.Runde@vdc-fellbach.de

II. C ONTROL C ENTER U SE C ASE
Conventional control centers consist of instruments, a planning table and communication devices [7]. Electronic control centers are assembled of capacity disposal and electric
planning tables. Incurred information may be accessed and
evaluated directly [8]. But this presented innovative control
center makes use of information technology and state-of-theart sensors to add an additional beneﬁt to a “normal” control
center.
The most important task is to provide information. Therefore building vehicles will be arranged with Topcon1 -sensors.
This is not a gps-receiver like a car sat, but rather a speciﬁc technology with increased accuracy. Additional sensors
are able to collect the excavator bucket, shield tilting dozer
1 Tokyo Optikal Company Nippon, one of the world largest afﬁliated groups
within the ﬁeld of geodetic surveying instruments

549

signment, performance characteristics, machine data,
installed webcams.
areas area dimensions, type of use, logistics capacity, road
condition.
infrastructure on construction site
fuel station, water and gas, external roads, dumps,
storage area, signage.
The interaction with this data must allow making cross section
cuts, panning, walking, zooming, and jumping to predeﬁned
camera positions. Further on there must be information retrieval from machine objects and area objects. The user should
be able to open a communication channel to staff on the
construction site and to open video streams from webcam installed on the construction site. Alarm messages (e.g. machine
breakdown, machine performance permanently too low) need
to be recognized and accepted.
It ﬁnally came out that a planning table hardware conﬁguration could be very useful to install. It delivers a 2D layout
from bird’s perspective and a 3D view from inside the ﬁeld.
This allows having a quick overview in the familiar layout
style as well as a intuitive 3D insight at the same time (see
ﬁgure 1).

position and orientation exactly. Also technical data like
maintenance interval, amount of diesel, engine oil pressure
are known, so that a huge data basis exists. In this manner
an overview of the entire site can be taken and a direct
management is possible.
For example if a long queue of dumpers is recognized while
removing binder soil, instructions can be displayed directly to
the dumpers’ drivers cab to adjust truck disposal. He can add
refueling, bring forward his lunch break or be advised to slow
down his dumper to rest its’ material. As a result all dumpers
can drive equally-distributed at the building site and all are in
a continuous work ﬂow again.
The control center information does not only show the
direct environment but also vehicles working far away, which
allows a global and not just a local optimization. Consequences
of changes in the ﬂow chart are automatically adjusting the
time schedule. The impact will be shown directly. The same
applies to the interaction of costs, so the site manager is
knowledgeable at his best.
But help of the control center is not always required.
Using multi-agent technology, every machine is allocated by a
software-representative; as a result intelligent support for the
machine driver stands by. For example, if no more dumpers
are available, so an excavator is not able to dump the material
to be removed. It now has got the alternative to retrieve truck
data and get to know where the dumpers are. Optional extra
work can be accomplished or more trucks requested.
In case of a simple breakdown or changes of ground conditions, the removal-team can arrange themselves and adapt their
load to new circumstances - without any connection to the
control center. Just if it is impossible to ﬁnish the task in the
given time-frame or rather crossing a threshold, there will be
an escalation to the control center layer. Using vr-visualization
techniques an ergonomic and intuitional layout is possible,
which professionally supports users with a background in
construction management and not computer science. A simple,
clear display on the basis of ﬁrm data allows to achieve an
established decision.
For the control center the requirements analysis brought
following results concerning the necessary aspects to be visualized:
terrain and subsoil
initial DTM (digital terrain model), actual DTM,
desired DTM (after end of activities), geometric difference between desired and initial DTM, geometric
difference between desired and actual DTM.
soil type of soil, soil conditions, soil classiﬁcation (reusable, sustainable, dump, . . .), obstacles (e.g. rocks).
the structure to be build
e.g. new road, difference between desired structure
and status quo.
other structures
vegetation, brooks, existing human-made structures
(e.g. buildings, installations, tunnels, cables, pipes).
equipment and resources
machines according to exact position, status, as-

III. O N -S ITE U SE C ASE
[9] does notice the beneﬁt of AR for construction sites
and recommends the adoption of ergonomic visualization to
process-related information, especially for drivers. [10] and
[11] also see AR as the adequate technique to optimize
processes at construction sites. Workers are able to do their
action simpler and more efﬁcient, supported in a comfortable
way by visual information, usable in different areas at the
building site. For many building vehicles that are combined
with state-of-the-art sensors, lots of application possibilities
exist. Some examples are given below.
excavator
visualization of the digging place and geometry or
cable or tubes in the earth to present zones of care
to the driver (transfer of [12] to construction sites).
roller compacter
visualization of dynamic densiﬁcation control; the
drivers knows at which places he still has to compact
and which he has to avoid to prevent overcompaction.
tower crane
illustration of the place of delivery of a load, visualization of jib length and rotation limiting and also
accessibility of not yet produced structures in the
planning phase (see [13]).
general
using mobile devices by an inspection of a construction site performance data can be embedded context
sensitive, working processes visualized and targetperformance comparison accomplished.
To realize these use cases, a computing background is
necessary. The continuity of 3D-data from the planning to
the execution phase has to be available. Media conversion

550

(a) visualization

(b) use case
Fig. 1.

Planning table for construction site monitoring

between these phases has to be deleted. The base may be the
5D Initiative (see [14], [15]).
For the on-site use case the requirements analysis brought
following results concerning the necessary aspects to be visualized:
infrastructure
display of subsurface infrastructure (e.g. tubes, cables).
process support
for operators of excavator, compacter.
comparison digital model vs. reality
evaluation of the digital model of existing man-made
structures on construction site compared to reality.
navigation support and geo fencing
for drivers on construction site.
Options 1 and 2 dropped out due to either a non precise
data basis or due to already existing solutions. Options 3 and
4 in contrast are feasible and promise a good beneﬁt.
Different AR hardware settings were analyzed. Head
mounted displays and projection AR could be interesting in
future but seem not to have reached enough practicable status
today. Hand held displays on the other hand could be interesting as well as ofﬂine AR, which uses digital photographs
to be augmented off-site at a desktop PC.

[3] W. Dangelmaier, Theorie der Produktionsplanung und -steuerung.
Springer-Verlag, 2009.
[4] Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology, “Autonomik - Autonome und simulationsbasierte Systeme fuer den Mittelstand,” Technologieprogramm AUTONOMIK, information brochure, 2010.
[5] C. Frantzen and U. Rickers, “Raupe an Walze - bitte kommen...” bd
baumaschinendienst 09/2010, 2010.
[6] J. Whyte, “Business drivers for the use of virtual reality in the construction sector,” in Chalmers University of Technology (editor): Conference
on Applied Virtual Reality in Engineering & Construction. Applications
of Virtual Reality. Current Initiatives and Future Challenges, Oct. 4.-5.,
2001. Goeteborg/Sweden: Chalmers University of Technology, 2001,
pp. 99–105.
[7] G. Pawellek, Produktionslogistik: Planung- Steuerung- Controlling.
Hanser Verlag, 2007.
[8] K. Kurbel, Produktionsplanung und-steuerung im Enterprise Resource Planning und Supply Chain Management. Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag, 2005.
[9] S. Sanladerer, “Edv-gestuetzte Disposition mit Telematikeinsatz und
mobiler Datenerfassung in der Baulogistik,” University of Munich,
Dissertation, 2008.
[10] D. H. Shin and P. S. Dunston, “Identiﬁcation of application areas
for augmented reality in industrial construction based on technology
suitability,” Automation in Construction, Vol. 17, No. 7, 2008.
[11] P. S. Dunston and D. H. Shin, “Key areas and issues for augmented
reality applications on construction sites,” X. Wang and M. A. Schnabel,
Eds. Springer Science + Business Media B.V., 2009.
[12] G. W. Roberts, A. Evans, A. H. Dodson, B. Denby, S. Cooper, and
R. Hollands, “The use of augmented reality, gps and ins for subsurface
data,” FIG XXII International Congress: TS5.13 Integration of Techniques, Washington, DC, 2002.
[13] A. Hammad, “Distributed augmented reality for visualising collaborative
construction tasks,” X. Wang and M. A. Schnabel, Eds.
Springer
Science + Business Media B.V., 2009.
[14] K. Kessoudis, “Umsetzung von BIM im Bauunternehmen,” buildingSMART Forum 2008 - 12. IAI Industrietag, 2008.
[15] Zueblin AG, “Position paper of the european construction industry for
developing model-based it tools for planning, realising and operating
buildings, facilities and infrastructure,” 5D Initiative - Initiative of the
European construction industry for the development of new IT tools for
design, realisation and operation of buildings and infrastructure, 2009.
[16] X. Wang and M. A. Schnabel, Eds., Mixed Reality In Architecture,
Design, And Construction. Springer Science + Business Media B.V.,
2009.

IV. C ONCLUSION
The novel construction control center offers a global sight
of the construction site. Real-time information is available and
allows an optical adaption to current circumstances. Variance
comparison in an operating state is the base for efﬁcient project
management/control and disposition and adaption of building
vehicles to the current situation. In this way cost effectiveness
and performance will be enhanced.
Newly developed and adapted VR and AR environments
carefully designed for the speciﬁc use case, promise good
beneﬁts for the control centers and on-site use cases in the
future.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Kuehn, Digitale Fabrik: Fabriksimulation fuer Produktionsplaner.
Hanser Verlag, 2006.
[2] M. Bergmann and C. Motzko, “Ergonomiegestuetzte Multiagentensimulation im Baubetrieb,” BauPortal 05/10, 2010.

551

