2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Investigation & Research of Ancient Book Layout Culture on Chinese Sutras
Edition – A Case Study on The “Jiaxing Tripitaka” Formation

Thzeng Chi-Shiung

Hung I- TZU

Graduate School of Design
National Yunlin University of Science & Technology
YUNLIN, TAIWAN, R. O. C.
tsengch@yuntech.edu.tw

Graduate School of Design
National Yunlin University of Science & Technology
YUNLIN, TAIWAN, R. O. C.
moon0621@ms57.hinet.net

into China, large amount of Buddhism books were translated
and this had opened the most prosperous period for Chinese
printing. As a result, various versions of books from different
dynasties were produced. From the hand-written contexts in
the early period to the engraving printing evolved in later
stage, a huge amount of character creation and editing were
accumulated accordingly.
Among numerous editions of Tripitaka of Buddhist
scriptures, the representative Jiaxing Tripitaka, which was
engraved by private sector back in the Ming Dynasty, is a
Chinese Tripitaka of the largest scale with the richest
contents in the history of China. It is also the first threadaffixed ancient book of Tripitaka. The so-called “Tripitaka”
is the generic term for Buddhist scriptures. It’s a collection
of Buddhist books that include scripture, law and theory on
Mahayana and Hinayana, which were broadcasted from the
China’s ancient western region and India to China, as well as
writings, chapters and annotations made by Chinese. It is
equivalent to a collection of Han Dynasty ancient books.
One Tripitaka includes thousands of Buddhist scriptures.
Does Tripitaka have its own unique form of presentation? If
yes, what form is it? Chinese Buddhist scriptures are an
inseparable part of the Edition Philology. Numerous new
vocabularies came from the translation of Buddhist
scriptures. Meanwhile, Chinese Buddhist scriptures have
significant influences over the way books were affixed, the
organization and editing of large scale collections of books
and Bibliography. Research on these issues will help
establish the editing and design of books with Chinese
characteristics.

Abstract
The case study in this research adopts the interpretation
editions of Zibu (Philosophy Section) of Complete Library of
the Four Treasures of Knowledge of Volume633, block-print
edition of an ancient Buddhism scripture of Sutra Hall of
Zhongdian of “Jiaxing Kuramoto” collections of National
Library circulating from the regime of Emperor Wanli of
Ming Dynasty to early Ching Dynasty. This research was
conducted in essays derived from the comparison of documents.
The focus is on the investigation of formation from modern
design layout editing elements. With researches on Edition
Study and related fields as a basis, we’ve reached quantity
statistics in the form of character alignment through actual
observation, arrangement and documentation. We intended to
come up with a principle of regularity for the formation of the
Jiaxing Tripitaka engraved Sutras through the relationship
between title of volume and arrangement in the formation.
Below are research result˖
˖
1.) scripture title,names of translators, sub-title, the First
Line of Article,the second line of article. It has been found
this research that: the denomination principle was that the
first character of the volume was used as the first
character of the volume title and the first character of the
first line of fist page of each of 214 scripture contents were
used as the initial character of subject titles.
2.) For translator names in 28 books, related names for each
writing were presented in one line. Characters of the
whole paragraph in 56 books were all aligned to the lower
line of the bottom column with a space of one word laid up
above. Translator names in 241 books were engraved in
front of sub-titles. Most sub-title characters reached the
top cell. As for the first and second lines of articles, most
of them also reached the top cell.

II.

From the perspective of character editing and designing,
we discussed the composition elements of editing the
formation of the ancient Sutras of the “Jiaxing Lengyen
Temple Ancient Book Tripitaka,” which is a Dikan edition
from the Wangli period of the Ming Dynasty to the early
stage of the Qing Dynasty. We summarized the general
principles for the engraved Sutras of the “Jiaxing Lengyen
Temple Ancient Book Tripitaka” and came up with the
formation editing and designing features, which will serve as
references for the teaching and practicing of design, for
ancient Sutras with Chinese traditional characteristics.

Keywords-“Jiaxing Tripitaka”, Shurangama-temple Sutra,
historiography, Buddhism, scripture format, print layout.

I.

RESEARCH BACKGROUND

The Sutras is one of the classifications for ancient books.
This is because Buddhism ancient books accounted for a
major proportion of printed materials found in the early days.
Buddhism originated in ancient India and it entered China in
somewhere around 2 B.C. After the induction of Buddhism
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.94

PURPOSE OF RESEARCH

564

Focusing on the formation editing features of the ancient
Sutras of the “Jiaxing Lengyen Temple Ancient Book
Tripitaka,” which is a Dikan edition from the Wangli period
of the Ming Dynasty to the early stage of the Qing Dynasty,
this research conducted various related studies and a
compilation was processed through the gathering and
comparison of statistics. With modern day design application
research as a basis, we compared ancient Sutras features with
contemporary editing and designing concepts in order to
explore the unique presentation of formation editing for
the“Jiaxing Lengyen Temple Ancient Book Tripitaka,”
which is a Dikan edition from the Wangli period of the Ming
Dynasty to the early stage of the Qing Dynasty. We hope to
find different point of views which will help provide true
foundation for the history of editing and designing with
Chinese characteristics when building editing standpoints. In
the meantime, this research will focus on the formation
features of the“Jiaxing Lengyen Temple Ancient Book
Tripitaka.”
This research conducted investigation on the formation
composition elements for ancient engraved Sutras in order to
find out formation editing element application phenomenon
for ancient engraved Sutras of the“Jiaxing Lengyen Temple
Ancient Book Tripitaka,” which is a Dikan edition from the
Wangli period of the Ming Dynasty to the early stage of the
Qing Dynasty. We have also summarized general principles
of formation editing composition elements for ancient
engraved Sutras of the“Jiaxing Lengyen Temple Ancient
Book Tripitaka.” Finally, we have come up with the
principle of style, which will serve as references for the
teaching and practicing of design, for ancient Sutras
formation with Chinese traditional culture.
III.

this research will focus on formation only because of the
constraints on the size of this article. The so-called
“formation” is actually the writing orders and formation of
words. It includes orders for words and sentences. Through
the statistics, analysis and understanding of formation, we
hope to categorize formation characteristics of the Jiaxing
Tripitaka, which was engraved by private sector back in the
Ming Dynasty, in order to serve as a reference for modern
day editing design.
Scope of this research was mostly based on the “Jiaxing
Lengyen Temple Ancient Book Tripitaka” manuscript
collected by the Manuscript Office of Special Collection
Division of the National Central Library. According to the
“National Central Library Documentary Manuscript First
Draft,” total Sutras manuscripts collected include: (1).
Scripture: 452 books; (2). Law: 21 books; (3). Theory: 47
books; (4). Essays from Western Saints: 13 books; (5).
Articles from Local Scholars: 100 books. The total volume is
633 books. This research mainly focused on engraved and
movable-type printing books. Therefore, the handwritten
copies, transcripts or Sutras engraved with dynasty will not
be included in the scope of this research.
As for the research method, it was conducted in two
ways.One way is through actual observation, documentation,
and gathering of statistics under assistance from the National
Central Library and consultation from experts on Textual
Study. In this way, we hope to obtain quantity statistics on
styles and features and use these data for the foundation of
our theory. The other way is to use actual academic research
results on Textual Study from both domestic and Chinese
scholars as classification references during the research.
Through this, we hope to come up with representative
formation characteristics which will serve as references for
the teaching and practicing of editing and design.

RESEARCH METHOD

This research mainly focused on the scripture of
theϘJiaxing Lengyen Temple Ancient Book Tripitaka”, a
9975-chapter and 2247-volume Dikan edition from the
Wangli period of the Ming Dynasty to the early stage of the
Qing Dynasty listed in the category of Zi-Bu-Shi-Jia-Lei and
collected by the National Central Library. Among them. This
was conducted via the investigation and compilation of
documents. From the perspective of research, we utilize
research results from the study of edition, history of
publication, history of printing, study of editing, editing and
design, study of historical documents, study of Buddhist
historical documents and editions of Buddhist scriptures as a
basis. Through the discoveries on categorization statistics,
we intended to summarize formation’s principle of regularity
hidden in the Buddhist scripture of the Jiaxing Tripitaka,
which was engraved by private sector during the Ming
Dynasty.
The names for the editing and major structures of
Chinese ancient books include text, introduction, table of
contents, postscript, notes, annotation, frontispiece, ending,
appendix, additional collection, end of chapter, sub-title,
main title, book mark, words of cloudy engraving, bye
wen ǃ punctuation marks, juan fa, mo wei, mo ding,
formation, seal, Bon Shou and so on. Among these elements,

IV.

INVESTIGATION RESULT

Based the space between the lines, the numbers of the tier
of word and changes in combination of paragraphs derived
from the number of words and lines of the formation, this
research studied scripture title, names of translators, sub-title,
the first line of article, the second line of article, combination
of the first and the second lines. This research also analyzed
the principle of regularity on the layout of the Buddhist
scripture of the Jiaxing Tripitaka.
A. Scripture Title
This research observed that the naming of the Scripture
Title started from the first word of the first line in the first
chapter. All the 633 books in the Scripture Title appeared on
the first line of the beginning page in the first chapter. For
example, illustration 1 of the Jiaxing Tripitaka indicated that
scripture tiles from the Buddhist scriptures all started from
the first word of the first line in the beginning chapter. It was
the most common scenario that scripture titles started from
the first line of the first page in the beginning chapter. 104
books had smaller printing under scripture titles and 92 of
them had dual lines of printings in one cell. As for the word
of “Won-Yi” on lowest part of the scripture title in
illustration 2, it indicated the serial number for the engraving

565

of thousand words. such as illustrations of 3 and 4 which
indicated two lines of smaller printings in one same cell
under scripture titles.

Figure 1. Mohoyenpao- yen
ching Chapter 1

cases that the names of translator were printed in smaller
fonts so that more words could be cramped into the line.
According to the statistics from table 1, sampling was
based on the 633 Buddhist scripture of the Jiaxing Tripitaka.
For ancient Buddhist scriptures, most of them are Buddhist
scriptures translated from Indian Sanskrit into Chinese.
Therefore, space originally reserved for the names of authors
was filled with the names of translators. Words of “unknown
translator(s)” would be engraved in the column of
translator’s name if translator(s) could not be found. This
phenomenon differed a lot from the cases that, in Chinese
ancient books, the space for author name would be left blank
if there was no author name. The number of samples for
translator name actual analysis was 633 books. Statistics and
result from the analysis of translator name characteristics in
Chinese ancient books from today’s editing perspective are
as follows:
TABLE 1 Statistics and Characteristics for Translators in
the Jiaxing Tripitaka:

Figure 2. Liu tu chi ching Chapter
8

Code

A1
A2
A3

A4
B1

Figure 3. Shuo wu kou ch'eng
ching Chapter 6

Figure 4. Liu tu chi ching Chapter
8

Multiple lines engraved for multiple authors in
one book. That is, the related name for every
author would each occupy a single line.
2 or 3 translator names in one column.
The whole paragraph was in line with the
lower line of the bottom column with a 2-word
space laid up above.
The whole paragraph was in line with the
lower line of the bottom column with a 3-word
space laid up above.
No translator name.

Contents

B2
B3
B4

Lines started from the same cell.
Lines varied in positions of both front and end.
Positioned in the middle.
Name(s) of author(s) engraved in front of subtitle.
Smaller Printing
Spanned Across Two Columns

C2
C3

5
3
12

56
46

Code

C1

B. Names of Translators
For Names of Translators on the Jiaxing Tripitaka, the
names of translators were edited into one independent line
with a space of 1 to 16words laid up above. The number of
empty cells varied depending on the different lengths of titles
or respected names. The other way for a layout would be to
leave spaces on both the top and the bottom ends. Words
bearing translator’s name would then be placed in the upper
space within a line and this would make the lower space
larger than the one up above. However, there were also cases
that words for multiple lines all started in the same cell. That
is, multiple lines of translators’ names would each occupy
one column with empty space of several words in both the
upper and lower parts. Other lines would then be placed in
the middle, or, be laid downwards to the edge of the
parameter. dozens of words, which included the name of
country, dynasty, temple, respected name, name, title,
religious name, virtue name, Buddhist name, place of origin,
order of emperor, order of monarch, level of translation and
so on were cramped into a single line. There were a few

Number
of
Books

Contents

Number
of
Books
6
273
42
102
56
32

(statistics compiled from this research)

The editing ways presented Buddhist scripture of the
Jiaxing Tripitaka were closely related to engraving. Take
illustration 5 for example. There was a half-cell space up
above the “Chao” character right behind the translator’s
name. The whole of line of translators’ names was
positioned in the middle with a one-cell space both up and
below. This is the only book with a one-cell space between
the upper line of parameter and translator’s name. In
illustration 6, the name for each of the two translators
occupied one line and in total the names spanned across two
columns. One translator worked on “Chang Han” with the
other one on the “Jong Sung.” We have to point out here that
most ancient Sutras engraved copies came from classical
Chinese Sutras translated from Indian Sanskrit. That’s the
reason why translators’ names were engraved in places
where authors’ names were originally supposed to be such as

566

the example in illustration 7. As for books that translators’
names were unavailable, the words of “translator name
missing” would be engraved on the author name columns.
This is very different from Chinese ancient books where
there would be no engraving at all if author’s name was
unavailable.
For a scripture translated by various translators, their
names would be engraved in one single line or multiple lines.
That is, the names would be presented in the way that each
of the related translators occupied one line. The names for
the writers of translation were spread among two columns in
line with the lower line of the bottom parameter. In total,
there were 45 characters occupying 4 columns such as the
case in illustration 8. As for the words used for co-translation,
they included “Gon”, “Yu”, “Ton” and so on.

Figure 5 Tafang kuang
manshu shihli ching Chapter 1

Figure 7 Shuo wu kou ch'eng
ching Chapter 6

demonstrated in illustration 9. In illustration 10, there were
of praising words before the “Zhang Sin” text. This was
done by someone in the later stage for the purpose of
showing respect and these words were not essential. Cases
of special presentation of sub-titles in the Buddhist scripture
of the Jiaxing Tripitaka were presented in illustration 11.
There were small printings of note in one single line laid in
line with the right side of parameter line under the sub-title.
The characters were slim and long. Words of “Chu-Yi-ZiYon” were engraved in the space down below with7-word
of space in between. There was a 2-word of space between
the top parameter line and the first line of the text for the
2nd paragraph. Characters for the sub-title in illustration 12
spanned across two columns.

Figure 6 Miao Fa Lien
Hua Jing Gwan Si Yin Pu Sa Men
Pin Cing Chapter 1

Figure 8 Liu tu chi ching Chapter 8

Figure 9 Pan jo teng lun cing
Chapter 15

Figure 10 Ta ch'eng ssu fa ching
Chapter 1

Figure 11 Jon A Han Jing Chapter
60

Figure 12 Fo Shui
Yi Che Ru Lai Jin Gan

D. The First Line of Article
Most starting points in the Buddhist scripture of the
Jiaxing Tripitaka lied in the top of the lines, with cases of 2word or 1-word of space between the top and the starting
points came in the 2nd place. For the remaining, there was no
space at all. The most common cases were presented in
illustration 13. From the presentations of different printing
changes, ink parameter and punctuation marks in the space
before the first line in Table 2, we learned that presentations
of top cell mainly focused on the Scripture.In illustration

C. Sub –Title
One character for the sub-title of the Buddhist scripture
of the Jiaxing Tripitaka was that most of these sub-titles
would occupy one independent column no matter how many
words were involved. Most of them have a 2-word space
between them and the top of the cell. most of them had an 0word of space between themselves and the upper line of the
top parameter. Only two of them had a 2-word space as

567

14,there was also a line of praising words for the Buddha,
the Dharma and the Sangha. These words stretched all the
way to the other page on the same layout. The first line of
the scripture actually started from the second line. For
illustrations 15, there were honorific names to respect the
Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha before the text with 2word of space from the top parameter line for 2
paragraphs.These printings would occupy 4 lines, or, be
divided into 4 paragraphs with 1-word of space from the top
parameter line and 4 printings for each paragraph.

E. The Second Line of Article
Most of the layouts for the 2nd line of articles in the
Buddhist scripture of the Jiaxing Tripitaka concentrated on
scriptures with Articles from Local Scholars trailing behind.
This phenomenon is similar to the one for the first line of
article. Most texts of the 2nd line came with the presentation
of dual-line of small printings and this indicated changes
occurred between big and small printings. As per statistics ,
there were 602 books with the 2nd line of article reached the
top cell and there were 72 books with a 2-word of space
between the 2nd line and the top parameter line.
V.

Figure 23 Tapao kuang po lou ko
shan chou pi mi t'o lo ni ching
Chapter 3

Figure 15 Pu Ti Sin Guan Si
Chapter 1

Figure 14 Fo i po pa ming tsan ching Chapter 1

TABLE 2 Statistics on the space in the first lines of the
Buddhist scripture of the Jiaxing Tripitaka˖
Space in the first lines
Scripture
452
Law
21
Theory
47
Essays from
13
Western Saints

0
426
21
47

1
26
0
0

2
0
0
0

3
0
0
0

4
0
0
0

5
0
0
0

11

2

0

0

0

0

Articles from
Local Scholars

100

59

13

28

0

0

0

Total

633

564

41

28

0

0

0

CONCLUSION

This research focused on the layout editing features of
the Jiaxing Tripitaka and research result was obtained after
analysis and comparison on these features. We observed that
there were various types of starting formation, scripture title,
translator name, sub-title and the beginning of text involved.
On the locations for scripture titles, they all started from the
first word of the first line of chapter in these 633 books and
most of them were spelled out in the first line of the page
where the first chapter started. Sub-titles for 66 out of the
215 books reached the top cell. There were more changes on
the combination of translator names. For a book with
multiple translators, the names would be engraved in
multiple lines. There were also cases that multiple names
were cramped into the same column. There were 7 books
that the name for every translator occupied one line each in a
single column. There were 56 books that their whole
paragraphs stayed in line with the lower parameter line with
a 1-word of space up above. There were 466 books that their
paragraphs did not go in line with each other in neither ends.
There were 216 books that translators’ names were engraved
in front of sub-titles. Cases of sub-titles reaching the top cell
accounted for the most part. As for the layout of the first and
2nd lines of article, most of them reached the top cell. This is
a combination that both lines were parallel to each other.
The following special cases were observed: different
printings for text and translator name, two translators
cramped into one column, translator name spanned across 2
columns or multiple lines, translator name engraved in front
of the sub-title, presentation in Sanskrit and ๼ₜ, dual lines
and single line of small printings for notes, extension of
word tier and flattening of words, and so on.
According to analysis result from this research, the layout
editing features of the Jiaxing Tripitaka ancient Sutras
followed the rules of 10 lines for each page and 20 engraved
words on each line. As for layout editing characteristics,
changes in layout were presented following the compliance
of these rules. Statistics were obtained after analysis on the
quantity concentration phenomenon. With this, we have
come up with simulated most common formation structures
for the“Jiaxing Lengyen Temple Ancient Book Tripitaka,”
which is a Dikan edition from the Wangli period of the Ming

Note: X no chapter name 0 the top cell
1-5 space of words in the upper parameter line
(statistics compiled from this research)

568

Dynasty to the early stage of the Qing Dynasty. These
structures will serve as references. The combined layout
was presented in illustration 16 below:

[5]

The followings were derived from the research:
˄1˅ʳ Major Title˖Starts with the first word of the
first line in the beginning chapter.
˄2˅ʳ Sub-Title˖Starts with the first word of the
first line in the beginning chapter.
˄3˅ʳ Translator Name˖For multiple translators on
one book, related names for each item would
occupy one line.
There was a 2-word of space between the
paragraph and the lower parameter line and a
3-word of space from the upper parameter line.
Not in line with each other in neither ends.
Translator name engraved in front of the subtitle.
˄4˅ʳ The first line of article: top cell.
˄5˅ʳ The 2nd line of article: top cell.

[7]

[6]

[8]

[9]

Figure 36 Simulation of formation in the Buddhist scripture of the
“Jiaxing Tripitaka.”

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

See Wang, Wen-Yen, “Observation on Buddhist scripture of Bie
She Jing - with the scope of Buddhist scripture table of contents
from the Tan Dynasty and previous dynasties,” Cheng Da Chinese
Newspaper, issue 2, 2004, pp.141-159.
See Shen Jin, “Chinese edition collection” – Thoughts from the
“Buddhist scripture,” Table of Contents Quarterly, Chapter 38,
Issue 4, 2005 pp.23-28.
See Shen Jin, “Buddhist Scripture Jing Yen Lu – Engraved in Sung
Dynasty and collected by the U.S., ” Documentary, Issue 1, 1989
pp.195-210.
See Wang, Je-Fu, “Book Marks on Ancient Books, ” National
Palace Museum Monthly, Chapter 7, Issue 8, 1989 pp.76-81.

569

See Chou, Bo-Kan, “Hsu, Fu-Hua, Ho, Mei-Yi – Study on Han
Dynasty Buddhist Scripture,” New History, Chapter 16, Issue 2,
2005, pp.185-196.
de Jong, J. W.ወ1996ወBuddha's Word in ChinaወEast Asian
HistoryወIssue 11ወpp.45-58.
Zhu, Tianshu. "Buddhas and bodhisattvas emanators and emanated
beings in the Buddhist art of Gandhara, Central Asia, and China."
Ph. D. Dissertation, Ohio State University, History of Art, 2007.
Kim, Sunkyung. "Decline of the law, death of the monk Buddhist
texts and images in the Anyang Caves of late sixth-century China."
Ph. D. Dissertation, Duke University, 2005.
Pan, An-yi. "Li Gonglin's Buddhist beliefs and his Lotus Society
Picture an iconographic diagram of the bodhisattva path " Ph. D.
Dissertation, University of Kansas, 1997.

