2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

CyBiS: A novel Interface for Searching Scientiﬁc Documents
Gennaro Costagliola, Vittorio Fuccella
Department of Informatics
University of Salerno
{gencos,vfuccella}@unisa.it
Abstract

ﬁlter, then details-on-demand”.
In order to evaluate if a document meets his/her needs,
the seeker should evaluate different features, including its
relevance with respect to the query terms, inﬂuence over
the ﬁeld, ”age” and relation with other documents. Many
visual tools described in literature can display one or more
of the above. Nevertheless, it is rare that all of them are
shown in a single view at the same time: e.g., some systems
[13, 9] use different views to show relevance to terms and
citation relations. In this paper we propose a novel interface,
called CyBiS, acronym of Cylindrical Biplot System, which
represents the salient data of searched documents in a single
view. This way, the user is not compelled to switch between
different visualizations thus loosing the focus on the current
context. CyBiS shows document items as spheres embedded
in a 3D cylinder placed horizontally on the screen. The relevance of a document to terms is given by height and depth
of the item in the cylinder; the horizontal position, instead,
represents document’s publication year; the inﬂuence of the
document is given by the color gradation of the item; citations are shown on-demand and are represented through
connections.
Several operations are available in order to reﬁne search.
Firstly, the cylinder can rotate on the horizontal axis, in order to bring in the foreground the documents more related
to a given term. It is also possible to zoom, which is equivalent to cut the cylinder along its horizontal axis, in order to
select a time slice or to ﬁlter, for selecting a subset of items
relevant to given terms. A prototypical implementation has
been developed and used to produce an example session for
evaluating the effectiveness of the proposed interface.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: the next
section contains a brief survey on BVTs; in section 3 the
interface is described, with a particular reference to its objectives and main distinguishing features; the subsequent
section presents the prototypical implementation, while section 5 describes the proposed example session; some ﬁnal
remarks and a brief discussion on possible future work conclude the paper.

Although textual interfaces for browsing scientiﬁc papers have several drawbacks, they are still the most used
in digital libraries. Several visual approaches have been
proposed in recent years in order to provide the user with
a deeper insight of the search context and to allow him/her
to quickly gather a collection of documents judged as useful
for his/her research. This paper presents CyBiS, a novel 3D
analytical interface for a Bibliographic Visualization Tool
with the objective of improving scientiﬁc paper search. The
design choices are justiﬁed on the basis of previous experiences described in literature and its effectiveness is shown
through the description of an example session.

1. Introduction
One of the key tasks of scientiﬁc research is the study
and management of existing work in a given ﬁeld of inquiry
[9]. Researchers have been spending many efforts in the
deﬁnition of visual interfaces for document search in the
last ﬁfteen years. Nevertheless, most digital libraries still
employ textual interfaces. In these interfaces the results are
generally presented as a list of items sorted by relevance,
each of them being a preview of the document. Textual visualizations can be ineffective from several points of view
[13, 19]. As reported by Nguyen and Zhang [19], it is difﬁcult for users to group results that are relevant to particular
topics or their current subjects of interest, with a linear way
of presenting Web search results. Other drawbacks are the
limited number of shown items, the lack of adequate means
for evaluating paper chronology, inﬂuence on future work,
relevance to given terms of the query.
Information Visualization (IV) can be useful to overcome the above drawbacks. Several visual interfaces
for Bibliographic Visualization Tools (BVTs) have already
been proposed. At present there are no standards in this ﬁeld
and there is not even a well established terminology. Nevertheless, some principles gained from the experience of the
researchers can be considered valid. For instance, a credited principle is the Visual Information-Seeking Mantra [17]
also known simply as the mantra, which describes a general
behavior for visual interfaces: ”Overview ﬁrst, zoom and
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.95

2. Related Work
The main objectives of BVTs have been identiﬁed in [9]:
though the main task is paper search, they can be also useful
276

for related tasks: ﬁnding authors or topics and tasks which
give an overall picture of the research in a ﬁeld, such as
studying the citation network, chronology or collaboration.
In this brief survey we only consider systems focused on
search.
Following a model given in [18], we classify BVTs interfaces according to the way in which the results of a search
query are presented:

attribute (i.e. document language) is associated to a sphere,
while a secondary attribute (i.e. document format) is associated to each sector. The dimension of the sectors allows the
user to evaluate the number of documents for each attribute
value.
Hybrid interfaces group the nodes on the basis of an attribute suitable for clustering. To this aim, they generally
use geometrical ﬁgures embedded in other ﬁgures. Real
world metaphors, such as a plant and its ﬂowers in the
Knowledge Garden [6], a library with books in the DocuWorld [8] system, a soil with mountains [7] in the VxInsight system are employed rather frequently to represent
a group and its articles, respectively. Another real world
metaphore is the butterﬂy used in [12]. The body of the butterﬂy represents an article, while the two groups of its references and citers are associated to its left and right wing,
respectively. A graph view is used in [15], where the articles are represented through small squares grouped in rectangular clusters. In a view of the Periscope system, [18]
coaxial cylinders located on vertical axis represent a group
of documents coming from the same domain (org, com,
etc.), while bricks embedded in the cylinders represent single documents. Bricks of the same color represent documents coming from the same website.

• analytical: an information item represents a single
document;
• holistic: information items represent groups of documents sharing the same value of a categorization attribute;
• hybrid: aggregated and detailed aspects of a search result are presented simultaneously.
The most commonly used analytical interfaces are those
using a graph representation. An acyclic direct graph is
a natural representation for a scientiﬁc paper citation network: the nodes generally represent documents, while connections encode a direct citation. A simple interface based
on graph visualization is used in the BIVTECI [13]. More
complex is the graph used in Citespace II [3], in which,
among other features, the node color is used to convey information related to variations in the inﬂuence of the article over time. A co-citation network is represented in [5]:
undirected arcs are drawn between two items representing
documents that are co-cited. The StarWalker system [4] enables a 3D collaborative exploration of the graph. In the
graph used in the Lyberworld system [1] both documents
and terms are associated to graph nodes. The relevance of
documents to terms is represented through distance.
Alternative to graph is the vector space-based visualization, in which attributes are associated to x, y and z axis: the
position of the item in the space is informative about those
attributes. On the other hand, with these interfaces it can be
rather difﬁcult to highlight the relations among the items.
Generally, attributes are also associated to color and dimension of the item. Simple analytical vector space-based interfaces are presented in [18] and [19]. In the Timeline View, of
the CiteWiz system [9] each article is visualized as an icon
on a timeline, on the basis of its publication date: a more recent time slice is represented above the previous one, while
an article citing a previous one is positioned just above it
(if possible). Icons are scaled proportionally to the citation
count of the represented article.
Pure holistic interfaces are not very spread, since hybrid interfaces can enable the same kind of analysis and
also show the single documents. The Interactive Concept
Map of the CiteWiz system adopts a graph-based interface
in which every node represents a term. The dimension
of a node is proportional to the weight of the represented
term. Another example of pure holistic interface is presented in the Periscope system [18]. The information items
are spheres split in sectors with different colors. A primary

3. The approach
CyBiS is the acronym of Cylindrical Biplot System. It is
a 3D analytical interface for a BVT system. The interface
is used for searching documents relevant to a given set of
terms of interest, but it can help seekers in related tasks,
such as: identifying the most inﬂuential documents in a set;
identifying the most relevant topics in a ﬁeld; analyzing the
trends over time in a speciﬁc research ﬁeld; ﬁltering a set of
documents according to speciﬁc criteria.
The above objectives are pursued by using a single visualization, thus alleviating the cognitive load required to
the user to learn the use of the interface. The use of 3D
is justiﬁed by the necessity of an additional dimension to
help the user in perceiving all the informative attributes. In
particular, the interface shows the following information:
• The relevance with respect to the search query and
afﬁne terms;
• The inﬂuence, given by the number of citations per
year;
• The publication date;
• The relation with other documents, such as references
and citations. These are available on-demand, upon the
selection of the desired item.

3.1

The Interface

CyBiS uses a visive metaphor representing both documents and terms. The interface presents a cylinder located
in the 3D euclidean space (see ﬁgure 1). The cylinder is
drawn horizontally, i.e. its axis (height) is overlapped to

277

Figure 1. A cylinder located in the 3D euclidean space.
Figure 2. A biplot containing document and
term vectors.

X-axis. A base of the cylinder is coplanar to the YOZ
plane. Thus, the center of the base coincides with the origin. The cylinder is a container of documents represented
through small spheres embedded in it. Each term is represented through a vector (y, z), i.e. located radially on the
base of the cylinder. Besides being a familiar ﬁgure for humans, positioned in the space as described, the cylinder has
a shape which immediately suggests the possibility of rotating around its axis.
The dimension of the spheres lets the user perceive their
depth in the 3D space. More precisely, the spheres are
scaled according to their position: those closer to the user’s
point of view are drawn bigger. If the user wants to bring in
the foreground the farthest documents, s/he can opportunely
rotate the cylinder around the X axis.
The X axis represents a timeline: documents are sorted
by publication year increasingly from left to right. The Y
and Z axes, instead, are used to represent the relevance of
the item with respect to a number of terms. We obtain this
effect by using the biplot graphical display of the matrix
of the document-term weights. This process is clearly explained in [11]: summarizing, we have a matrix M with
m rows and n columns corresponding to m documents and
n terms, respectively. The element yij in M denotes the
weight assigned to the j-th term tj for document di . The matrix is graphically displayed through a biplot chart. The biplot is a type of chart largely used in statistics whose visual
effect is to represent similarity in semantic space with proximity in the Euclidean space. In our case, the biplot contains two types of markers, representing document vectors
and term vectors. Documents or terms which are strongly
related to other documents or terms have a close direction
of the corresponding marker vectors. In particular, as a rule
of thumb, the relevance of a document to a term is visually
noted by considering the size of the projection of the document marking vector on the term marking vector. Figure 2
shows an example of biplot containing 4 term and 3 document vectors. The document represented by the d1 vector is
very relevant to terms represented through t1 and t3 vectors.
It also has a positive relevance to t2 .
In CyBiS, the biplot representation is used to obtain the y

and z coordinates of the documents, while the x coordinate
is given by the publication year of the document. Furthermore, a mapping concept-color is used to represent the inﬂuence of a document: document items (simply referred to
as items, in the sequel) are drawn with different levels of the
red color. A darker red is for a greater number of citations
per year.
The above described design choices have been inspired
from previous experience in the ﬁeld. In particular:
• The use of a single view instead of multiple views is
advised by previous authors: as experienced by Klein
et al. [10], switching between different visualizations
confuses the users.
• The use of a timeline has been proved to be effective:
as explained in [14], timelines ”are a very effective
method of displaying trends, building on the human
perception of time as linear and taking advantage of
the human ability to infer closeness of relation of two
items from their spatial proximity”. Spatial proximity is also exploited in the biplot, which itself is a well
established visual method in statistics.
• Showing the relations with references and citers as
soon as an item is selected is a way of interpreting the
”details on demand” statement of the mantra and the
possibility of seeing such details without loosing the
focus on the paper and its context of relevance to the
terms had been previously identiﬁed as an advisable
choice in [2]. The support of zoom and ﬁlter operations, described in the sequel, also follows the mantra.
• The association of the inﬂuence of a document to item
color is frequently adopted by other interfaces presented in literature. As remarked in [16], users take
advantage from a concept-color mapping.

3.2

The Environment

The cylinder is displayed into a suitable environment
which allows to launch queries and interpret their results.

278

venue and publication year of the item being hovered
over;
• Details: further details are obtained when the user
clicks over an item. The item is selected and the selection is highlighted through a yellow light surrounding
the item. Details of the selected item are shown in the
details view and include title, authors, venue, url, DOI,
publication data, number of citations, abstract and keywords. Furthermore, the relations of the selected item
to citers and references are shown through connectors.
Due to the chronological ordering of the documents on
the X-axis, the references and the citers will be shown
on the left and on the right of the selected item, respectively.

Figure 3. The three horizontal views of CyBiS.

• Zoom: this operation is useful when the user is interested in a shorter time interval than the one currently
visualized, including only the documents published in
one or more publication years. The interval of interest
can be selected by dragging the mouse over a horizontal slice of the cylinder. The zoom on the selection
is performed by pressing the provided zoom-in button
in the toolbox. The operation cuts off the time intervals complementary to the selection and stretches the
selected slice over the whole result view. The subset
of items included in the selection is visualized with a
larger spacing, thus allowing the user to have a more
detailed view. Further zoom operations are possible
on the selection. A zoom out operation, triggered by
a suitable button in the toolbox, restores the original
view.

The interface is horizontally divided into three views, as
shown in ﬁgure 3.
• In the upper part there is the Search View, containing
the search form to enter the search criteria. Besides the
text ﬁeld for the input of query terms, there is a combo
box for choosing the maximum number of documents
shown at the same time;
• In the center there is the Results View in which the
cylinder is shown. It takes up most of the environment
and most of the operations, except for initialization,
are performed on it. Right below the cylinder there is
a toolbox with buttons to perform speciﬁc operations;
• In the lower part there is the Details View, containing
the details of a selected item, including title, authors,
abstract, keywords, etc.

3.3

• Filter: when the user performs a selection as explained
at the previous point, without pressing the zoom-in
button, the items not included in the selection are
grayed. A similar ﬁltering operation can be performed
by clicking on a term marker. In this case, the items
with a negative projection on the marker are grayed.

Operations

The users mainly interact with CyBiS through the mouse
and the keyboard (only to enter the search query). The initialization of the interface occurs when the user ﬁlls the
search form and submits the entered data. Once the system has initialized the interface by showing terms and documents, the following operations to browse the results are
possible:

4

Implementation

A prototypical BVT with the CyBiS interface has been
developed. The system is a Java Web application designed
in compliance to the Model 2 design paradigm, a variation
of the classic Model View Controller (MVC) approach.
The Model principally manages the data contained in
a relational DBMS. The main entities represented in the
database are the document and the term. A local data set has
been populated with data extracted from 5715 documents.
The data set includes the papers published in the following
venues: IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, from 1995 to 2009; IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications from 1981 to 2009; International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV) from 1997 to 2009;
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (INFOVIS)
from 1995 to 2006; IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST) from 2006 to 2009.

• Rotation: this operation rotates the cylinder around the
X axis. The effect is to change the point of view for
the visualized items, e.g. to put a given document in
the foreground. This operation also entails a rotation
of the term vectors. Thus, the rotation can also be interpreted as the will of the user to put one or more terms
on top of the view, in order to have a closer view of
the documents relevant to her/him. The rotation is performed by rotating the mouse wheel. Alternatively the
cylinder can be animated by pressing the Play button
in the toolbox;
• Tooltip: when the user hovers the cursor over an item
without clicking it, a box appears containing title,

279

Figure 5. A tooltip with the details of a document.

Figure 4. The CyBiS interface initialized with
a query composed of the terms virtual reality
and languages.

Figure 6. The details of a document shown in
the Details View of the environment.

• ﬁnding and scanning the most inﬂuential documents in
order to go deeper into the ﬁeld;

The number of citations per paper has been obtained from
Google Scholar. The AlchemyAPI library has been used
to extract a set of terms from the documents and to determine their relevance with each of them. A many-to-many
relation ties documents and terms and a weight assigned to
each couple (document, term) represents the relevance of
the document to the term.
The Controller is composed of Java servlets responsible
for responding to user requests whenever an input operation
is performed. Once a query is issued by the user, terms are
extracted from the query and a set of relevant documents
is selected from the database. Then, a document-term matrix is computed. The computation of the biplot data is performed through the Java/R Interface (JRI), which enables
the execution of R commands inside Java applications. The
query of the user can contain an arbitrary number of terms.
In order to have an adequate number of them to create the
biplot, the system puts additional terms in the matrix, when
necessary. The chosen terms are those having the greatest
average relevance to the selected documents.
The View is composed of the dynamically generated JSP
pages. HTML5 and Javascript have been used to support
the graphical display and operations. Many operations are
handled through AJAX calls, to avoid page reload. The application is fully accessible with a Web Browser.
The prototypical BVT has been deployed on an Apache
Tomcat server with a MySQL RDBMS.

The view is initially void and the user can enter a search
query, select the desired number of results and ﬁnally submit the form. In this example, the minimum number of displayed terms is set to 5. Figure 4 shows the cylinder after searching the query composed of the two terms virtual
reality and languages separated by a comma. CyBis has
returned 78 documents relevant to the query. The publication dates of the documents span a time interval from 1996
to 2010. Since the query is only composed of two terms,
3 more terms are added through the procedure outlined in
section 4: user interfaces, VRML, and standards.
By observing the resulting view, the user can draw some
initial considerations: i.e., by evaluating the density of the
document markers, we can observe that the topic has a peak
of interest in the late nineties and beginning of the past
decade. The most inﬂuential papers are concentrated in that
period, as inferred by the number of items with a darker
color. At this point, the user can start exploring the result
by interacting with the interface through the mouse pointer.
The items representing the most inﬂuential documents, i.e.
those with a darker red color, stand out against the lighter
ones. The user can hover the pointer over them and obtain
information through tooltips, as shown in ﬁgure 5.
Further details are shown on demand in the Details View
of the environment as the user selects the item by clicking
over it (see ﬁgure 6). This operation also shows the relations
to other items already present in the view. A clearer view
of the documents and its references is obtained by selecting a horizontal slice covering the 1996-1998 time interval
and zooming in. E.g., the user can browse the references to
search for possible interesting documents (see ﬁgure 7).
Lastly, the user may want to deepen on the documents
more related to the VRML term, suggested by the system.
By rotating the cylinder, the term can be placed in a more
favorable position such that the items corresponding to the

5 An Example Session
With the objective of better clarifying the working and
the characteristics of CyBiS, we report an example session.
Let us consider the case of a user who wants to explore the
research ﬁeld of languages for virtual reality. The user has
the necessity of:
• identifying the main topics and research trends;

280

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

Figure 7. A zoom on the 1996-1998 interval.
References of the selected item are shown.

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

Figure 8. A rotation allows the user to see all
the documents relevant to a given term.

[10]
[11]

documents relevant to it can stand out. With the cylinder
rotated as in ﬁgure 8, all those items are shown in the upper
part of it. If needed, a ﬁlter on the term marker can be used
to exclude those not relevant to the term.

[12]
[13]

6 Conclusions and further research
Despite the effort spent by researchers to design visual
interfaces, most of the scientiﬁc digital libraries still use
textual interfaces to display the results of document search.
The CyBiS interface, presented in this paper, has been designed bearing in mind many of the principles gained from
the experience of the researchers in the last ﬁfteen years. Its
main distinguishing feature, rarely exploited in prior art, is
the inclusion in a single view of the most important data of
interest for a scientiﬁc paper. In CyBiS, they can be evaluated at the same time by the seeker without the need of
switching among different views or changing the context.
A detailed example has been presented in order to show
the potentiality of the interface. Future work will be aimed
at evaluating the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the interface through targeted user studies. Besides relying on the
opinion of users, we aim at obtain quantitative data for assessing the performances of the interface and compare them
to those of other systems.

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

References
[1] M. , C. Kunkel, and A. Willett. Lyberworld—a visualization
user interface supporting fulltext retrieval. In Proceedings

281

of ACM SIGIR’94, pages 249–259, New York, NY, USA,
1994. Springer-Verlag New York, Inc.
P. Bergstrom and D. Atkinson. Augmenting the exploration
of digital libraries with web-based visualizations. In Proceedings of ICDIM’09, pages 1 –7, nov. 2009.
C. Chen. Citespace ii: Detecting and visualizing emerging
trends and transient patterns in scientiﬁc literature. J. Am.
Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 57(3):359–377, 2006.
C. Chen, L. Thomas, J. Cole, and C. Chennawasin. Representing the semantics of virtual spaces. IEEE MultiMedia,
6(2):54–63, 1999.
T. T. Chen and L. C. Hsieh. On visualization of cocitation
networks. In Proceedings of IV’07, pages 470–475, Washington, DC, USA, 2007. IEEE Computer Society.
M. Crossley, N. J. Davies, A. J. McGrath, and M. A. Z.
Rejman-Greene. The knowledge garden. BT Technology
Journal, 17(1):76–84, 1999.
G. S. Davidson, B. Hendrickson, D. K. Johnson, C. E.
Meyers, and B. N. Wylie. Knowledge mining with vxinsight: Discovery through interaction. J. Intell. Inf. Syst.,
11(3):259–285, 1998.
K. Einsfeld, S. Agne, M. Deller, A. Ebert, B. Klein, and
C. Reuschling. Dynamic visualization and navigation of semantic virtual environments. In Proceedings of IV’06, pages
569–574, Washington, DC, USA, 2006.
N. Elmqvist and P. Tsigas. Citewiz: a tool for the visualization of scientiﬁc citation networks. Information Visualization, 6(3):215–232, 2007.
P. Klein, F. Muller, H. Reiterer, and M. Eibl. Visual information retrieval with the supertable + scatterplot. In Proceedings of IV’02, pages 70 – 75, 2002.
U. Krohn. Vineta: navigation through virtual information
spaces. In Proceedings of AVI ’96, pages 49–58, New York,
NY, USA, 1996. ACM.
J. D. Mackinlay, R. Rao, and S. K. Card. An organic user
interface for searching citation links. In Proceedings of
CHI’95, pages 67–73, New York, NY, USA, 1995.
D. Modjeska, V. Tzerpos, P. Faloutsos, and M. Faloutsos.
Bivteci: a bibliographic visualization tool. In Proceedings
of CASCON ’96, page 28. IBM Press, 1996.
S. A. Morris, G. Yen, Z. Wu, and B. Asnake. Time line visualization of research fronts. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol.,
54:413–422, March 2003.
Q. V. Nguyen, M. L. Huang, and S. Simoff. Visualization of
relational structure among scientiﬁc articles. In Proceedings
of VISUAL’07, pages 415–425, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007.
Springer-Verlag.
M. M. Sebrechts, J. V. Cugini, S. J. Laskowski, J. Vasilakis,
and M. S. Miller. Visualization of search results: a comparative evaluation of text, 2d, and 3d interfaces. In Proceedings
of ACM SIGIR’99, pages 3–10, New York, NY, USA, 1999.
B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type
taxonomy for information visualizations. In Proceedings
of VL’96, pages 336–, Washington, DC, USA, 1996. IEEE
Computer Society.
W. Wiza, K. Walczak, and W. Cellary. Periscope: a system for adaptive 3d visualization of search results. In Proceedings of Web3D ’04, pages 29–40, New York, NY, USA,
2004. ACM.
J. Zhang. A novel visualization model for web search results. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 12(5):981–988, 2006. Member-Nguyen, Tien.

