2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Multidimensional Visualization Techniques for Microarray Data
Urška Cvek1, 2, Marjan Trutschl1, 2, Phillip C. Kilgore1, Randolph Stone II2, John L. Clifford2
1
Department of Computer Science, LSU Shreveport, USA
2
Center for Molecular and Tumor Virology, LSU Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, USA
3
Department of Biochemistry, LSU Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, USA
{ucvek, mtrutsch, kilgorep54}@lsus.edu, {rstone, jcliff}@lsuhsc.edu
science domain. In 2004, Saraiya et al. evaluated the use
of visualization tools by biologists and discovered that
there is an overwhelming variety of tools to chose from,
causing confusion [5]. A similar survey has been recently
completed by Gehlenborg et al. [6]
Novel multidimensional visualization techniques
enable display of large, high-dimensional datasets in a
meaningful, more descriptive manner. They have been
shown to have a very high intrinsic dimensionality [7]
and the ability to uncover non-trivial patterns and
relationships in the data. We combine these
visualizations with the topology-preserving neural
network and projection technique, the SOM [8], enabling
the discovery of previously unknown relationships.
We are using a dataset of the urothelial cell
carcinoma (UCC) of the bladder generated by the
Clifford Lab at LSUHSC-S to illustrate these novel data
analysis techniques [9]. In Section 2, we discuss the
setup and processing of the UCC dataset. We continue
with the description of multidimensional visualizations,
including parallel coordinates and Radviz, and their
intrinsic dimensionality in Section 3. Section 4 is a
discussion of SOMs, their extensions and combination
with multidimensional visualization techniques. In
Section 5 we combine the techniques and apply them to
the UCC dataset.

Abstract
Analysis of high-dimensional microarray expression
data is based mostly on the statistical approaches that
are indispensable for the study of biological systems. To
aid the analysis and exploration of such data, the
process of analyzing such data is often enhanced with
visual, data mining and other computational techniques.
We utilize a set of tools for the visual analysis of data
aimed at generating the hypotheses. We show the
usability of classic and novel multi-dimensional
visualization tools in life sciences. Additionally, we
survey and show a few multidimensional visualization
tools applied to the process of data exploration using a
urothelial cell carcinoma of the bladder time course.
These tools have the potential of uncovering non-trivial
relationships and structures in the data.

1. Introduction
Microarrays have become the norm for simultaneous
measurement of expression levels of thousands of genes.
The “current/next generation” platforms have enormous
promise in revealing functions of genes, cell populations,
tumor classifications [1], understanding cellular
pathways, drug target identification, just to name a few
[2]-[3]. Biological conclusions as well as the methods
applied to the signal data can be roughly divided into
preprocessing and data analysis, which is further divided
into data mining and visualization exploration. A variety
of data mining algorithms are at hand for the subsequent
task: from self-organizing maps (SOMs) [4] to
hierarchical clustering - one of the most utilized data
mining methods. Visualization tools range from scatter
plots to dendrograms, line plots, histograms, and box
plots. Modern visualization tools and techniques targeted
towards high-dimensional data remain heavily
underutilized. A quick survey of the publications
applying
multidimensional
visualizations
in
bioinformatics indicates that manuscripts using such
tools are mostly published in the information
visualization and scientific visualization rather than life
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.37

2. Urothelial cell carcinoma dataset
Urothelial cell carcinoma of the bladder (UCC)
ranks 4th in incidence of all cancers in the developed
world, yet the mechanisms of its origin and progression
remain poorly understood. The transgenic mice, UPIISV40T [10], develop a condition closely resembling
human carcinoma in situ (CIS) starting as early as 6
weeks of age, progressing to invasive UCC from 6
months onward. We determined the relative expression
level on a set of duplicated microarrays for two factors:
mouse genotype (WT or SV40T) and week (3, 6, 20, 30)
creating eight targets [9].
We characterized the histologic progression of
premalignant, carcinoma in-situ, early invasive UCC and
more advanced invasive UCC occurring at 3, 6, 20 and
241

30 weeks of age, respectively, in the UPII-SV40T mice
[17]. Preliminary analysis using the Ingenuity Pathways
Analysis software package (Ingenuity Systems Inc.)
revealed that cell cycle regulatory, DNA replication, and
cancer related genes were more strongly expressed in the
SV40T bladder urothelium at the highest proportion,
even at the 3-week point.

We can divide the multidimensional techniques into
three sets. The first set of techniques is focused on the
reduction of the data size and preservation of its
significant features. Pixel level visualization schemes
allow for the display of a large number of records are not
scalable and depend on the size of the display area [19].
The second set of techniques is based on matrices [2022] as one of the techniques first utilized to address this
problem. A scatter plot matrix, for example, shows all
pairwise scatterplots, mirrored across the diagonal. The
problem with this approach is the growth of the scatter
plot matrix as the number of dimensions increases. The
third set of techniques is the group of line-based (i.e.,
parallel coordinates) and point projections (i.e., Radviz).
Parallel coordinates use parallel axes instead of
perpendicular axes for mapping of dimensional values
[23-24]. Radviz [25] positions dimensional anchors
around the perimeter of a circle using Hooke’s law.
Visual effectiveness of these visualizations can be
measured to determine their benefits.

Figure 1 Gene regulation at 6, 20 and 30 weeks
for the WT and SV40T lines.
We identified genes that are differentially expressed
between the bladders of SV40T mice and their agematched wild type (WT) littermates at 3, 6, 20 and 30
weeks of age. Figure 1 shows the counts of up and down
regulated genes for each of the lines, when compared to
the first time point for the WT. As expected, virtually no
regulation is present in the WT. An exponential increase
in regulation for the SV40T line from approximately
1,300 to 2,100 and 4,400 at time points 6, 20 and 30 is
observed (Fig. 2).

3.1. Parallel coordinates
The parallel coordinates (PC) [23-24] algorithm has
been applied to a wide range of data analysis tasks. They
can display a large number of dimensions of a dataset,
but suffer from the disadvantage that the number of
records that can be displayed is limited. Visualizing a
medium or larger size dataset usually results in overplotting or clutter, a featureless blob, which hides the
underlying data structure. Regardless of their application,
we can group existing techniques based on their topology
into 2D and 3D techniques.

Figure 2 Two-way analysis confirms the
increased regulation in the SV40T line.
We further analyzed the set of 585 genes that are
differentially expressed at the early stages, namely weeks
6 and 20 (Fig. 2). We tested several of the genes
upregulated in SV40T urothelium, including hyaluronan
mediated motility receptor (RHAMM), RacGAP1,
PCNA and others as biomarkers for premalignancy, in
urine samples from a completed chemoprevention trial.

3. Multidimensional visualizations

Figure 3 Parallel coordinates of the 585 early
changing genes of the UCC data.

It is difficult to display datasets of four or more
dimensions on a two-dimensional (2D) screen, or a piece
of paper, with no loss of insight. Two of the dimensions
of the data can be represented as x and y coordinates
while the other dimensions map to the color, texture,
size, and shape of a record. With human perceptual
ability limited to three to four dimensions tracked on a
visual display [18], our goal is to identify
multidimensional tools that can accommodate medium
and large datasets to aid the process of visual knowledge
exploration.

PCs can be augmented with information displays or
interactive tools such as histograms, frequency or density
information, glyphs, etc. Average shifted histograms
visualize density plots with PCs [26-27] aiming to
remove the problem of dimension’s bins or frequency
intervals. This approach is extended by painting pixels of
polylines with intensity proportional to the pixel’s record
overlap [28]. Artero et al. [29] create an interactive PCs
frequency and density plot. Visual data mining displays
[30] use cluster centroids placed on top of the PCs and
tracked statistical measures displayed as static or

242

animated glyphs in a separate coordinate system.
SpringView [31] explores coupled multiple views of
Radviz and PCs and applies brushing, color and data
clustering. PCs have also been interactively linked with
star glyphs, scatter plots and dimensional stacking [32][25], among others.
In Figure 3 we show the over-plotting or occlusion
that occurs when visualizing the set of 585 unique UCC
genes that are differentially expressed in SV40T line at
week 6 and/or week 20. We display all of the 15
dimensions of this dataset and order them by first listing
the SV40T lines followed by the WT lines. We cannot
notice any significant differences across the dimensions,
although we can detect that majority of the records have
low to mid values. There are only a few records with
high signal values. We notice a dip in the expressions in
the center of the display, which is due to the switch from
the SV40T dimensions to the WT dimensions and is not
a true pattern in the dataset.

have identical values on the displayed dimensions, but
also when the records are scaled. For example, records
(1,1,1,1,1,1) and (10,10,10,10,10,10) would appear at the
same location in the center of the circle (they are pulled
by all dimensions equally). Dimension ordering and
placement of dimensions away from the radial layout
minimizes this problem, but does not completely solve it.
We developed an approach that utilizes the third
dimension to organize the data when overlap occurs.
Upon the examination of the Radviz display of the
SV40T line on the 585 early differentially expressed
genes of the UCC dataset (Fig. 5), we noticed that
majority of them are either in the center (pulled equally
by all dimensions) or positioned towards the bottom of
the visualization. We can conclude that the signal values
at the 30-week time point are relatively large and that our
genes are more likely up-regulated. When we show the
UP or DOWN regulation for the genes as the record
color, we can confirm this.

3.2. Radviz

Figure 4 Example of Radviz spring forces of an
8-dimensional record.
Figure 5 Radviz display of the 585 early
changing genes of the UCC data.

Radviz (radial visualization) is a radial display technique
places dimensional anchors (dimensions) around the
perimeter of a circle and utilizes spring constants to
represent relational values among points. The record in
Figure 4 has 8 dimensions ordered on the circle in
counter-clockwise equidistant fashion. Each position
vector points from (0,0) to the corresponding fixed point
on the perimeter of a unit circle. The values of each
dimension are usually normalized to a 0 to 1 range to
eliminate any effects of the variable minimum and
maximum values in the range. Each data point is
displayed at the point where the sum of all spring forces
equals zero and the stiffness of each spring is
proportional to the value of the corresponding
dimension. The point ends up at the position where the
spring forces are in equilibrium. The position of the data
point depends largely on the arrangement of dimensions
around the circle; however, vectors with similar
dimensional values are always placed close together. The
technique has been complemented by dimension
ordering approaches, where the dimension order is
determined by the structure of the data or the inherent
class separation [31], [36-37] and 3D extensions [38].
One of the major disadvantages of Radviz is the
overlap of points that occurs not only when the records

4. Self-Organizing Map
The SOM is an unsupervised neural network that
facilitates mapping of a set of n-dimensional vectors to a
two-dimensional grid [8]. Training of the unsupervised
neural network is data-driven, without a target condition;
therefore, the output of a SOM algorithm represents the
relationships among the input vectors. SOM is a great
summarization technique, effectively reducing the
complexity of the dataset by displaying clusters of the
data in a grid. Its widespread use is attributed to its
simplicity.
The learning of the SOM is the process in which a
nonlinear projection of the records onto a map is
performed. The self-organizing grid or map consists of
an array of output nodes (neurons), each of them
associated with an n-dimensional weight vector ni
(corresponding to the n dimensions of the input dataset).
Initial values of ni may be randomly selected, preferably
based on the values in the dataset. Each randomly
selected record is positioned on the map, one by one,
until the dataset is exhausted. The process is repeated to
achieve convergence.

243

plane into a number of partitions. The second option we
provide is force-directed record placement. This
approach utilizes weight vectors used for selforganization along the grids. Using these weights, nodes
are either pushed apart or pulled together, depending
upon their similarity.

A record is mapped onto the SOM by calculating the
similarity between the input vector and node i’s weight
vector ni. Each node i receives the same input vector and
produces a single similarity value. The input record maps
onto the best-matching (winning) node w, based on the
largest similarity coefficient or the smallest distance
(depending on the implementation). The weight vectors
of nodes topologically close to the winning node (up to a
certain geometric distance) adjust their weight vectors,
learning about the current input. The adjustment depends
on the size of the neighborhood, the value of the
neighboring function and the learning function. This
process is repeated until the output map converges to a
stable or organized state when the average error falls
below a pre-specified value or a certain number of
iterations have been reached.
Most SOMs are visualized on a rectangular display
of output nodes, although hexagonal and irregular grids
are also used. Numerous SOM algorithms and extensions
have been developed in a multitude of fields, which
include biomedical applications. One of the seminal
applications of SOMs in the biomedical arena was the
work by Tamayo et al. [4] in which SOMs were used to
find the classes in 828 genes of the Yeast cell cycle.

Figure 6 Binned Radviz surface and secondary
mapping into the third dimension.

5. Combining SOM with multidimensional
visualizations
5.1. 3D PC and 3D Radviz algorithms
The original SOM algorithm only has one mapping
step at which the output node for the record is
determined. Our algorithm consists of primary and
secondary mapping steps in the effort to merge the SOM
and a multidimensional visualization. For the 3D parallel
coordinates, we first start by replacing the original
dimensional axes by grids of output nodes and then
proceed with a two-step mapping process (Fig. 6).
Primary mapping determines the location for a
record on the dimensional axis, just as in the original
step, but mapping to a primary bin that has been created
by the grid in the y dimension. The secondary mapping
replaces the single grid cell is by the single-dimensional
set of SOM output nodes to which the record can map.
The output node is chosen based on the Euclidean
distance between the record and representative weight
vectors of the output grid (Fig. 6). Records with similar
dimensional values are placed closer together in three
dimensions through the repetition of the two mapping
steps using the neighborhood and learning function.
The organization of records into the three PC
dimensions provides a larger surface on which the
records’ polylines can be organized onto, which helps
remove the overlap/occlusion, but does not completely
eliminate it. One of the options we provide to resolve
these is bundling of records. We represent the records
plotted in a 3D PC plot mathematically in the form of
Bezier curves (replacing polylines) grouping similar
records together. To set the number of bundles in the y
and z directions, we implemented partitioning of the

Figure 7 Primary and secondary mapping steps
of our 3D PC algorithm.
For the 3D Radviz we first start by placing the
records based on the original Radviz algorithm. The
main difference is that instead of positioning it in by the
original algorithm, we grid the Radviz surface and
position the record into its primary bin (Fig. 7). The
position is then augmented in the secondary mapping
step, where we build a single-dimensional SOM at each
Radviz grid cell into the third dimension. The same
process is repeated for all of the records, adjusting based
on the neighborhood and learning function and stopping
after no learning takes place (or it falls below a certain
threshold). The neighborhood affects the three
dimensions (x, y, z) as all of the neighboring output
nodes are adjusted.

5.2. Application to the UCC dataset
Figure 8 shows the binned parallel coordinates plot
of the 585 records that are differentially expressed early
(weeks 6 and 20). We are displaying one replicate at the
3, 6, 20 and 30-week points (in order from left to right)
of the SV40T line. The data is colored by the 30-week
time point (the dimension furthest to the right). If we
compare it to the original parallel coordinates plot, it is
less cluttered, as the records have been collapsed into the
bins (10 bins were created for each dimension). The
points appear to distribute evenly on each dimension.

244

stereo pair of the 3D Parallel Coordinates visualization
from Figure 10 [39].
The 3D Radviz approach moves the 585 record set
into the third dimension based on all or a subset of
dimensional values (Fig. 11). The pull is driven by the
self-organization of the data. We color the records by the
regulation, creating a color map from red (up-regulated)
to green (down-regulated). The distribution of signal
values of the data is not uniform, with more values at the
lower end of the range. It is important to note that we do
not only provide for self-organization of the data within a
classic visualization, in this case Radviz, but at the same
time also address and virtually eliminate the effect of
occlusion. Records that continue to overlap are either the
same or have similar dimensional values.

There is a lot of occlusion and the only way that structure
like this can be explored further is by utilizing brushing,
selection, filtering and similar interaction techniques.

Figure 8 585 records of the SV40T set, 4 time
points, and colored by regulation in week 30.

Figure 9 Records move along the z-axis based
on their dimensional values.
Our next step was to explore the projection using the
3D PC, which position a grid of 10x10 output nodes at
each of the dimensional axes (Fig. 9). We can start
discovering more structure – not all the records that have
the same dimensional values continue to stay together in
the third dimension. We can observe that while some of
the records have higher dimensional values, most of
them do not stay at the high value across all dimensions
but rather project onto the low or medium dimensional
values in majority of the dimensions.

Figure 11 3D Radviz projection of all 8
dimensions of the SV40T line.

Conclusions
We emphasize the importance of multidimensional
visualization tools in the knowledge discovery process of
microarray and other life science data. We discuss the
details of two visualization techniques: parallel
coordinates and Radviz, which we combine with the selforganizing map projection to showcase novel data
exploration methods. We examine the UCC dataset from
which we already obtained meaningful leads that have
been confirmed in the laboratory setting.

Figure 10 Force-directed record placement and
bundling of the 585 UCC records.

Acknowledgements

A bundling approach is applied to the data (Fig. 10).
Records with similar expression values are bundled
together thus reducing clutter. To create an even more
descriptive display, we apply a force-directed placement
of records. Output nodes associated with a grid at each
dimension are pulled together whenever the output nodes
contain similar weight vectors or repelled when the
values in the neighboring output nodes are dissimilar.
This helps to further reduce clutter and provide for a
cleaner set of data patterns to be explored interactively.
Moreover, this process separates related records into
distinct groups. Each of the 585 records belongs to one
of the clusters associated with each dimension. There are
four such clusters associated with SV40-03w, five with
SV40-06w and so on. We provide a sample cross-eye

The project was supported by NIH Grant Numbers
P20RR016456 and P20RR018724 from the National
Center for Research Resources. The content is solely the
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the National Center for
Research Resources or the National Institutes of Health.

References
[1]

[2]

245

T.R. Golub, D.K. Slonim, P. Tamayo, et al. Molecular
classification of cancer: class discovery and class
prediction by gene expression monitoring. Science
286(5439), pp. 531-537, 1999.
P.T. Spelman, G. Sherlock, M.Q. Zhang, V.R. Iyer, K.
Anders, M.B. Eisen, P.O. Brown, D. Botstein, B. Fucher.

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21] J.M. Chambers, W.S. Cleveland, B. Kleiner, P.A. Tukey.
Graphical Methods for Data Analysis, 1976.
[22] J. Bertin, Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks,
Maps. University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, 1983.
[23] A. Inselberg, The plane with parallel coordinates. The
Visual Computer, pp. 69-92, 1985.
[24] A. Inselberg, B. Dimsdale, Parallel coordinates: A tool
for visualizing multidimensional geometry. Proc. IEEE
Visualization, pp. 361-378, 1990.
[25] P. Hoffman, G. Grinstein. Dimensional anchors: a
graphic primitive for multidimensional multivariate
information visualizations. Presented at NPIV 99, 1999.
[26] J.J. Miller, E.J. Wegman, Construction of line densities
for parallel coordinate plots. Computational Statistics
and Graphics, eds. A. Buja, P. Tukey, Springer-Verlag,
pp. 107-123, 1990.
[27] E.J. Wegman, Hyperdimensional data analysis using
parallel coordinates. Journal of American Statistical
Association, 85 (411), pp. 664-675, 1990.
[28] E.J. Wegman, Q. Luo, High dimensional clustering using
parallel coordinates and the grand tour. Proc. Conf.
German Classification Society, Freiburg, 1996.
[29] A.O. Artero, M.C. Ferreira de Oliveira, H. Levkowitz,
Uncovering Clusters in Crowded Parallel Coordinates
Visualizations. Proc. IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, pp. 81-88, 2004.
[30] D. Ericson, J. Johansson, M. Cooper, Visual data
analysis using tracked statistical measures within parallel
coordinate representations. Proc. 3rd IEEE Conference
on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory
Visualization, pp. 42-53, 2005.
[31] E. Bertini, L. Dell’ Aquila, G. Santucci, Springview:
cooperation of Radviz and parallel coordinates or view
optimization and clutter reduction. Proc. 3rd IEEE
International Conference on Coordinated & Multiple
Views in Exploratory Visualization, pp. 22-29, 2005.
[32] P.C. Wong, R.D. Bergeron, Multivariate visualization
using metric scaling. Proc. IEEE Vis., pp. 111-118, 1997.
[33] Y.-H. Fua, M.O. Ward, E.A. Rundensteiner, Hierarchical
parallel coordinates for exploration of large datasets.
IEEE 5th Int. Conference on Info. Vis., 425-432, 2001.
[34] M.O. Ward, XmdvTool: Integrating multiple methods for
visualizing multivariate data. Proc. IEEE Visualization
1994, pp. 326-333, 1994.
[35] J. Yang, A. Patro, S. Huang, N. Mehta, M.O. Ward, E.A.
Rundensteiner, Value and relation display for interactive
exploration of high dimensional datasets. Proc. IEEE
Symp. on Information Visualization 2004, pp. 73-80.
[36] G. Leban, I. Bratko, U. Petrovic, T. Curk, B. Zupan.
VizRank: finding informative data projections in
functional
genomics
by
machine
learning.
Bioinformatics, 21, 2005.
[37] P. Au, M. Carey, S. Sewraz, Y. Guo, S. Ruger. New
paradigms in information visualization. Proc. 23rd
International ACM SIGIR Conf., Athens, Greece, 2000.
[38] L. Novakova, O. Stepankova, Multidimensional clusters
in RadViz, Proc. WSEAS Int. Conf. on Sim., Modeling
and Optimization, pp. 470-475, 2006.
[39] http://dl.dropbox.com/u/18739750/IVBI2011/3D-PC.png

Comprehensive identification of cell-cycle regulated
genes of the Yeast Saccharomyces Cerevisiae by
Microarray Hybridization. Molecular Biology of the Cell,
9(12), pp. 3273-3297, 1998.
T. Zhang, R. Ramakrishnan, M. Livny. Birch: an
efficient data clustering method for very large databases.
Proc.Int. Conf. Management of Data, pp. 103-114, 1996.
P. Tamayo, D. Slonim, J. Mesirov, Q. Zhu, S.
Kitareewan, E. Dmitrovsky, E.S. Lander, T.R. Golub.
Interpreting patterns of gene expression with selforganizing maps: methods and application to
hematopoietic differentiation. Proc. Atl. Acad. Sci.,
96(6), pp. 2907-2912, 1999.
P. Saraiya, C. North, K. Duca. An evaluation of
microarray visualization tools for biological insight.
Proc. Information Visualization 2004, pp. 1-8, 2004.
N. Gehlenborg, et al. Visualization of omics data for
systems biology, Nature Methods, Vol. 7 (3), pp.S56-68.
G. Grinstein, M. Trutschl, U. Cvek, High-dimensional
visualizations. 7th ACM/SIGKDD Data mining
Conference (KDD), 2001.
T. Kohonen, Self-organized formation of topologically
correct feature maps. Biological Cybernetics, 1982.
R. Stone, A.L. Sabichi, J. Gill, I-L Lee, R.
Loganantharaj, M. Trutschl, U. Cvek, J.L. Clifford.
Identification of genes involved in early stage bladder
cancer progression, Cancer Prev. Res., 3:776-786, 2010.
Z.T. Zhang, J. Pak, E. Shapiro, T.T. Sun, X.R. Wu.
Urothelium-specific expression of an oncogene in
transgenic mice induced the formation of carcinoma in
situ and invasive transitional cell carcinoma. Cancer
Res., 59(14), pp. 3512-7, 1999.
R. Gentleman, V. Carey, et al. (editors) Bioinformatics
and Computational Biology Solutions Using R and
Bioconductor, Springer, 2005.
R. Gentleman, W. Huber. Working with Affymetrix data:
estrogen, a 2x2 factorial design example. Practical
Microarray Course, Heidelberg, 2003.
R Development Core Team. R: A Language and
Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna Austria, 2008.
R.C. Gentleman, V.J. Carey, D.M. Bates, B. Bolstad, M.
Dettling, S. Dudoit S, et al. Bioconductor: open software
development
for
computational
biology
and
bioinformatics. Genome Biology, 5(10), R80, 2004.
G.K. Smyth. Limma: Linear models for microarray data.
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Solutions
using R and Bioconductor. R. Genleman, V. Carey, S.
Dudoit, R. Irizarry, W. Huber (ed.), pp. 397-420, 2005.
L. Gautier, L. Cope, B.M. Bolstad, R.A. Irizarry. affy-analysis of Affymetrix GeneChip data at the probe level.
Bioinformatics, 12(3), pp. 307-315, 2004.
R. Stone, A.L. Sabichi, J. Gill, I-L Lee, R.
Loganantharaj, M. Trutschl, U. Cvek, J.L. Clifford.
Identification of genes involved in early stage bladder
cancer progression, Cancer Prev. Res., 3:776-786, 2010.
J. Farrington, From the Research: Myths Worth
Dispelling: Seven plus or minus two. Performance
Improvement Quarterly 23(4) 113–116, 2011.
D. Keim, H. Kriegel, M. Ankerst. Recursive pattern: a
technique for visualizing very large amounts of data.
Proc. Visualization 1995, pp. 279-286, 1995.
D.F. Andrews. Plots of high-dimensional data.
Biometrics, 29, pp. 125-136, 1972.

246

