2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Revealing the Celt: digitilising Irish placenames in Australia
Dymphna Lonergan and Theodor Wyeld
Flinders University, Australia
{ dymphna.lonergan@flinders.edu.au, twyeld@gmail.com}
In particular, the tool facilitates the ability to visualise
the migratory movements across Australia at particular
times as migrants followed employment opportunities
such as mining and farming – a feature not possible with
existing text-only searchable databases. The visualisation
of this information opens up possible research
trajectories not otherwise apparent with the text-only
tools.

Abstract
This paper describes the integration of various kinds
of historical and geographic information about placenaming and immigration. Information about space, place
names and cultural meanings is usually disparate and
fragmented in location and time. The digital resource
described in this paper addresses this fragmentation by
providing an interface that is both searchable and
navigable. As a pilot study, it presents a rich
visualisation of Irish migration and heritage within the
Australian landscape and history. The resource will be
used as a foundation structure for the digital collation of
other cultures and migrations, internationally. It has
proven to be useful for researchers from a variety of
disciplines.
Keywords--- GPS, Irish, placenames, Google
Maps, history, migration.

Introduction
Many places around the world bear a name that is
representative of the ethnicity of the immigrants who
settled there. However, the stories behind these
settlements and their naming are often lost in the time
that has passed since their establishment. In an attempt to
recapture some of that history the authors of this paper
have begun the process of collating the history of
migrant named places and the stories behind them. In its
first iteration, as a pilot study, the project focuses on
Irish placenames in Australia. The database uses Google
Maps with markers and pop-up texts to provide a
searchable interface which correlates placenames with
their geographical locations (see Figure 1). In future
iterations it is expected the project will expand to include
placenames applied by immigrants of different ethnic
origin – in Australia and internationally. This is
potentially a huge project. The pilot study is being used
to provide the framework for the larger databases to
come. While the process itself is not novel what the
searchable map provides is a tool for correlating
placename with location, context and its history.
Preliminary evaluation suggests the tool’s ability to
provide visual and other cues to correlations between
placename history, location and dates has been effective.
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.99

Figure 1. Irish Place Names interface showing
pull-down menu of placenames and pop-up text
box for Bagot Range in South Australia (see
wyeldbydesign.com/irishplacenames).

Overview of Existing Interfaces
There are various existing searchable online place
name databases (see, for example: nona.net,
familyhistorysa.info, gazetteer.com.uk). They allow the
user to search for a place name and its occurrence in
multiple global locations. Selecting one will show that
location in relation to surrounding areas. For example,
the Nona Net [1] website at http://nona.net/features/map
allows the user to select a placename such as Dublin.
This is returned as Dublin in the state of Virginia, US
580

(see figure 2). However, the history behind the naming of
Dublin in Virginia is not provided.

and edit placenames which are automatically updated on
the map. A feedback button allows for continuous
updating of the database through input from the public.

Background
According to the historian Patrick O’Farrell [5, p5]
the Irish language in Australia “…died out on reaching
these shores.” A subsequent PhD study by Lonergan [6]
claims this to be untrue. Instead, she claims, the Irish
language has played a significant role in the development
of Australian English. Several iconic Australian words
such as didgeridoo and sheila, for instance, have an Irish
language origin. Indeed, the Irish origins of a word or
place can be hidden in its anglicizing. For example,
Belfast comes from Béal Féirste (a sandy ford mouth);
Dublin from Dubh Linn (a black pool). The Irish name
Inis Fáil, ‘island of destiny’, a mythological name for
Ireland, is an example of the Australian town of Inisfail –
with its anglicized pronunciation (the original Irish name
Inis Fáil is pronounced ‘Innish fawl’).
Our focus here is on placenames originating in the
Irish language or with another Irish connection, the
relationship between these ethnic placenames and
settlement, and to what extent place names reflect the
original settlement patterns. The current database of
placenames and their historical background has been
built up from a number of resources. The South
Australian research was drawn from place name books,
family histories, and other texts such as Mary Burrows’
[7] Riverton: Heart of the Gilbert Valley, Reg Butler’s
[8] The Quiet Waters By: The Mount Pleasant District
1843-1993; Rob Charlton’s [9] The History of Kapunda ;
Teresa Donnellan’s [10, 11] Home of the East Wind:
Hornsdale and her Tarcowie: Place of Washaway Water
; and Julie Anne Ellis’s [12] Yacka: The Story of a Mid
North Town in South Australia.
Placename books and family histories can be found
in public libraries and genealogical centres, and in
government electronic databases. For example, all states
in Australia have electronic placename databases
available to the public such as Western Australia’s
Landgate website [13]; Victoria’s Vicnames website
[14]; and the South Australian PlaceNames online
website [15]. These electronic databases provide
information such as feature code (whether the place is a
town, locality, or geographical feature); postcode; status
(official or unofficial); and its GPS coordinates. Some
sites provide the history behind the name. For example,
the Western Australian Landgate site provides for the
place name ‘O’Connor’:
The suburb of O'Connor was named in 1955 in
honour of Charles Yelverton O'Connor. O'Connor
was Engineer in Chief and General Manager of the
Railways of Western Australia in the 1890's, and is
remembered for his genius that resulted in
construction of the Goldfields Water Supply,
Fremantle Harbour and Perth's suburban rail
system. He died in 1903. [13 n.d.]

Figure 2. nona.net search for Dublin, Michigan
[1]
Similarly, the website, Genealogy Australia [2]
provides access to interactive maps for the various states
and
territories
at
www.familyhistorysa.info/australia.html. However, users
can only drill down to a place. Again, no history is
provided to the origins of the place name. The United
Kingdom Gazetteer [3] is another example at
http://www.gazetteer.co.uk. A search for a place name
reveals some geographical details such as county name
and coordinates, but there is no visual reference such as
an interactive map and no historical detail is provided for
the place name. By contrast, the framework provided by
the Irish placenames in Australia project (URL currently
http://www.wyeldbydesign.com/irishplacenames/)
provides a searchable interface that can reveal location,
history, and ethnic connection. For example, in searching
for Bagot Range its location in South Australia is
revealed as a green dot. Clicking on the dot drills down
to a more specific location and at the same time a textbox
provides the history behind the name, including the
information that the range is named after an Irish-born
immigrant, Captain Hervey Bagot.

Overview of the Tool
While Irish placenames and their history in Australia
can be found in various books or online databases that
include GPS coordinates, to-date there has been no
attempt to collate these and apply this information to a
visual, searchable, navigable map. Collating the existing
information and linking it to its GPS coordinates was the
first task necessary to establish a searchable map. Using
Google Maps with placename data fed into it, one can
now type in or search via a drop down menu Irish
placenames in Australia and be taken to that location on
the map. By clicking on the marker for that location a
summary history is provided in a pop-up text box.
Clicking on the link in the pop-up text box takes the user
to a more detailed historical overview of the location.
Administrative tools allow the database managers to add
581

However, the Irish background of Charles O’Connor
is not mentioned. By contrast, the Australian Dictionary
of Biography online gives the information that Charles
O’Connor was Irish-born, but does not mention the place
named after him:
CY (Charles Yelverton) O’Connor was born in 1843
in Meath, Ireland. He was apprenticed to an Irish
railway before emigrating to New Zealand and then
Australia. [16]
What this study does is to bring together a place
name’s geographical, spatial, historical, and ethnic
information in a single resource. Hence, what this project
adds to the collection of Irish-related placenames in
Australia is the historical background linked to its
location in a visible way that opens up new possibilities
for interpretation and further research.

in this project is often not included. For example, a
search for Bagot Gap on the South Australian
Government place name website shows that the Name
Information section remains blank. This is because, for
this database, the historical information is of secondary
importance compared to the geographical information
(see figure 3).
The history behind Irish and other ethnic settlement
in relation to placenames is a little researched field, not
just in Australia, but worldwide. There are place name
websites but what is missing from most of them is
historical detail that reveals an ethnic connection. With
the framework this study sets up this ethnic connection
will be accessible electronically by researchers in
history, settlement, migration, and cultural studies linked
to existing studies of migration patterns and their GPS
coordinates in a visual interface.

Motivation for the Study
The idea to use a GPS coordinate system in the
collection of Irish-related placenames in Australia was
first considered in viewing The Australian Word Map
website [18]. This site provides a searchable database of
Australian colloquial words. It provides information on
their ethnic origins. The continent is divided into regions
where the words are used. For example, a search for the
word ‘Gabba’ reveals it as being used in the Sydney and
Brisbane regions and these regions are highlighted when
the curser is passed over the name. The word ‘Gabba’ is
known nationally as the name of the cricket ground in
Brisbane. It is a shortening of the suburb the cricket
ground is located – Woolloongabba – an Australian
Aboriginal term with undefined meaning (see Figure 4).
The Australian Word Map project’s word collection
initiated the idea to collect and collate Irish and other
ethnic place names in Australia and transfer the database
to a similar searchable interface. At that time the
database contained a number of recurring Irish place
names. This raised the question whether this represented
signified settlement in Australia from a particular area in
Ireland or whether the name was chosen because it was
Irish or simply at random. This is significant if further
study shows that place names played a significant part in
attracting new settlers to an area. For example, many
would be familiar with the placename ‘Irishtown’.
Occurring worldwide wherever there has been Irish
settlement, it is often an unofficial placename and one
seldom chosen by the Irish themselves. Yet, the
placename ‘Irishtown’ signals Irish settlement, and so it
follows that more Irish might choose to settle there [6].
Choosing a place name to attract a particular ethnic
group has been part of Australian European settlement.
An 1839 address to Irish landlords who may want to
downsize their tenantry by paying for the passage of
some to South Australia, a suggestion was made that, in
Ireland, the society might immediately purchase 100,000
acres of land and call it “New Dublin,” “St. Patrick’s
Land,” or any other patronymic, and locate on it such

Figure 3. Search for Bagot Gap [15].

South Australian Study
Existing electronic placename websites provided by
the various government authorities tend to focus
primarily on geographical data. According to Knowles
[17] these sites are mainly interested in the application of
geographic information systems (GIS) to the study of
history. The history behind the place name is of
secondary interest evidenced by the absence of so much
place name history from sites such as Geoscience
Australia. Moreover, when the history part of a place
name has been recorded ethnic data such as that provided

582

surplus of their tenantry as would cultivate their new
country [19].

Participant feedback tended to focus on the value of
the background information (coordinates, location, and
stories) and the ability to locate a place on the map which
previously may have only been part of a list in a book.
The fact that all Irish placenames in Australia could be
seen in a single glance of the map highlighted just how
many such named places there are in Australia. It also
shows clusters of Irish-named places which suggests
further investigation is needed to answer questions, such
as: what, if any, is the correlation between Irish
settlement and Irish-related place names?
Participants commented that the searchable map
‘provides researchers with “starting points” and possible
sources of further information’. They also commented
that when conducting research on an unrelated site they
could quickly and easily ‘check to see what, if any,
“Irish” detail [we had] listed for the area’. More
generally, the map was ‘useful in clarifying [the general]
spread of Irish placenames across the landscape’.
Users were interested in the information and were
positive about the tool. They wanted more context,
especially to be able to continue to see the place when
reading the pop-up text against a background of
Australia. Context has been improved since the survey
was conducted by making sure the entries have the full
name of the state or territory, as international users may
not know that SA stands for South Australia, for
example. The GPS coordinates need to be checked using
a proper digital survey, as some locations listed by the
official placenames websites are incorrect.

Figure 4. Australian Word Map search for
‘Gabba’ [18].

Conclusion
This paper has demonstrated an existing gap in the
inquiry into migration settlement and place names. Place
names are found in every habited and uninhabited region
in the world. These names are associated with people
who lived in these places or travelled to these places.
Place names carry our histories but in a fast moving age
of new technologies the slow work of the individual
researcher in collecting these histories means over time
there is a danger of the histories being lost. The database
search tool described here can lead to disparate
geographical and historical studies of places and peoples
that have been traditionally separated being brought
together in a new way that creates a new type of research
tool that generates new ways to enquire and pose new
questions about their connections.

Historical Boundaries
As was seen in the example from the South
Australian place names data base, a hierarchical focus
has been geographical information taking precedent over
historical. At the same time, historical studies such as
family histories and histories of ethnic groups are not
usually digitilised. One reason the historical background
to placenames is often missing or truncated in the
electronic databases is that the disciplines of geography
and history tend to follow different paths of enquiry.
Hence, bringing these two disciplines together using the
searchable map tool promotes a reconsideration of the
research divide of settlement and migration studies.

Preliminary Evaluation
References
Once the searchable map tool was developed a
survey was conducted to ascertain user reception.
Respondents included international and national users.
Participants were asked to attempt a search with the tool
and answer three questions:
1. In what ways is the site helpful in researching
Irish-related placenames?
2. What areas are working well?
3. How could the site be better?

[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

583

Nona Net, http://nona.net/features/map
Genealogy
Australia
(2001),
http://www.familyhistorysa.info/australia.html.
United
Kingdom
Gazetteer
(2010),
http://www.gazetteer.co.uk
http://www.wyeldbydesign.com/irishplacenames/
O’Farrell, P. 2000, The Irish in Australia, University of
New South Wales Press, Sydney

[6]

Lonergan, D.2006, ‘A Place named Irishtown’,
Placenames
Australia,
http://www.anps.org.au/documents/Sept_2006.pdf
[7] Burrows, M. 1965, Riverton: Heart of the Gilbert Valley
, Griffin Press, Adelaide
[8] Butler, R. 1993, The Quiet Waters By: The Mount
Pleasant District 1843-1993, District Council of Mount
Pleasant, Adelaide
[9] Charlton, R. 1971 The History of Kapunda, Austaprint,
Adelaide
[10] Donnellan, T. 1995, Home of the East Wind: Hornsdale,
Open Book Publishers, Adelaide
[11] Donnellan, T. 1998, Tarcowie: Place of Washaway
Water, Tarcowie Book Publishers Association, Adelaide
[12] Ellis, J. A. 1995, Yacka: The Story of a Mid North Town
in South Australia, Yakka Historical Group, Adelaide

[13] Landgate Western Australia Land and Information
Authority
2011,
accessed
4
March
2011
<http://www.landgate.wa.gov.au>
[14] Vicnames,
accessed
4
March
2011
<http://services.land.vic.gov.au/vicnames>
[15] PlaceNames online (2000) South Australian Gazetteer,
Department for Transport, Energy, and Infrastructure,
accessed 4 March 2011, <www.placenames.sa.gov.au>
South Australia
[16] Australian Dictionary of Biography 2006, accessed 4
March
2011
<http://adbonline.anu.edu.au/adbonline.htm>
[17] Knowles, A. K.2005, ‘Emerging Trends in Historical
GIS’, Historical Geography (Vol 33) 2005, pp. 7-13
[18] The
Australian
Word
Map
(2005)
http://www.abc.net.au/wordmap/.
[19] Dublin University Magazine, Vol. X1V, September,
1839

584

