2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Information Visualization in Climate Research
Christian Tominski1

Jonathan F. Donges2,3

University of Rostock
Rostock, Germany
ct@informatik.uni-rostock.de

Humboldt University
Berlin, Germany
donges@pik-potsdam.de

1

2

Abstract—Much of the work conducted in climate research
involves large and heterogeneous datasets with spatial and
temporal references. This makes climate research an interesting
application area for visualization. However, the application of
interactive visual methods to assist in gaining insight into climate
data is still hampered for climate research scientists, who are
usually not visualization experts.
In this paper, we report on a survey that we conducted to
evaluate the application of interactive visualization methods and
to identify the problems related to establishing such methods
in scientiﬁc practice. The feedback from 76 participants shows
clearly that state-of-the-art techniques are rarely applied and
that integrating existing solutions smoothly into the scientists
workﬂow is problematic. We have begun to change this and
present ﬁrst results that illustrate how interactive visualization
tools can be successfully applied to accomplish climate research
tasks. As a concrete example, we describe the visualization of
climate networks and its beneﬁts for climate impact research.
Index Terms—Information Visualization, Climate Research,
Climate Networks, Graph Visualization, Geo-Visualization

Thomas Nocke3
Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research
Potsdam, Germany
nocke@pik-potsdam.de

Impact Research (PIK). Our major interest was in getting to
know:
•
•
•

Which visual, interactive, and analytical tools are applied
by the scientists?
Which tasks are accomplished with the help of these
tools?
What are the reasons for the low pervasion of state-ofthe-art visualization tools?

In Section II, we summarize the feedback that we got with
regard to these questions and discuss possible interpretations
of the results. Based on the feedback from the questionnaires
we launched an effort to convince the scientists of the advantages of interactive visual analysis and exploration. In this
effort, PIK has begun to incorporate visual methods into the
research workﬂow.
In this paper, we present a concrete application of information visualization to the exploration and analysis of
climate networks. As we will see in Section III, analyzing
climate networks is a recent movement that has already yielded
promising results in climate research.
How this new branch of climate research can be supported
with interactive visualization will be explained in Section IV.
We describe the speciﬁc requirements of the application
background and how interactive visualization was utilized to
accomplish climate research tasks, including visual exploration for hypothesis generation and visual conﬁrmation for
hypothesis evaluation. We also include the scientists’ feedback
and indicate where they saw shortcomings and disadvantages.
Section V will summarize our work and suggest possible
directions for future work.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Climate research involves many different scientiﬁc activities, among which data analysis and exploration play an
important role. Interactive visualization methods aim to ease
the interpretation of countless data tables ﬁlled with large
quantities of numbers by providing an interactively steerable
mapping process that transforms data into more easily interpretable visual representations.
When climate researchers visually analyze data, the typical
procedure is to reduce or aggregate the data by analytical
means and then to visualize them in a rather straightforward
way as a static image. The consequence is that only little or no
interaction is possible. For the purpose of presenting research
results, the scientists use online portals such as the Climate
Wizard (http://www.climatewizard.org), which provide access
to a large number of climate-related maps, but these maps are
also limited in terms of interaction and analysis facilities.
On the other hand, advances in the ﬁeld of information
visualization have yielded a number of innovative and promising solutions (see for example [1], [2], [3]). However, an
interactive visual exploration of heterogenous climate data
with multiple coordinated interactive visual representations has
not yet become common practice in this ﬁeld.
In order to better understand the current situation of application of visualization in climate research, we conducted a
survey among 76 scientists at the Potsdam Institute for Climate
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.12

3

II. S CIENTIST I NTERVIEWS ON V ISUALIZATION IN
C LIMATE R ESEARCH P RACTICE
To gain an overview of the requirements in the heterogeneous ﬁeld of climate and climate impact research, we informally interviewed researchers at the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research (PIK). We took notes of the interviews
and collected answers to key questions in a questionnaire for
later investigation. In total, we had 76 participants including
senior researchers, researchers, post-docs, PhD students, and
student assistants. The participants had a wide range of scientiﬁc backgrounds: 24 participants classiﬁed themselves as
meteorologists, climatologists, oceanographers & hydrologists,
30 as economists & sociologists, 27 as ecologists & biologists,
298

With our survey, we found that there is a lack of utilization
of visualization as an interactive analysis tool in the routine
work of these scientists. The major task accomplished with
the help of visualization is to transform data and analysis
results into classic static visual representations for scientiﬁc
publications (often called “plotting”).
Possible reasons for this are manifold. First, the advantages
of sophisticated visualization methods and tools are hardly
known. Second, data heterogeneity due to different types of
data, different scales, and different climate scenarios is not
easily resolvable by scientists because there is no system
that covers all of these aspects. Third, managing the volumes
of data to be queried interactively requires elaborate data
structures and caching mechanisms, so the scientists tend to
believe that a large dataset can not be handled by an interactive
analysis system at all.
Data size and heterogeneity are most challenging in this
context, because they burden climate researchers with the task
of making an appropriate choice for the methods or tools to be
applied. In practice however, climate researchers are familiar
with one visualization system and hardly know alternatives.
Thus, the users’ ﬂexibility of using interactive visualization
techniques is strongly restricted, and therefore they tend to
resort to basic “plotting” solutions.
Furthermore, discussions with the scientists revealed that
there is a kind of mistrust in interactivity in general. They fear
the arbitrariness of visual representations that have been generated by interactive adjustments of thresholds or visualization
parameters. In (natural) sciences, the comparability of visual
representations is very important. Therefore, script-based visualization systems that generate reproducible representations
are favored over interactive solutions where it is often unclear
which parameter settings are required to generate a certain
view on the data.
However, in recent years, new technologies such as “Google
Maps”, “Gapminder”, and other web-based visualization services serve as a kind of starter. Many young scientists are very
accustomed to utilizing the interactive features that such tools
offer. So, nowadays, there is a rising acceptance of interactive
visualization, however, mainly for the purpose of presentation.
Using this “new wave”, we have started to go beyond
presentation and to provide researchers with interactive visual tools for data exploration and analysis. Our goal is to
incorporate such tools into the researchers’ typical workﬂows.
This also includes raising the awareness of well-accepted
interactive visualization concepts such as multiple coordinated
views, brushing and linking, or dynamic queries. Although
not queried in the questionnaire, our experience was that climate researchers hardly use such concepts. After introductory
lessons and demonstrations of tools that support these features,
the feedbacks have been very encouraging and ﬁrst successes
were achieved with the help of such tools.
In the next sections, we describe this in more detail with
the example of visual exploration and analysis of climate
networks.

14 as physicists, 14 as geo-statisticians & geographers, and
others (multiple disciplines were possible).
As our interest is mainly in scientists who have already
applied visualization tools and in those who could potentially
use such tools in the future, we ﬁltered out 5 participants for
whom this was not the case.
For the remaining 71 interviewees, we analyzed the questionnaire in more detail. We sought answers to the following
questions: (1) Which visualization techniques are used? (2) For
which tasks are visualization techniques applied? (3) Which
systems and tools are utilized to generate visual representations? (4) Which are important features of visualization
software?
In the following, we summarize the main results from the
questionnaire:
Visualization techniques – The majority of participants
apply classic visualization techniques. Time charts are applied
most of the time (90%) followed by bar charts (77%), basic
maps (66%), and scatter plots (56%). There is a clear preference for 2D techniques. Visualization techniques that generate
2.5D and 3D presentations are of minor relevance: Only 18%
of the participants mentioned the use of height ﬁelds and 37%
of them apply 3D techniques.
Tasks accomplished with visualization – 93% of the participants use visualization mainly for the purpose of presenting
results in a scientiﬁc context (e.g., publications and conference talks). The evaluation of models and the veriﬁcation
of hypotheses are also quite relevant: 76% and 70% of the
participants use visualization to accomplish these tasks. Even
69% of the participants said that they use visualization for data
exploration in order to ﬁnd unknown patterns and structures.
The communication of scientiﬁc results in a comprehensible
manner for decision makers, stakeholders & public media has
been mentioned by 58% of the participants.
Applied systems & tools – Ofﬁce suites (spreadsheets,
diagramming, presentation) are the most frequently applied
software for generating visual representations. Such tools are
applied by 75% of the participants. In the shared second
place follow script-based systems (e.g., R, Ferret, Grads and
GMT) and commercial mathematical packages (e.g., Matlab,
Mathematica), where each group of software is used by 44%
of the participants. Unsurprisingly, 38% of the participants
apply geographic information systems (GIS) (e.g., ArcGIS) to
accomplish climate research tasks. Special purpose systems
(Ocean Data View, Vis5D) were mentioned in only 20% of
the questionnaires. Sophisticated visualization systems and
toolkits (e.g., OpenDX, AVS/Express, IDL, Spotﬁre, InfoVis
Toolkit, prefuse) are only marginally used (7%) or are even
unknown.
Important features of visualization software – Appropriate
labeling was mentioned as an important feature in 81% of the
questionnaires. The ability to faithfully represent geo-spatial
aspects of the data (e.g., different geographic projections)
was mentioned as important by 56% of the participants.
Surprisingly, a high degree of interactivity is important to a
minority of only 14% of the participants.

299

III. C LIMATE N ETWORKS : BACKGROUND & DATA

The types of data studied by means of climate network analysis range from purely observational such as raw data collected
by the Deutscher Wetterdienst (engl: German weather service),
which are the basis for reﬁnement by scientists at PIK, to
processed reanalysis data sets relying on observations, e.g.,
the one provided by the NCEP/NCAR Reanalysis 1 project
[14], to pure model output as generated by Atmospheric and
Oceanic General Circulation Models (AOGCMs), e.g., the
WCRP CMIP3 Multimodel Dataset [15].
The main aim of climate network analysis is to serve as
an explorative technique for investigating the wealth of information contained in the data’s spatial correlation structure. Its
validity may be conﬁrmed by showing that known statistical
relationships and structures are picked up by the method in
a way that is consistent with physical expectations and the
network theoretical interpretation of speciﬁc network measures
under study. Moreover, the above cited studies demonstrate
that climate network analysis has the potential to uncover
previously hidden or unexpected structures in the data which
subsequently have to be put through a process of interpretation
and careful analysis using complementary methods to answer
relevant questions of interest and to generate new insights into
the climate system’s functioning.

Climate researchers are investigating the impact of natural
phenomena and human society on the earth’s climate and vice
versa. These investigations involve a variety of data sources as
well as complex models, which in turn produce an enormous
amount of data. Linear statistical analysis is currently the main
means to gain insight into such data.
In this context, the analysis of climate data from the point
of view of complex network theory is a very recent and
powerful approach for studying the rich data available to
researchers today. In this novel approach, which has become
known as climate network analysis, the idea is to construct
a network or graph G = (V, E) representing the structure of
signiﬁcant pairwise statistical relationships present within a
spatiotemporally resolved data set [4]. Here V and E denote
the sets of vertices and edges, respectively. This method is
complementary to the by now classical and exclusively linear
principle component analysis of climate data ﬁelds [5], which
is commonly used in climate science [6]. Climate network
analysis has been successfully applied to detect the signature
of El-Ni˜no Southern Oscillation (ENSO) variability in climate
data [7] even if only data from the Arctic is considered [8], and
a backbone structure carrying a considerable amount of matter,
energy and dynamical information ﬂow was uncovered in the
global surface air temperature ﬁeld [9], [10]. More recently, a
well pronounced community structure was detected in climate
networks constructed from various climate observables and
exploited to improve statistical predictions of future climate
variability [11]. Furthermore the method has been generalized
to coupled climate network analysis allowing to study the
cross-correlation structure between two or more distinct ﬁelds
of climate variables which already provided some interesting
insights into the Earth’s atmosphere’s general circulation structure [12].
The vertices i ∈ V of a climate network represent measurement stations or grid points, where data like temperature or
precipitation is available in the form of time series xi (t). An
edge is introduced between pairs of vertices (i, j) iff the value
of a particular measure of statistical association Cij between
time series xi (t), xj (t) (e.g., linear Pearson correlation or
nonlinear mutual information [10]) exceeds a threshold Tij .
Hence, the network’s adjacency matrix Aij [13] is given by

IV. V ISUALIZATION OF C LIMATE N ETWORKS
In the following, we describe ﬁrst successful applications
of interactive visualization to climate network analysis. As
described in Section III climate networks are complex multivariate structures. They typically contain |V | = O(104 )
vertices and |E| = O(106 ) edges rendering any attempt
to extract useful information from a direct and unprocessed
visualization (plot) of the network structure unfeasible. Hence,
researchers applying climate network analysis have so far
relied on static visualizations of statistical results such as
degree and edge length distributions [7], time series of the
number of edges |E(t)| for time-dependent climate networks
[8], global maps and scatter plots of local network measures
such as degree, closeness and betweenness centrality and
local clustering coefﬁcient [9], [10], or line plots showing the
evolution of global network measures such as average path
length or transitivity with height [12]. This static approach
is not unique to climate network analysis, but appears to be
common practice in the modern analysis of general complex
networks which is guided by quantitative ideas from physics
(most prominently statistical mechanics), mathematics and
social science [16], [13], [17].
However, the plethora of different metrics provided by
complex network theory complicates the process of gaining an
overall picture and, hence, a deeper understanding of climate
network structure when following the static approach. This
is particularly true since the spatial embedding as well as a
possible time dependence of climate networks add additional
dimensions to the problem. Given this challenging situation,
interactive visualization promises to provide an intuitive way
of combining information from the actual network structure,
the network’s spatial embedding and several statistical network

Aij = Θ (Cij − Tij ) − δij ,
with Θ(·) the Heaviside function and δij Kronecker’s delta
introduced to avoid artiﬁcial self-loops. Usually a global
threshold T is prescribed such that Tij = T for all (i, j)
[9], [10], [12], [4], [7], [8], but the threshold may also be
chosen adaptively for each pair based on suitable statistical
signiﬁcance tests of time series analysis [11].
The so obtained climate network is then subjected to a
detailed statistical analysis using the tools of complex network
theory [13], where the choice of particular methods and
network theoretical measures depends on the questions to be
asked about the data at hand.

300

Fig. 1. The global SAT climate network visualized on a two-dimensional map, where vertex color and size encode degree and betweenness, respectively.
The network has been ﬁltered dynamically based on vertex and edge betweenness in order to reduce edge clutter. This revealed the backbone of the network.

There are a number of graph visualization tools and systems,
including Pajek [18], ASK-GraphView [19], GUESS [20],
and Gephi [21]. However, only a few systems fulﬁll the
requirements stated before: Tulip [22] and CGV [23]. While
Tulip offers fully-ﬂedged visual graph analysis functionality,
CGV focuses on interactive exploration. Moreover, CGV is
able to run in a web browser, a feature that matches with
the scientists’ common practice of making research results
publicly available on web sites.
Next, we present two examples of applying the CGV system
to interactive visualization of climate networks and discuss
some ﬁrst experiences as well as advantages and disadvantages
with respect to this approach. The climate networks to be
visualized are provided in the DOT or GraphML ﬁle format
with precalculated vertex-based and edge-based network measures of interest included in the network as vertex and edge
attributes, respectively.

quantiﬁers, e.g., degree and (edge-) betweenness centrality
[13], to generate and test hypotheses ultimately based on the
underlying climate data set.
Before going into detail with concrete visualization examples, let us ﬁrst brieﬂy summarize the requirements that have
been derived from the interviews with the climate impact
researchers:
•
•

•

•

•

•

Climate networks with |V | = O(104 ) vertices and |E| =
O(106 ) edges must be handled efﬁciently.
Due to the size of the data, dynamic ﬁltering mechanisms
are mandatory. The ﬁltering must be ﬂexible in order to
account for various data attributes and analysis tasks, and
it must be reproducible (e.g., re-apply stored ﬁlters).
The visual encoding of vertex and edge attributes should
be interactively adjustable. However, this should be possible only within reasonable limits to tackle the arbitrariness of visual representations.
The geographical frame of reference of the network is
of utmost importance for the interpretation the data.
Visualizing networks on two dimensional maps as well as
on three dimensional globes is important, whereas graph
layout algorithms are less relevant.
To address the demand for comparability of visual representations, views must show data consistently. So, linking
and coordination of views is required.
Because network vertices have ﬁxed geographical positions, the layout cannot be modiﬁed to reduce edge
crossings. Therefore, other means are required to tackle
edge congestion.

A. Visualizing global climate networks
In this example, we study a climate network derived from
the monthly averaged global surface air temperature (SAT)
ﬁeld taken from a 20th century reference run (20c3m, as
deﬁned in the IPCC AR4) by the Hadley Centre HadCM3
model [15] covering the time span January 1860 to December
1999. Consistently with [9], [10], we choose a global threshold
T such that 0.5 % of all theoretically possible edges associated
to the largest values of linear Pearson correlation between pairs
of time series are included in the SAT climate network. The
networks contains about 6k vertices and 115k edges.

301

rendering the results arbitrary to some degree. However, it
should be noted that visualizations such as the one presented
in Figure 2 have already proven highly valuable and successful
in intuitively conveying the basic ideas and results of climate
network analysis to scientiﬁc audiences at international conferences (see [24]).
B. Visualizing regional climate networks
Our second example concerns a regional climate network
constructed from daily mean surface air temperature time
series covering the years 1951 to 2006 measured at climate stations scattered across Germany. While the raw data is provided
by the Deutscher Wetterdienst, the scientists at the Potsdam
Institute for Climate Impact Research have processed the data
to improve its quality and consistency before compiling the
climate network. A global threshold T was chosen to include
1 % of all maximally possible edges corresponding to the
largest values of Pearson correlation. The resulting network
contains 2k vertices and 27k edges.
A two-dimensional node-link visualization as provided by
the CGV system at ﬁrst glance highlights a pronounced community structure being particularly prevalent in the northeast
of Germany (see Figure 3). Furthermore, one clearly sees that
vertices of high degree tend to have a small betweenness,
while those of high betweenness have a small degree. This
behavior is typical for networks with an organized, nonrandom structure [13].
But what factors could be essential for organizing the network and, hence, the underlying temperature ﬁeld’s correlation
structure in the observed way? We may hypothesize that
geographic features, e.g., orographic structure such as hills
or mountain ranges play a major role as one would expect
from physical considerations.
This hypothesis could be tested interactively by adding
information from a digital elevation model to the CGV system.
If visual support were to be found, the next step would be to
test the hypothesis in a statistically rigorous way. In this spirit,
our second example illustrates how interactive visualization
can aid in formulating and testing hypotheses on network
structure and the underlying data, particularly if few a priori
knowledge and expectations are present.
Although the visualization has been considered useful for
exploring the climate network in general, the scientists also
raised concern about the heavy clutter of edges in the nodelink representation. One way to alleviate this problem is to
dynamically ﬁlter out edges based on edge attributes. As an
alternative, the edges can be routed into bundles. To this
end, we adapted Boyandin’s implementation [25] of the forcedirected edge bundling approach of Holten and van Wijk [26].
The edge bundling was generally perceived as a suitable and
aesthetically pleasing solution. However, as shown in Figure 4,
there is a tradeoff between using straight edges and bundled
edges. While bundled edges are quite useful for reducing edge
clutter, individual edges can be best identiﬁed when using
straight edges. This indicates that there is no visual representation that suits all of the different tasks that climate researchers

Fig. 2. Spherical three-dimensional globe representation of the SAT network.
The visual encoding and ﬁltering is the same as in Fig. 1.

The climate network of a selected time point is visualized as
a node-link diagram, where the positions of vertices are ﬁxed,
and where vertex color and size encode the vertex attributes
degree and betweenness, respectively. Using CGV’s dynamic
ﬁltering facilities, we interactively ﬁltered for vertices and
edges with high vertex and edge betweenness, therefore highlighting structures with particular importance for hypothetical
communication following shortest paths within the network.
A two dimensional lat-lon-projection of the ﬁltered network
(see Figure 1) reveals patterns consistent with the backbone
of signiﬁcantly increased vertex betweenness discussed in [9].
Moreover, this visualization contains additional information on
edge betweenness, highlighting that high betweenness edges
tend to fall into two categories: very short and very long edges.
This fact becomes particularly clear in a spherical representation of the same ﬁltered climate network (see Figure 2) which
shows less visual clutter than the two dimensional projection,
but on the downside restricts the view to one hemisphere only.
Based on both views we may formulate the hypothesis
that certain short range as well as long range processes are
particularly important for coupling the dynamics of the surface
air temperature ﬁeld. While the important short range edges
may represent advection of heat by strong surface ocean
currents, the long range connections appear to correspond to
known teleconnection patterns, e.g., the long range edges in
the tropical Paciﬁc ocean seen in Figure 2 are consistent with
teleconnections induced by ENSO. Interactively varying the
ﬁlters one can easily evaluate the robustness of such patterns,
which is particularly important when testing hypotheses.
One disadvantage with respect to this approach is that ﬁlter
settings are not derived from quantitative criteria, thereby

302

Fig. 3. Visualization of a climate network derived from daily mean temperature data collected at weather stations scattered across Germany. Vertex betweeness
and degree are visualized with varying sizes and colors, respectively. The visual representation clearly reveals the network’s strong community structure.

might have to accomplish. Therefore, interactive and taskdependent parametrization of the visualization is important in
order to arrive at appropriate visual representations. So besides
making climate scientists aware of new innovative information
visualization approaches such as edge bundling, we also have
to provide information about the approaches’ usefulness for
different data, tasks, and application scenarios.

visualization as a valuable tool. Based on a list of requirements, we were able to provide solutions that enable the
scientists not only to present their research results, but also to
evaluate hypotheses, and in particular to generate hypotheses
through visual exploration. These ﬁrst successes are very
promising and motivate us to continue our work.
But still it is too early to claim that climate researchers
would be using information visualization tools, and we feel
that there is still more trust in statistics and analytical computations, rather than in visual representations, the interpretation
of which may vary. In order to accomplish the ambitious goal

V. D ISCUSSION & F UTURE W ORK
The examples presented in the previous paragraphs indicate
that climate researchers have begun to recognize information

303

(a) Straight edges.

(b) Bundled edges.

Fig. 4. Rendering edges as straight lines better suits the task of identifying connections between vertices, but visual clutter is a problem. Bundling edges
reduces clutter, however discerning individual edges becomes more difﬁcult.

of really making information visualization common practice
in climate research, further hurdles have to be taken.
As we learned from the questionnaire, the interactivity
is not always appreciated because the options for different
visual encodings and different perspectives on the data are
sometimes experienced as indiscriminate. Additional methods
are required to support the users in ﬁnding good views on
the data and in determining appropriate parametrizations of
visualization techniques. As researchers begin to integrate
visualization systems in their daily work, there are a number
of practical aspects to consider: Undo and redo mechanisms
must be integrated, ongoing work must be storable on disk for
later continuation, and derived ﬁndings must be annotatable,
to name only a few (see [27], [28]).
Secondly, there is the pressing issue of time-dependency
of climate networks. In general, time-dependency implies
additional conceptual and technical challenges because the
dimension of time can be structured in a number of different
ways and because the data size is multiplied by the number of
time steps [29]. Up to now, individual time steps have to be
loaded separately, which hinders the exploration of temporal
trends and patterns in the data. New visualization views have
to be integrated to address this problem.
In future analysis scenarios, the climate networks’ geographical frame of reference will not be restricted to latitude
and longitude, but may also contain depth (oceanographic
models) or height (atmospheric models). Additionally, uncertainty of model structure and hence of the generated data will
play an increasingly important role. As a result, we have to
consider the 3D visualization of uncertain graph structures
with uncertain attributes, which we think is a formidable
challenge.
In order to arrive at user-centered solutions for these issues, we will continue the close collaboration between our
institutions, applying recent developments in the ﬁeld of
visualization to problems in climate impact research and nonlinear analysis. We plan to extend existing solutions and to
integrate additional tools (see Figure 5) into the researchers’
workﬂows much like in the spirit of visual analytics [30].

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We acknowledge ﬁnancial support by the German National Academic Foundation, the Leibniz association (project
ECONS), the Federal Ministry for Education and Research
via the Potsdam Research Cluster for Georisk Analysis, Environmental Change and Sustainability (PROGRESS), and
the DFG Graduate School (GRK 1539 “Sichtbarkeit und
Sichtbarmachung”). The work presented in this paper has been
partly conducted in the context of the EU coordination project
“VisMaster”.
R EFERENCES
[1] T. Nocke, U. Heyder, S. Petri, K. Vohland, M. Wrobel, and W. Lucht,
“Visualization of Biosphere Changes in the Context of Climate Change,”
in Information Technology and Climate Change – 2nd International
Conference IT for empowerment, V. Wohlgemuth, Ed.
trafo Wissenschaftsverlag, 2009, pp. 29–36.
[2] J. Kehrer, P. Filzmoser, and H. Hauser, “Brushing Moments in Interactive
Visual Analysis,” Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 29, no. 3, pp.
813–822, 2010. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.14678659.2009.01697.x
[3] F. Ladst¨adter, A. K. Steiner, B. C. Lackner, B. Pirscher, G. Kirchengast,
J. Kehrer, H. Hauser, P. Muigg, and H. Doleisch, “Exploration of
Climate Data Using Interactive Visualization,” Journal of Atmospheric
and Oceanic Technology, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 667–679, 2010. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/2009JTECHA1374.1
[4] A. A. Tsonis and P. J. Roebber, “The Architecture of the Climate
Network,” Physica A, vol. 333, pp. 497–504, 2004. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2003.10.045
[5] J. Wallace and D. Gutzler, “Teleconnections in the Geopotential
Height Field During the Northern Hemisphere Winter,” Monthly
Weather Review, vol. 109, no. 4, pp. 784–812, 1981.
[Online]. Available: http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/15200493%281981%29109%3C0784%3ATITGHF%3E2.0.CO%3B2
[6] H. von Storch and F. W. Zwiers, Statistical Analysis in Climate Research.
Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[7] A. A. Tsonis and K. L. Swanson, “Topology and Predictability
of El Ni˜no and La Ni˜na Networks,” Physical Review Letters,
vol. 100, no. 22, p. 228502, 2008. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.228502
[8] K. Yamasaki, A. Gozolchiani, and S. Havlin, “Climate Networks
Around the Globe are Signiﬁcantly Affected by El Ni˜no,” Physical
Review Letters, vol. 100, no. 22, p. 228501, 2008. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.100.228501
[9] J. F. Donges, Y. Zou, N. Marwan, and J. Kurths, “The Backbone of the
Climate Network,” Europhysics Letters, vol. 87, no. 4, p. 48007, 2009.
[Online]. Available: http://stacks.iop.org/0295-5075/87/i=4/a=48007

304

Fig. 5.

Multiple coordinated views as provided by the system CGV to support the interactive visual exploration of climate networks.

[20] E. Adar, “GUESS: A Language and Interface for Graph Exploration,”
in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI). ACM, 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124889
[21] M. Bastian, S. Heymann, and M. Jacomy, “Gephi: An Open Source
Software for Exploring and Manipulating Networks,” in International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2009.
[22] D. Auber, “Tulip : A Huge Graph Visualisation Framework,” in Graph
Drawing Softwares, ser. Mathematics and Visualization, P. Mutzel and
M. J¨unger, Eds. Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[23] C. Tominski, J. Abello, and H. Schumann, “CGV – An
Interactive Graph Visualization System,” Computers & Graphics,
vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 660–678, 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cag.2009.06.002
[24] Y. Zou, J. F. Donges, and J. Kurths, “Recent advances in complex climate
network analysis,” Complex Systems and Complexity Science, vol. 8,
no. 1, pp. 27–38, 2011, in Chinese.
[25] I. Boyandin, E. Bertini, and D. Lalanne, “Using Flow Maps to Explore Migrations Over Time,” Workshop GeoVA(t) - Geospatial Visual
Analytics: Focus on Time at the AGILE International Conference on
Geographic Information Science, 2010.
[26] D. Holten and J. J. van Wijk, “Force-Directed Edge Bundling for
Graph Visualization,” Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 28, no. 3, pp.
983–990, 2009. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.14678659.2009.01450.x
[27] M. Kreuseler, T. Nocke, and H. Schumann, “A History Mechanism
for Visual Data Mining,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization (InfoVis), 2004, pp. 49–56. [Online].
Available: http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/INFOVIS.2004.2
[28] C. T. Silva, E. W. Anderson, E. Santos, and J. Freire, “Using VisTrails
and Provenance for Teaching Scientiﬁc Visualization,” Computer
Graphics Forum, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 75–84, 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8659.2010.01830.x
[29] W. Aigner, S. Miksch, W. M¨uller, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski,
“Visualizing Time-Oriented Data – A Systematic View,” Computers
& Graphics, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 401–409, 2007. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cag.2007.01.030
[30] D. Keim, J. Kohlhammer, G. Ellis, and F. Mansmann, Eds., Mastering
The Information Age – Solving Problems with Visual Analytics. Geneve,
Switzerland: Eurographics Association, 2010.

[10] ——, “Complex Networks in Climate Dynamics,” European Physical
Journal Special Topics, vol. 174, no. 1, pp. 157–179, 2009. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjst/e2009-01098-2
[11] K. Steinhaeuser, N. V. Chawla, and A. R. Ganguly, “Complex
Networks as a Uniﬁed Framework for Descriptive Analysis
and Predictive Modeling in Climate Science,” Statistical Analysis
and Data Mining, 2011, to appear. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/sam.10100
[12] J. F. Donges, H. C. H. Schultz, N. Marwan, Y. Zou, and
J. Kurths, “Investigating the Topology of Interacting Networks
– Theory and Application to Coupled Climate Subnetworks,”
European Physical Journal B, 2011, to appear. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjb/e2011-10795-8
[13] M. E. J. Newman, “The Structure and Function of Complex Networks,”
SIAM Review, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 167–256, 2003. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/S003614450342480
[14] R. Kistler, E. Kalnay, W. Collins, S. Saha, G. White, J. Woollen,
M. Chelliah, W. Ebisuzaki, M. Kanamitsu, V. Kousky, H. V. D.
Dool, R. Jenne, and M. Fiorino, “The NCEP–NCAR 50-Year
Reanalysis: Monthly Means CD–ROM and Documentation,” Bulletin
of the American Meteorological Society, vol. 82, no. 2, pp.
247–268, 2001. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/15200477(2001)082%3C0247:TNNYRM%3E2.3.CO;2
[15] G. A. Meehl, C. Covey, T. Delworth, M. Latif, B. McAvaney, J. F. B.
Mitchell, R. J. Stouffer, and K. E. Taylor, “THE WCRP CMIP3
Multimodel Dataset: A New Era in Climate Change Research,” Bulletin
of the American Meteorological Society, vol. 88, no. 9, p. 1383, 2007.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-88-9-1383
[16] R. Albert and A. L. Barabasi, “Statistical Mechanics of Complex
Networks,” Reviews of Modern Physics, vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 47–97,
2002. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.74.47
[17] S. Boccaletti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, M. Chavez, and D. U.
Hwang, “Complex Networks: Structure and Dynamics,” Physics
Reports, vol. 424, no. 4–5, pp. 175–308, 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/j.physrep.2005.10.009
[18] W. de Nooy, A. Mrvar, and V. Batagelj, Exploratory Social Network
Analysis with Pajek. Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[19] J. Abello, F. van Ham, and N. Krishnan, “ASK-GraphView: A Large
Scale Graph Visualization System,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, vol. 12, no. 5, 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/TVCG.2006.120

305

