2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Exploratory Visualization for Weather Data Veriﬁcation
Patrik Lundblad∗ , Hanna L¨ofving† , Annika Elovsson† and Jimmy Johansson†
∗
Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute, Sweden
†
C-Research, Link¨oping University, Sweden
patrik.lundblad@smhi.se, {hanlo184,annel047}@student.liu.se, jimmy.johansson@liu.se
Abstract

these forecasts are as accurate as possible.
In this paper we present a web-enabled application
for interactive exploration of weather data veriﬁcation for
analysis of road weather conditions. The application has
been developed in close collaboration with domain experts from the Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological
Institute (SMHI). The input for the application consists
of hourly measured observations along Swedish roads together with daily forecasts for the observation points.
The interface consists of visual representations that allow both overview as well as detailed analyses. The
overview components are used to analyze the full season
and enable searching for systematical errors that occur over
long time periods. These components can also be used
to investigate the accuracy of forecasts for different geographical areas. With the aid of a Self-Organizing Map
(SOM) the multivariate data is projected to a lower dimension to facilitate analyses. The detail components are used
to explore speciﬁc scenarios during the season.
The web-based application, ﬁgure 1, has been developed to support the following major exploratory tasks:

Today weather forecasts assist in the preparation of
roads during the winter season to avoid accidents resulting from snow, rain and slipperiness. As with any weather
forecast there is always a search for improvement. One
way to do this is by verifying the forecasted parameters
with the actual weather observed in the forecasted area.
To facilitate identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant trends and patterns within weather data we have developed an application based on interactive information visualization techniques. The application was created in close collaboration with domain experts from the Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute and initial feedback from a
performed user study shows that interactive visualization
speeds up the analysis process as well as increases ﬂexibility compared to currently used manual methods.
Keywords— Information visualization, veriﬁcation of
weather data, exploratory analysis

1 Introduction
The Swedish infrastructure is vulnerable to unexpected
weather events that can result in severe trafﬁc accidents.
This creates a demand for both accurate as well as long
time forecasts so that preparations for the effects of
weather may be taken to improve personal safety. One
area of particular interest is road safety during the winter
season. Every year roads are affected by rain, snow and
ice that make them dangerous for driving unless preventive
actions are taken. The decreasing regard for bad weather
conditions, due to modern aids such as anti-lock and antispin systems, is another factor that contributes to many accidents during the winter season. Inaccurate weather forecasts can also mean unnecessary costs for municipalities
sending out snow ploughs when the forecasts wrongfully
indicate snow. Preventive methods are taken using forecasts provided by meteorologists speciﬁcally assigned to
the task of making forecasts and warnings within this domain. Veriﬁcation is needed to improve the forecast models and help meteorologists ﬁnd speciﬁc scenarios that will
aid them in their work. Consequently, it is important that
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.79

• Investigation of signiﬁcant trends and patterns for veriﬁcation of the underlying forecast model.
• Communication of accuracy measurements for competitive comparisons.
• Visual analysis on multiple levels of detail; from the
full winter season down to individual hours.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Related work is provided in section 2. General description of
attributes in the input data and events in section 3. In section 4 the application is described followed by an application scenario in section 5. Section 6 contains a user study
and ﬁnally the paper is concluded with the general results
and a discussion in section 7.

2

Related Work

Analysis of large, multivariate and spatial data is a very
active research area within the information visualization
306

Figure 1: The application is developed to assist the weather forecast veriﬁcation work at SMHI. Weather data can be
examined in different components and on different levels of detail. The application consists of four overview components:
table lens (a), glyph map (b), SOM (c) and frost time shift plot (d), and two detail components: detail data plot (e) and time
line plot (in the second tab, next to e). In f, three tabs contain extra information about the selected stations.
system in Canada. A network of sensors collect weather
data which is used to determine when hazardous road condition occurs. The paper does not, however, describe how
the data can be visualized.

and geo-visualization communities. Several tools for multivariate data analysis are available today, some of which
are Protovis [2], Improvise [21], Prefuse [8], GAV Flash
[9], InfoVis Toolkit [4], CommonGIS [3], GeoVista Studio
[6], VIS-STAMP [7] and CGV [19]. As discussed in Ho
et al. [9], it has been a challenge to adapt many of these
tools to the Internet. They propose that web-enabled tools
are needed for applications with the purpose of communicating analyses of large spatial-temporal and multivariate data. GAV Flash has been adapted for Internet usage
through Adobe Flash and is “designed with the intention
to signiﬁcantly shorten the time and effort needed to develop sophisticated and dynamic Web-enabled Geovisual
Analytics applications” [5].

Exploratory analysis of multivariate, time-varying and
spatial data for weather forecast veriﬁcation requires specialized visualization and interaction components not readily available in the tools described above. Our proposed solution is inﬂuenced by several of these tools and also adopts
the concept of coordinated and multiple linked views.
The review of multiple linked view tools, methodologies and models provided by Roberts [15] presents that
linking and relating information between views will assist
the user’s exploration process and provide additional insight to the underlying information. Multiple views can
also help stimulate the visual thinking process [13]. Wang
Baldonado et al. have developed a set of guidelines for
when and how to use multiple views in information visualization [1] to avoid unnecessary complexity of the system.
According to Kosara et al. [12] the usage of multiple views
on the same data is trivial, but it is not as easy to implement
it right and to provide it with the necessary interaction.

RoadVis [14], introduced by Lundblad et al., is a webenabled application created for road weather visualization.
It is a tool for deploying real-time weather forecasts and
observations for the winter roads for selected attributes.
The tool calculates present and forecasted scenarios for the
coming 24 hours and alert the user of risks on the roads,
using information visualization components.
Koonar et al. [11] present a road weather information
network built to provide a safer and more sustainable road

307

EVENT

RAW DATA

OBSERVATION

OVERVIEW
CALCULATIONS

INFORMATION
VISUALIZATION
COMPONENTS

OVERVIEW
PARAMETERS

00:00 01:00 02:00 03:00 04:00 05:00 06:00 07:00 08:00 09:00 10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00 14:00
FORECAST

DETAIL
CALCULATIONS

Figure 2: Forecast and observation data is collected for
each hour, which is called a time tag. One or more coherent time tags are described as an event. In the ﬁgure, two
events partly overlap. The forecast event starts two hours
before the observation event and ends three hours early.

3

Figure 3: The raw forecast and observation data is used
to calculate the overview parameters used as input to the
visualization. When a station is in focus, the data for the
speciﬁed station is read and both shown in its raw format
as well as used to calculate detail parameters.

Weather Forecasts and Observations
formation of frost can be calculated from other parameters.
Frost is formed when solid surfaces are cooled to below the
dewpoint temperature of the adjacent air as well as below
the freezing point of water (formula 1).

This section describes the data provided by SMHI and
the Swedish Transport Administration which is used as input to the application, and introduces the concept of events
which is used to describe a snowfall or a frost occasion.
SMHI produces several different forecasts on a daily basis, covering weather information from one hour up to ten
days in advance, based on models and calculations. Four
times a day, the numerical model HIRLAM (High Resolution Limited Area Model) forecasts the weather for 24
hours [20]. This means that for any given hour there are
four forecasts, hereinafter referred to as model runs, predicting a number of weather parameters for that hour. The
model runs are called 03Z, 09Z, 15Z and 21Z where the
number indicates when (in UTC) the forecast was made.
The Swedish Transport Administration provides SMHI
with observations from over 760 weather stations that are
located at roads with a high risk of slipperiness [18]. The
stations monitor the weather conditions and measure air
temperature, road temperature, air humidity, precipitation,
wind speed and wind direction. The forecasts can be compared to the observations to verify their accuracy.
The majority of the weather stations have an associated
environment description. This information can be interesting to examine and compare between different stations
since patterns in these descriptions can be found between
stations with similar values.
For both the forecasts and the observations, data for an
entire winter season is collected at hourly intervals, hereinafter referred to as a time tag. Each time tag contains
values for the observation and the four forecast model runs,
for all parameters.

3.1

DETAIL
PARAMETERS

road temperature < dewpoint temperature
road temperature < 0◦ C

(1)

The road temperature is difﬁcult to forecast and can also
occasionally be observed incorrectly, e.g. if snow is covering the observation location. In these cases the forecast and
observation can differ signiﬁcantly and needs to be taken
into account when examining the data.

3.2

Event

When measuring the difference between for example
road temperatures, the observation value has been subtracted from the forecast value. However when verifying
parameters such as frost or snowfall different methods for
non numerical values need to be used.
One or more coherent time tags are described as an
event. If a forecast event and an observation event fully
overlap, the forecast is perfect regarding time. However,
if they only partly overlap, see ﬁgure 2, it is unclear how
to measure the accuracy of the forecast. The values can be
compared for each time tag and give a hit/miss value that
can be used to calculate different hit rates, but they do not
indicate whether the forecast was on time or not. A time
shift is calculated by comparing the start for the observation and forecast, regarding time. The difference between
the start times can range between -5 to 5 hours (chosen as
a limit by the domain experts), where a value of zero indicates that the forecast and the observation frost events usually start at the same time and a negative value represents
that the forecast events usually are too early.

Parameters

The weather parameters focused on in this work are
road temperature, frost and snowfall. Surface temperature
and snowfall are both forecasted with calculations from
HIRLAM and observed by the weather stations. However,
frost cannot be measured by the weather stations, but the

4

Application

The following section describes the functionality and
interactivity of the application (ﬁgure 1). The application

308

(a) All parameters

(b) Surface temperature

(c) Frost

(d) Distance to neighbours

Figure 4: In this application three different SOMs are calculated. In (a) the map is calculated from all parameters, in (b)
it is based on the road temperature parameters and in (c) the frost parameters. In (d) colour is used to convey similarities
between neighbouring nodes, from green (small values) to brown (large values).
quantitative data and has the advantage that many people
are familiar with tables [17].
The table lens, ﬁgure 1a, is central in the application.
The rows represent the stations and the columns represent
the overview parameters. Using this component, stations
with high or low values can be found, the rows can be
reordered to ﬁnd correlations between parameters and a
number of interesting stations can be selected for further
examination. The user can edit the visible parameters to
adjust the view for easier examination. The colours of the
stations represent the values for a speciﬁed parameter and
can be changed so that further relationships can be found.

contains two component categories: overview components
and detail components. Multiple stations can be selected
in the overview components and the ﬁrst selected station,
hereinafter referred to as the station in focus, is presented
in the detail components.

4.1

Pre-processing

The raw input data is pre-processed into overview and
detail parameters, see ﬁgure 3. The following section gives
a short description of the calculated parameter categories.
• The road temperature is examined in two ways. Sum
Ty indicates if forecasts for a station tend to be too
warm or cold and Mean Ty describes the mean error
between the forecast and the observation.

4.2.2 Glyph Map
The geographical position of a weather station can affect its values, and to be able to extract geographical patterns the application contains a glyph map, see ﬁgure 1b.
The map consists of a Google Map with an associated
glyph layer, where the weather stations are represented by
black glyphs. Selected stations are represented by purple
glyphs, and to distinguish the station in focus from the rest
it is represented by a red glyph. The map is zoomable and
a level of detail function controls the size of the glyphs so
they are visible on all zoom levels without overlapping.

• A root mean square value of the frost time shift distribution is calculated to indicate the deviation of the
start for the frost event.
• For the frost forecasts accuracy a number of hit rates
(hit, miss, false alarm) are calculated.
For all parameters global values are calculated for an entire season, as well as local values for the different months
during the season. Also an hourly average is calculated for
each hour of the day for the entire season. The global parameters can be used as a starting point when examining
the data to ﬁnd stations with interesting values for further
analysis, and to give an overview of the stations.

4.2

4.2.3 Self-Organizing Map
To examine and ﬁnd patterns in multivariate data, the
data is often projected to a lower dimension using reduction methods [7]. A SOM is an artiﬁcial neural network
that represents a multidimensional data set with a lowdimensional map [10]. The visual representation of the
multivariate data becomes easier to understand since the
data is represented with spatial clustering which facilitates
exploratory analyses [13]. The link between the attribute
space visualization tools and maps in multiple views can
provide multiple perspectives for exploration, evaluation
and interpretation of patterns and ultimately support for
knowledge construction.

Overview Components

The overview components are used to analyze the full
winter season and consists of a table lens, a glyph map, a
SOM and a frost time shift plot.
4.2.1 Table Lens
A table lens is a graphical spreadsheet that can be
used when examining multivariate data sets. It combines
overview and detail, can manage both categorical and

309

4.3

Detail Components

A detail data plot and a time line plot are used to explore
speciﬁc scenarios.
4.3.1 Detail Data Plot
The detail data plot distributes the overview parameters
over the 24 hours of the day (ﬁgure 1e). Each measurement
represents a mean value for the speciﬁc hour for the whole
season. The plot allows the user to further examine the
parameters and ﬁnd if the accuracy of the weather forecasts
differ during certain parts or hours of the day.
The parameters can be examined separately in the plot,
where the x-axis concern the time and the y-axis the actual
values. The model runs can be examined separately or all
at the same time. It is also possible to view a line showing
the merged values from all the model runs for comparisons
between the overall trend and a speciﬁed model run.

(a) Snow

(b) Accumulated snow

(c) Surface temperature

4.3.2 Time Line Plot
While the overview components can provide the user
with an image of what the data looks like, there are times
when the data needs to be examined in very high detail.
The plot displays the raw data and is generated by selecting
a time span and one of the parameters road temperature,
snowfall or accumulated snowfall (ﬁgure 5). The model
runs are presented as lines and the observation values are
shown as a blue surface. The dots represent the ﬁrst hours
of the forecasts.

Figure 5: The raw data of the forecast and observation is
shown in the time line plot. For a speciﬁed range of dates
the snow (a), accumulated snow (b) or road temperature (c)
can be examined. The green line represents the 15Z model
run and the dot indicates the ﬁrst hour of the forecast. The
observed values are represented by the blue surface.

The SOM (ﬁgure 1c) consists of 15 x 15 nodes, which
can be adjusted if the number of stations change. There
are three different maps in this application: all parameters
(ﬁgure 4a), road temperature parameters (ﬁgure 4b), frost
parameters (ﬁgure 4c). This enables the user to examine
clusters using a speciﬁc parameter category. Initially the
colours of the nodes represent the distance between the
weight vector and a zero vector. The brown nodes are
further away from zero than the green nodes. The nodes
can also be coloured using the distance between the weight
vectors and its neighbours (ﬁgure 4d), or coloured by the
station quantity in each node. If one or more, but not all,
stations in a node are selected the node is marked with a
red rectangle in the upper left corner. If all stations in a
node are selected it is indicated with a red bounding box.

4.4

Implementation

The application has been developed using GAV Flash
[5] which includes visual components, analytic algorithms,
data providers and other tools for developing web based interactive systems. A pre-processing programme was written in C# to process the raw data and calculate the overview
parameters. The SOM was calculated in MATLAB using
the function package SOM Toolbox [16].

5

Application Scenario

The following is a typical application scenario where a
meteorologist explores the data on different levels of detail
to ﬁnd areas where the model may be improved.
The meteorologist starts exploring the data in the table
lens and selects the station with the highest mean road temperature error, Mean Ty (ﬁgure 6, left), to examine possible reasons to why the forecasts for this station are less
accurate than for other stations. The geographical position of this station can be seen in the glyph map (ﬁgure 6,
middle). To ﬁnd stations with similar values for the road
temperature parameters, the user selects the node belonging to the selected station in the Ty SOM (ﬁgure 6, right).
These stations are now also selected in the glyph map (ﬁgure 7) and since all three stations are located in the northern
part of Sweden the user can suspect a possible correlation
between geographical position and a high value for Mean

4.2.4 Frost Time Shift Plot
In the frost time shift plot (ﬁgure 1d) each selected station is represented by a line in the plot. The x-axis represents the number of hours the forecast event is shifted in
time compared to the observation, from -5 to 5 hours, and
the y-axis represents the number of times each case has
happened. To match the selected stations with the lines in
the plot, the lines have the same colour as the stations in
the table lens. The black line represents the mean value
of all the stations to indicate the trend of the frost forecast
accuracy.

310

Figure 6: When a station is selected in the table lens (left) it is also selected in the glyph map (middle) and the SOM (right).
The cell containing the selected station is marked in the SOM, which contains two additional stations with similar values
for the road temperature parameters.

(a) Mean Ty - the mean road temperature error.

Figure 7: Three selected
stations in the glyph map.
The red glyph represents
the station in focus.

Figure 8: Detailed information about the three selected stations in the table
lens.
(b) Sum Ty - the sum of the road temperature error.

Ty. In the glyph map, the station in focus is represented
by a red glyph and the other selected stations are represented by purple glyphs. The three selected stations can
also be further examined in the table lens (ﬁgure 8) where
the user ﬁnds that these stations also have very low values
for the parameter Sum Ty, which indicate that the forecasts
for these stations are usually too cold.
The detail data plot is used to examine the road temperature for a station on a detailed level. In the plot for Mean
Ty (ﬁgure 9a), the user can see that the 03Z forecast is better during the ﬁrst hours from when the forecast was made
and also better during the afternoon. In the plot for Sum
Ty (ﬁgure 9b), the user can see that the forecasts are usually too cold during the night and too warm during the day.
These conclusions can be subject to further analysis.
To see if the found results have any correlation with
other parameters, the user examines the starts of the frost
events in the frost time shift plot (ﬁgure 10). The three selected stations are represented with three lines in the plot
and the user can draw conclusions whether the frost forecasts are early or late.

Figure 9: The station in focus in the detail data plot, showing the overview parameters distributed over the 24 hours
of the day.

Another examination possibility could be if the user
knew that the forecasts had difﬁculties during a particular time period. This period can be selected in the time line
plot where the raw data is graphically represented and the
user can study the data in very high detail. Figure 11 shows
the snow forecast for the Christmas Day 2009 and reveals
that the 03Z forecast was approximately correct in amount
but incorrect with respect of time.

6

User Study

A preliminary user study was performed as a ﬁrst attempt to evaluate the application. The main purpose was to
get feedback on the functionality, interface, and the overall
navigation of the application.

311

Figure 11: The time line plot shows the 03Z snow forecast
for Christmas Day in 2009. The forecast is approximately
correct in amount but incorrect with respect of time.
Figure 10: The distribution of occurrences of frost forecasts that are early or late, from -5 to 5 hours, compared to
the observations. The station with a peak value at 0 (blue
line), indicates that the forecasts often are on time, while
the station with a peak value at +1 (yellow line), indicates
that the forecasts often are one hour late. For the station
represented by the red line a signiﬁcant peak is missing
and thus the forecasts are usually both early and late.

6.1

When the tasks were completed the test ended with a
discussion about the overall experience of using the application, which tasks had been difﬁcult to complete and why,
and what improvements could be made.

6.2

Result

Most of the tasks were completed by the test group with
little or no difﬁculty and the general opinion was that the
applications feels intuitive and easy to use after the given
introduction. The test group pointed out suggestions for
concept design improvements and changes in the layout.
In the time line plot, one of the participants wanted to be
able to adjust the time span with a slider in addition to the
calendars. This would make the creation of weather data
plots easier and more intuitive, and would help improve
the interactivity and efﬁciency of the component.
Some of the participants confused the overview and detail parameters and tried to change the parameter for the
detail data plot component in the table lens.
Since many stations are represented in the table lens it
is hard to examine them in a time-efﬁcient manner, but as
one of the participants pointed out a ﬁsh-eye feature could
make the searching in the table lens more efﬁcient.

Procedure

The user study was conducted with two meteorologists
and four master students, all performing the same tasks.
The meteorologists, who had been involved in the requirement and design phase, had domain knowledge but were
less experienced with visualization. The students were familiar with information visualization, but had no previous
experience with meteorological data.
According to Koua and Kraak [13] a user-based evaluation is the most suitable approach to assess usability
and usefulness of geovisual environments. Their presented
performance-oriented approach was however replaced with
a more satisfaction-oriented test. Since no one in the test
group was familiar with both the weather data and the visualization techniques, the focus lay on whether the components and user interface felt intuitive and easy to use.
To begin with, the application was demonstrated and explained, and the users were provided with a parameter and
component description. Two test leaders were present to
answer questions and document the result. The users were
asked to complete a number of tasks, which were designed
to encourage them to try all the visualization components.
Some representative tasks were as follows:

7

Conclusions and Future Work

In this paper we describe a web-based interactive application for exploration of weather data, focusing on veriﬁcation and analysis of road weather conditions. The application has been developed together with meteorologists from
the Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute. It
was designed to simplify the process of ﬁnding spatial and
temporal regions where weather forecasts models needs to
be improved and to identify inaccurate weather stations.
The results from an informal user study with meteorologists showed that the application has great potential to help
them in their veriﬁcation work. The use of interactive visualization was a new way of working with weather data
veriﬁcation which was seen as a good compliment to the
traditional manual methods currently used.
The presented application was designed as a proof of
concept to demonstrate interactive visualization and its

• ”Identify one station with more than 800 frost hours
that is not located in the northern part of Sweden.”
• ”Is there any correlation between the nodes in the
SOM and the geographical position of stations?”
• ”When during the Christmas weekend was there most
precipitation for the station MS4 SMHI?”

312

[11] A. Koonar, P. Delannoy, and D. Denault. Building
a road weather information network for integrating
data from heterogeneous sources. In Third International Conference on Information Technology and
Applications, pages 501–507, 2005.

possibility to assist the process of ﬁnding patterns and relationships in weather data. Possible future work includes investigating the usability of more advanced information visualization components as well as further evaluation of the
existing application. Furthermore, the user study showed
that additional interaction, allowing even more detailed exploration, were highly desired by the meteorologists.

[12] R. Kosara, H. Hauser, and D. L. Gresh. An interaction
view on information visualization. In Eurographics,
pages 123–138, 2003.

Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by the Swedish Research Council in the Linnaeus Centre CADICS and by
funding from the Visualization Programme coordinated by
the Swedish Knowledge Foundation. The authors wishes
to thank the involved meteorologists at SMHI for their
feedback during the project and their dedicated contribution that made this project possible.

[13] E. L. Koua and M-J Kraak. A usability framework for
the design and evaluation of an exploratory geovisualization environment. In Proceedings of the Eighth
International Conference on Information Visualisation, pages 153–158, 2004.
[14] P. Lundblad, J. Thoursie, and M. Jern. Swedish road
weather visualization. In Information Visualisation,
International Conference on, volume 0, pages 313–
321, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2010. IEEE Computer
Society.

References
[1] M. Q. Wang Baldonado, A. Woodruff, and
A. Kuchinsky. Guidelines for using multiple views
in information visualization. In Proceedings of the
working conference on Advanced visual interface,
2000.

[15] J. C. Roberts. Exploratory visualization with multiple
linked views. In Exploring Geovisualization, pages
150–170. Amsterdam: Elseviers, 2004.

[2] M. Bostock and J. Heer. Protovis: A graphical toolkit
for visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 15:1121–1128, 2009.

[16] Self-Organizing Map Toolbox for Matlab.
http://www.cis.hut.ﬁ/somtoolbox.

[3] CommonGis. url: http://www.commongis.de.

url:

[17] R. Spence. Information visualization design for interaction. Prentice Hall, Harlow, second edition, 2007.

[4] J.-D. Fekete. The infovis toolkit. In Third International Conference on Information Technology and
Applications, pages 167–174, 2005.

[18] The Swedish Road Administration’s brochure about
Road Weather Information Systems (VViS). url:
http://publikationswebbutik.vv.se/upload/5455/
89370 vagvaderinformationssystem vvis.pdf.

[5] GAV Flash. url: http://ncva.itn.liu.se/tools.
[6] Geovista. url: http://www.geovista.psu.edu.

[19] C. Tominski, J. Abello, and H. Schumann. CGV - An
Interactive Graph Visualization System. Computers
& Graphics, 33(6):660–678, 2009.

[7] D. Guo, J. Chen, A. M. MacEachren, and K. Liao.
A visualization system for space-time and multivariate patterns (vis-stamp). IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(6):1461–1474,
2006.

[20] P. Unden, L. Rontu, H. J¨arvinen, P. Lynch, J. Calvo,
G. Cats, J. Cuxart, K. Eerola, C. Fortelius, J. A.
Garcia-Moya, C. Jones, G. Lenderlink, A. Mcdonald, R. Mcgrath, B. Navascues, N. Woetman Nielsen,
V. Degaard, E. Rodriguez, M. Rummukainen, K. Sattler, B. Hansen Sass, H. Savijarvi, B. Wichers
Schreur, R. Sigg, and H. The. Hirlam-5 scientiﬁc
documentation. Technical report, 2002.

[8] J. Heer. Prefuse: a toolkit for interactive information visualization. In In CHI 05: Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems, pages 421–430. ACM Press, 2005.
˚ om, and M. Jern. A web[9] Q. Ho, P. Lundblad, T. Astr¨
enabled visualization toolkit for geovisual analytics.
In SPIE: Electronic Imaging Science and Technology, Visualization and Data Analysis, Proceedings of
SPIE, San Francisco, 2011.

[21] C. Weaver. Building highly-coordinated visualizations in improvise. Information Visualization, IEEE
Symposium on, 0:159–166, 2004.

[10] T. Kohonen. Self-Organizing Maps. Springer; 3rd
edition, 2000.

313

