2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Comparing static Gantt and mosaic charts for visualization of task schedules
Saturnino Luz
School of Computer Science and Statistics
Trinity College
Dublin 2, Ireland
Email: luzs@cs.tcd.ie

Masood Masoodian
Department of Computer Science
The University of Waikato
Hamilton, New Zealand
Email: m.masoodian@cs.waikato.ac.nz

grated into the electronic medium [4]. They are now widely
used in a variety of systems that deal with sequential data,
including project management applications, browsing of
multimedia collections [5] and meetings [6], representation
of patient history and planning in health informatics [7],
[8], visualization of travel itinerary information across timezones [9], [10] and many others.
As timelines were incorporated into interactive systems,
certain innovations were introduced which facilitated data
input and presentation of multiple views. However, the basic
design concept remained roughly the same. While the coordination roles of timeline artifacts such as paper Gantt charts
have been either neglected or assumed to be performed
elsewhere (through, for instance, integrated collaborative
environments, etc) the screen real-estate limitations of the
new medium have often been addressed through standard
graphical user interface techniques such as scroll-bars, zoom
and pane, and overview plus detail.
Leaving aside the coordination issue, which this paper
will not address, and focusing solely on the timeline as a
user interface component, one could argue that the transition
to the electronic medium facilitated by the aforementioned
techniques has not been entirely satisfactory either. For
instance, if vertical scroll-bars are used the user’s ability
to align events decreases. Even in cases where the entire
diagram ﬁts on the same screen one needs to consider
that visual sensitivity to spatial alignment decreases as the
distance between the targets increases [11]. The difﬁculty
is also accentuated if alignment needs to be recognized
across intervening parallel lines, as is often the case in Gantt
charts. The basic design premise of Gantt charts, i.e. that
each event type be allocated a horizontal line, contributes
to making these limitations quite common in practice. As
the number of event types (task types, in Gantt charts)
increases, so does the height of the chart. This results
in wasteful space allocation since most diagrams will be
dominated by blank spaces representing inactivity. As the
graph grows vertically with the number of event types, the
user’s ability to recognize concurrent events and exclusively
inactive intervals is also greatly impaired.
Luz & Masoodian [12] introduced “temporal mosaics”
as an alternative to timelines for visualization of multiple

Abstract—A mosaic chart has been proposed for representation of events on a timeline. While early studies demonstrated
the effectiveness of mosaics in supporting visualization of
multimedia records on a meeting browser, the usability of
mosaics as a static timeline visualization has not been studied
in more general settings. This paper investigates the use of
the mosaic charts for visualization of project schedules. A user
study was conducted to compare a building project schedule
encoded alternatively as a mosaic or as a Gantt chart. Although
the study focused on static graphs, for which the Gantt
technique is usually very effective, results showed that the users
were as fast and accurate at answering the questions using the
mosaic representation as they were using Gantt charts. The
analysis and experiment indicated algorithmic, space-ﬁlling
and interpretation limitations of the mosaic technique. We
suggest possible design improvements to overcome some of
these limitations.
Keywords-Timelines; Gantt charts; Screen design; Information Visualization;

I. I NTRODUCTION
Visualization of multiple chronologies spanning a common time period is usually done through timelines. A ubiquitous example of timeline is the Gantt chart, a tool which
has been used for representation of task schedules since the
beginning of the last century [1]. The fact that Gantt charts
are still widely used in a number of areas testiﬁes to how
intuitive and effective the idea of representing temporal data
streams as rectangular bars stretching along a timeline can
be.
Although Gantt charts were initially conceived for the
paper medium, where space constraints are not usually a
cause for concern, the representational recipe for Gantt
charts has undergone little change since Henry Gantt’s
time. In fact, a case could be made that because Gantt
charts serve broader group coordination purposes as shared
organizational artifacts they are irrevocably bound to the
paper medium. Tufte [2], for instance, acknowledges the
strengths of timeline visualizations, but elsewhere he claims
that Gantt charts are ill-suited to computer screens and
can only be useful if drawn on large sheets of paper and
made available in public spaces [3]. Despite these concerns
the static metaphor of Gantt charts also carries through to
interactive contexts, and timelines have evolved and mi1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.53

182

based on it at least as effectively as when using the Gantt
chart. Therefore, we chose a building schedule visualization
task as the basis of our evaluation.
A. Method
In this study, a single project schedule was displayed to
the participants as mosaic or Gantt timelines in conjunction
with a question about the schedule, followed by a difﬁculty
rating question. The project schedule used in the experiment
is shown in Figure 2, in its mosaic and timeline forms.
A within-subject design was employed. All subjects were
given a written tutorial explaining both forms of the visualization. The tutorial consisted of a short text which described
the types of visualization to be used (i.e. Gantt and mosaic),
illustrating each type with graphs similar to those actually
used in the study. At the end of this tutorial the subjects
were directed to the live visualization trial.

Figure 1. The same set of events represented in temporal mosaic (left)
and Gantt (right).

streams of events and their dependencies and relationships.
Unlike a timeline, which grows vertically on demand, a
temporal mosaic is a form of visualization that starts with a
ﬁxed height and allocates space proportionally to the number
of overlapping tasks in a given time interval. Task types
are no longer tied to particular lines but are represented
through colour codes, as illustrated in Figure 1. Temporal
mosaics preserve the representation of overview, even as the
available drawing area is reduced, and facilitate the detection
of concurrent and overlapping events, even as the number
of events to be represented increases.
Temporal mosaics have been used in a mobile meeting
browsing system [13] and evaluated for usability and effectiveness in a multimedia browsing task [12]. Although the
evaluation showed that users performed better when using
the mosaic-based browser, the tasks they were asked to
perform were not typical schedule visualization tasks, and
involved dynamic, interactive elements such as playing audio
events and alternating between timeline and textual views.
This paper addresses these issues by assessing the use
of mosaics in a static (non-interactive) and more familiar
schedule visualization task. A user study is reported which
compared user performance at answering questions about
building schedules represented in mosaic and Gantt charts.
Results are presented for accuracy, time to answer, and difﬁculty ratings. The main ﬁndings are discussed, limitations
of the mosaic technique are analysed, and methods and
guidelines for addressing those limitations are proposed.

Table I
S AMPLE QUESTIONS .
Type
e
i
c
d
o

sample question
No more than 3 tasks should be scheduled for the same day.
Is this a problem with the current plan?
How many days are free in the ﬁrst two weeks?
All the windows are installed by the same person and should
happen in the same days. Is this possible in the current
schedule?
How many days does the bathroom plumbing take in total?
Painting a room should ﬁnish before its carpet can be installed.
Is this a problem for the bedroom schedule?

Each trial consisted of a set of 10 pairs of questions,
displayed one at a time in conjunction with either the mosaic
or Gantt representation of the project chart. For each pair,
we randomly allocated images to questions according to a
uniform probability distribution. Therefore, in addition to
randomizing the presentation sequence so as to minimize
order effects, we randomized the question-image pairs in
order to minimize possible learning effects. The types of
questions employed in this trial were exclusion (e), duration
(d), inactivity (i), concurrence (c) and ordering (o). Examples
of each type of questions are shown in Table I.
All questions were multiple choice and the choices were
presented through drop-down lists. Once the participants
selected their response from a list of choices, the system
recorded the time taken to answer the question, and then
presented them with a request to rate the difﬁculty of the
question they had just answered on a Likert scale ranging
from 1 (easy) to 7 (difﬁcult). The participants were told that
the time taken to rate a question would not count towards
the total task completion time. A prize (book voucher) was
offered to the participant that answered the questions most
accurately in the shortest time.
The study had 23 participants: 14 were male, 9 female;
11 were academics, 7 were students and 5 had other occupations. The system recorded 460 answers and ratings.

II. E VALUATION
As mentioned above, the mosaic technique has been found
in a previous study [12] to be effective for visualization
of meeting recordings, where the number of event types is
relatively small, and the vertical axis can be faceted to group
events according to media source (audio, text). In contrast,
the evaluation described in this section compares the mosaic
visualization with the more familiar Gantt visualization, in
a more complex context where the number of event types
is much greater than the number of event types used in the
previous study.
Furthermore, although we anticipated that temporal mosaics would be most useful for interactive dynamic visualizations systems, particularly for small-screen devices, in
this comparison we were mostly interested in ﬁnding out
whether users could readily understand the mosaic mapping
in a static representation, and perform temporal inferences

183

Week 2

Week 4

Week 1

bathroom
plumbing
tiling
painting

Figure 2.

S
4

lounge
wiring
cabinet
window
carpet
painting

M
5

T
6

Week 2
W
7

T
8

Week 3

Week 4

F S S M T W T F S S M T W T F S S M T W T F S
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31

bedroom
carpet
closet
window
painting

bathroom
plumbing
tiling
painting

lounge
wiring
cabinet
window
carpet
painting

Scheduling constraints used in the study, represented as mosaic and Gantt charts.

36.3

B. Results

answer time (seconds)

Remarkably, very little difference was observed in accuracy and answer time results for Gantt and mosaic charts.
Mean error rates were practically identical. Macro-averaged
(over mean error per question) the error rates were 15% for
mosaic and 15.1% for the Gantt chart. Mosaic users took an
average of 20.4 seconds to answer a question while Gantt
timeline users took 21.2 seconds, but the difference was not
found to be statistically signiﬁcant (t[436]=0.5, p = 0.5).
Difﬁculty ratings were also very similar, with mosaic
being rated slightly less difﬁcult than Gantt timelines on
average (2.3 versus 2.4, not signiﬁcant). Since participants
were randomly presented with both alternative visualizations
for each question type, it is likely that these ratings accurately reﬂect their assessment of the relative difﬁculties of
mosaic and timeline. Time-rating correlations were found to
be quite robust. Pearson’s product-moment correlation was
0.68 (p < 0.001) for Gantt and 0.62 (p < 0.004) for mosaic,
showing that subjects tended to ﬁnd more difﬁcult those
questions they took longer to answer.
A detailed breakdown of answer times and error rates per
question is shown in Figure 3. While some questions were
probably too easy, as is the case of the ones about inactivity
(11 and 12), other seemingly straightforward questions such
as question 4 proved surprisingly challenging. Question 4
reads: “All the windows are installed by the same person,
and should be installed in the same days. Is this possible
in the current schedule?”, requiring a simple concurrence
detection task. It is possible that the problems found by the
subjects in answering this question stem from difﬁculties in
interpreting the text itself, rather than the graphics. However,
the low accuracy observed in both conditions seems to
indicate otherwise.
We also grouped the answers according to type (concurrence, inactivity, duration, exclusion and ordering) and
plotted the combined results for speed, accuracy and ratings
(Figure 4). The only group for which one of the visualization styles had a noticeable advantage was the group of
concurrence assessment questions, for which mosaic users
were faster (and practically as accurate as timeline users).

Gantt time
mosaic time
Gantt error rate
mosaic error rate

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

c

c

c

c

d

d

d

d

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

e

c

c

o

o

d

d

e e
i
i
question type

Figure 3.

●

●

●

e

0.7

bedroom
carpet
closet
window
painting

Week 3

F S S M T W T F S S M T W T F S S M T W T F S
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
error rate

T
8

0

W
7

20.5 25 29.5

T
6

14.8

M
5

9.4

Week 1
S
4

●

●

Answer times and error rates.

C. Discussion
Temporal mosaic matched the Gantt timeline visualization
very closely for all types of event relationship detection
tasks. Mosaic users performed well at detecting event overlaps, as expected, but they also did well at assessing event
duration. The latter is somewhat surprising, since in the
meeting visualization task evaluation carried out previously
[12] users often mistakenly assumed event duration to be
proportional to the area occupied by the event representation
on the graph. We infer from this that since in the schedule
visualization study participants were presented with both
Gantt and mosaic charts, the former (for which interpretation
of duration is clearly unambiguous) helped them form the
correct mental model when using the latter. The mosaic
visualization should, therefore, aim to utilize this mental
model of timeline that most people already have due to their
familiarity with Gantt charts. An improvement to the mosaic
design along these lines could be to draw thin horizontal bars
spanning the maximum width of each mosaic area as a way
of suggesting the right mapping of width to time duration.
As noted above, of the questions that required detection
of concurrency, question number 4 can be regarded as
“difﬁcult”, specially if answered against a Gantt chart. They
took a long time to answer it but still made many mistakes.

184

c

o

d

e

i

Figure 4.

2.0
1.5
1.0

Difficulty ratings (1−7)

0.0

0

0.00

5

0.5

Time (secs.)

10

15

20

0.25
0.20
0.15
0.05

0.10

Error rate

2.5

Gantt
25

mosaic

c

o

d

e

i

c

o

d

e

i

Answer time, accuracy and ratings by type of question.

Similarly, the questions concerning inactivity (11 and 12)
can be regarded as “easy” in both visualizations. Question
18 illustrates the issue of misinterpretation of event duration
in the mosaic visualization discussed above. Mosaic users
did not take too long to answer the question but eventually
answered it incorrectly. Closer examination of question 18,
which reads “How many days does the bathroom tiling take
in total?”, also suggests that the respondents might have been
misled by the placement of the legend for bathroom directly
under week two, which happens to be exactly where the
ﬁrst period of tiling activity ends (see Figure 2). This was
particularly problematic for the mosaic representation since
it happened to extend right down to the beginning of the
legend, causing its users to overlook the second period of
tiling activity which starts much later, in week four.
Finally, the study revealed a shortcoming of the mosaic
drawing algorithm, which sometimes produces the undesirable result of rendering an event that should be drawn as a
single contiguous rectangle as two rectangles discontinuous
(“broken”) across lines. An example of such discontinuous
drawings occurred for the lounge carpeting task (days 22
and 23). Figure 5 illustrates the problem: the two rectangles
marked (a) in the zoom area should have been drawn as a
single rectangle. This seemingly caused the high number of
errors made by mosaic users in question 2 (“Putting carpet
in a room and painting that room can’t coincide. Is this a
problem for the lounge schedule?”) while Gantt users always
answered correctly. A few of the participants pointed out that
they were confused by the fact that the area corresponding
to carpeting appeared not as a single rectangle spanning
the 22nd and 23rd but as two adjacent rectangles, one at
the top and one at the bottom of the screen. This indicates
that discontinuity is undesirable. The question however is,
can discontinuity always be avoided in mosaics? In the next
section we address this question.

Figure 5.

Example of discontinuity.

simpliﬁed version of the original mosaic drawing algorithm
[12].
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

drawMosaic
a s s i g n a unique c o l o u r ci t o each event t y p e ei
f o r each t i m e s t e p t
n ← number o f events between t and t − 1
area
h ← height of drawing
n
for ( i in 1:n )
s e t f i l l c o l o u r t o ci
drawRectangle ( t − 1 , i−1
, t , hi )
h
Algorithm 1.

Mosaic drawing.

We say that a representation for an event e on the mosaic
is a discontinuous representation if e extends from time tb
to te and there are times ti and tj = ti + 1 (tb ≤ ti < te )
such that the vertical sides of the rectangles representing
e at ti and tj do not coincide or overlap. In the case of
Figure 5 the problem could have been avoided by reordering
the plumbing event (b) to be drawn below the carpeting
event (a). However, this forward ordering strategy will
not always guarantee continuity. In fact, for any 2-interval
sequence consisting of an interval t with m > 3 events,
immediately followed by an interval t , containing m − 2
events that also occur in t, Algorithm 1 will produce at
least one discontinuous representation. This is also true of
the algorithm proposed in [12].
Let e1 , . . . , em be the m events represented in interval
t. Assume that t is followed by interval t containing
e1 , . . . , em−2 . If h is the height of each rectangle for each

III. D ISCONTINUITY IN MOSAICS
Let us start by formalizing the issue of discontinuity
in mosaic visualization based on Algorithm 1, which is a

185

ei in t, then the height h of each ei will be:
h (m − 2) =

continuity constraints rarely arise in practice. Therefore, a
heuristic that seeks to minimize the number of discontinuous
representations by looking ahead one interval and reordering
streams appropriately before drawing will sufﬁce in most situations. The required modiﬁcation to the drawing algorithm
of temporal mosaic is straightforward. Algorithm 1 can be
modiﬁed so that the events occurring between t − 2 and
t − 1 are stored in a vector, and the events between t − 1
and t are reordered prior to drawing so that the events that
also occurred in the previous interval are drawn as closely
to their height in that interval as possible.

hm

m
(1)
m−2
At best all m events in t will be ordered, say, from e1
to em , and all events in t correspondingly ordered, i.e.
(e1 , . . . , em−2 ) so that, for all ei in t and ej in t , i = j.
Let h0 (ei ) be the vertical coordinate for the top side of the
rectangle that represents ei , and h1 (ei ) the coordinate for the
rectangle’s bottom corner. Clearly, in order for continuity
to hold, ∀i h1 (ei ) > h0 (ei ). According to (1), the general
pattern of the sequence is the following:
t
t
0
0
h

h

=

h

IV. D ESIGN PRINCIPLES FOR DRAWING MOSAICS
The results of the study presented in the this paper can
be used to deﬁne a series of visual design principles which
can be incorporated into the algorithm for drawing temporal
mosaics to improve its effectiveness.
In terms of visual variables [14], the basic difference
between the temporal mosaic and a conventional timeline
is that the latter relies on position, size (and occasionally
colour) as its core attributes while the former trades position
for colour (and optionally texture) as the plot’s underlying
visual variables. An event representation based on colour
rather than position risks undermining visual continuity.
Preserving visual continuity is the most important aspect
of conventional timelines such as the Gantt chart, while
space efﬁciency is the most beneﬁcial aspect of temporal
mosaics. Therefore, the overall aim of the design principles
outlined below is to preserve, as much as possible, the visual
continuity of individual tasks across the time axis, while also
utilizing space more efﬁciently across the tasks axis.

m
h m−2

2h

m
2h m−2
m
(m − 2)h m−2
= hm

mh

Therefore, for h1 (ei ) > h0 (ei ) to hold for all i we need:
ih >
i

<

(i − 1)hm
m−2
m
2

(2)

In other words, for i = m − 2 inequation (2) can only be
satisﬁed by m < 4.
A. Strategies for avoiding discontinuity

A. Avoiding discontinuity

A possible strategy for dealing with the discontinuity issue
would be to alter the mosaic drawing algorithm so as to
allow the rectangles (tiles) to have variable heights within
intervals. In this case, vertical space would no longer be
allocated equally among concurrent events. Before drawing
a rectangle for event e we would check if drawing the
next rectangle in the same time interval would result in
discontinuity. If so, we would reduce the height h1 (e ) so
as to keep h0 (ei+1 ) < h1 (ei+1 ). The visual result would be
a mosaic in which the events at the top of the graph would
seem “compressed” in certain intervals, producing a visually
less intuitive design.
Another possibility would be to allow all segments (not
only the next segment to be drawn) to be reordered once
the continuity constrain has been violated. However, this
strategy would be much costlier, since an exponentially
large space of possible arrangements would need to be
searched. Moreover, it does not guarantee continuity, as
can be easily veriﬁed by trying to lay out a set of events
{e1 , . . . , e6 } on a 3-interval mosaic, such that the ﬁrst interval contains {e3 , . . . , e6 }, the second contains {e1 , . . . , e6 }
and the third {e1 , . . . , e4 }. Fortunately, such unsolvable

Visual discontinuity is the least desirable aspect of the mosaics visualizations, and therefore should be avoided when
possible. As demonstrated, even though there are some cases
where discontinuity cannot be avoided, an approximation
algorithm can be employed which deals with the cases in
which it can be avoided, as described above.
B. Visual alignment against the time axis
Timeline visualizations such as Gantt charts allow viewers
to scan space reserved for each task, which is aligned against
the time axis, to see all the instances of that particular task
across time. Although this is not the case for mosaics, as
no speciﬁc area is reserved for each task, it may still be
possible to provide some visual alignment against the time
axis especially for tasks that occur more frequently. One
way of achieving this is to analyze the entire tasks dataset
to calculate the frequency, or duration, of each task and then
order the tasks according to their frequency or duration,
so that task mosaics can be drawn in the order of their
frequency or duration (e.g. top to bottom along the tasks
axis). Although this does not guarantee alignment, it is likely

186

R EFERENCES

to lead to higher frequency tasks being drawn in a narrower
visual space along the time axis (e.g. always closer to the
top).

[1] H. Gantt, “Organizing for work,” Industrial Management,
vol. 58, pp. 89–93, 1919.
[2] E. R. Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information,
2nd ed. Graphics Press, 2001.

C. Selection of colours
Selection of colours to represent different tasks in Gantt
charts is not usually very important, as space is used to
preserve the visual continuity, and separation, of individual
tasks. In temporal mosaic, on the other hand, the association
between colours and different tasks is crucial to the effectiveness of the visualization. It is very important to carefully
choose colours that would allow individual tasks to be easily
identiﬁed and separated from other tasks, particularly when
the number of tasks increases. There are a number of colour
selection criterion, based on graphic design principles, that
could be adopted. The most important criteria is that tasks
that are likely to co-occur, and hence be drawn close to one
another, should be complementary so that they are easily
distinguished from one another. This selection criteria could
be combined with the task ordering and drawing sequence,
as described above.

[3] ——, “Project management graphics: ET notebooks
(Ask
ET,”
http://www.edwardtufte.com/bboard/
2002,
(retrieved
q-and-a-fetch-msg?msg\ id=000076,
November 2010).
[4] S. F. Silva and T. Catarci, “Visualization of linear timeoriented data: A survey,” in Procs. of the International
Conference on Web Information Systems Engineering (WISE).
Hong Kong: IEEE, 2000, pp. 310–319.
[5] D. Huynh, S. Drucker, P. Baudisch, and C. Wong, “Time quilt:
scaling up zoomable photo browsers for large, unstructured
photo collections,” in CHI ’05: Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 2005, pp. 1937–1940.
[6] M.-M. Bouamrane and S. Luz, “Meeting browsing,” Multimedia Systems, vol. 12, no. 4–5, pp. 439–457, 2007.
[7] S. Cousins and M. Kahn, “The visual display of temporal
information,” Artif. Intell. in Medicine, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 341–
357, 1991.

D. Enhancing visual continuity
Visual continuity of individual tasks could also be enhanced by combining some elements of Gantt timelines
with temporal mosaics. Although such improvements can
be added more easily in interactive visualization systems
(e.g. by overlaying Gantt timelines over mosaics), in static
visualizations connecting lines could for example be used to
join occurrences of different instances of each task across
the entire mosaic visualization.

[8] R. Kosara and S. Miksch, “Visualization methods for data
analysis and planning in medical applications,” International
Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 68, no. 1–3, pp. 141–
153, 2002.

V. C ONCLUSION

[10] M. Masoodian, D. Budd, and B. Rogers, “A comparison of
linear and calendar travel itinerary visualizations for personal
digital assistants,” in Procs. of OZCHI’04: Conf. on HumanComputer Interaction, 2004, pp. 124–133.

[9] M. Apperley, D. Fletcher, B. Rogers, and K. Thomson,
“Interactive visualisation of a travel itinerary,” in AVI ’00:
Proc. of Advanced Visual Interfaces. ACM, 2000, pp. 221–
226.

The study presented above demonstrated that, despite its
different visual style, temporal mosaic preserve the intuitiveness of timelines while using space more effectively.
It also showed that ﬁrst-time users of temporal mosaic are
able to match the performance of Gantt users for speed
and accuracy. Results and user feedback indidated possible
improvements and guidelines for drawing mosaic charts.
Although our focus here has mainly been on evaluation
of “static” mosaic and timeline visualizations, we believe
that much can be gained by providing interactive alternatives
to these static visualizations. Therefore, in parallel to this
research, we have also been developing a prototype tool
for interactive creation, visualization and manipulation of
scheduling tasks using Gantt and mosaic techniques, as well
as different combinations of both [15].

[11] S. J. Waugh and D. M. Levi, “Spatial alignment across gaps:
contributions of orientation and spatial scale,” Journal of the
Optical Society of America, vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 2305–2317,
1995.
[12] S. Luz and M. Masoodian, “Visualisation of parallel data
streams with temporal mosaics,” in Proc. of the 11th Intl.
Conf. on Information Visualisation. Zurich: IEEE Computer
Soc., 2007, pp. 196–202.
[13] ——, “Visualisation of meeting records on mobile devices,”
in Handbook of Research on User Interface Design and
Evaluation for Mobile Technology, J. Lumsden, Ed. IGI,
2008, pp. 1049–1067.
[14] J. Bertin, S´emiologie graphique.
1967.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Gauthier-Villars Mouton,

[15] S. Luz and M. Masoodian, “Improving focus and context
awareness in interactive visualization of time lines,” in HCI
’10: Proceedings of the 24th BCS Conference on Human
Computer Interaction, British Computer Society. Dundee,
Scotland: ACM Press, 2010.

Saturnino Luz is supported by the Science Foundation
Ireland (Grant 07/CE/I1142) as part of the Centre for Next
Generation Localisation (www.cngl.ie) at Trinity College
Dublin.

187

