2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Interactive Animated Visualizations of Breast, Ovarian Cancer and Other Health
Indicator Data using Weave, an Interactive Web–based Analysis and Visualization
Environment
Shweta Purushe, Georges Grinstein, Mary Beth Smrtic and Helen Lyons
Institute for Visualization and Perception Research, Department of Computer Science,
University of Massachusetts, Lowell
{shweta_purushe@student.uml.edu, grinstein@cs.uml.edu}
consuming and error-prone. For this reason, visualization
is used to allow researchers to quickly identify patterns
of interest in large datasets. With interactive
visualization and animation the researchers can explore
data more quickly most often by selecting specific data
or parameters on fly. Interactive visualizations have been
used to study cancer data in a variety of ways.
In 2000 Carr used micromap plots of linked panel
graphs [6] and in 2006 he used conditional choropleth
maps supplementing an interactive visualization tool for
displaying cancer statistics [7]. These tools enabled
hypothesis generation and communicating patterns in
statistical summaries. Robinson developed the
Exploratory Spatio-Temporal Analysis Toolkit, a
collection of geo-visualization tools for cancer spread
data [8].

Abstract
Recent research in genomics and biomedical studies has
shown a relationship between heredity, mutations in
certain genes and the corresponding probabilities of
developing certain cancers. In this study we looked at
breast and ovarian cancer distributions across all states
and counties in the United States over time. We describe
briefly Weave, our Web–based Analysis and
Visualization Environment and use it to explore these
cancers and present interactive animated visualizations
of family hereditary patterns and genetic distributions,
not only for these cancers, but also for other lifethreatening cancers and related health indicators. We
also show how Weave can be used to integrate other
diverse epidemiological data, in particular obesity, and
explore its relationship with cancer data.

The National Cancer Institute (NCI) has funded a
number of projects to map the spread of cancer incidence
and mortality rates [8]. These have lead to a significant
improvement
in
understanding
the
regional,
environmental
and
socio-economic
differences
associated with cancer rates across the United States.

1. Introduction
Breast cancer and ovarian cancer are the leading
life-threatening cancers in women today. Breast cancer
has a lifetime risk of > 10% and ovarian cancer, although
more rare, is also lethal with a lifetime risk of 1.71%
Research in the past decade has attributed mutations in
tumor suppressor genes to an increased predisposition to
developing both these cancers. These genes are primarily
BRCA1 and BRCA2. Based on breast cancer families
with multiple and/or early-onset cases, estimates of the
lifetime risk of breast cancer in carriers of BRCA1 or
BRCA2 mutations may be as high as 85% and 54% for
ovarian cancer [1, 2, 3 and 5].

Most of the systems developed through these
projects as well as many other commercial systems are
not web-based, lack support for multiple visualizations
and data sets and more importantly are difficult to
extend.
We
developed
a
web-based
interactive
visualization system, Weave, with the Open Indicators
Consortium [www.openindicators.org]. Weave is a highperformance interactive visualization system (large
datasets with high interaction response) providing a
number of different visualizations tools including
linegraphs, scatterplots, bargraphs, radial visualization
and histograms for example. Visualization tools are
linked so that actions on one tool are simultaneously
reflected in all other visualizations. Data subset
generation, subset visualization and linked highlighting
throughout all the visualizations enable better user
involvement and analysis.

Although some breast and ovarian cancers have a
hereditary component, others seem to be sporadic (non–
inherited) [5]. Such sporadic occurrences may be
attributed to a number of environmental and/or lifestyle
factors such as exposure to carcinogens, lifestyle
preferences or addictions [1, 2]. To identify which
environmental or life-style factors could be associated
with increased risk of developing cancer is a daunting
task as manual inspection of raw data is tedious, time

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.108

247

used.
Other available data, including incidence
population, incidence counts, death population and death
counts were not considered since they were utilized in
the calculation of the age-adjusted incidence and death
rates.

Weave also includes statistical and mathematical
calculation tools including an equation editor and an ‘Rproject text’ editor. The former allows calculation of new
metrics using the attributes from the datasets. The ‘Rtext’ editor for script generation enables Weave to
interact online with various R packages enabling quick
on- the-fly statistical calculations that aid further
analysis.
Weave supports visualizing several diverse and
distributed datasets. For example rather than just
visualizing breast cancer incidence rates across the
United States , datasets on pollution, obesity or other
socio-economic factors can also be tied into a single
visualization in a single instance.
We used Weave to observe the trends of these
cancers across the United States down to county level
when possible. We explored visualizations of cancer
statistics over a period of nearly ten years looking at the
trends in incidence and death rates from both breast and
ovarian cancers. The Weave visualizations were used to
explore the data to identify possible relationships
between the cancer data and other health indicators such
as obesity. This same software was used to create
presentations.

In both cases (CDC and SEER data), the
incidence rate was per 100,000 individuals and was ageadjusted to the 2000 U.S. standard population (19 age
groups - Census P25-1130). Rates provided by both the
CDC and SEER were suppressed in cases where there
were fewer than 16 in any category (area, ethnicity etc)
or when requested by a state or metropolitan area. The
data obtained from CDC and from SEER includes only
invasive cancer data and omits cancer reoccurrences.
The data collected from the CDC varies from that
collected from the SEER program. The CDC provides
annual incidence rates, while SEER provides a single
rate for each state for the full four-year period from
2002-2006.
The data had to be cleaned by removing missing
values and the additional statistics that had been reported
for geographical regions within the U.S. were also
removed. As a result only state and county level data
remained in the final dataset.

2. Motivation
Although a large number of research articles have
been focused on understanding the causes, risk factors,
heredity and occurrence of these cancers, additional
studies are needed to understand the spread of the
implicated heredity factors over given geographic
locations. Data for this type of research is becoming
more accessible as national organizations continue to
accumulate cancer incidence and related data. To date,
simple visualizations have been used to study these data
sets, highlighting discernable statistics, however, there
has not yet been a concerted effort to visualize, explore
and link other variables to identify causalities involving
socio-economic and environmental factors such as
education, health standards, employment and life style
preferences. Visualizing such relationships may help
hint at specific suspected causes or new contributing
factors currently not addressed by public health
professionals.

The cancer statistics were used to find correlations
if any, with other types of data. Percent obesity for each
state was used to find a correlation with breast cancer.

3. Methods

In addition to identifying interesting patterns,
visualizations can be used to find correlations with
potential causes, which have not yet been discovered,
although proving or disproving such correlations will
still require corroborating scientific studies. We give a
simple example of the use of Weave to generate a
hypothesis between incidence of cancer and obesity.

4. Results
4.1. Visualization and Inferences
A number of different interactive visualizations and
animated visualizations were created to study 10 years of
cancer data. We present a few slides but these do not do
justice to the interaction support for exploration or the
interactive animations that can be generated with Weave
[11]. A video which demonstrates the use of Weave to
investigate
this
data
is
available
at
www.openindicators.org.

4.2. Hypothesis generation

Breast and ovarian cancer data and statistics at the
U.S. state level was collected from the Center for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) while countylevel data was collected from Surveillance Epidemiology
and End Results (SEER) [9, 10]. The state-level data,
covered the years 1999 to 2006 while the county-level
data covered the period from 2002 to 2006. As this was a
preliminary study, only incidence and death rates were

248

Figure 1: Incidence of Breast Cancer of the United States in 1999. States shown in the background color
are those with missing data. This visualization shows an area of high incidence in the northwest and a
generalized high incidence, ranging from 130-140 (number of individuals diagnosed with breast cancer
per 1000,000 individuals), over most of the northern states.

Figure 2: Incidence of Breast cancer in the United States in 2005. Compared with 1999 data shown in
Figure 1, this visualization shows a marked decrease in the incidence of breast cancer with the rates of
130 or higher (dark pink) appearing in the far northwest and the far northeast.

249

Figure 3: Incidence of Breast Cancer across United States counties from 2002-2006. The visualization
shows a further decrease in breast cancer incidence. In this case the data is displaced at the county
level. Those counties which display the background color (appear blank) are those for which data is
missing or unavailable. The Shackelford, Hardeman and Cottles counties in Texas show the highest
incidence rate (dark red and orange).

Figure 4: Profiles of death rates due to ovarian cancer in the United States from 1999 to 2006.
Interaction allows users to observe the details of every state in a tooltip as seen above. Wyoming shows
an undulation with an alternating increases and decreases in death rates.

250

Figure 5: An attempt to visualize relatedness between different health indicators, percent obese and
breast cancer in this case, in Weave. In this visualization, each point on the scatterplot represents one
state. The points are positioned on the X-axis based on the percentage of the population within the state
that is classified as obese (percent obese).
to visualize the trend in the readiness of certain states to
provide vital cancer statistics over time.

5. Discussion
Comparing Figures 1 and 2, at the end of 1999, we
see that many of the states showed breast cancer rates of
130 or higher. By the mid 2000s, the incidence rates drop
significantly across the country. Different factors could
cause or explain this trend. Significantly increased
disease awareness, more affordable health insurance
plans or healthier changes in the population’s lifestyle
are possible factors. However it is also possible that
another uninvestigated cause led to a significantly high
incidence rate in 1999. Such investigations are time
consuming and that’s where Weave comes in.

Figure 5 shows a negative correlation between
percent obesity and the probability of developing breast
cancer. One possible reason for this could be the
difference in test populations contributing to the
statistics. The entire population that was counted in the
obesity study was not necessarily tested for breast or
ovarian cancer. In addition the cancer study included
only women whereas the obesity study included both
men and women. This highlights the importance of using
different visualization tools within Weave to gain quick
insight on correlation between different datasets.

The visualization shows a high incidence of breast
cancer in the far northeast and in the far northwest. In
addition, a higher incidence of cancer seems to prevail in
the northern states whereas the southern states show a
comparatively lower incidence rate. It would definitely
be interesting to study why the northeast and the
northwest show similar high rates. What do these two
regions have in common and what factors are starkly
different which nonetheless contribute to a similar high
cancer incidence?

In addition it was observed that the groups of states
on either side of the regression line map to different
regions of the United States. The states below the
regression line are mostly western states and the ones
above eastern. Although the reason does not seem
obvious it would be worthwhile to study further.
In this paper we cannot show Weave’s interactive
animated visualizations (see videos at [11]) which
dramatically convey changes over a time period. By
using a time or dimension slider, visualizations can show
trends over time. Since the user can probe, query and
thus interact with the data while the animation is
progressing much insight can be gained and learned from
the animations.

Figure 1 also shows that some states have missing
data (displayed without any color). While collecting data
from CDC and SEER, the data reported from some states
did not match the publication requirements of the United
States Cancer Statistics (USCS). Some states did not
report data, although the CDC mentions that their data
did meet publication standards. It would be worthwhile

251

6. Conclusion
Weave was used not only to create interesting
animated visualizations but also to visualize profiles of
incidence and death rates of breast and ovarian cancers
over a decade.
It would be incorrect to suggest that visualizations
alone could identify the factors implicated in cancer
spread. However with the plethora of cancer data and
statistics available, Weave can help narrow the focus of
experimentation to those factors which show a strong
correlation. In addition any unexpected results could
pave the way for further research studies. Weave
provides a quick, efficient and comprehensive
environment for clinicians, epidemiologists and heath
care professionals to present important data and statistics
to the general public.

[5]

7. Further Studies

[11]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[12]

We will continue to use Weave to study more and
different types of cancers. We will study cancers across
the globe and across different ethnicities and extrapolate
the results to possible implicated genes. Our next focus
of study is the occurrence of breast and ovarian cancers
in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. The penetrance of
the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes is known to be significant
in this community. We will map the epidemiological
spread of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers across
the United States and ultimately on a global level.

[13]

Interactive animated visualizations encourage
hypothesis generation and experimentation. Visualization
of relationships between cancers and lifestyle attributes
such as obesity, education and pollution are possible by
using other measure and indicator datasets. The early
identification of such factors would definitely reduce the
onus on scientists who are involved with exploratory
studies.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

Antoniou. A. et al “Average Risks of Breast and
Ovarian Cancer Associated with BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutations Detected in Case Series Unselected for
Family History: A Combined Analysis of 22 studies”
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72:1117-1130, 2003
Fodor. F. et al “Frequency and Cancer Risk
associated with Common BRCA1 and BRCA2
Mutations in Ashkenazi Jewish Breast Cancer
Patients” Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63:45-51, 1998
Claus. E. et al “Effect of BRCA1 and BRCA2 on the
Association between Breast Cancer Risk and Family
History” Journal of the National Cancer Institute 90:
23 1998
John.E.et al “The Breast Cancer Family Registry: an
infrastructure
for
cooperative
multinational,
interdisciplinary and translational studies of the

252

genetic epidemiology of breast cancer.”Breast Cancer
Research 6: R375 – R389 2004
King .M. et al “Breast and Ovarian Cancer Risks
Due to Inherited Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2”
Science 302 2003
Jim X. et al “Interactive Visualization of Multivariate
Statistical Data” The International Journal of Virtual
Reality, 5(3):67-73 2006
D. B. Carr, J. F. Wallin and D. A. Carr. Two New
Templates for Epidemiology Applications: “Linked
Micromap Plots and Conditioned Choropleth Maps”,
Statistics in Medicine, vol. 19, pp. 2521-2538, 2000.
Robinson A, et al “Human-Centered Design of
Geovisualization Tools for Cancer Epidemiology”,
Proceedings of GIScience 2004, Adelphi, MD, p.314316 2004
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC):
http://www.cdc.gov/
Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results (SEER):
http://seer.cancer.gov/
The
Open
Indicator
Consortium
(OIC):
www.openindicators.org
Baumann .A. et al “Exploratory to presentation
visualization, and everything in-between: providing
flexibility in aesthetics, interactions and visual
layering”
Baumann, A., Grinstein, G.G., and Mass, W.:
Collaborative Visual Analytics with Session
Histories. Unpublished Research Paper. No. 2009005,
University of Massachusetts Lowell, Dept. of
Computer
Science,
Lowell,MA
01854.
(http://teaching.cs.uml.edu/~heines/techrpts/details.js
p?Year=2009&SeqNo=005).

