2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Visualization of Automated and Manual Trajectories in
Wide-Area Motion Imagery
Anoop Haridas, Rengarajan Pelapur, Joshua Fraser, Filiz Bunyak, Kannappan Palaniappan
Department of Computer Science, University of Missouri
Columbia, MO 65201 USA
{ahkrc,rvpnc4}@mail.mizzou.edu, jbfraser@gmail.com, {bunyak,palaniappank}@missouri.edu
Abstract

the VSSN series, and national-level projects, such as i-LIDS
[7] and ETISEO [11], utilize the ViPER-XML annotation
format in their video databases. Another important example
is the ground truth motion database developed along with the
layer segmentation and motion annotation tools at MIT CSAIL
[9]. Since manual ground truth creation from real video is
time consuming and error-prone an alternative approach using
computer graphics tools to automatically create precise ground
truth from realistic/synthetic video of virtual worlds using
simulated cameras has also been studied [12], [18], [19]. The
NGA coordinated Motion Imagery Standards Board (MISB)
has been developing a metadata architecture and standardsbased software interfaces for Video Moving Target Indicator
(VMTI) systems to analyze and share activity-based GeoINT
and tracking results for characterizing actions and interactions
in a wide range of motion imagery including FMV and Large
Volume Streaming Data (LVSD) [21].
The term LVSD is a NATO designation for a class of
imagery also referred to as wide-area persistent surveillance
(WAPS), wide-area aerial surveillance (WAAS), wide-area
large format (WALF) and WAMI, which is an emerging
area of interest, due to its large scale continuous coverage
of geospatial regions for a variety of applications [16], [2],
[17]. Given the established importance of FMV annotation
ground truth databases and performance metrics, increasing
attention is being focused on developing equivalent capability
for WAMI. Working with WAMI data presents a unique
set of challenges, distinct from standard video surveillance
data, including interactive visualization of very large timesequence imagery (100 Mpixels to 10 Gpixels per frame at
rates of one Hz or faster using images from an array of
smaller cameras with VIS, IR, MSI or HSI sensors), efﬁcient
algorithms for mosaicing, georegistration, stabilization, multitarget tracking, event and activity analysis [16] [17]. The
difﬁculties of tracking vehicles in low frame rate aerial widearea motion imagery are many, including large object displacements, parallax and occlusions from tall structures, low
contrast, moving seams across camera boundaries, signiﬁcant
object appearance changes with viewing direction, shadows
and are described in recent publications including [16], [13],
[3], [17], [22], [8]. Unlike regular video surveillance databases,
there are currently only a few WAMI datasets that are available
in the public domain. One example is the PSS imagery
described in this paper; another is the Columbus Large Image
Format (CLIF) dataset, collected in a ﬂyover of the Ohio

The task of automated object tracking and performance
assessment in low frame rate, persistent, wide spatial coverage
motion imagery is an emerging research domain. The collection of hundreds to tens of thousands of dense trajectories
produced by such automatic algorithms along with the subset
of manually veriﬁed tracks across several coordinate systems
require new tools for effective human computer interfaces and
exploratory trajectory visualization. We describe an interactive
visualization system that supports very large gigapixel per
frame video; facilitates rapid, intuitive monitoring and analysis of tracking algorithm execution; provides visual methods
for the intercomparison of very long manual tracks with multisegmented automatic tracker outputs; and a ﬂexible KOLAM
TrackingSimulator (KOLAM-TS) middleware that generates visualization data by automating the object tracker performance
testing and benchmarking process.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Tracking in wide-area motion imagery is a challenging
research domain that is receiving a lot of current interest.
The visualization of hundreds to thousands of tracks resulting
from automated and manual tracking of objects offers new
challenges in visualization and visual analytics. Even with
standard video sequences, also known as full motion video
(FMV), meaningful comparisons of tracking algorithm behavior with quantitative performance metrics were difﬁcult
to perform due to the paucity of standard video datasets
with associated manual labeled ground truth. However, recent
work has led to the creation of extensive, open repositories
of non-wide area video datasets, tools and ground truth.
Notable examples include open source tools such as the Video
Performance Evaluation Resource (ViPER-GT) of scripts and
Java programs [4], which allows for metadata viewing and
editing, ground truth generation and annotation of video
including a frame accurate MPEG-1 decoder; VIPER-PE a
scriptable command-line based performance evaluation tool;
VirtualDub for frame accurate capturing, playing back and
ﬁltering of video in AVI format; the Video Surveillance Online
Repository (ViSOR) project [24], which comprises a webbased dynamic, shareable, open repository of surveillance
video sequences and annotations using an event ontology;
and the Scoring, Truthing And Registration Toolkit (START),
for semi-automated ground truth generation using a keyframe
approach [20]. Several workshops, such as the PETS series and
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.67

288

State University Campus in October 2007 [1]. Visualizing the
statistical distribution of a dense set of automatically estimated
tracks in a limited geographical region by overlaying a large
number of trajectories is described in [8], [22].
The WAMI database utilized here for visualization, tracking
and ground truth generation purposes, is from the Persistent
Surveillance Systems (PSS) event management, law enforcement and emergency response collection. WAMI datasets were
collected using an eight camera array on an airborne platform
producing 256 megapixel mosaiced georegistered images. We
used sample WAMI consisting of several thousand frames
collected over Philadelphia (March 13, 2008) for this paper.
Some of the features of the Philadelphia WAMI dataset are
listed in Table I.
Frame Rate:
Altitude:
Coverage:
GSD:
Pixel Type:
Bandwidth:
File Format:

Level 3
Level 2
Level 1

Level 0

Fig. 1. Multiresolution tiled image pyramid data structure using the scale–
and–tile approach for supporting interactive access to datasets much larger
than main memory.

 







 

1 frame per second (fps)
3,500 – 12,500 ft.
4 square miles, 80°x 60°fov
25 – 50 cm
Grayscale
1 TB/hr; 16K x 16K pixels / frame
Tiled JPEG pyramids


  



 




 



  







 




  


TABLE I
WAMI N ORTH P HILADELPHIA , P ENNSYLVANIA DATASET
CHARACTERISTICS (DATASETS COURTESY OF PSS).

 


 


 
 

 

We have summarized some of the challenges in interactive
visualization of WAMI datasets. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, we brieﬂy describe our visualization
platform KOLAM, followed by details about KOLAM-TS
which automates tracker execution and performance evaluation. Then the different parser modules developed to handle
the various ground truth formats are explained and the need
for a standard format for ground truth described followed by
conclusions.



Fig. 2.
Multithreading and priority caching system using a tile request
queue in KOLAM for parallel reads overlapped with non-blocking interactive
visualization.

level (one-half in each dimension) to create a multiresolution
structure which is then reorganized into ﬁxed-size tiles [14],
[15]. Each tile is individually compressed to create a selfcontained subimage. KOLAM can display this tile organization
by drawing grid lines to depict the scaled tiles being drawn
from the appropriate layer of the pyramid as the user zooms
in and out.
In addition to the native pyramid storage format, the open
architecture of KOLAM allows for the support of different
multiresolution, hierarchical data types. The PSS ﬁle format
is organized using a scale–and–tile pyramidal structure similar
to the native KOLAM datasets and utilize per-tile JPEG
compression. Extensions to support JPEG2000 and NCSA
HDF5 access are being explored.
In order to provide interactive display updates, KOLAM
fetches and displays only those tiles required for the view
into the data. In order to display images much larger than
primary memory, tiles are cached and paged according to a
distance-based metric. The reading and decompression of tiles
is accomplished asynchronously using a safe multithreaded
architecture. Tile visibility determination for display is managed in a separate thread from those servicing I/O and decompression requests in order to keep the display interactive. A
single thread manages the display while multiple read (worker)
threads fulﬁll the tile requests.
KOLAM utilizes a workpile concurrent model by creating

II. KOLAM I NTERACTIVE V ISUALIZATION T OOL
The KOLAM (K-tiles for Optimized muLtiresolution Access with coMpression) application was developed using C++
and the Qt 4.x SDK to provide cross-platform (Windows,
Mac OS X, Linux) interactive visualization of extremely large,
time-varying image datasets, on the order of hundreds of gigabytes to terabytes in size. KOLAM achieves smooth interactive
display, navigation and analysis of massive datasets through a
combination of pyramidal out-of-core data structures, efﬁcient
application-level paging, and concurrent I/O and processing
[14], [15]. An early motivation for developing KOLAM was
to extend linked multiple window visualization tools [5],
[6], [23] to support extremely large datasets. Other tools for
visualization of WAMI datasets include Persistent Surveillance
Systems (PSS) iView and MIT Lincoln Laboratory Advanced
Persistent Image eXploitation (APIX) Viewer and processing
system.
The pyramidal data structure used for organizing the image
into spatially coherent multiresolution tiles using a hierarchical scale–and–tile architecture is shown in Figure 1. Each
successive image layer is scaled by one-fourth of the prior

289

Fig. 3. The KOLAM user interface, showing the various subsystem widgets during a sample session for tracking moving and stationary objects, the lat-long
position readout panel in the lower left, ﬁlename, ROI and zoom information in the status bar, interactive animation panel, assisted multi-object tracking panel
on the right that also controls the display parameters for multiple trajectories and the original and stabilized trajectories trailing behind the two tracked objects.

a queue in which pending operations are enqueued, to be then
dequeued by worker threads. KOLAM takes advantage of the
manner in which the operating system scheduler manages the
blocking and yielding of thread execution for load balancing.
The workpile model is used in the KOLAM multithreaded
environment by inclusion of the POSIX pread() functionality
(under Mac OS X and Linux), which ensures that all read
operations are atomic (combined seek and read) with respect
to the ﬁles being handled and ensures that the operations are
threadsafe with multiple reader threads. Under the Windows
operating system a fully functional pread() is not available
so KOLAM uses a single reader thread. Figure 2 illustrates
the primary display and read/worker threads architecture of
KOLAM.
An important theme in the KOLAM GUI design, has been to
minimize the number of interaction steps needed for a speciﬁc
functionality to maximize productivity – such as single-click
manual/assisted tracking. The interface components needed
for ground truth generation and output visualization from
KOLAM-TS are explored below.

Fig. 4. Animation playback interface in KOLAM supporting forward and
backward temporal access, adjustable framerate, random frame access, scrub
bar, etc.

of interest at any zoom factor like a virtual light table. An
overlay system provides multiple, transparent layers tiered
above the actual display area, which serves the dual purpose of
presenting additional information superimposed on the display,
and enabling marking and annotation of the data. The overlay
feature enables the ground truth creation and trajectory display
either interactively or using KOLAM-TS.
B. Video Playback/Animation Interface

A. KOLAM Display Interface

The KOLAM animation GUI panel in Figure 4 is compact,
with an expandable detail tab that provides access to commonly used functionality for seamless playback of multiple
WAMI sequences as well as a sequence of (same-sized)
image frames in popular formats like TIFF, PNG, JPEG, etc.
Bidirectional playback with or without looping is supported,
at varying frame rates and stride sizes. It is also possible
to single-step forward or backward one frame at a time,
or jump to an arbitrary frame in the sequence. Rock (RK)
cycles between playing the sequence forward then in reverse
order. Blink (BK) animates two adjacent frames that may be
separated by an arbitrary stride (step) size. A drop down list
shows a selectable playlist of active sequences currently loaded
by the user.

Figure 3 shows the KOLAM user interface along with
three subsystem tool interfaces. The KOLAM user interface
was designed so that user dialogs can be freely moved and
do not occupy a ﬁxed subregion of the main window area.
This maximizes the main window region available for motion
video visualization. This design choice is useful when multiple
monitors are available, in which case the entire display area
of the primary monitor can be devoted to visualization, and all
dialogs can be positioned on the other display devices in an appropriate user-preferred conﬁguration. Standard functionality
such as panning and zooming within large gigapixel imagery
is efﬁciently implemented to provide a smooth interaction
user experience. This enables rapid navigation to any region

290

C. KOLAM Tracking Interface

taking into account occlusions, similar to how assisted tracking
is done.
KOLAM-TS uses several different output processing modules for visualization as well as for performance assessment.
These modules allow us to combine ground truth centroids
and polygons, visibility/occlusion status, and tracker outputs
in a uniﬁed framework in order to assess tracker behavior
post-simulation. This combined information is visualized using
KOLAM. The block diagram in Figure 7 describes the overall
KOLAM-TS system.
KOLAM-TS has evolved over a period of time to accommodate a variety of trajectory ground truth and WAMI ﬁle
formats. It currently reads ground truth in XML (structured),
KOLAM (ﬂat ﬁle), iView (ﬂat ﬁle) formats. The initialization
of the tracker needs a parameter input ﬁle which also acts
as one of the inputs to the main harness/simulator module.
KOLAM-TS provides ﬂexibility by allowing the user to select
partial or complete input from any of the listed sources.
The XML structured format is produced by the MIT Layer
Annotation Tool [9] as output from ground truth annotation;
an example of the MIT LAT GUI is shown in Figure 6.
We transitioned from using only centroid information for the
target to using both polygon and centroid XML structured
tags in order to facilitate automatically restarting trackers
during performance testing with accurate, oriented and scaled
bounding-box information for the target (vehicle).

The assisted tracking interface in KOLAM is a versatile
GUI front-end that interfaces in an open architecture manner
to multiple tracking algorithms and allowing tracker speciﬁc
conﬁguration. These may be grouped as follows: (a) Tracker
properties: Creating instances for objects that need to be
tracked, selecting a tracker algorithm, switching between automatic (algorithm invocation) and manual (ground truth generation) tracking modes, and invoking the selected tracker on
a selected object. (b) Track properties: Setting track visibility,
color, and thickness; whether the display dynamically centers
itself on the current object, saving to and loading from an
archive of previously generated track data, and deleting data
for a particular object. Figure 5 shows the KOLAM tracker
interface providing real-time feedback via messages whenever
any of the above properties are modiﬁed, updating the user
about tracker initialization, and normal or abnormal tracker
termination.
III. KOLAM-TS M IDDLEWARE
The KOLAM-TrackingSimulator (KOLAM-TS) middleware provides a set of utilities and tools for creating, evaluating
and visualizing object trajectories for assisted tracking in
WAMI. KOLAM-TS automates the process of tracker algorithm performance testing and benchmarking, as a faster alternative compared to manual target reacquisition by restarting
the tracker on the exact frame where it fails, using the ground
truth information. The program is also used to determine
performance characteristics of a tracker. One key function is to
provide the tracker with an accurate template (bounding box)
of the object that is being tracked when restarts are needed by

Fig. 6. MIT Layer Annotation Tool [9] for ground truthing showing polygon
boundaries around several moving objects and the tracked vehicle highlighted
in green.

The MU-Harness component of KOLAM-TS shown in
Figure 7, outputs two main types of ﬁles – MATLAB ﬁles
needed for tracker performance evaluation as well as computing bounding box information helpful for static visualization,
and KOLAM track ﬁles for dynamic trajectory visualization.
A high level description of MU-Harness functionality is shown
in pseudocode form in Algorithm 1. There are three different
parser modules that are embedded within the MU-Harness.
The XML parser mainly extracts data from a structured XML
ﬁle format. It reads the object shape information represented
as a polygon and calculates the geometric center of the object
(i.e. centroid) using Simpson’s method. The other two parsers
within the MU-Harness are for reading visibility occlusion
status and for target initialization (non-oriented bounding
box and frame ﬁlename) from ﬂat ﬁles. In addition to the

Fig. 5.
KOLAM-Tracker interface for specifying tracking parameters:
manual vs automatic vs assisted tracking, type of tracker (i.e. LOFT), type of
trajectories to display (stabilized and unstabilized) and text feedback showing
the state of the automatic tracker.

291

parsers embedded within the MU-Harness, we also have ﬁve
different parsers for conversion between the different ﬁle
formats shown in purple in Figure 7. This gives us the freedom
to collect ground truth using a host of different tools. The
XML2KOLAM converter was mainly designed to facilitate the
visualization of polygons in KOLAM. The XML2iView and
iView2KOLAM essentially perform the same task but they do
not include the polygon information while outputting to the
KOLAM output trajectory format.
&$+ &%'

& '2 '2
%&"'
4"( !'

)# %! (""!#% (&" #%!#*

 

!# %$


 6 '( ($ !(( ')# # ,!+)$#

&-& '

-

These parsers were required to convert between and combine
different trajectory, meta-data and supporting information ﬁle
formats. The tools shown in Figure 7 all have their advantages
and disadvantages for collecting and managing ground truth information but output metadata in different formats. KOLAMTS needs to interface with all these formats in order for us
to be able to evaluate our tracking algorithm given multiple
ground truth sources and dataset formats. The need for a
standard format for ground truth has thus become essential in
order to effectively share data and results. We propose the use
of GTML, as an extension of the XML formats used in ViPERXML [4] and the MIT Layer Annotation Tool [9]. ViPER
and MIT LAT do not support wide-area imagery, ViPER does
not provide general polygon shape drawing and MIT LAT
does not support marking occlusions. GTML is still in its
nascent phase and currently incorporates occlusion status for
every frame, bounding polygon information as well as other
metadata. The GTML ﬁle can further interface with a database
for managing a large collection of experiments similar to the
ViSOR system [24]. Key-Length-Value (KLV) representation
established by the Society of Motion Picture and Television
Engineers (SMPTE) is an alternative to XML based metadata
that is being adapted by the MISB for WAMI and consists of a
16-byte SMPTE administered universal label (Key), followed
by length of the data (Length) then the payload of bytes
(Value). KLV coding is very efﬁcient for streaming and high
performance applications and is generally more backwards
compatible as metadata standards evolve [10].
Figure 8 shows the visualization of tracker produced segments (computed tracks in cyan) along with the ground truth
(target tracks) using KOLAM. The yellow trajectory shows
the stabilized ground truth or target track and the cyan
trajectory segments show the automated tracker output or
computed tracks. The marked area shows the location where
the tracker failed and was restarted by MU-Harness (Algorithm
1). KOLAM provides dynamic visualization of the trajectory
evolution compared to ground truth within the spatial context
of occlusions and scene complexity.

  
7 5 
 8

'(&( &"
!74(.(:8

 
'+!0)$#

7& ;498

&

!'

7 $!" $&"(8

&"
!74(.(:8

&$+#&+(
& !'
7- $&"(8


;&


 *#
##$()$#
$$!

 )
##$()$#5'
$$!


; 
 

!'

7  
 $&"(8


 ;-

 6 




; #&/

-; 


'
"'



!

!! #%
'+!0)$#

, $&"! & # 5 '+!0)$# $3 & & ,!+)$# !$-

Fig. 7. KOLAM-TS middleware system diagram with external interactions
showing the MU-Harness in cyan, track ﬁle conversion parsers (MATLAB
programs) in purple, the interactive tools in yellow, and the ﬂow of information
as directed edges.

Algorithm 1 MU-Harness (MATLAB)
Input: GT List // Centroids, polygons, start & end frame, etc.
Output: T rackList, BBoxList
1: //Initialize total number of tracker segments and target object
2: count ← 0, T arget = [ ]
3: for each (GT ∈ GT List) do
4:
f r ← GT.start f rame
5:
while (f r < GT.end f rame) do
6:
// Update Target information
7:
T arget.start f rame = f r
8:
T arget.start bbox = GT [f r].bbox
9:
// Start Tracker
10:
T rack ← Tracker(T arget)
11:
// Tracker returns when (f r > GT.end f rame) .OR.
12:
// (||T rack[f r].xy − GT [f r].xy|| > max dist)
13:
count ← count + 1
14:
T rackList[count] ← T rack
15:
BBoxList[count] ← T arget.start bbox
16:
f r ← T rack.end f rame + 1
17:
// Re-acquire target only when it is fully visible
18:
while ( (f r < GT.end f rame) .AND.
(GT [f r].visible == f alse) ) do
19:
fr ← fr + 1
20:
end while
21:
end while
22: end for

IV. C ONCLUSIONS
The KOLAM environment provides an integrated toolset
for: (i) interactive visualization of WAMI datasets (ii) manual
ground truth generation of moving and stationary objects
(iii) an efﬁcient assisted tracking mode to increase user productivity and (iv) KOLAM-TS to facilitate automated evaluation of tracking algorithms. KOLAM allows the user to
interactively step through and view tracked frames, compare
trajectories or segments with ground truth. KOLAM-TS uses
ground truth information to evaluate the tracker algorithm
performance and visualize the track segments, making it
convenient to view the image region in the failed frame and/or
the restarted frame for debugging and improving the tracker.
Together, these tools provide a comprehensive interface for visualization, evaluation and benchmarking of automated object
tracking performance versus manual ground truth in wide-area
motion imagery.

The need for multiple parsers (eight so far in the KOLAMTS) points out the beneﬁts of developing a common XMLbased Ground-truth Tracking Markup Language (GTML).

292

[3] N.P. Cuntoor, A. Basharat, A.G.A. Perera, and A. Hoogs. Track
initialization in low frame rate and low resolution videos. In Int. Conf.
Pattern Recognition, pages 3640–3644. IEEE, 2010.
[4] D. Doermann and D. Mihalcik. Tools and techniques for video performance evaluation. In 15th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognition, volume 4,
pages 167–170. http://viper-toolkit.sourceforge.net, 2000.
[5] A. F. Hasler, D. Chesters, M. Jentoft-Nilsen, and K. Palaniappan. High
performance animation of GOES weather images. In SPIE Proc. on
GOES-8 and Beyond, volume 2812, pages 80–83. 1996.
[6] A. F. Hasler, K. Palaniappan, M. Manyin, and J. Dodge. A high
performance interactive image spreadsheet (IISS). Computers in Physics,
8(4):325–342, 1994.
[7] Home Ofﬁce Scientiﬁc Development Branch. Imagery library for
intelligent detection systems i-LIDS. In IET Conf. Crime and Security,
pages 445–448. http://www.ilids.co.uk/, 2006.
[8] X. Jiangjian, C. Hui, H. Sawhney, and H. Feng. Vehicle detection and
tracking in wide ﬁeld-of-view aerial video. In IEEE Conf. Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 679 – 684, 2010.
[9] C. Liu, W.T. Freeman, E.H. Adelson, and Y. Weiss. Human-assisted
motion annotation. In IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. IEEE, 2008.
[10] NGA Motion Imagery Standards Board.
Proﬁle 2:
KLV
for
LVSD
Applications
(MISB
EG
0810.2).
http://www.gwg.nga.mil/misb/docs/eg/EG081002.pdf.
[11] A.T. Nghiem, F. Bremond, M. Thonnat, and V. Valentin. ETISEO:
Performance evaluation for video surveillance systems. In IEEE 5th
Int. Conf. Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance, 2007.
[12] Object Video.
Virtual Video Tool: A Half-Life 2 Mod.
http://development.objectvideo.com/.
[13] K. Palaniappan, F. Bunyak, P. Kumar, I. Ersoy, S. Jaeger, K. Ganguli,
A. Haridas, J. Fraser, R. Rao, and G. Seetharaman. Efﬁcient feature
extraction and likelihood fusion for vehicle tracking in low frame rate
airborne video. In 13th Int. Conf. Information Fusion, 2010.
[14] K. Palaniappan and J.B. Fraser. Multiresolution tiling for interactive
viewing of large datasets. In 17th Int. Conf. on Interactive Information
and Processing Systems (IIPS) for Meteorology, Oceanography and
Hydrology, pages 338–342. American Meteorological Society, 2001.
[15] K. Palaniappan, A.F. Hasler, J.B. Fraser, and M. Manyin. Network-based
visualization using the distributed image spreadsheet (DISS). In 17th
Int. Conf. on Interactive Information and Processing Systems (IIPS) for
Meteorology, Oceanography and Hydrology, pages 399–403, 2001.
[16] K. Palaniappan, R. Rao, and G. Seetharaman. Wide-area persistent
airborne video: Architecture and challenges. In B. Banhu, C. V.
Ravishankar, A. K. Roy-Chowdhury, H. Aghajan, and D. Terzopoulos,
editors, Distributed Video Sensor Networks: Research Challenges and
Future Directions, chapter 24, pages 349–371. Springer, 2011.
[17] R. Porter, A.M. Fraser, and D. Hush. Wide-area motion imagery. IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine, 27(5):56–65, 2010.
[18] F.Z. Qureshi and D. Terzopoulos. Surveillance camera scheduling: A
virtual vision approach. Multimedia Systems, 12(3):269–283, 2006.
[19] F.Z. Qureshi and D. Terzopoulos. Smart camera networks in virtual
reality. Proceedings IEEE, 96(10):1640–1656, 2008.
[20] S.K. Ralph, J. Irvine, M.R. Stevens, M. Snorrason, and D. Gwilt. Assessing the performance of an automated video ground truthing application.
In 33rd IEEE Workshop Applied Imagery Pattern Recognition, pages
202–207, 2004.
[21] S. Randall and J. Antonisse. The standard exchange of motion indicators
by image-based trackers. In Proc. SPIE on Geospatial InfoFusion
Systems and Solutions for Defense and Security Applications, volume
8053, 2011.
[22] V. Reilly, H. Idrees, and M. Shah. Detection and tracking of large
number of targets in wide area surveillance. In 11th European Conf.
Computer Vision, pages 186–199. Springer-Verlag, 2010.
[23] Jonathan C. Roberts. State of the Art: Coordinated & Multiple Views in
Exploratory Visualization. In Gennady Andrienko, Jonathan C. Roberts,
and Chris Weaver, editors, Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Coordinated & Multiple
Views in Exploratory Visualization, July 2007.
[24] R. Vezzani and R. Cucchiara. Annotation collection and online performance evaluation for video surveillance: The ViSOR project. In IEEE
5th Int. Conf. Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance (AVSS),
pages 227–234, 2008.

Fig. 8.
Visualization of tracking results (Car2, Philly) showing manual
ground truth (unstabilized in red and stabilized in yellow) and several
stabilized automatic tracker segments (in cyan). One location where MUHarness restarted the tracker after it failed is shown inside the white box
(detailed zoomed view in lower left inset). The red triangles mark the failed
frames.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The PSS database is a WAMI repository collected and
maintained by Persistent Surveillance Systems Inc. kindly
made available to us by Ross McNutt. Ilker Ersoy provided
feedback on improvements to KOLAM and KOLAM-TS and
worked on the tracking algorithms. Ariel Abrams-Kundan
and Koyeli Ganguli assisted with ground truth creation and
parts of KOLAM-TS middleware. This research was partially
supported by grants from the U.S. Air Force Research
Laboratory (AFRL) under agreement FA8750-11-1-0073
and Leonard Wood Institute (LWI 181223) in cooperation
with the U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL) under
Cooperative Agreement Number W911NF-07-2-0062. The
views and conclusions contained in this document are those
of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing
the ofﬁcial policies, either expressed or implied of AFRL,
LWI, ARL, or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government is
authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government
purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation thereon.
R EFERENCES
[1] Air Force Research Laboratory. Columbus Large Image Format (CLIF)
2007 dataset. https://www.sdms.afrl.af.mil/datasets/clif2007/.
[2] C.J. Carrano. Ultra-scale vehicle tracking in low spatial resolution
and low frame-rate overhead video. In O.E. Drummon and R. D.
Teichgraeber, editors, SPIE Proc. Signal and Data Processing of Small
Targets, volume 7445, 2009.

293

