2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

The Contemporisation of Dante’s Inferno
Jenefer Marquis and Theodor Wyeld
University of New South Wales and Flinders University
{sust.solutions@gmail.com, twyeld@gmail.com}
Abstract

psychopomp that facilitates entry into the afterlife, who
takes the soul to the gates of Hell; and, an angel who
ferries the soul to the shores of Purgatorio. Then, from
the peak of Mount Purgatory, the purified soul ascends
into the heavenly realms - that equates with the model of
the Medieval geocentric universe - eventually returning
to the state of beatification and into the presence of God.

This paper discusses the contemporisation of
Dante’s Inferno [1]. It attempts to highlight the role of
contemporary media in recasting this culturally
significant work in a new light. More accessible to the
current generation in the form of a computer game, the
contemporisation of Dante’s Inferno loses none of its
impact and meaning. More than this, the game facilitates
the search for a virtual soul-space previously reserved
only for those vested with the ‘given powers’ (in
Medieval times and prior). In this sense, the
contemporisation of the Inferno also brings with it much
of the mythological intensity it once sought.
Keywords--- Dante, Inferno, Game.

Dante’s Soul Space
The gravity of human vice and virtue in Medieval
Christian theology shaped the topography of what
Wertheim [2] calls ‘soul-space’. Towards the end of the
Gothic era, Dante’s [3] La Divina Commedia (The
Divine Comedy) mapped the three kingdoms of Christian
metaphysical reality: Paradisio, Purgatorio, and Inferno
(Paradise, Purgatory, and Hell) in a virtual soul space
that could be visited on its reading – at least in one’s
imagination. The gateway or portal to the three realms he
maps out is death. Dante’s entry to the afterlife is to
embark on an allegorical, archetypal quest of the
Christian soul's return to God.
But Dante’s Divine Comedy is much more than this.
It is seen by many as the culmination of the medieval
worldview developed by the Western church in the
thirteenth Century [5]. This worldview did not
distinguish between physical reality and the reality of the
soul as two distinctive spaces. It reflected a medieval
geocentric (heaven above and hell below) cosmology:
"Heaven was co-incident with the celestial realm,
metaphorically surrounding and enveloping mankind in
an ethereal embrace" [2, p53]. Hell was in the bowels of
the Earth, and Purgatory was still attached to the Earthly
plane but stretched up towards the Heavens, providing a
bridge between the two realms.
Dante’s travels through each realm was
accompanied by his guide Virgil; there is a demon
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.97

Figure 1. La Commedia Illumina Firenze.
Domenico di Michelino (1417-1491) [4].
Regular Christians could never expect to enter any
of the ten levels of Heaven immediately after death as
this sanctified state was reserved for saints and martyrs
only. Instead, Purgatorio was a transitory space or state
on the way to Paradisio. Inferno was forever. Depending
on the severity of the soul's sin, incarceration on one of
the series of descending levels in the pit of Hell denoted
the torment that the soul would endure for all eternity.
The Gate of Hell is the portal to the subterranean realm
with Satan situated at the centre of the Earth.
Dante’s topography of the Medieval Christian
afterlife is thus a vertical axis crossed by approximately
fifteen horizontal axes with various portals or gateways
into the soul space. The ascension of Dante and Virgil
from the darkest depths of Inferno to the highest light of
the heavenly realms parallels the metaphorical polarities
and oppositions of up/down, light/dark, good/evil,
heaven/hell, heavy/light – mapping out a multi585

dimensional space. Until, in the final canticle of Inferno,
he describes his and Virgil’s emergence from the
subterranean metaphysical reality:
By that hidden way
my guide and I did enter, to return
To the fair world: and heedless of repose
We climbed, he first, I following his steps,
Till on our view the beautiful lights of heaven
Dawn'd through a circular opening in the cave:
Thence issuing we again beheld the stars. (Inferno
Canto XXXIV [3, pp126-133])

the power of Death to absolve and redeem hapless souls
on his epic quest. Hence, 21st century Dante is no
passive observer of metaphysical revelation. He is a
warrior of impeccable integrity and moral purpose who
navigates the multi-levelled topographies of the
underworld, eventually redeeming his lost love from the
very grasp of Satan himself. Dante, as an avatar, also has
the capability of returning to the physical realm, unlike
his original medieval souls who remained eternally
damned.
In contemporary society, Dante’s Inferno, as a game,
sees the shift in metaphysical grounding of Christian
values that once produced a symbolism by which a
culture navigated moral and ethical challenges [7]. In the
contemporary version, self-responsibility and self
determination enable the transcendence of the avatar,
Dante, into demi-godlike status. It denotes the possibility
of a return of superhuman powers to the merely mortal
human aspirant. These more-than-human sensibilities
and powers are the driving forces behind the motivation
to play the game.
Feedback from gamers describes Dante's Inferno as
being 'heavy', 'full-on' and 'unrelenting'. Nine levels of
constant battling with the forces of the underworld,
human vice and sin still has an impact. The metaphorical
conquest of Death and the vanquishment of Satan, within
the virtual Inferno, affects the course of contemporary
metaphysical reality by changing the rules of the quest
and introducing iterations that would have been
considered blasphemous to thirteenth century Dante. Yet,
the results of these expanded parameters enable the
liberation of numerous souls and the avatar from eternal
incarceration in hell.
The contemporisation of the affects of Dante’s poem
have rendered them largely unchanged. The
ethnographer of mythologies, Eliade [8, p57], describes
the powers of navigation through metaphysical realms
and easy communication with the 'gods' during
mythological human history reflected a "nostalgia for
Paradise… [and] a regression into the mythical time of
the Paradise lost". Where once the ‘paradisiac myth’ in
which humankind travelled into the realms of the
immortal gods and communicated with them face to face,
this was replaced after the mythical 'Fall' – (from
religious following or faith) by increasing distance,
spatially and temporally – from the metaphysical
kingdoms of the overworlds and underworlds and
decreasing communications with their more-than-human
inhabitants. Today, these more-than-humans are the
avatars standing in for gamers in games based on
medieval mythology.
Eliade's [8] distinction between the physical reality
of everyday living as being ‘profane space’ and that of
the metaphysical realms as ‘sacred space’, where the
normal laws of physics are suspended, also describe two
existential modes. This is highlighted in changing
perceptions of space and views of reality. In Crary's [9]
'genealogy of attention' and it's role in the modernization
of subjectivity, the privileging of visuality and the
'capturing of attention' during the age of empiricism has

Dante’s Inferno – the Game
The story of Dante’s multileveled world of the soul
has evolved through many incarnations over time (in
literature, sculpture, music, the fine arts, cinema,
multimedia and computer games). Of interest here is the
interactive computer game: Dante's Inferno [6]. In a
similar manner to Dante's experiences of a 13th century
metaphysical 'walkthrough' of Inferno, it is possible to
experience its 21st century equivalent in the form of a
virtual 'walkthrough' of the nine levels of Dante’s Hell.
The goal is to pass through successfully in order to save
Beatrice (who was abducted by demons) from Lucifer's
grasp. Thus, the topographies of 'soul space' [2] can now
be navigated not entirely through one’s imagination but
interactively as a cyberspatial experience. Gamers
manoeuvre through virtual space in the form of an avatar
version of Dante. Various blogsites are available online
to explain the degrees of 'infernal difficulty', cheats and
codes for (amongst others) 'auto-absolve', 'holy crossattacks', and 'divine armour'.

Figure 2. Screenshot from 'Dante's Inferno'
Xbox360 game [6].
Despite the shift in technology, Dante’s Christian
symbolism remains. Its moral and ethical dilemmas
endure as gamers descend through the levels to be faced
with increasing challenges to physical and spiritual
transcendence.
Christian cultural mythology has endured the seven
centuries separating Dante’s original poem from its
contemporary, interactive, version. However, the
interactive version of Dante's Inferno bears witness to the
development of cultural thought as, unlike the Medieval
poem, in the game it is possible for Dante to defeat
Death and, taking his scythe into the levels of Hell, use

586

superhuman powers. Hence, ‘cyber-imagination’, as
Wertheim [2] calls it, shapes a virtual world within
which the metaphysical forces of sacred space have the
capacity to be as powerful as those of a physical reality.
This is evident in the contemporisation of Dante’s
Inferno as a computer game and espoused by those who
play it and existentially claim those powers.

resulted in a fixation on the physical process and
production dominated by the visual. This is no more so
pronounced than in the interactive computer game – with
its simple keyboard, mouse and screen.
Within the gaming culture, the interface is the
threshold, the boundary, in the journey from profane to
sacred space. The avatar transcends the profane world
through the portal, creating a new and constantly
changing territory that is “qualitatively distinct from the
surrounding milieu” [8, p12].
Twenty-first century Dante navigates multiple
iterations of metaphysical reality, communicating with
superhuman beings. As the avatar moves from plane to
plane, it becomes apparent that the 'sacred' space is
actually a state of numinosity – induced by the revelation
of an aspect of divine power [8] – from which he draws
forces equivalent to powers that are divine-like or
‘wholly other’.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

Dissolution
Whether the reality is virtual or physical, the
‘irruption of the sacred’ [2] in the game Dante’s Inferno
creates a portal of communication between cosmic
planes – heaven, earth, and the underworld – creating the
possibility of passage from one state to another and the
navigation of otherworldly realms, albeit virtual. In this
sense, the cyberspace of the game can be thought of as
the modern equivalent of the mystic or shamanic
experience: a movement outside conventional physical
laws where the aspirant or initiate dreams themselves as
something greater than mere reality allows and creates

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

587

Alghieri, D. The Vision: or Hell, Purgatory, and
Paradise of Dante Alighieri. Transl. by The Rev. Henry
R. Cary (1844). London: Frederick Warne and Co.
Wertheim, M. (1999) The Pearly Gates of Cyberspace: A
History of Space From Dante to the Internet. New York:
W.W. Norton & Company.
Alghieri, D. The Divine Comedy. Transl. by C.H. Sisson
(1993) Oxford: Oxford University Press
Web Gallery of Art, online, http://www.wga.hu/framese.html?/html/d/domenico/michelin/dante.html,
23-042011
Russell, J.B. (1997) A History of Heaven: The Singing
Silence. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Dante's Inferno Game Official Site, Visceral Games,
Electronic Arts, www.dantesinferno.com, 23-04-2011
Geertz, C. (1973) The Interpretation of Cultures. New
York : Basic books
Eliade, M. (1959) The Sacred and The Profane: The
Nature of Religion. London : Harcourt Brace
Crary, J. (1999) Suspensions of Perception: Attention,
Spectacle and Modern Culture. Camb. Mass: MIT Press

