2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Visualizing Service Contracts – The Case of an Equipment Manufacturer
Katri Rekola, Ph. D. (Econ.), M. Sc. (Tech.)
Rekola Design, Finland
Kerttuli Boucht, M. Sc. (Tech)
Bredantie 34 b, 02700 Helsinki, Finland
processes, and the emphasis of the business model
changes from transaction- to relationship-based. [15] In
addition, recent organizational, economic, and legal
research shows the importance of contracts for inter-firm
relationships [2]. Does this mean that as well as
becoming
more
service-oriented
manufacturing
companies should increase their contracting capabilities
and legal expertise? In practice, legal matters are often
left to legal professionals for various reasons. Recently,
legal visualization has emerged as a new research field
and a potential tool to increase interest in contracts
among non-lawyers.

Abstract
This paper presents the case of an industrial
equipment manufacturer facing the challenge of selling
services. The main source for confusion was the
complexity of the services and the multiplicity of options
offered to the customers. It was hard to have a clear
picture of what entitlements or responsibilities followed
from the choices, and draft a contract accordingly. The
company decided to try visualization to facilitate
communication and to clarify the service content. The
experiment provided valuable insight into the
possibilities and limitations of contract visualization in
the context of industrial service contracts. The conclusion
was that visuals can help but are not the answer to all
communication problems. It is for example essential to fit
the visual content to the targeted audience and to make
sure that the text that is going to be visualized is
understood correctly in the first place.

In this paper we describe the way towards what
might one day become 'contract visualization', the
challenges encountered along the way, and the lessons
learned. We present the case of an equipment
manufacturer trying to sell more and better services with
the aid of service contract visualization. To provide
background for the case, we first discuss the role of
contracts and contracting capabilities in manufacturing
companies, and explore the potential of visualization.

1. Introduction
2. Goals and Methods
The shift from products towards services with the
‘servitization’ [29] of the manufacturing industry has
made it necessary to find new ways to cope with the
situation, for example through adopting a servicedominant logic which means a more service-oriented way
of thinking and operating [30], or service productization
which means giving services product-like features [18,
19, 20]. The transition from product manufacturer into
service provider constitutes a major managerial
challenge. Manufacturing companies must learn to value
services and how to sell, deliver and bill them. Services
require new organizational principles, structures, and
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.35

The case study was conducted in spring/summer
2010 in a globally operating equipment manufacturing
company in Finland. The case provides insights into legal
visualization in practice in the context of service
contracts: what works, what does not, and what the
challenges are. Obviously, one case study does not
provide sufficient grounds for generalization of the
conclusions. However, the goal of this paper is to initiate
a discussion on service contract visualization and its
potential benefits, pitfalls, and challenges.
359

First, to provide background for the case study, we
discuss the role of contracts and the possibilities of
visualization based on literature and present qualitative
findings from 21 interviews in 4 companies that are good
representatives of globally operating manufacturing
companies with different levels of service focus. Those
interviewed were different professionals that come into
contact with contracts in their daily work. They were
asked about contracting practices and potential ways to
enhance the contracting process, including visualization.
We conclude the paper with a discussion on the topic of
contract visualization, initial conclusions based on the
case as well as remarks on future research.

management, organization studies, human-computer
interaction, diagram research, anthropology, small group
research,
cognitive
psychology,
information
visualization, design studies, and architecture [10]. Legal
visualization research has its origins in Central European
legal informatics [7] and the doctoral thesis by C. R.
Brunschwig on “Visualization of Legal Norms” [6].
Existing literature outside Europe addresses cognitive
and linguistic reasons for common difficulties in
comprehending law focusing on pedagogical aspects, but
does not address business relationships [23]. In the U.S.,
research on legal visualization mainly relates to using
visualization in court [12, 13, 27]. Some articles on
contract visualization have been published in professional
publications [21].

3. Background

A visual perspective on collaboration offers
tremendous potential even for areas where drawings do
not necessarily represent tangible objects, like strategic
planning or process management [10]. Visualization has
been successfully used to make understanding easier and
to combat information overload [9]. Words can have
different meanings to different people, even if they are
supposedly speaking the same language. Visuals don’t
necessarily depend on the language and can help
communication in global contexts and between people
with different backgrounds [22]. In their framework,
Eppler and Platts [11] emphasize a process view of
visualization: the actual act of visualizing rather than the
final outcome is the vital sense-making activity. Their
framework also stresses the situated use of visualization
that is targeted to a specific content, step or goal, and
benefit. Used in this systematic way, visualization can
become a powerful, analytic business language [11].

Our interviews support the view that many nonlawyers consider contracts a real pain and prefer to leave
all law-related matters to legal professionals. Contracts
are seen as risk management tools that are needed if
something goes wrong. Few consider contracts
management tools that work as road maps for business
relationships. One reason might be that contracts contain
concepts and language that non-lawyers can find
incomprehensible. However, the complicated language of
law is seldom the fundamental reason for a reluctance to
deal with legal matters; non-lawyers just do not see why
they should be bothered. After all, a business
organization has specialized experts, including legal
professionals, for a reason. Non-lawyers need a valid
incentive to add legal understanding to their expertise.
Research suggests that law [4, 25] and contracts
[26], can add value to an organization, and emphasizes
the importance of legal astuteness for managers [3] as
well as legal knowledge as a company's capability [25].
Crafting business contracts requires both subject matter
and legal expertise. Argyres and Mayer [1] show that
much of the knowledge needed to craft successful
contracts resides in managers and engineers, rather than
legal professionals. These economic implications of good
contracting capabilities might provide non-lawyers with a
reason to not ignore contracts. Could something be done
to further facilitate this change in behavior and make
contracts more usable in practice? Can for example
visualization techniques be of use here?

Our interviews show that there are some road blocks
in the way of contract visualization. In the words of an
interviewed sales manager: 'Contracts are much too
important and serious to be visualized. Are we supposed
to draw pictures in them?' The danger is that if contracts
are too visual they do not seem official any more to those
used to lengthy legal text. There are also cultural
differences in how contracts are regarded. Global
business requires contracts that are accepted globally, and
too much visualization might get a negative reaction from
potential business partners. Offering a visual contract
might seem like not taking the deal seriously or not
respecting the ability of the other party to understand
contract language. Visualization is a tool that has to be
approached with caution.

Using images as part of a collaborative
conversation seems to be a practice that is both rich in
practical relevance and in unresolved research questions
[10]. Research on visualization is fragmented and needs
to be collected from many fields such as knowledge

Bresciani and Eppler [5] note that despite the
notable number of publications on the benefits of using
visualization in a variety of fields, few studies have so far
investigated the possible pitfalls of graphic depictions
used for communication or reasoning, even though there

360

services, to sell more services better. The goal is to make
selling service contracts or add-on modules to service
contracts safer and easier and to facilitate conflict
resolution, collaboration, and communication, both
internally and with customers. The service offering is
modularized and packaged into products according to the
principles of service productization. One of the sources
of confusion is trying to make sense of what follows
when customers make choices between available options
in the service products: what is it that they are actually
entitled to and what that means to the service delivery
organization.

are several caveats that need to be considered in the
application of visualization [11]. They provide valuable
insights into the pitfalls of graphic representations [5]:
i.e. the cause of a visualization disadvantage can be the
designer(s) or the user(s) and their interpretation [28].
The effect of visualization drawbacks can be classified
for example into cognitive, emotional, and social effects
[8, 24, 5].
The way people understand visual images is
embedded in their cultural and professional backgrounds.
If visuals differ from the generally understood forms,
icons, and symbols, the practical purpose of visualization
is defeated. Instead of demystifying, it will create more
complexity. Even though icons, unlike symbols that are
based on a general agreement of their meaning, are based
on images of concrete objects, even they can be
misleading if one does not have the right background.
For example the image of a computer disc used to mean
‘save’ has no meaning as such for those who have never
come into contact with one. [22]

Visualization comes up as one possible way to
clarify the contracts and the entitlement dilemma. The
idea is to create for example flowcharts as a
complementary element to the text – no way as a
replacement to the contract text – and to clarify the main
elements of a service contract in a more simple chart and
the details in separate charts. The goal is to first create a
visual sales tool to help explain the service content to
customers and eventually somehow make it easy to
connect corresponding contract modules and service
modules thus facilitating crafting better contracts faster
and with better results. Here, better is understood to mean
more manageable and more understandable, indeed
contracts that would possibly have the potential to work
as some kind of road maps for the service relationship.
Another goal is to facilitate communicating the content of
the contracts to all concerned. So far, so good, the goal
has been agreed on. Or has it?

The challenge is to use visuals in a way that
removes complexity instead of adding confusion. It is
most likely impossible to create a visual language that
would immediately be understood by all without any
additional information. When visualizing contracts an
important guideline is to first understand the context and
the people that are going to need to understand the
information we plan to visualize. [21]
To be able to fully benefit from contract
visualization we need to learn another skill in addition to
contract literacy: visual literacy. Learning to read and
write using visuals, being visually literate, enables us to
communicate accurately and appreciate and accept
diversity of culture and visual expression [16]. Visual
literacy which has been widely ignored as a concept [17]
can be defined as the learned ability to interpret visual
messages accurately and to create such messages [14].

The first misunderstanding concerns the concept of
a contract. Is it a legal document including all appendices
etc? After much discussion it appears that with a service
contract the company representatives mean the
productized service product: a package of service
modules with some options for the customer to customize
the service product for their particular requirements. The
'legal stuff' should be left alone and visualization applied
to the service description and related documents with the
goal of making it easier to craft the final contract
document by putting together the customer's choices
(mostly affecting the service description) and the 'legal
stuff', meaning terms and conditions, limitations of
liability etc.

4. The Case

The visualization team sets to work, armed with
contract templates (80 pages), appendices, service
descriptions, and product specifications. Many of the
internal documents are already visual: flowcharts are
used to describe the service process including everything
the service personnel is supposed to do. However, these
documents are not to be shown to the customers since
they contain a lot of information that is irrelevant to
them. Tables and matrices are used to describe the service

The case company is a high-technology machine
manufacturer with worldwide business activities and
representation in more than 130 countries. Its strengths
are leading technological expertise in three primary areas
and insight into customer processes. The company has
44,000 employees and sales of approximately EUR 8
billion (2009). It has successfully embraced the
servitization challenge with open arms and is now trying
to do even better: to sell more services, to sell better
361

content, outcomes, and deliverables. The first task is to
understand the service products in order to be able to
visualize them. And here comes the first really major
problem. In spite of their prior knowledge and experience
of the company and its products as well as extensive
engineering expertise, the visualization team is
completely puzzled by a couple of sentences in the
descriptions. Reading through all the available
documents does not help, this is just something
'everybody knows'. After several false interpretations
they finally get it (almost) right – but not quite, as it turns
out after the visual tool has been finalized.

The third lesson is that the process of visualization
can be much more useful than the final visualized result.
To create meaningful visuals the visualizers need to truly
understand the text they are visualizing and analyze its
meaning. Thus the process can lead to for example new
understanding of what a service contract should include
or how the service process could be improved. Visuals
can be effective communication tools especially when
language fails, as was sometimes the case here. Drawing
things can clarify thought processes and thus promote
understanding and communicating that understanding to
others.

The result of the visualization effort is a
combination of drawings, charts, text, and photographs
that describes the service process. The 'legal stuff' comes
in as connections to another document that contains 'legal
alerts', as in contractual matters that concern certain
actions in the service process, for example the
responsibilities and accountabilities of the customer and
what happens if those are not fulfilled satisfactorily.
There are also different views of the visual document,
some to be used internally and some to be shown to
customers.

The fourth lesson is that it is still unclear what
contract visualization actually means and should mean in
practice. At one point the visualization team considered
turning the actual contract text into a flowchart but in the
end that did not seem to add clarity. Some things just
need to be spelled out and putting text in boxes that are
connected to each other by arrows does not necessarily
help. The idea of using an 80-page document as a
practical management tool in its entirety is slightly
absurd; different groups need different parts of the
contract and for example service descriptions – in many
cases including flowcharts and service level graphs - are
already used to guide the service process.

5. Discussion

Finally, the case supports the belief that attitudes
need to change a lot before non-lawyers start reading
contracts and finding them even remotely interesting or
useful in practice. No legal professionals participated in
the visualization project. The consensus among all
participants was that it was best to leave legal matters to
lawyers and get on with real business without them; the
best contract being the kind of contract that never needed
to be looked at after signing.

What can we learn from the visualization
experiment? The first lesson is that to construct a
meaningful visualization of a text one first needs to really
understand the message of that text. Before text can be
visualized successfully it has to be clear and
understandable. In this case one reason for the unclear
text was probably that the documents had been written by
multilingual teams whose first language was not English.
Another reason was that the documents described
something that the service engineers and sales people
were very familiar with, and consequently did not need to
read any documents to know what was to be done.

If we assume that non-lawyers in a business
organization should adopt a new mindset towards
contracts, the question is how to motivate them. All
experts have their own professional pride and if someone
– in this case a lawyer – comes up and suggests that they
are somehow lacking – in this case lacking legal
understanding – that is bound to lead to immense
resistance. Most business professionals need a reason that
can be translated into money to be convinced. The
argument that increased legal understanding promotes
better business and successful long-term business
relationships could be a valid reason. Visualization can
help communication and make contracts less off-putting
for visual thinkers and could thus be one way to promote
an increased interest in contracts. In a global company
visuals might serve as the common language that all
understand, if created with care and an understanding of
the company and its employees. However, it is necessary
to keep in mind that in a business organization also non-

The second lesson is that it is essential to consider
and understand the target audience and the goal of
visualization. The engineers liked the idea of showing
service levels in graph form and were of course very
familiar with flowcharts but found the simplest form of
the sales tool too simple. After all, the buyers are mostly
also engineers and can be insulted if their ability to
understand complex matters in relation to a product they
know well is put to question. If, on the other hand, the
goal is to illustrate marketing material, the visualization
needs are very different.

362

4.

lawyers are experts in their own fields and in no way
illiterate or intellectually challenged and can be insulted
if their ability to understand contracts is automatically
put to question.

Bird, R. C. [2010]. The many futures of legal strategy, American Business Law

Journal, 47, pp. 575-586.
5.

Bresciani S. and Eppler M. [2009]. The Risks of Visualization: a Classification of

Disadvantages Associated with Graphic Representations of Information. In: Schulz, P.J.,
Hartung, U., Keller, S. (Eds.), Identität und Vielfalt der Kommunikations-wissenschaft, UVK
Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Konstanz (Germany).
6.

6. Conclusions and Further Research

Brunschwig, C. R. [2001]. Visualisierung von Rechtsnormen – Legal design

[Visualization of legal norms]. Doctoral Thesis. Zürcher Studien zur Rechtsgeschichte, Vol. 45.
Rechtswissenschaftliche Fakultät d. Universität Zürich. Schulthess Juristische Medien, Zürich.
7.

Brunschwig, C. R. [2006], Visualising legal information: Mind maps and E-

government, Electronic Government, an International Journal, 3, pp. 386–403.

The goal of this paper was to provide material for
further discussion on the topic of legal and contract
visualization. As a starting point, we offer five points
based on conclusions drawn from the case as well as the
interviews and literature review: (1) The ultimate goal
should be a clear message, whether textual or visual, (2)
You should make sure you understand what you are
visualizing, to what purpose and to what audience, (3)
The process of visualization can be more useful than the
final result, (4) Much research into what contract
visualization means in practice is still needed, and (5)
Increasing the legal expertise of non-lawyers entails a
huge attitude change. Admittedly, the paper would have
benefited from the inclusion of concrete examples of the
created visual tools. However, the case company did not
agree to have the results published and altering the
visuals enough to satisfy their wishes would have
defeated the purpose of providing a concrete example.

8.

Buergi, P. and Roos, J. [2003]. Images of strategy.

European Management

Journal 21(1), pp. 69-78.
9.

Eppler, M. J. and Mengis, J. [2004]. The concept of information overload: A

review of literature from organization science, marketing, accounting, MIS, and related
disciplines. The Information Society - an International Journal, 20, 5, pp. 1-20.
10.

Eppler, M. J. [2007]. Toward a visual turn in collaboration analysis ?, Building

Research & Information, 35, pp. 584-587.
11.

Eppler, M. J.

and Platts [2009]. Visual strategizing The systematic use of

visualization in the strategic-planning process, Long Range Planning, 42, pp. 42-74.
12.

Feigenson, N. and Dunn, M.A.

[2003]. New visual technologies in court:

Directions for research, Law and Human Behavior, 27, pp. 109–126.
13.

Feigenson, N. and

Spiesel, C.

[2009]. Law on Display. The digital

transformation of legal persuasion and judgment. New York [USA], New York University
Press.
14.

Further research into legal and contract visualization
should be constructive of nature and geared towards more
practical applications in business contexts, including the
concrete analysis of the visuals created during the
research. It is necessary to turn theory into practice, in a
way that can actually benefit real business organizations
in the real world. A question that needs further research is
whether it is necessary to increase legal knowledge
among non-lawyers and to what extent - and how to
overcome the resistance that gets in the way of adopting a
new mindset.

Heinich, R., Molenda, M. and Russell, J. [1982] Instructional media and the new

technologies of instruction. John Wiley, New York .
15.

Oliva, R. and Kallenberg, R. [2003]. Managing the transition from products to

services. International Journal of Service Industry Management, Vol. 14(2), pp. 160-172.
16.

Pettersson, R. [2009] Visual literacy and message design’, TechTrends, Vol. 53,

No. 2, March/April, pp. 38–40.
17.

Rezabek, L.L. [2004] ‘Why visual literacy: Consciousness and convention’,

TechTrends, Vol. 49, No. 3, pp. 19–20.
18.

Rekola, K. [2007a] Service design as a basis for successful contracting,

Contracting

Excellence,

December.

[Online]

Available

at:

http://www.iaccm.com//contractingexcellence.php?storyid=374.
19.

7. References
1.

Rekola, K. [2007b] Service design as a basis for successful commercial

contracting, IACCM EMEA Conference proceedings.

Argyres, N. and Mayer, K. J. [2004]. Learning to contract: Evidence from the

20.

personal computer iIndustry, Organization Science, 15, pp. 394–410.

Rekola, K. [2008] Service design as a basis for successful commercial

contracting in Corporate contracting capabilities; Conference proceeding and other writings,
Joensuun yliopisto.

2.

Argyres, N. and Mayer, K. J. [2007]. Contract design as a firm capability: An

integration of learning and transaction cost perspectives, Academy of Management Review, 32,

21.

pp. 1060-1077.

Rekola, K. and Haapio, H.

[2009]. Better business through proactive

productization and visualization of contracts. Contracting Excellence, June/July, pp. 17–19.
Available at http://www.iaccm.com/userfiles/file/CE_2_5_press_C2 [1].pdf

3.

Bagley, C. E. [2008]. Winning legally: The value of legal astuteness, Academy

of Management Review, 33, pp. 378–390.

363

22.

Rekola, K. and Haapio, H. [2011] Proactive contracting + service design =

success! International Journal of Services, Economics and Management, forthcoming
23.

Robinson, P. [2009]. Graphic and symbolic representation of law: Lessons from

cross-disciplinary research, Murdoch university electronic journal of law, 16, 1, pp. 53-83.
24.

Roos, J., V. Bart, et al. [2004]. Playing seriously with strategy, Long range

planning 37, pp. 549-568.
25.

Roquilly, C. [2010], From legal monitoring to legal core competency: How to

integrate the legal dimension into strategic management. In Legal Strategies: How Corporations
Use Law to Improve Performance, edited by A. Masson and M. J. Shariff. Berlin Heidelberg:
Springer.
26.

Siedel, G. J. and Haapio, H.

[2010]. Using proactive law for competitive

advantage, 47 American Business Law Journal, 4, pp. 641–686.
27.

Taiti, D. [2007]. Rethinking the role of the image in justice: Visual evidence and

science in the trial process, Law, Probability and Risk, 6, pp. 311–318.
28.

Tufte, E. R. [1986]. The visual display of quantitative information. Cheshire,

Connecticut, Graphic Press.
29.

Vandermerwe, S. and Rada, J. [1988] ‘Servitization of business: Adding value by

adding services’, European Management Journal, Vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 314–324.
30.

Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. [2004] Evolving into a new dominant logic for

marketing, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 1–17.

364

