2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Moving from Folksonomies to Taxonomies:
Using the Social Web and 3D to Build an Unlimited Semantic Ontology

Konstantinos Gkoutzis

Vladimir Geroimenko

Faculty of Science and Technology
University of Plymouth
Plymouth, United Kingdom
konstantinos.gkoutzis@plymouth.ac.uk

Faculty of Arts
University of Plymouth
Plymouth, United Kingdom
vladimir.geroimenko@plymouth.ac.uk

called Ontologies [2]. This will gradually create a common
ground for all topics, making information sharing easier and
more automated.
Social Networks can benefit from the use of Semantic
Ontologies to improve their simple, yet unsophisticated,
method of tagging which is based on keywords rather than
logical concepts. Adding Semantics may require more time
than plain old word tagging, but the long-term gains can
prove to be profitable in the quality of search results and in
data categorisation.
With the number of 3D-based virtual communities
increasing every day, both for Social and Gaming worlds,
combining all the aforementioned technologies can result
into a powerful online tool which will offer ease of use and
meaningful search results [3].

Abstract—The Semantic Web was introduced in 1999 as a
method of interrelating information to help computers derive
conclusions based on the links between data. With the rising
popularity of Social Networks though, unconnected pieces of
information have only chaotically increased instead of
becoming parts of well-organised Taxonomies.
In this paper, we suggest a system which will take advantage of
the Social Web and put it to work so that it will operate under
the common cause of categorising old and new data into an
unlimited Semantic Ontology. This ontology will be created
gradually and ever-changing, like a versatile encyclopaedia of
information compiled from interconnected data. With the
addition of a 3D Web interface on top of the ontology
management mechanisms, the entire experience will become
more user friendly, providing graphical presentation of all
opinions and interpretations in a clear and comparable
manner.

II.

Keywords-semantic web; social networks; 3d; information
visualisation; knowledge management

I.

INTRODUCTION

We live in the Information Era, where knowledge is
everything and everywhere. The proper management of
knowledge presupposes the existence of mechanisms for
organising information, in order to match the appropriate
pieces together. When the Internet came along, it offered
users the ability of having access to many different types of
electronic data. Unfortunately, these data are still mostly
uncategorised and the human mind simply cannot absorb and
process the increasingly huge amount of information
available. This is the reason why computers are utilised to
gather and present information in a more streamlined
manner, so that people are able to browse through the
findings in a faster and more efficient way.
XML and all the technologies that are based on it, like
the Semantic Web [1], provide the facilities for electronic
devices, even of a different nature, to communicate with
each other and exchange data in a commonly acceptable
way. This is really useful, especially when it comes to
making machines responsible for information gathering and
the delivery of coherent results which a human can
understand and rely upon. The Semantic Web is already
trying to organise information into standardised structures

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.77

BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

At the original proposal of the World Wide Web in 1989
[4], most could not predict that it would become as
widespread as it eventually did. Despite initial expectations,
the Web has turned into a killer app of the Internet, gradually
taking over the roles of other applications like E-mail,
Usenet Newsgroups and IRC.
While the number of websites and webpages kept rising,
it became impossible for a human to memorise all the
available Web addresses or manually search through online
data for specific information. That is the reason why Search
Engines were invented, aiming to provide faster searching
through a large amount of webpages based on requested
keywords. After many attempts, and a variety of algorithms
for page ranking, new age Search Engines are beginning to
adopt the Semantic Ontology model to categorise their data
in order to provide faster and more relevant results.
A. Search Engines and the Semantic Web
Computers are programmed by people to respond in a
predefined way to specific actions. Artificial intelligence
scientists have made several attempts to make computers
come up with original ideas but, up to this point, it has not
been achieved. Given the fact that computer applications can
only follow the rules programmed into them (or the rules that
those rules produce), they cannot yet cross the line from
computing to improvising.
Since Search Engines are computer applications too, their
search results are bound to be calculated and precise, based
205

Near the end of the 1990s, users started calling their
personal websites “blogs”, a contraction of the words “Web”
and “log”, leading to the creation of a new trend in the Web
culture [11]. This eventually lead to the creation of the first
“online social networks” in the early 2000s, a term also
popularised as “Web 2.0” by Tim O’Reilly of O’Reilly
Media [12]. Social networks reused all the well-known
technologies of the Web but, instead of offering free Web
space, they prompted users to upload all their information
and material inside a standardised personal profile page.
Friendster, MySpace, Facebook, LinkedIn and other well
known Social Web giants became increasingly popular
because they responded to the need of people to keep in
touch with their friends or acquaintances and participate into
activities together, like groups or games. Many companies,
like YouTube, Flickr, Delicious and others, followed the
Social paradigm by adding mechanisms to increase
community participation and cooperation.
What all of the above websites have in common is that
they categorise their data by using Folksonomies. This term
was coined up around 2004 [13] from the words folks and
taxonomy and basically defines the method of using
keywords to describe the content of a data object. Blog
articles, images, video and sound files stored all over the
Web have been annotated using the words that uploaders
chose to describe their data. Those words might or might not
be related to the content, depending on the perception (or
mood) of each uploader. It may be an extremely fast way to
annotate data but, due to the lack of standards, many tags are
vague, misspelled or simply wrong.
When the Social Web eventually merges with the
Semantic Web, the users will be the first to benefit because,
after the Semantics have been agreed upon, data sharing will
be seamless and instant. It may take longer to annotate data
than plain old keywords, but visualisation techniques can be
used to speed up the process.

on mathematical formulae for text searching. This way,
results may match the given words or phrases, but the
meaning is totally lost. A search for the word “apple” will
return many links to webpages and pictures of apple trees, as
well as Apple computers, among a lot of other things.
Researchers suggest [5] that in the circumstance of the
results being too many, users usually go through the first few
pages and then either accept what they found as the truth or
just give up.
The most practical method to deal with this problem is to
help the computer “understand” what each piece of
information “means”, by using the relations between
interconnected objects. The Semantic Web project is trying
to address this issue by grouping information into
Ontologies, which are logically organised datasets, a formal
and well defined version of Taxonomies [6]. This means a
user could specifically search for the fruit called apple,
retrieving more relevant results. A few Semantic Web based
Search Engines already exist [7, 8].
Computer users have grown accustomed to the habit of
text search engines where they must type in keywords which
they believe are related to their search. Those keywords are
then matched to the index of the engine by using proprietary
algorithms and a result list is produced, usually ordered by
relevance or link popularity.
Semantic Web based search engines are trying to
redefine this procedure. They may still be asking the user to
type in text but they match those keywords to ontology items
thus making results more logically relevant, rather than just
plain keyword relevance [9]. This is feasible because
ontologies organise items based on logical connections
derived from the item meaning.
As time passes, ontology standardisation will play an
increasingly significant role in information categorisation
and exchange. Scientists will be able to compare their
research with others faster and in great detail due to the
specific nature of ontology definitions. All individuals can
benefit from the advantages of Semantic annotation, for
example while searching for music that sounds like their
favourite band or for a movie to watch based on which films
they have enjoyed so far [10]. It is only a matter of
presenting the idea of well-organised data to the Social Web
communities in a useful and inviting way.

C. 3D Environments and Virtual Worlds
With the rise of the computer age in mid 20th century,
every type of business tried to get the best out of the new
technological achievements. Even though at first computers
only had text command interfaces, they eventually became
able to present graphics. These graphics were initially plain,
but as computer capabilities increased, so did the complexity
of the designs.
The computer game industry has taken advantage of 3D
graphics and moved from classic point-and-click games to
3D gaming. From first-person shooters to massively
multiplayer online role-playing games, 3D graphics improve
the gaming experience by offering a more realistic gameplay
to the users.
With the Social Networking niche in mind, companies
decided to combine 3D gaming environments with online
communities, such as Second Life, Active Worlds and
IMVU, among others. These programs, though, require the
users to download extra Windows applications, which
execute separately from the Web browser in order to access
the 3D environment. This fact not only prevents application
mobility but also isolates the actual program from the Web

B. The Power of Social Networks
Soon after the Web became available to the public in the
early 1990s, many users became interested into creating their
own personal website to present themselves, their businesses
or their interests. Certain companies begun giving away sizelimited Web space for free on their servers and in exchange
they placed advertisements on top of each webpage. This
way, Web “citizens” began interacting with each other,
linking their websites, exchanging virtual “awards” and
comments in electronic “guestbooks”, as well as publishing
their personal thoughts, ideas, pictures or even poems and
passages. Separated from the commercial websites, the
personal websites had a life of their own, either organised in
communities or independently posting articles and news of
interest to this new “global village”.

206

a new age Web application, merging the aforementioned
technologies into a 3D Social community, which will
constantly be improving an underlying, unlimited, Semantic
Ontology.

realm, leaving only the account management on the company
website.
A notable attempt to combine browser based 3D graphics
with a Social Network was Google “Lively”, which was
launched, popularised and shut down in 2008. Lively used
Flash, as well as a proprietary plug-in, in order to execute
inside the browser and the final result was a fully in-browser
3D experience. Despite its initial success, Google decided to
discontinue “Lively” shortly after its inauguration to focus
more on their core search [14]. A similar Flash application
called “Smeet” still exists, created by a German company.
As far as 3D search engines are concerned, there have
only been a few attempts. In 2005, a company called
“INOZON” announced [15] that they would be creating the
first 3D based search engine, running inside a browser, but
eventually the project fell apart. Another example was
“Ergo” by Invu, launched as beta in 2007, running in an
application outside the browser, offering a visual
environment for searching information [16].
Although all these attempts are recent, a Web language to
express 3D graphics started to be formed as early as 1994
and was called VRML (Virtual Reality Modelling
Language). Since that time, it managed to become a standard
and reached version 2.0, before being succeeded by X3D.
X3D is an XML based language which aims to
popularise a file format to display 3D graphics by using
XML syntax [17]. This makes 3D graphics ideal to parse and
present inside browsers or to use with any type of XML
related API. At this moment, though, X3D is not widely used
and its commercial utilisation is limited. Also, Web browsers
require extra add-ons to display the X3D environment. Being
standardised with HTML5, the latest version of HTML, will
help this format to gradually gain more recognition, while
the X3DOM [18] project is already trying to bypass the need
of a plug-in.
HTML5 will also bring instant embedded support of
WebGL, a language based on JavaScript which offers inbrowser interactive 3D graphics, as well as CSS3 which will
also offer 3D transformations. The basic aim of HTML5 is to
be able to run in all types of devices and support the creation
of Web applications without the need of extra plug-ins. This
will bring the Web to an entirely new level.
III.

A. Creating an Information Driven Community
The proposed system will have a search engine which
will not only check indexed keywords for similarities to a
given input, but will also classify data to specific categories
of an unlimited catalogue. This catalogue will be created
gradually as users add new multimedia objects or change the
already existing ones. Some organisations, such as
Wikipedia, Dmoz or Open Source Software communities,
have managed to maintain quite a high level of data quality,
even though they are not always edited by professionals, but
by earnest individuals who dedicate their time to adding and
correcting the website material.
The users of this system will enjoy the advantages of a
3D Social community, such as 3D avatars and personalised
virtual “lounges”, and at the same time will contribute to the
creation of an infinite and global source of knowledge. This
way, not only they will be able to participate into Social
Networking activities but they will also play an important
role into rating the quality of the information available in the
system by voting up or down additions and changes based on
the correctness of the submission.
This participation will make the Web community more
active and raise awareness against spam and phishing
attempts because data will be immediately comparable due
to the nature of ontology objects. Users will be required to
make all changes and additions using their real name which
will radically reduce the cases of “trolling” (i.e. uploading
inflammatory or off-topic data).
Using an overall reputation based scheme, the level of
user access to the system will be altered depending on how
their additions and changes are ranked. Thus, material which
contains mistakes or is miscategorised will be voted down
and gradually replaced by correct ones, while at the same
time the overall reputation status of the uploader will
decrease, restricting their access to website features.
B. Making Data Management User Friendly
The most interesting factor of the system is that the users
do not have to possess any type of Semantic Web or XML
knowledge in order to use it. The 3D Web interface will help
them to add, change or search for specific website objects by
creating new compositions. In order to manage or look for
data, users will select 3D objects and connect them to each
other, thus graphically compose what they are adding or
seeking.
An example connection of three objects is presented in
Figure 1. More specifically it has been composed to look for
a “Person” who is working for a “Business” in a specific
“Location”.

THE FUTURE WEB: SOCIAL, SEMANTIC AND 3D

What the Web needs now is a new idea, to make users
feel that all these advancements can indeed improve the
current status quo.
Introducing 3D visualisation techniques to the Social
Web would be a start but by itself it would only appear like a
“cool” looking improvement of the graphics. There has to be
essential change in the way we perceive data annotation and
information acquisition. The Social community is a power
strong enough to fill websites with a plethora of multimedia
files gathered in many different ways. The users only need to
become accustomed to a new method of tagging data, in
order to make them part of a Semantic Ontology.
This is why we propose the creation of a system that will
have the properties of the Social Web, but with a 3D Web
interface on top and a Semantic Ontology behind it. It will be

207

drawbacks of Social Semantics are summed up by three
basic factors of human nature: responsibility, credibility and
objectivity.
When people publish data on the Internet, they do not
always take the time to label and organise them based on the
existing standards for each category, thus making their
meaning vague for a computer. This lack of responsibility
can be avoided by utilising predefined methods for adding
and manipulating objects so that they carry at least some
basic annotation, which will be aided by using visual objects
and Semantic Synthesis.
Even if this problem is surpassed, no one can guarantee
that the categories and relations the user has selected are
appropriate for that object, because not everyone is a field
expert on everything they post online. That is why users will
have the ability of voting additions up or down, which will
affect the overall reputation of the uploader appropriately.
Finally, the biggest problem of all is objectivity. Even for
an organised consortium of scientists and field experts it
would be difficult to agree on a common methodology for
characterising every possible piece of information. The only
way to prevent the debates from reaching a total deadlock is
to try and present all opinions in a very specific and
comparable way, so that each researcher can then determine
what applies to their specific case.
Philosophy and Sociology will play an important role in
the definition of most data categories (e.g. ideas and
concepts) which are unsubstantial by nature. Gradually, all
views and suggestions will be synthesised and depicted,
allowing users and researchers to compare them side by side
in a more streamlined manner.

Figure 1. Draft layout of a query in a custom user interface.

We call this method “Semantic Synthesis”, from the
Hellenic word “synthesis” which means “composition”. It is
interesting to note that the term “Semantic Synthesis” was
initially used by Igor' Mel'cuk in 1965 [19], for his Meaning
Text Theory which was the suggestion of linking words of
different languages together, based on their meaning (i.e.
semantically). In our system the objects will be semantically
connected to compose (synthesise) specific queries or
additions. The associations between the objects will be
assigned roles, based on a list of supported role objects for
each relation.
In addition to the connection roles, extra information may
be provided for each selected item, in a menu offering a
choice of specific properties available for each object. As
soon as the query or addition has been synthesised, there will
be an option to either add it or search for it. Figure 1 also
shows possible search results below the synthesised query.
The positive factor of showing results this way is that
they can be selected and then further explored with
additional queries. Specifically designed mechanisms will
help the user quickly shift through the results. Some are
currently being evaluated based on their performance for a
variety of different queries. The whole search experience
must be fast and always produce relevant results which
means that the total time spent and the quality of the results
are the most important factors.
To create these mechanisms, information must be viewed
not only as words and phrases, but as objects which are all
parts of the same unified system. That is where the 3D Web
interface will come in handy, to give users a look and feel of
actually connecting objects.
Ultimately, the user may search through the information
provided by our system and then explore links to external
websites for extra references, such as images, videos and
additional, not yet stored, material.

IV.

METAKOSMOS

All of the above will be joined together in a system called
“Metakosmos”, from the Hellenic words “meta”, which
means “after”, and “kosmos”, which means “world” or
“universe”. The name reflects the ultimate purpose of the
system, which is to create a graphical virtual world of
organised information about the entire real world.
A. Social Knowledge Management
Metakosmos will be a 3D Social Web community that
will store its information by taking advantage of Semantic
Web Ontologies. The system will have two types of users:
unregistered (visitors) and registered (members). Visitors
will only be allowed to use the search engine, without being
able to adjust the user interface or participate to the addition,
categorisation or correction of data. Members will be able to
use the website to its full extend.
Additionally, the members will be able to edit their user
interface on the website by choosing which items should
appear at their home screen, also known as their “lounge”.
They will select those items by searching through the
available categories offered by the website or by adding new
ones. They will also be able to add new items to the system,
rearrange existing data or even correct mistakes that may
exist such as, for example, object miscategorisation or
misspelling.

C. Social Semantics Drawbacks
Web citizens have been tagging online data sources for
many years now. Apart from the obvious powerful virtual
workforce of collective intelligence they comprise [20, 21],
there are also certain negative aspects to it. The current

208

websites, as well as to share local syntheses with external
Web applications by exporting them in an appropriate form.
As time passes, more and more websites will appreciate
the advantages of using Semantic Ontologies, making data
sharing and integration simpler and instant. Semantic
annotation will gradually replace the keyword cloud tagging
of Folksonomies, allowing increased access to data of all
types and formats.

Collecting consistent data is essential for any search
engine, especially for one that needs to store them inside an
ontology. Members will have to correctly synthesise the data,
based on their understanding, in order to add them to the
system in the appropriate categories. Other members with
better understanding or expertise on a domain will be able to
suggest corrections, if needed.
Members that offer a lot to the website, either by adding
new material or by correcting existing items, will receive an
increased reputation status which will allow them to
influence the system faster. Clearly, members that do not
cooperate respectfully will receive a decrease of their
reputation status, giving them less and less access in
influencing the system.
All the user interaction will bring out the social aspect of
the system, uniting the members under the common cause of
keeping everything organised and as accurate as possible.
The additions or changes which are well defined and
correctly categorised will be voted up by the members, thus
increasing the overall reputation status of the person who
synthesised them. In contrast to this, constant mistakes and
sloppiness will cause members to vote items down,
decreasing the reputation of the person responsible.
Five reputation levels will be used: Ignored (0%),
Trainee (25%), Notable (50%), Popular (75%) and Perfect
(100%). Newly registered users will start as Trainees and
then, depending on how well they adjust, their reputation
will increase or drop. If their additions or changes are
constantly voted down they will eventually reach the Ignored
status which would mean that their new additions will be
automatically pre-voted down and they will also be unable to
make any changes to the system.

C. Adding a 3D User Interface
In order to make Semantic annotation easier and more
straightforward, 3D visualisation elements will be used to
depict the various Semantic objects that comprise each
synthesis. Usability will be an important factor of this new
age 3D community, in order for it to get accepted by the
general public and integrated into everyday life. It has to
combine simplicity with scalable complexity, based on
custom options, while maintaining the same effective search
experience for all users.
To achieve this, an extra layer of graphics is added on top
of text searching, making search queries visually accurate
and, as a result, retrieving more relevant search results. With
the help of the underlying Semantic Web ontology, as well
as with the introduction of 3D graphics, users will be able to
query content both textually and visually, depending on their
personal preferences and the nature of their search. This way,
they will be able to retrieve highly relevant results, which
can be presented in many different forms.
With the upcoming official arrival of HTML5 [22] and
the constantly increasing improvements of Web 3D graphics
like X3D, X3DOM, WebGL and CSS3, the Metakosmos
system will obtain its final form and gain its place among the
first 3D Social Web communities, while at the same time
participate in the storing and categorisation of global
knowledge on a large scale.

Figure 2. The five suggested reputation levels.

The Metakosmos system will aim to provide simplicity to
all users, whether they are technology amateurs or experts, as
well as offer scalable complexity based on customisable
options, while maintaining the same effective search
experience despite of the settings.
B. Synthesising, Integrating and Sharing
By reintroducing the term of “Semantic Synthesis”, users
will be called to select predefined objects, connect them in a
way they consider meaningful, add literal parameter
information and finally search for matching results stored in
the system. Additionally, registered members will be able to
synthesise additions or any needed changes to the system.
All of the syntheses will be Semantic Web based, even
though the website users will only see the 3D visualisation
representation.
Metakosmos will aim to set certain standards which other
developers will be able to follow so as to interact externally
with the system or to implement additional capabilities for
the user interface. Currently set as future work, is creating
the mechanisms to integrate Semantic Syntheses from other

Figure 3. Mock-up user interface compiled in X3D.

209

V.

[5]

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

When the Metakosmos PhD thesis is complete, the first
prototype will be launched online in order to offer users a
preliminary beta testing of the system.
The initial version will be a visually searchable and
updatable catalogue which will aim to produce useful and
relevant results as quickly and as accurately as possible. This
means minimising unsolicited advertisements, preventing
misinformation and yet presenting all possible views of each
subject, both concisely and thoroughly, based on the
personal preferences each user sets. Gradually, more and
more users and websites will be able to create and exchange
their information syntheses and come up with ways to merge
and unify new and old data as efficiently as possible.
Eventually, new functionalities will be added to the
system which will give members increased access in
affecting their user interface themes, thus making searching
and editing further adjustable. Additionally, Web Services
will be launched to make information integration and sharing
more automated for external applications.
The merging of the Social Web with the Semantic Web is
an inevitable advancement which will lead to increased
information organisation and universally useful data mining.
The addition of the 3D Web interface on top of the ontology
management mechanisms provides an extra level of
simplicity in order to make the experience more userfriendly. Although keyword search will be also available, the
proposed visual search environment is only a glimpse of
what the future of the Web holds.

[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]
[19]

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila, “The Semantic Web,”
Scientific American, May 2001, pp. 34-43.
H.P. Alesso and C.F. Smith, Thinking on the Web: Berners-Lee,
Gödel, and Turing, John Wiley & Sons, 2006, pp. 16.
V. Geroimenko and C. Chen, Visualizing the Semantic Web: XMLbased Internet and information visualization, Springer, 2006, pp 3-18.
World
Wide
Web
CERN
Proposal:
http://www.w3.org/History/1989/proposal.html.

[20]
[21]

[22]

210

iProspect, “Search Engine User Attitudes,” May 2004;
http://www.iprospect.com/premiumPDFs/iProspectSurveyComplete.p
df, Accessed: 1 February 2011.
W. Pidcock and M. Uschold, “What are the differences between
a vocabulary, a taxonomy, a thesaurus, an ontology, and a
meta-model?,”
2003;
http://www.metamodel.com/article.php?story=20030115211223271,
Accessed: 1 February 2011.
Swoogle: http://swoogle.umbc.edu/.
Hakia: http://www.hakia.com/.
D. Li, et al., “Swoogle: a search and metadata engine for the semantic
web,” ACM, 2004.
Jinni: http://www.jinni.com/.
J. Wortham, “After 10 Years of Blogs, the Future's Brighter Than
Ever,”
2007;
http://www.wired.com/entertainment/theweb/news/2007/12/blog_ann
iversary, Accessed: 1 February 2011.
T. O'Reilly, “What Is Web 2.0 - Design Patterns and Business Models
for
the
Next
Generation
of
Software,”
2005;
http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/whatis-web-20.html, Accessed: 1 February 2011.
Folksonomy: http://vanderwal.net/folksonomy.html, Accessed: 1
February 2011.
Lively: http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2008/11/lively-no-more.html,
Accessed: 1 February 2011.
INOZON:
http://www.prweb.com/releases/2005/02/prweb211778.htm,
Accessed: 1 February 2011.
Ergo: http://www.yourergo.com/help.php, Accessed: 10 May 2009.
V. Geroimenko and C. Chen, Visualizing information using SVG and
X3D: XML-based technologies for the XML-based Web, Springer,
2005, pp. 3-20.
X3DOM: http://www.x3dom.org/.
A.K. Zolkovskij and I.A. Mel'cuk, “O vozmoznom metode i
instrumentax semanticeskogo sinteza [On a possible method and
instruments for semantic synthesis (of Texts)],” Nauchnotexnicheskaja informacija, vol. 1, no. 6, 1965, pp. 23-28.
H. Halpin, V. Robu, and H. Shepherd, “The complex dynamics of
collaborative tagging,” ACM, 2007.
V. Robu, H. Halpin, H. Shepherd, “Emergence of consensus and
shared vocabularies in collaborative tagging systems,” ACM Trans.
Web, vol. 3, no. 4, 2009.
HTML5:
http://dev.w3.org/html5/spec/.

