2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Evaluating a Potentiometer-Based Graphical User Interface for Interacting with a
Music Recommendation Service

Arto Lehtiniemi

Jukka Holm

Nokia Research Center
Tampere, Finland
arto.lehtiniemi@nokia.com

Human-Centered Technology
Tampere University of Technology
Tampere, Finland
jukka.holm@tut.fi

graphical 3D world [15] or turning a wheel [26]. Still, there
is room for more innovation when trying to make the
exploring of new music a playful and an entertaining
experience. As argued in [3], the traditional HCI approaches
are often too limited and must be extended to include
enjoyment as well.
In this paper, we study accessing music recommendation
services using a potentiometer-based prototype application
for a touch screen PC. The metaphor is familiar to many
from home appliances such as stereo systems and microwave
ovens; turning a potentiometer clockwise increases the
selected value and vice versa. In the prototype, the user first
selects the musical genre to listen to, and then rotates tempo
and energy level potentiometers to fine-tune the music
selection. Turning the potentiometers offers instant feedback
by changing the audible music to match the user selection,
and creates a new playlist of music recommendations using
SuperMusic [17]. To emphasize the selected genre, the look
(“skin”) of the interface is changed accordingly. By relying
on clear associations between visual elements and musical
genres, user’s cognitive load can be reduced, and the users
do not have to be musical experts or know the exact genre
names to create representative playlists. Finding new music
can be fun and targeted for everyone including young
children.
To study the prototype in practice, a user study with 40
participants was arranged. This paper describes the results of
the user study and the prototype implementation, and
suggests ideas for the further development of the concept.

Abstract— This paper studies the idea of using potentiometers
as a graphical user interface for interacting with a music
recommendation service. In the implemented prototype, the
user selects a musical genre and adjusts tempo and energy level
potentiometers to fine-tune the playlist of new music
recommendations. The look of the interface is changed to
reflect the currently selected genre. In a user study with 40
participants, the idea of using potentiometers to access music
collections was found to be suitable for discovering new music
and to complement traditional music player applications. The
prototype was seen to be easy to use and entertaining, and the
graphical designs matched well with the musical genres. In the
longer-term use, the prototype was slightly too simple and it
would have benefited from e.g. text-based search functionality.
Several other interesting ideas for the future development of
the concept were also received.
Keywords-music; visualization; skin; potentiometer; knob;
playlist; music recommendation; musical genre; SuperMusic,
user experience

I.

INTRODUCTION

Modern music consumers are faced with a new kind of
music discovery problem: how to find personally relevant
and interesting music from the vast online collections
containing millions of songs. One solution is to use one of
the existing music recommendation systems, which are able
to recommend new music based on a personal preference
profile or one or more example songs. Such systems are
usually based on collaborative filtering [25] or music content
[22]. Content-based methods can be further divided into
music signal analysis and manual content classification
systems (e.g. Pandora [23]).
Many recommendation services such as Pandora and
Last.FM [16] are essentially personalized radio stations,
where the user gives input (e.g. artist, song, or genre name)
to the system to receive recommendations of similar type of
music. However, the fine-tuning of these stations can be
rather limited, and the user does not have much control over
music selected for the playlist. Another common restriction
is the graphical user interface (GUI), which typically
presents music as a list of tracks or using simple graphics
such as album covers.
Some more interactive interfaces for discovering new
music have also been proposed, such as navigating a

1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.51

II.

RELATED RESEARCH

The musical tempo or BPM (Beats per Minute) value is a
common parameter in modern music player applications. In
most cases, the tempo is selected manually using means such
as text boxes, x- and y-axis location, sliders, wheels, or rings.
By selecting the desired value or value range, the user can
select fast or slow music fitting his/her current mood or
listening context. According to several studies [13], fast
tempi can result in expressions such as happiness, activity,
and pleasantness, while slow tempi are generally associated
with sadness, tranquilness, and the like.
One example of a commercial music player application
with the tempo parameter is Apple iTunes, where the user
can create smart playlists containing songs that match certain
conditions. For example, one can add songs that are slower
110

than 120 BPM or faster than 200 BPM to the playlist. The
parameters are set using pull-down menus and text boxes.
Van Gulik’s artist map user interface [28] visualizes artist
similarities by using colored circles located on an x-y space.
Musical tempo can be mapped to circle color or location on
the y-axis. In [29], tempo has been mapped to the x-axis and
brightness to the y-axis.
In the Musiclens application [20], the user can adjust
sliders such as tempo and mood to get new
recommendations. Schedl et al. [26] have arranged the tracks
of a music collection around a wheel in the order of
maximum similarity. The wheel also functions as the track
selector. To make the finding of certain styles easier, tracks
from a selected genre or tempo are visualized on the ring
using gray lines.
In some use contexts such as sports it may preferable to
select the tempo automatically. One example of such a
system is [18], where the system measures the step
frequency of a runner and then creates a playlist with a
suitable tempo.
In [9], 66% of the questionnaire participants were
interested in using the tempo parameter either often or
sometimes in their music player application. Despite the
interest towards using the parameter, many digital music
collections still do not contain pre-calculated BPM data. In
such cases, automatic music tempo detection algorithms such
as [4] can be utilized. Fortunately, the music collection used
by the SuperMusic system already contained pre-calculated
tempo metadata.
While several music player applications let the user to
select songs based on tempo, the “energy level” and other
similar type of parameters have not been commonly used. As
the concept of energy level is slightly ambiguous and more
difficult to understand than tempo, suitable signal processing
algorithms are also more difficult to design. However, a
couple of mood-based music applications do exist.
For example, Moody [19] is a mood-based playlist
generator for iTunes. To start with, the user has to tag his
iTunes library according to mood or download existing tags
for the songs. This is done along two axes, where y-axis
represents intensity and x-axis denotes happiness. As a
default, the axes are color-coded in such way that red
represents intensive but sad music, yellow intense and happy
music, blue calm and sad music, and green happy but calm
music. Once the library is tagged, the user can define new
playlists based on mood. In the case of Musicovery [21], the
user can select music according to mood (dark, energetic,
calm, and positive), decade, and genre. Mood is selected by
clicking on an x-y space.
In services such as All Music Guide [2], the moods of
individual songs have been determined manually by a group
of music experts. However, when such accurate data is not
required, the moods can also be mapped to musical genres.
In [11], we presented a list of genres that could be used as a
starting point for making recommendations fitting the current
mood of the user.
While all implementations discussed above have their
own benefits, we feel that there are also some areas that
could be improved or studied further. Firstly, we feel that the

fine-tuning of music recommendations should be as easy as
possible. In the case of Apple iTunes, for example, selecting
music from a certain genre and tempo is typically done using
smart playlists. Still, in [9] it was found out that 72% of the
users were not willing to take such an effort. Secondly, as the
above mentioned applications were developed for personal
computers, many of them require quite a lot of screen space
and are not directly applicable for touch screens and mobile
devices. Thirdly, while there are some simple user studies on
these applications, they have focused on traditional usability
aspects instead of fun, enjoyment, or graphical design. Also,
we are not familiar with applications that would use the
combination of tempo and energy level potentiometers for
accessing music collections.
In the case of our prototype, the goal was to develop a
novel interface that would allow the users to create new
music recommendation playlists in a fast and easy manner
and fine-tune their contents using the familiar potentiometer
metaphor. While we had to test the ideas using a touch
screen PC, the prototype was designed in such way that it
could easily be modified to operate on future mobile phones.
We wanted to make the prototype highly visual and change
the look of the player automatically according to the selected
genre. By relying on clear associations between visual
elements and musical genres, user’s cognitive load can be
reduced and finding new music can become easier and more
fun. This type of functionality is not supported by the current
line of music player applications.
III.

PROTOTYPE

The prototype was implemented as a Flash application to
enable the use of different platforms including personal
computers and mobile devices such as Nokia N900. As
suitable mobile devices or Apple iPad were not available at
the time of implementing the prototype, the main platform
was a HP Pavilion tx2500 touch-screen laptop.
One of the main design drivers was that the prototype
should be so easy to use that it could be learned by using it
for a short while. Due to this, the number of UI elements was
kept to the minimum. The elements were designed in such a
way that they could be operated with fingers.
When the user starts the prototype, he/she first sees the
generic main view consisting of only two potentiometers or
knobs (Fig. 1). By pressing the play button, the user can start
listening to a playlist of rock and pop recommendations.

Figure 1. Generic main view of the prototype.

111

The user can fine-tune the contents of the playlist by
rotating the Tempo and Gain potentiometers. After each
knob movement, a new playlist is automatically generated,
the first song in the list starts to play, and music is streamed
from an updated version of Nokia Research Center’s
context-aware music recommendation service [17]. By
turning the Tempo knob clock-wise, faster songs are selected
to the playlist. The Gain knob selects the overall energy level
of the music in such way that higher values correspond to
more energetic and aggressive sounding songs.
When the user presses the upward-pointing arrow located
on the bottom of the screen, another screen for selecting the
desired musical genre opens on top of the main view (Fig. 2).
After selecting one of the five alternatives (soul, pop, rock,
metal and electronica & dance) by pressing the
corresponding icon, the user has to press the downwardpointing arrow to return to the main view for music listening.

Figure 2. Selecting the musical genre.

The appearance (“skin”) of the main view is changed to
reflect the selected musical genre (Fig. 3). The user can also
fine-tune the music recommendations within the selected
genre by turning the Tempo and Gain knobs.
The user can access the automatically generated playlist
(top of Fig. 4) by clicking on the name of the currently
playing song. The playlist consists of five songs. The chosen
knob settings are displayed on the top left corner of the
screen, which also works as a back button to the main view.
Songs details can be accessed by clicking on the
corresponding track name. In the song details view (bottom
of Fig. 4), the album cover is shown with more detailed
information on the song. The user is able to listen to the
track, remove it from the playlist by pressing the cross icon,
and find more similar music. If the user presses the heart
icon to retrieve more similar music, a new playlist is
generated based on the selected track.

Figure 3. Skins used in the prototype. From top to bottom: soul, pop,
rock, metal, and electronica & dance.

112

The rock and soul designs did not rely on any theoretical
studies, but the decisions were based our instincts and
knowledge of the genres. The rock theme was based on
Gibson Les Paul, which is a guitar commonly used in rock
bands all over the world. For soul, we used pictures of James
Brown and a tweed-covered amplifier.
B. Used Music Recommendation System
The used music recommendation system was a new and
enhanced version of Nokia Research Center’s SuperMusic
[17]. The system utilizes both textual metadata tags
(describing genre and style) and audio signal processing. The
similarity in terms of metadata tags is calculated at the artist
level. For more details on the used music recommendation
algorithms, see [8].
In the potentiometer prototype, each genre is represented
with a set of prototypical seed songs. The songs were
manually selected to be well representative of the
corresponding genre, and there is a separate seed song for
each Tempo and Gain potentiometer combination. Whenever
the user turns the knobs to a new position, a new playlist is
generated based on the corresponding seed song.
IV.

Figure 4. Playlist (top) and song details (bottom) views of the prototype.

RESEARCH METHOD

To study how well the prototype works in practice, we
arranged a user study with 40 participants as a part of a study
on six novel music recommendation applications. The initial
research questions were formulated as:
x Are users interested in using potentiometers to
access music recommendation services and generate
playlists? Do they consider the concept fun and
entertaining?
x Would the users be willing to replace their current
music player with this type of application? Or does it
only complement traditional applications?
x How does the prototype work in general? Is it fast
enough and easy to use? How could it be developed
further?
x How well do the looks of skins & icons and the
music match?
x How does the user experience change after using the
prototype for a longer time?
The research method was a combination of observation, a
semi-structured interview, questionnaires, and evaluations
done at home or other preferred listening context. Each
interview session lasted for about 30 minutes. All
participants tested the software for the first time, and they
were not informed about how the prototype works or what to
do with it. Tutorials or help files were not included.
The interview sessions were arranged in various locations
such as participants’ own homes, authors’ homes, as well as
the premises of Nokia Research Center and Tampere
University of Technology. 37 of 40 interview sessions were
arranged using a HP Pavilion tx2500 touch-screen laptop and
three using a basic Dell Inspiron laptop. Evaluations at home
were performed using participants’ own computers.
In the beginning of the interview session, the users had to
fill in a short background information questionnaire. Next,

A. Designing Skins and Icons
Musical genres are “categorical labels created by humans
to characterize pieces of music” [27]. While categorizing
music to different genres may be difficult and sometimes
even artificial, they are commonly used in music player
applications and recommendation systems including
SuperMusic. For our research purposes, we selected five
genres that we wanted to visualize using skins and icons: 1.
electronica & dance, 2. heavy metal, 3. pop, 4. rock, and 5.
soul. In a commercial product implementation, the number
of genres should obviously be increased (in most of our
previous research we have used 17), and the genre set should
be localized for the target country or region.
The graphical designs were influenced by various things
such as album cover art, movies, and the history of certain
genres. Whenever feasible, we used colors and symbols from
our previous studies [6] [10]. To enable studying how well
the designs are recognized in practice, they were not labeled
in any way.
Influenced by the movie Wall-E, we selected a robot
theme to represent electronica & dance music (Fig. 2 and 3).
In [6], most participants had already associated robots with
electronica & dance, and the cover art of techno albums also
uses them as common elements [24]. The selection of cyan
color was based on the results of [10].
Designing the metal skin and the icon were
straightforward tasks. According to our previous studies [6]
[10], black color and the devil horns sign are mostly
associated with metal music. The looks can be verified by
studying album covers [1] or the history of the genre.
For pop, we selected a pink, soft, and happy theme. The
decision was mainly based on our previous work on colors
[10] and emoticons [11].

113

common sources included the Internet (65% of which 18%
mentioned especially YouTube), friends (63%), magazines
(33%), radio (33%), and Spotify (20%). 88% of the
participants had used YouTube for listening to music, 51%
had used Spotify, 32% Last.fm, and 29% iTunes Genius.

they used the software freely for 5-15 minutes while being
observed. The participants were asked to describe their first
impressions on the prototype, and various quality aspects of
the prototype were studied by asking questions and filling in
a questionnaire. Both hedonic (a.k.a. emotional, experiential)
and pragmatic (a.k.a. ergonomic, functional, instrumental)
aspects were studied. (In [5], Hassenzahl et al. have shown
that these can be independently perceived by the users.) In
the questionnaire, the participants had to rate several aspects
of the software on a seven-point Likert scale (1=totally
disagree, 7=totally agree). The statements to be graded were:
x ”The program looked impressive”
x ”The program was fun to use”
x ”The program presented music in a novel way”
x ”I believe that the appeal of the program will last and
I will use it actively in the future”
x ”The program had an extensive set of wellimplemented features”
x ”The program was easy to use” and
x “I was able to start the playback of desired music
quickly.”
In addition, the participants had to rate “My overall grade
for the program” using a seven-point scale.
After the interview session, the users were able to use an
online version of the software for circa three weeks. In the
end, they had to evaluate the prototype by filling a
questionnaire similar to the one used during the interview.

V.

RESULTS

The combination of questionnaires and a semi-structured
interview worked well, and the initial research questions
were answered. In addition, we received a broad range of
ideas for the future development of the concept. In this
section, the results are discussed in a detailed manner.
A. Interview
In the beginning of the interview session, the participants
were able to use the prototype freely for 5-15 minutes while
being observed. After that, various quality aspects of the
prototype were studied by asking questions and by filling in
a questionnaire.
1) First impressions
For over 60% of the participants, the first impressions of
using the prototype were very positive. Several participants
considered selecting music with two knobs to be exciting,
different, and novel. Most participants considered changing
the skin based on genre selections to be a good idea.
Rotating the potentiometers was considered to be an
intuitive way to select music, and “fine-tuning” within a
selected genre was an especially appreciated feature.
Rotating was seen very useful in exploring new music and
for creating playlists in parties. One participant commented
that this type of solution could very suitable for a casual
listener, but too restricted for the active music consumers.
Adjusting the tempo was seen as a very interesting attribute
for music classification. One participant commented that
"there are days when you want to listen to slower or faster
music… For example if you have thousands of tracks in your
collection and you want to quickly select some slow music."
A typical usage pattern was to first test how the
minimum and maximum values affected the selection of the
next track. After the basic operation of the knobs was
understood, the users typically left them to a certain position
reflecting their current mood. The knobs were not touched
until the user got bored or felt that some other type of music
would be more appropriate for the current mood and/or
situation. Thus, the usage resembled closely the process of
selecting and listening to a certain radio channel.
2) Quality aspects
During the interview, various quality aspects of the
prototype were studied by asking questions and filling in a
questionnaire. In the questionnaire, the participants had to
rate several aspects of the software (see Section 4) on a
seven-point Likert scale (1=totally disagree, 7=totally agree).
Fig. 5 illustrates the ratings given by the participants as
pairs of boxplots. In the case of each pair, the left boxplot
represents ratings given after the interview, and the right
boxplot represents ratings given after longer-term use.
Numbers surrounding the outlier circles refer to certain users
in the SPSS data. In the following, we concentrate on

A. Participants
The participants were selected using convenience
sampling from varying age groups and education levels. All
the participants were Finnish. 77% (31 participants) were
male and 23% (9) female. 8% (3) were 12-17 years old, 12%
(5) 18-30 years old, 55% (22) 31-40 years old, and 25% (10)
41-55 years old. The average age was 34.6, and all
participants from the 12-17 age group were male. 63% of the
participants were university graduates, and the rest were split
between all types of education. 8% were professional and
50% hobby musicians.
50% of the participants considered listening to music as
their hobby. During listening, 20% did not usually do
anything else but concentrate on the music. All except two
participants listened to music at least once a day, and the
average listening time per day was 2.1 hours. The most
popular genres included pop (85% of the participants liked
it), rock (80%), metal (63%), soul, rnb & funk (60%),
alternative & indie (55%), and blues (55%), while the least
popular genre was gospel (5%). The most popular listening
contexts were home (55%) and the car (45%).
All major listening mediums were used, the most popular
ones being computer (most important for 35% of the
participants), traditional radio (23%), CD (18%) and mp3
players excluding mobile phones (15%). Only 5% named
mobile phone’s mp3 player as their main listening medium.
On the average, the participants owned 302 music CDs and
4732 digital music (mp3, AAC etc.) files, and the number of
CDs increased slightly with age. 43% of the participants
searched actively for new music to listen to. The most

114

boxplots on the left and leave the right side for discussion in
the “Longer-Term Use” section.
As seen from Fig. 5, the prototype was received well in
the interview. Most participants considered it to be a novel
way to present music collections (median 6.0). While the
conditions for using the Chi-Square test were not met, slight
correlation between gender and novelty was found
(Spearman’s rho=0.35, significant at the p<0.05 level (2tailed)), meaning that women considered the prototype to be
slightly more novel than men. In the case of all other
statements, the ratings did not correlate with participants’
gender, age, or level of experience with modern music
technologies such as music recommendation systems, and
the conditions for using the Chi-Square test were not met.
The participants also thought that the prototype looked
good or impressive (median 6.0). The minimalistic design
was commented to be stylish, handy, and visually funny. The
skins were said to be illustrative and good-looking.
The prototype was considered to be easy to use (median
6.0). After using the system for a while, 90% of the
participants considered the general interaction to be good.
When asked the question “Did you understand how the
prototype works?” 75% gave a positive answer. In general,
the participants felt that help files and/or tutorials were not
required. However, several participants did not understand
the meaning of the Gain knob, and 45% never found the
playlist view. Almost 40% found the system to be a little
confusing at start. The idea of tweaking knobs on a computer
screen was new for many, and the relationship between knob
positions and the generated playlists was not that clear. Some
participants thought that rotating the knobs would affect the
currently playing song instead of creating a new playlist for
listening. However, many of these confusions were cleared
rather quickly by simply exploring of the system.
The majority of participants felt that the prototype was
fun to use (median 6.0), and the overall grades for the
program were also high (median 6.0).
63% of the participants felt that the prototype fit well to
their current music consumption habits. While 78%
mentioned that they would like to use the prototype for a
longer time, some were unsure of whether the appeal would
last. The median for lasting appeal was 5.0, but there was
more scattering in the results (mean=4.7, std. deviation=1.6)
than in the case of most other statements.
Only 50% of the participants thought that the prototype
had enough features implemented. For 38%, the lack of a
text-based search function was a major shortcoming. As a
result, the median for the statement “The program had an
extensive set of well-implemented featuresā was 5.0 and
several participants gave a grade of ≤4.0. Except for the
playlist view, the features were easy to find.
The lack of search function might also have had an effect
on some of the grades for “I was able to start the playback of
desired music quickly.” For this statement, the median was
5.0 but there was quite a lot of scattering in the results (mean
4.9, std. deviation 1.7).

Figure 5. Boxplots for the quality aspects of the prototype: Ratings given
at the end of the interview (boxplots on the left) and after longer-term use
(boxplots on the right).

B. Longer-Term Use
The user study was arranged as a part of a study on six
novel music recommendation applications. The participants
were also able to use the online versions of five applications
at home (or other preferred place) for circa three weeks. On
the average, the participants tested the potentiometer
prototype for 3-4 times during this time. In the end of the
evaluation period, the participants had to rate the same
statements as during the interview, rate the skins and icons,
and write some textual comments.
By comparing the different boxplot pairs in Fig. 5, one
can notice a drop in most of the grades. The only exceptions
were novelty, which stayed the same, and ease of use, which
increased slightly as the participants already had some
experience with the prototype. In the case of the last four
statements of Fig. 5, the drop was statistically significant.
Using Wilcoxon’s signed ranks test, the Z values for overall
grade and lasting appeal were -2.19 and -2.46 at the p<0.05
level (2-tailed). For the statements “I was able to…” and

115

“The program had…”, the Z values were -2.74 and -2.65 at
the p<0.01 level (2-tailed).
In the longer-term use, the prototype was seen to be too
simple and lack some important features (see section “Ideas
for Further Development”). This is well in line with [14],
where it was found out that “Overall, while early experiences
seemed to relate mostly to hedonic aspects of product use,
prolonged experiences became increasingly more tied to
aspects reflecting how the product becomes meaningful in
one’s life”. The lack of a text-based search function was a
major shortcoming to 63% of the participants (cf. 38% after
the interview). Due to the small number of available musical
genres, 50% also felt that the music collection did not meet
their needs, and 30% mentioned that they did not use the
prototype much for this reason.
Only 55% of the participants stated that they would like
to use the prototype for a longer time (cf. 78% after the
interview). In addition to the lack of certain important
features, limited amount of genres, etc., another potential
reason for this was major and/or minor technical problems.
Circa 33% of the participants had some type of problems
including program and server crashes, pauses in the music
playback, and other network related problems. The median
for lasting appeal decreased from 5.0 to 4.0, and there was
also more scattering in the results (mean=3.8, std.
deviation=2.0) than in the case of other statements.
Logically, participants who felt that the prototype had an
extensive set of well-implemented features also believed that
the appeal of the program will last, and that they will use it
actively also in the future (Spearman’s rho=0.77, significant
at the p<0.01 level (2-tailed)). The lasting appeal also
correlated strongly (rho≥0.43) with all other statements
except novelty (rho=0.25 with p=0.13).
58% of the participants felt that the prototype fit to their
current music consumption habits. As the corresponding
number after the interview was 63%, the user experience did
not change significantly in this respect. While only 8% of the
participants thought that they could use the prototype as their
main music player application, 60% answered that they
could use it to complement other players. 83% preferred that
the music comes from a music recommendation service
instead of their own music collection (cf. 80% after the
interview).
1) Relationship between skins, icons, and music
The participants were also asked to rate how well the
looks of skins and icons matched with the recommended
music on a seven-point scale (1=did not match at all, 4=
neutral, 7=perfect match). As seen from Fig. 6, the graphics
performed well and most participants felt that the looks
matched well with the related music recommendations.
In the initial interview, the participants had been asked to
describe what type of music each skin & icon pair could
possibly represent. This was done before listening to any
music. The answers were given orally in participant’s own
words, and the number of genres was not restricted in any
way. These first impressions revealed some reasons for the
“negative” ratings of some of the designs.
The best ratings were given to the metal genre. During
the initial interview, 93% participants associated the metal

graphics with some type of metal music. After listening to
the songs at home, all except one participant still felt that the
music and the graphics matched well (median 6.0). The
results are well in line with our other studies sharing similar
graphical characteristics. In [12], all parts of the metal avatar
were mapped to metal music by ≥79% of the participants. In
[7], the female metal character was also recognized best
(median 6.0 on a seven-point scale).
Soul came next with the median of 6.0. However, the
initial impressions during the interview were not that good.
While 48% associated the graphics with soul music, 33%
associated them with blues, 25% with jazz, and 13% with
rock or rock ’n’ roll. As the graphics should be easy to
recognize without recall, there is still some improvement
needed in this respect.
The same can be said of the rock graphics (median 5.5),
too. During the initial interview, 65% of the participants
associated the designs with rock but country and blues music
were also mentioned several times.
In the case of pop music, the main problem is that the
label may refer to almost any genre that is popular at the
moment. This was also reflected in the results. Before
listening to any music in the interview, 93% of the
participants associated the pop graphics with pop music.
However, after using the prototype at home, the median was
5.0, and there was quite a lot of scattering in the results. As
the recommendations may not have matched some
participants’ own definition of what pop music is, other seed
songs for the algorithm should also be tested.
To our surprise, the electronica & dance graphics
performed worst in the study. In our previous studies [6] [8]
[12], the genre has always been one of the winners. While
the median was now 5.0, there were also quite a few
“negative” (<4.0) responses. Also in this case, one possible
explanation may be that the seed songs were not optimal;
during the initial interview as many as 83% of the
participants associated the graphics with electronic music.

Figure 6. Boxplots for how well the recommended music matched with
the looks of skins and icons.

116

VI.

song. In the beginning, 45% of the participants had problems
in finding the playlist. While they paid great attention to how
turning the knobs affected what type of music started to play,
they did not know in advance that the prototype would
generate playlists based on the knob positions. As one
solution, it was proposed that the song name could be
highlighted after turning the knobs. Another alternative
would be to integrate the playlist with the main view.
In the playlist view, the user is able to request more
similar songs by pressing the heart icon. However, 28% of
the participants confused the icon with the “Like” button,
which is often used to give positive feedback to a system or
to add tracks to the favorites list. Still, the idea of requesting
more similar songs from the service was considered to be
good. When good music was found, the participants wanted
to listen to more music from the same artist. Some also
indicated that they would want to give feedback to the
underlying algorithm by liking/disliking certain songs, and
thus, gradually build their own personal music profile.
To fit well to the UI layout, each playlist contained only
five songs. This was said to be too few, and the amount
should be increased to around 20 as proposed in [17]. The
prototype also lacked some important playlist related
features such as adding songs to “favorites” and other
playlists, selecting songs from one’s listening history, and
recommending songs to friends.
From observing the participants during the interview
session, we learned that many problems could have been
avoided by starting the prototype with the genre selection
view. This would have removed the need for the confusing
generic skin, and the users would have immediately seen the
graphical effect of the genre selection. As a result, the
prototype would have been even more easy to use and the
general user experience could have been slightly improved.
One purpose of the prototype was to hide the
overwhelming details of a massive music collection from the
end user and provide easier access to the preferred types of
music. However, several participants would have wanted to
see a list of the complete music catalogue and lists of all
artists and tracks belonging to the specified genre. One
reason for this may be that the prototype hid too much
information from the user and did not reveal the magnitude
of the available music collection. Further studies are needed
to verify if adding a search function would satisfy also this
need.
Several participants mentioned that they were interested
in getting more information on the currently playing song.
The following information was seen as interesting: detailed
artist info/biography, release year of the album, record label,
and links to music videos, artist’s website, and MySpace.
Several participants mentioned that they would also like to
access their own music library through the knobs.

IDEAS FOR FURTHER DEVELOPMENT

During the interview, we also received several ideas for
the future development of the concept. These included the
operation of the potentiometers, selecting the genre(s),
playlists, recommendations, and the user interface in general.
In the following, these ideas have been explained in more
detail.
While rotating the knobs was considered to be an
intuitive way to select music, 17% of the participants thought
that selecting music solely this way might be too restricted in
the longer-term use. There are many use cases where the user
wants to select a certain artist or song to listen to or use it as
a seed song for the music recommendation system. However,
these types of use cases were not in the scope of our study.
The operation of the Tempo knob was obvious to almost
every participant. However, using the Gain knob was not that
clear. When asked about its purpose, it was thought to adjust
for example the balance between acoustic and electronic
music, volume, compression level, roughness/smoothness,
gloominess, or loudness/softness. As a result, the Gain knob
should be renamed to something more descriptive (e.g.
“Energy”), and some type of energy meter could also be
shown on the screen.
In the current version of the prototype, the different knob
positions are displayed in the form of "Tempo 2, Gain 4".
However, there was a clear demand for a more informative
numbering system that would clarify the meaning of the
knobs and changes made. For example, it was proposed that
the tempo could be displayed in beats per minute (BPM).
25% of the participants wanted to extend the prototype
with more knobs to make the music selection more precise.
Suggestions for the additional knobs included
happy/melancholic, mainstream/underground, release year or
decade, gender, and genre. When rotating the knobs, preview
clips of the songs (e.g. chorus) could also be played.
Some participants considered the use of a generic default
skin to be slightly confusing. While the default genre
included mostly rock music, the skin was not recognizably
related to any genre. It was proposed that the application
should instead start with the genre selection view. Since the
arrow button did not indicate in any way what it was used
for, some participants had problems in opening the genre
view for the first time. As one potential solution, it was
proposed that the potentiometer and the genre views could be
combined.
While the genre icons were seen to be distinctive, it was
also proposed that there could be a textual explanation (such
as a tooltip or a genre name) to avoid confusions. Music
playback from the selected genre should start immediately to
provide instant feedback on the selection. Over 20% of the
participants were requesting a greater number of genres to
select from, and roughly the same amount was interested in
generating cross-genre playlists. The participants hoped that
the knobs would work across genre boundaries in such a way
that they could e.g. add fast pop and electronica songs to the
same playlist.
In the current implementation of the prototype, playlists
are accessed by clicking on the name of the currently playing

VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we studied the idea of using potentiometers
as a graphical user interface for interacting with a music
recommendation service. In the implemented software
prototype, new recommendations were generated based on
the positions of tempo and energy level potentiometers as

117

[7]

well as the selected musical genre. The graphical skin of the
prototype changed according to the genre.
The prototype was evaluated by 40 participants, and the
concept was considered to be suitable for discovering new
music and to complement traditional music players. The
prototype was seen to be innovative, handy, easy to use, and
entertaining. The graphical designs matched well with the
musical genres.
In the longer-term use, the prototype was slightly too
simple and it would have benefited from the addition of e.g.
text-based search functionality. Many interesting ideas for
the future development of the concept were also received.
These included adding more potentiometers (e.g. release
year, vocalist gender, and mood) for fine-tuning the playlist
even more, more advanced playlist modification capabilities,
and visualizing the entire music catalogue. Despite the flaws,
60% of the participants commented that they could use the
prototype to complement other music player applications. In
the future, it would be interesting to test an improved version
of the prototype as an alternative view to a traditional listbased music player.
During the last few years, automatic tempo detection
technologies have improved to such a level that they are
viable alternatives for use in commercial applications. In the
case of the energy level parameter, there are still many
challenges ahead. As the concept of energy level is slightly
ambiguous and more difficult to understand than tempo,
suitable signal processing algorithms are also more difficult
to design. Another alternative would be to base the design on
manually (user or expert) annotated metadata. For example,
the application could search the database of All Music Guide
[2] or Last.fm [16] for “aggressive” and other related
keywords and map those songs to the scale of the
potentiometer. Alternatively, the users could select or change
the seed songs by themselves. Descriptive tags could also be
shown on the screen while turning the potentiometers.
The potentiometer study was conducted as a part of a
larger user study on six novel music player interfaces. After
all the interfaces have been analyzed in detail, the results
should be compared against each other and used to design
the “perfect” next-generation music player UI.

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

N. Aldis and J. Sherry, Heavy Metal Thunder: Album Covers That
Rocked the World. London, Mitchell Beazley, 2006.
All Music Guide, url: http://www.allmusic.com.
M. Blythe, K. Overbeeke, A. Monk, and P. Wright, Funology: From
Usability to Enjoyment. Dordrecht, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
2004.
A. Eronen, Signal Processing Methods for Audio Classification and
Music Content Analysis. PhD Thesis, Tampere University of
Technology, 2009.
M. Hassenzahl, A. Platz, M. Burmester, and K. Lehner, “Hedonic and
Ergonomic Quality Aspects Determine a Software’s Appeal,” Proc.
CHI 2000 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI 2000), ACM Press, April 2008, pp. 201-208.
J. Holm and H. Holm, “Associating Icons with Musical Genres,”
Proc. International Conference on Internet and Multimedia Systems
and Applications (IMSA 08), ACTA Press, Aug. 2008.

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

118

J. Holm and A. Lehtiniemi, “A Virtual World Prototype for
Interacting with a Music Collection,” Proc. 14th International
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (HCII 2011), Jul. 2011,
in press.
J. Holm and A. Lehtiniemi, “Evaluating an Avatar-Based User
Interface for Discovering New Music,” Proc. 9th International
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia (MUM 2010),
ACM Press, Dec. 2010.
J. Holm, “Popularity of Music Player Parameters and Features,” Proc.
International Computer Music Conference (ICMC 08), Aug 2008.
J. Holm, A. Aaltonen, and H. Siirtola, ”Associating Colours with
Musical Genres,” Journal of New Music Research 38, vol. 1, 2009,
pp. 87-100.
J. Holm, H. Holm, and J. Seppänen, “Associating Emoticons with
Musical Genres,” Proc. International Conference on New Interfaces
for Musical Expression (NIME 2010), Jun 2010, pp. 383-386.
J. Holm, H. Siirtola, and L. Laaksonen, ”Associating Avatars with
Musical Genres,” Proc. 14th International Conference on Information
Visualisation (IV 2010), IEEE, Jul. 2010, pp. 186-193.
P. N. Juslin and J. A. Sloboda, Music and Emotion: Theory and
Research. New York, Oxford University Press, 2001.
E. Karapanos, M. Hassenzahl, and J-B. Martens, “User Experience
over Time,” Proc. CHI '08 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI 08), ACM Press, Apr. 2008, pp. 35613566.
P. Knees, M. Schedl, T. Pohle, and G. Widmer, “An Innovative
Three-Dimensional User Interface for Exploring Music Collections
Enriched with Meta-Information from the Web,” Proc. 14th Annual
ACM International Conference on Multimedia, ACM Press, Oct.
2006.
Last.fm, url: http://www.last.fm.
A. Lehtiniemi, “Evaluating SuperMusic: Streaming Context-Aware
Mobile Music Service,” Proc. International Conference on Advances
in Computer Entertainment Technology (ACE 08), ACM Press, Dec.
2008, pp. 314-321.
N. Masahiro, H. Takaesu, H. Demachi, M. Oono, and H. Saito,
“Development of an Automatic Music Selection System Based on
Runner’s Step Frequency,” Proc. 9th International Conference on
Music Information Retrieval (ISMIR 09), Sep. 2008.
Moody, url: http://www.crayonroom.com/moody.php.
MusicLens, url: http://finetunes.musiclens.de.
Musicovery, url: http://musicovery.com.
E. Pampalk, Computational Models of Music Similarity and their
Application to Music Information Retrieval. PhD Thesis, Vienna
University of Technology, 2006.
Pandora, url: http://www.pandora.com.
M. Pesch, Techno Style: Album Cover Art. Zurich, Edition Olms,
1998.
B. Sarwar, G. Karypis, J. Konstan, and J. Reidl, “Item-Based
Collaborative Filtering Recommendation Algorithms,” Proc. 10th
International Conference on World Wide Web, ACM Press, 2001.
M. Schedl, T. Pohle, P. Knees, and G. Widmer, “Assigning and
Visualizing Music Genres by Web-Based Co-Occurrence Analysis,”
Proc. 7th International Conference on Music Information Retrieval
(ISMIR 06), Oct. 2006.
G. Tzanetakis and P. Cook, “Musical Genre Classification of Audio
Signals,” IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, vol.
10, no. 5, 2002.
R. Van Gulik and F. Vignoli, “Visual Playlist Generation on the
Artist Map,” Proc. 6th International Conference on Music
Information Retrieval (ISMIR 05), Sep. 2005, pp. 520-523.
J. Zhu and L. Lu, “Perceptual Visualization of a Music Collection,”
IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, vol. 10, no. 5,
2002.

