2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Lyricon: A Visual Music Selection Interface Featuring Multiple Icons
Takayuki Itoh
Ochanomizu University
Tokyo, Japan
Email: itot@is.ocha.ac.jp

Wakako Machida
Ochanomizu University
Tokyo, Japan
Email: matchy8@itolab.is.ocha.ac.jp

Abstract—This paper presents ”Lyricon”, a technique that
automatically selects multiple icons of tunes block-by-block,
and effectively displays the icons. Here, Lyricon selects icons
based on not only musical features, but also lyrical keywords.
In other words, Lyricon can reﬂect not only the features of the
tunes but also the story of lyrics on its icon selection. Users can
understand both impression of the sounds and the content of
the lyrics, and they can choose songs which is suitable for their
feeling based on the visual impression of the icons. Besides,
embedding Lyricon on GUIs of music players is convenient to
play speciﬁc parts of songs.

icons based on not only musical features, but also lyrical
features. We have designed Lyricon to represent musical
and lyrical features by multiple icons, not by a single icon,
because story of lyric may be too complex to explain by a
single picture. We can apply this idea to selection of larger
pictures as well as icons; however, in this paper we focus
on icon selection, because icons are smaller than pictures,
and therefore suitable to display in limited sizes of GUIs.
Figure 1 shows examples of selected icons. Users can
understand both impression of the sounds and the content
of the lyrics when they look at the icons selected by Lyricon,
even before listening to the song. This paper discusses the
detail in Section III. Moreover, embedding Lyricon on GUIs
of music players is convenient for partial play of tunes. This
paper presents potential user interfaces of Lyricon in Section
IV.

Keywords-Visualization, Icon selection, Lyrics, Music player

I. INTRODUCTION
Today, people can enjoy their favorite songs easily and
freely due to the evolution of portable music player products
and free video sharing Web sites. We often demand smoothly
working song selection mechanisms because we often store
large number of tunes. Sometimes user cannot remember the
melody of the song and the lyrics, only by looking the titles
or artist names of the tunes on the song selection panels.
We think that ”music visualization” is useful to solve the
problem.
Lyrics are very important on recent popular hit songs.
There are many big sale songs which lyrics are key points,
such as answer songs those lyrics reply to another song, and
songs on compilation albums which collect multiple artists’
songs following particular themes (e.g. ”sea”, ”love”). As
a feasibility study for lyrics, we asked the following two
questions to 86 students in our university:
• ”Are you usually conscious of lyrics while listening to
the music?”
• ”Do you often choose the music based on lyrics?”
We got results that 66 students answered ”yes” for the
former question, and 42 students answered ”yes” for the
latter question. These results indicate that lyrics may be
informative for many people while selecting the songs they
want to listen to.
This paper presents ”Lyricon”, a music visualization technique that represents musical structure by multiple icons,
taking lyrics into account. Lyricon automatically selects
multiple icons of songs block-by-block, and provides a user
interface to effectively display the icons. Lyricon selects
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.62

II. RELATED WORK
There have been several novel techniques for icon generation or selection. Setlur et al. presented Semanticons [1] that
synthesizes small pictures to generate semantics-matched
icons. It can represent various semantics by single icon;
however, the technique is not music-speciﬁc. Music Icons [2]
by Kolhoff et al., and MIST [3] by Oda et al., generate/select
icon pictures according to musical features. However, these
techniques do not take lyrics into account. Moreover, these
techniques assign only one icon for each tune, and therefore
it may be often difﬁcult to represent changes or structures
of tunes.
There have been several novel techniques for visual representation of lyrics-based information. Xu et al. presented
a technique to create slide shows according to the story of
lyrics [4]. Framework of Lyricon is also applicable to slide
show generation; however, we preferred to develop an icon
selection technique, because we think we can understand the
features and story of the songs more quickly by looking at
sequences of icons. Neumayer et al. presented a technique
to visually represent clusters of songs taking both features
and lyrics into account [5].
III. MULTIPLE ICON SELECTOIN
This section describes our multiple icon selection technique consisting of the following technical components:
145

Figure 1.

Examples of icon selection resutls of three songs.

Adjectives of icon xij as Aij = {aij1 , ..., aijN aij },
where Naij is the number of adjectives of xij .
To deﬁne categories, we ﬁrst asked the following question
to 86 students in our university:
”What kind of topics or themes do you occasionally want
to use to select songs?”
We got many topics as the result of the question, and used
23 topics such as ”Love”, ”Summer”, and ”Christmas”, as
categories. Then, we extracted synonym of the categories
from Japanese thesaurus dictionary [6], and selected frequently used words as keywords. We scanned the lyrics of
randomly selected a lot of Japanese hit songs, and divided
the lyrics into words. We used ”Chasen” [7] for this process.
Then, we matched the words extracted from the lyrics with
the synonym extracted the dictionary, and ﬁnally selected
frequently matched synonym as keywords of the categories.
Our current implementation prepares 23 categories and 248
keywords.

1) Preparation during system development:
a) Category and keyword selection
b) Musical feature selection
c) Icon selection
2) Process during input of new songs:
a) Lyrical processing for icon candidate selection
b) Musical feature processing for ﬁnal icon selection
Following sections describe these processing units. Section III-A to Section III-C describes preparation processes.
Section III-B describes steps 1 to 3. Section III-D and III-E
describes lyrical and musical processes for icons election.
Note that our implementation supports songs those lyrics
are written in Japanese, but the mechanism of Lyricon is
not limited to Japanese songs.

•

A. Preparation(1): Category and keyword selection
Our implementation prepares ”categories”, and sets multiple keywords and icons into the categories. A category
contains a set of related keywords that can be the main
theme of the lyrics and its synonyms. At the same time,
the category contains a set of multiple icons which bring
different impression. Let us formulate categories, keywords,
and icons, as following:
• Categories as C = {c1 , ..., cN c }, where Nc is the
number of categories.
• Keywords belonging to ci as Ki = {ki1 , ..., kiN ki },
where Nki is the number of keywords belonging to ci .
• Icons belonging to ci as Xi = {xi1 , ..., xiN xi }, where
Nxi is the number of icons belonging to ci .

B. Preparation(2): Musical feature selection
At the same time, Lyricon uses several musical feature
values. Our current implementation uses MIRtoolbox [8],
working on MATLAB, for musical feature calculation. We
had a feasibility study of features calculated by MIRtoolbox
by applying randomly selected 26 Japanese hit songs. We
subjectively estimated that 10 features were especially meaningful for our purpose. We then selected 3 features from
the 10 features by the following procedure. We assigned
pairs of inverse meaning of adjectives for each feature. For
example, we assigned ”fast” and ”slow” for the feature
”Tempo”. At the same time, we calculated the 10 feature

146

;͞/͟ ŶŽƵŶͿ
;͞ůŽǀĞ͟ ŶŽƵŶͿ
;͞Ăŵ ĚŽŝŶŐ͟ ƉƌŽŐƌĞƐƐŝǀĞͿ
;͞ƐĂĚ͟ ĂĚũĞĐƚŝǀĞͿ
;͞ĂƐ ŝĨ͟ ĐŽŶũƵŶĐƚŝŽŶͿ

Figure 2.

(Left) Keywords and icons of a category. (Right) Morphological analysis.

values for the songs as shown in Figure 2(Right). We then
applied the following procedure for each feature. We asked
6 examinees to subjectively divide the 26 songs into two
groups according to one of the pairs of adjectives, such as
”fast” and ”slow”. At the same time, we divided the songs
according to an automatically determined threshold value of
the feature corresponding to the pair of adjectives, such as
”Tempo”. We then calculated the average concordance rate
between the subjective and automatic division. Finally, we
determined the feature can be used for Lyricon, if the two
division results were sufﬁciently similar.
As a result of above mentioned process, we selected the
following three features:
•
•
•

if the adjectives matched to the icons. We did not use icons
which less than half of examinees agreed that they matched.
D. Lyrical analysis for icon candidate selection
Since Lyricon assigns icons block-by-block, we would
like to use lyrics divided based on blocks of the songs. We
used ”Lyric Master” [9] to obtained lyrics of Japanese hit
songs which are divided block-by-block.
Lyricon then analyzes morphologic of each block and
divides the block of the lyric into words by using ”Chasen”.
Figure 2(Right) shows an example of the morphological
analysis.
Let us describe a set of words in a block as W =
{w1 , ..., wN }. If a word wk completely matches to the
keyword kij , Lyricon determines that the block is related to
the category ci . In this case Lyricon treats the set of icons
Xi as the candidates to be assigned to the block, and ﬁnally
one of the icons xij is assigned to the block.

Tempo. ”slow” and ”fast” are used as adjectives.
Percentage of high-tone range. ”simple” and ”rich” are
used as adjectives.
Percentage of inharmonic tones. ”primitive” and ”complex” are used as adjectives.

Here, the word ”simple” may point songs which sound
naively because of small number of musical instruments or
less sound effects. On the other hand, the word ”rich” may
point songs which feature many musical instruments or use
various sound effects. The word ”complex” may point songs
which apply complicated chords or tensions like Jazz music.
On the other hand, the word ”primitive” may point songs
which do not apply complicated chords or tensions.

E. Musical feature analysis for ﬁnal icon selection
Lyricon also calculates feature values selected in the
preparation process. We selected three features, ”Tempo”,
”Percentage of high-tone range”, and ”Percentage of inharmonic tones”, as described in Section 3.1. Lyricon then
selects the adjectives of the song according to the calculated
feature values. Our current implementation selects at least
one adjective from the selected 6 adjectives described in
Section 3.1 by the following procedure.
Let the three feature values F1 , F2 , and F3 , and
these ranges [F1min , F1max ], [F2min , F2max ], and
[F3min , F3max ]. Here, we deﬁne the relevance of the
song to the two adjectives of the i-th feature value as Ria
and Rib , calculated as Ria = Fi , and Rib = 1.0 − Fi .
When there are multiple icon candidates in a same category speciﬁed from a block of the lyric, Lyricon selects
one of the icons which is assigned the adjective bringing
the maximum Ria or Rib value.

C. Preparation(3): Icon selection
Lyricon supposes to prepare several icons for each category. It also supposes that one or more adjectives, slow,
fast, simple, rich, primitive, or complex are assigned to every
prepared icon. The assigned adjectives are referred to select
icons. Figure 2(Left) shows an example of a category ”love”,
which contains 9 keywords, and 6 icons. Lyricon ﬁrstly
speciﬁes the category corresponding to the contents of song
by keyword matching between each category and lyrics, and
then selects the most adequate icon in the speciﬁed category
based on musical features, referring the adjectives of icons.
During our experiments, we prepared enough number of
icons for each category. We then showed the icons and
adjectives assigned to the icons to 12 examinees, and asked

IV. USER INTERFACE
We implemented visual music selection interfaces that
display the multiple icons selected by our technique on two
platforms: Windows PC and Android OS.

147

Figure 3. (Upper-Left) User interface implemented for Windows PC. (Upper-Right) Zooming user interface. (Lower-Left) User interface implemented for
Android OS. (Lower-Right) A scroll-bar of a music player software

songs using the vertical scroll bar. The user interface initially
displays the most important icon for each block. When a user
clicks a name of a song, the user interface zooms up so that
all icons of the speciﬁed song are displayed.
We think that Lyricon can be also applied to icon indication along scroll-bars of media players. Figure 3(LowerRight) shows an illustration of the application. Users can
easily play the song from any block that they want to listen,
by looking at the icons.

Figure 3(Upper-Left) shows our implementation of the
user interface for Windows PC. It horizontally displays a set
of icons for one song, and vertically aligns the sets of icons.
Users can select their favorite songs by clicking the names of
songs. They can start or stop of playing the songs by pressing
the downside buttons. Also, users can click icons so that
Lyricon can start the play of songs from the corresponding
parts of the songs.
Here, this mechanism occupies large area of window
space to completely show the selected icons of many songs.
To solve the problem, we implemented a level-of-detail
mechanism to control the number of displayed icons. It
vertically reduces the number of displayed icons according
to change of heights of windows. Also, it vertically reduces
the number of displayed icons according to change of
widths of windows. Figure 3(Upper-Right) illustrates the
mechanism.
Figure 3(Lower-Left) shows our implementation of the
user interface for Android OS. It features start, pause, next,
and previous buttons as orange buttons. It also features
horizontal and vertical scroll bars: users can browse icons
through a song using the horizontal scroll bar, and many

V. RESULTS
A. Examples
Figure 1 shows examples of the multiple icon selection
results applied to real Japanese hit songs. Theme of the
song displayed in Figure 1(upper) is love, and the icon
selection result clearly represents the theme. Theme of the
song displayed in Figure 1(center) is Japanese cherry, which
blossoms during graduation and enrollment season in Japan.
It displays an icon of country and an icon of city, because
the central character of the song graduates from a school in a
country and then moves to a city. The icon selection result
narrates such story of the song. The former part of lyrics

148

icon sets. For example, lyric 2 in Table II was a Christmas
song, but some of examinees selected another icon set shown
in Figure 1(upper). We assume that some of examinees
associated the Christmas day from icons of hearts and starts
from the wrong icon set. We would like to gather such
mistakable examples and discuss how to improve in our
future experiments.

displayed in Figure 1(lower) negatively contains keywords
”ﬁght” and ”tear”, but the latter part of the lyrics positively
contains keywords ”love” and ”ﬂower”. The icon selection
result well represents the change of the nuance.
These results demonstrate that the icon selection results
by Lyricon clearly represents the theme of the songs, and
story of the lyrics.

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

B. Subjective evaluation of icon selection results

This paper presented ”Lyricon”, a technique for automatically selecting multiple icons of tunes block-by-block.
Lyricon ﬁrstly selects candidates of icons according to words
of lyrics block-by-block, and then selects suitable icons
from the candidates according to musical features. Lyricon
also supports user interfaces to effectively and adaptively
display the icons. This paper demonstrated the effectiveness
of Lyricon with examples and subjective evaluation results.
As a future work, we would like to reexamine the icons
and keywords. Section V-B discussed that several songs
bring mistakable results, or consist of important words which
are not prepared by our implementation. We would like to
prepare more categories, keywords, and icons to support
more variety of lyrics. Also, we would like to have more
experiments to ﬁnd more mistakable results and discuss how
to improve.
Also, we need to improve the implementation. Section
V-B also discussed that interpretation of lyrics is mistakable
while Lyricon just extracts keywords. We would like to apply
more sophisticated natural language processing techniques
to solve the problem. Another issue is that Table I suggests
adequate answer rates for impressions were a little bit worse
than those for keywords. We think one reason may be
selection of musical features, and therefore we would like
to discuss how to improve the processes of musical features.
As another future work, we would like to extend Lyricon
to allow users to edit the categories, and to add keywords
and icons. For example, we assume it is effective if users
can add their favorite photographs or original pictures which
they can easily imagine the songs.

We showed printed icon selection results for examinees,
and asked them several questions. Examinees were 13 female university students majoring computer science.
1) Impression of songs associated by looking at icons:
We asked 50 examinees to look at sequences of icons
which expressed the whole songs, and asked to answer their
impression of the songs. We prepared 10 sequences of icons,
and asked to freely write keywords imagined to be contained
in the lyrics of the songs, and impressions imagined to
be led from musical features of the songs. We extracted
adequate keywords and impressions from their answers, and
calculated adequate answer rates, which are the rates of the
number of adequate answers against the total number of
answers.
Table I shows the adequate answer rates for keywords and
impressions. This result denotes that the answers were very
adequate for several songs (e.g. icon set 2, 5, and 6). The
icon set 2 is selected for a summer love song, which have
fast and bright musical features. Figure 1(Upper) shows this
icon set. Lyricon successfully selected icons of summer and
love icons, and examinees adequately mentioned keywords
including summer and love, and impressions including fast
and bright.
On the other hand, we could not get high adequate answer
rates for some of other songs. Icon set 7 was selected for a
song of family love, but many examinees imagined a song
of love between a man and a woman looking at icons of
heart. We need to apply more sophisticated natural language
processing techniques to distinguish between family love
and man-woman love. Icon set 10 was selected for a song
of urban life struggling against business and economics. We
did not prepare adequate categories and keywords for such
songs. We need to prepare wider categories and keywords
for more variety of songs.
2) Selection of icons from lyrics: We asked 50 examinees
to read lyrics of 7 songs, and then choose the best sequence
of icons for the lyrics. We prepared 10 similar sets of icons
for each song, and asked them to choose one of the icon
sets for the song.
Table II shows correct answer rates, which are the rates
of the numbers of correctly answered examinees against the
total number of them. This result denotes that the rates were
totally good, and Lyricon works well to associate semantics
of songs by looking at the sequences of icons. On the other
hand, this result denotes that there were several mistakable

R EFERENCES
[1] V. Setlur, C. Albrecht-Buehler, A. A. Gooch, S. Rossoff,
B. Gooch, Semanticons: Visual Metaphors as File Icons.
Computer Graphics Forum (Proc. of Eurographics), Vol. 24,
No. 3, pp. 647-656, 2005.
[2] P. Kolhoff, J. Preub and J. Loviscach: Music Icons: Procedural
Glyphs for Audio Files, Brazilian Symposium on Computer
Graphics and Image Processing (SIBGRAPI’06), pp. 289296, 2006.
[3] M. Oda and T. Itoh: MIST: A Music Icon Selection Technique
Using Neural Network, NICOGRAPH International, 2007.
[4] S. Xu, T. Jin, F. C. M. Lau, Automatic Generation of Music
Slide Show Using Personal Photos, 10th IEEE International
Symposium on Multimedia, pp. 214-219, 2008.

149

Table I
A DEQUATE ANSWERS RATES , WHERE ANSWERS ARE KEYWORDS IMAGINED TO BE CONTAINED IN THE LYRICS , AND IMPRESSIONS IMAGINED TO BE
LET FROM MUSICAL FEATURES .
Icon set
Rate(keyword)
Rate(impression)

1
0.97
0.57

2
0.96
0.88

3
0.87
0.62

4
0.96
0.63

5
0.94
0.98

6
0.86
0.85

7
0.18
0.33

8
0.98
0.35

9
0.85
0.24

Table II
C ORRECT ANSWER RATES OF SELECTION OF ICON SETS FOR LYRICS OF SONGS .
Lyric
Rate

1
0.92

2
0.76

3
0.82

4
0.80

[5] R. Neumayer, A. Rauber, Multi-Modal Music Information
Retrieval - Visualisation and Evaluation of Clusterings by
Both Audio and Lyrics. 8th International Conference on
Computer-Assisted Information Retrieval, 2007.
[6] Japanese WordNet, http://nlpwww.nict.go.jp/wn-ja/
[7] Chasen, http://chasen.naist.jp/hiki/Chasen/
[8] O. Lartillot, MIRtoolbox,
http://www.jyu.ﬁ/hum/laitokset/musiikki/en/
research/coe/materials/mirtoolbox
[9] K. Maehashi, Lyric Master,
http://www.kenichimaehashi.com/lyricsmaster/

150

5
1.00

6
0.84

7
0.96

10
0.25
0.28

