2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Interactive Information Visualization for Sensemaking in
Power Grid Supervisory Control Systems
Christine Mikkelsen∗ † , Jimmy Johansson† , Mikko Rissanen∗
Corporate Research, Industrial Software Systems, Sweden
† C-Research, Link¨
oping University, Sweden

∗ ABB

christine.mikkelsen@se.abb.com, jimmy.johansson@liu.se, mikko.rissanen@se.abb.com
sensemaking process. Their model is intended to describe
the process of how situation awareness is achieved when
the available information is uncertain or conﬂicting, and
maintained or recovered after a surprising event, which are
typical situations that an operator of a HSC system has
to deal with. The metaphor frame is used to describe how
humans start with some form of framework to make sense
of data and events. This framework can, in the beginning
of the sensemaking process, be minimal but it expands and
becomes more elaborate when more data is acquired. The
frame is a hypothesis about the connections among data
and sometimes new information conﬁrms the hypothesis but
sometimes new data forces the user to reject the frame and
thus the user has to replace it with another.
In this paper, we present ﬁndings from a comprehensive user study that describes how operators have essential
problems with navigation and interaction with data in the
system. Even if new visualization techniques that present
data in a more intuitive way are used, there is still a need for
intuitive navigation and interaction techniques that support
the sensemaking process so operators can understand the
situation and make the right decisions.
We propose visualization solutions for interactive analysis
of data in a control environment that support sensemaking. The solutions have been inﬂuenced by the Visual
Information-Seeking Mantra [16]: ”overview ﬁrst, zoom and
ﬁlter, then details on demand” and are based on coordinated
and multiple views (see [1] for a survey and user guidelines)
and dynamic visual queries using parallel coordinates [8].
The proposed solutions are the result of an extensive user
study with 76 participants from 16 different power utility
control rooms in USA, India, Sweden, United Arab Emirates
and Oman.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II describes the fundamental views in the targeted
system. In section III related work on interactive information
visualization methods for power grid supervisory systems is
discussed. Details of the method used for conducting the user
studies are presented in section IV and the ﬁndings from
the ﬁeld studies are together with the proposed solutions
presented in section V. The proposed solutions and future
work are discussed in section VI.

Abstract—Operators of power grid supervisory control systems have to gather information from a wide variety of
views to build situation awareness. Findings from a conducted
ﬁeld study show that this task is challenging and cognitively
demanding. Visualization research for power grid supervisory
control systems has focused on developing new visualization
techniques for representing one aspect of the power system
data. Little work has been done to demonstrate how information visualization techniques can support the operator in the
sensemaking process to achieve situation awareness. To ﬁll this
gap, and with support from a ﬁeld study, we propose solutions
based on multiple and coordinated views, visual interactive
ﬁltering and parallel coordinates.
Keywords-Human supervisory control systems, sensemaking,
information visualization, power grid visualization, ﬁeld study

I. I NTRODUCTION
Human Supervisory Control (HSC) system is a general
term for systems that include an automation layer between
the human operator and the system [15]. HSC systems can be
found within a wide range of application domains and in this
paper we will focus on control systems used for supervision
of power grids. The main objective for an operator of such
control system is to make sure that the power grid runs
in ”normal mode”. That task involves information and data
gathering from several different views of the power grid. The
gathered information is used for building a mental model of
the situation, a concept referred to as situation awareness
[3].
Today’s sophisticated and extremely complex power grids
generate large amounts of data which needs to be analyzed
by power system operators. Analyses of recent blackouts
have shown that power grid operators ability to understand
the situation is crucial and that problems with situation
awareness have been one major factor that has affected the
propagation of failures [4].
In recent years, sensemaking has been introduced as a
process that should be considered while designing decision
support systems for power grid supervision [4].
”Sensemaking is the active process of building, reﬁning,
questioning and recovering situation awareness.” [7]
Sensemaking is related to situation awareness [3] and
the conceptual model of sensemaking presented in [10],
[11] deﬁnes situation awareness as the product of the
1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.100

119

II. BACKGROUND
An HSC system for power grid supervision usually includes the following fundamental views:
•

•

•

•

•

Geographical overview - This is an overview of the
power grid’s geographical area, see Figure 1a. It includes, for example, transmission lines and substations
that are mapped to their geographical location on the
overview. The purpose of the view is to show overall
status of the grid, for example voltage levels and if
there are reported alarms in substations.
Single line diagrams (SLD) - In addition to the
geographical overview there is also a schematic view,
called single line diagram (SLD), over the whole
system showing more details, see Figure 1b. This
schematic view focuses on the connectivity in the grid
and does not maintain geographical distance between
devices. The schematic view is also divided in subviews showing individual substations with more details
about devices and their status.
Alarm and event lists - One of the most important
views is the alarm list, see Figure 1c. The alarm list is
usually a vertical list that represents reported alarms in
the power grid. Each alarm that is reported to the alarm
list has a number of alarm attributes that can be used
for sorting and ﬁltering. When a device in the power
grid report a value that exceeds one of its limits then
an alarm is sent to the alarm list. Usually a device has
a number of different alarm limits and the ﬁrst level
is supposed to be used for alerting the operator about
potential problems in the future if the value continues to
increase or decrease. In addition to the alarm list there
is usually an event list that includes recorded manual
operations and other types of system events.
Detailed information views - The single line diagrams
display a subset of available information about devices in the power grid. The displayed information is
typically numerical values which operators constantly
need to supervise. Other information that the operator
needs occasionally is displayed in separate detailed
information views, see Figure 1d.
Automatic support function views - The supervision
of a power grid system is supported by automatic
functions. One example is a function called contingency
analysis which analyzes the effect of losing one or
several transmission lines, due to damage or overload.
The results from the automatic support functions are,
in some cases, displayed on the schematic views or on
the geographical overview but in some cases only in
tabular lists, see Figure 1e.

Figure 1. The wide variety of views in HSC systems for power grid
supervision: (a) geographical overview, (b) single line diagram, (c) alarm
list, (d) detailed information view and (e) automatic support function view.

views in the HSC system. The views represent different
aspects of the system and are used for supervising the status
and for performing manual operations. Most of the tasks
performed by an operator involve some kind of decision
making and thus the process of making sense of information
to understand the current situation is very important.
III. R ELATED W ORK
During the last decade, research within power grid operations has focused on how to enhance situation awareness.
Several visualization techniques have been developed to
improve the representation of power grid data.
One early proposed technique for visualizing power system data is colour contouring [18]. Colour contouring is
described as useful for representing voltage levels in the
power grid. This technique has been validated in a follow-up
study on the human factors aspects [13]. The study showed
that the colour contouring display attracts the users’ attention
to the worst voltage violations quicker than the numerical
display, but at the cost of worse performance when used
for solving or removing the voltage violations. Overbye et
al. also found that combining the numerical display with
colour contouring resulted in worse performance in some
situations, than just colour contours or numerical display
alone, and their proposed explanation is that users are not
able to ignore one dimension (numbers) while using another
(colour contours).
Two other presented visualization techniques are static or
animated arrows that represent power ﬂow, and pie charts
that represent the transmission lines’ load percentage [12].
There are several attempts to utilize 3D views by mapping
power system data to a three dimensional shape that is
placed onto a tilted geographical map or schematics of the
power grid. In some cases the tilted map is a terrain map
representing additional aspects of the power grid. [2] used a

Figure 1 shows an example subset of views that operators
use while supervising a power grid system. Due to the
size and complexity of the physical power grid system the
information and data is spread over thousands of various

120

were conducted in 2008 and 2010 covering 16 different
power utility control rooms in USA, India, Sweden, United
Arab Emirates and Oman. During each visit a selection of
users, having different roles, were observed and interviewed.
The goal was to gather as much information as possible
about the different users’ tasks and how they were using the
system. How they navigated and interacted with information
in the system to perform their tasks and making decisions
was of special interest. Different types of control rooms
(managing transmission (EMS) and/or distribution (DMS)
power grids) located in three different continents was covered to capture differences between them. Figure 2 illustrates
the role and geographical location distribution of the 76
studied users.

terrain map in combination with colour contours to visualize
results of power ﬂow analysis and state estimation.
One example of visualizing the result of a contingency
analysis is presented in [20]. In this case the presented
solution also utilizes a third dimension by mapping attributes
(height, colour and orientation) of bars, cones and other 3D
shapes onto a tilted 2D plane with a single line diagram.
Thus, different kinds of 3D visualization techniques have
been presented as solutions to enhance the way power
system data is presented to the operator but few user
studies have been performed to validate that 3D visual
representations actually improve the performance. The user
study presented in [19] only concludes that 3D displays
could potentially be valuable tools but that more studies
are needed. However, a number of situations where 3D can
add value are presented. In particular they highlight 3D
representations as a tool for improving the speed of highlevel judgements of current operating levels in relation to
upper and lower limits.
Evaluations of 3D displays in comparison to 2D displays
have been done for various other domains with mixed
results. The reason for the variety of conclusions in previous
conducted evaluations is discussed in [17] and Smallman et
Al. present their own comparison study where they found
that information about a third dimension can be better
obtained in a well-designed 2D display.
The fact that data in a power grid supervisory system has
a spatial nature is the background for the work presented
in [14]. They suggest several visualization techniques for
different problems that would beneﬁt from a geographical
view. Their main idea is to map power system data onto
different types of 2D icons within a geographical map,
a similar solution as one of the solutions presented and
compared in [17].
Some of the techniques summarized above, such as colour
contours, animated arrows, 3D bar graphs on tilted 2D
display and pie charts, have been implemented in power grid
supervisory systems as solutions to ﬁll the need for more
intuitive displays that provide operators with better situation
awareness.
The above summary of previous work shows that research
within visualization for power grid operations has been
focusing on developing visualization techniques that map
power system information to one separate view for exploring
a speciﬁc aspect of the data. There is little research about
how these proposed techniques would ﬁt into the whole decision making process to support sensemaking in situations
when information needs to be gathered from several views.

Figure 2.

Distribution of studied users (roles and geographical location)

We chose to do ﬁeld studies instead of laboratory studies
since it is difﬁcult to replicate a true realistic situation with
all interruptions and conﬂicting events that are going on in a
control room. In addition, all control rooms have their own
variations of the system and we were interested in ﬁnding out
whether those variations affected the users’ way of working.
Another issue with laboratory testing is that it is difﬁcult and
expensive to get subjects with the right background to travel
to the laboratory site.
The drawback of ﬁeld studies is the lack of control. The
opportunities for conducting the interviews with operators
were strongly affected by the control rooms’ organization
and schedule and we had to adjust our methods depending on
the available time in the control room and with the different
users.
Generally a variation of different protocols for cognitive
task analysis was used. In some cases a modiﬁed bootstrapping protocol [5] was enough to get the overall picture of
the users’ main tasks. In some cases we had the opportunity
to observe a user while performing a task where he had to
carefully analyze the situation and make critical decisions.
In those cases an adapted version of the critical decision
making method [6] was used to get a deeper understanding
of the decisions the user had to make.

IV. M ETHODOLOGY
To investigate what operators need in their supervisory
role, and how they operate and make decisions in dynamic
and complex systems, the best way is to observe them in
their real environment [21]. Thus a number of ﬁeld studies

121

information on the alarm list. Thus this function is not used
very often.
Our proposed solution to the above ﬁndings is to implement a system based on the concept of multiple and
coordinated views. Figure 3 displays an alarm list view
coordinated with an SLD view. A selection of one alarm in
the alarm list will make the SLD diagram view automatically
display the matching SLD for the device raising the alarm
and with the device highlighted to guide the operator to
directly understand where the device is located. Other alarms
related to the same device is also highlighted in the list and
gives the user an instant way to understand if the alarm is
recurring or what the previous alarm from the same device
was about.

We aimed for an individual interview with each user,
combined with naturalistic observations but in some cases
the interview had to be done at the same time as the user was
in operation due to the fact that replacement operators were
not available. Thus the interview was constantly interrupted,
but that also gave us additional and important information
about how the system is used. The individual interviews
together with the different cognitive task analysis protocols
gave us deeper knowledge about the users’ decision making
process. Through the naturalistic observations we captured
basic problems that users had with navigation and interaction
with information in the system.
The information we got from the interviews and the
conducted observations were mainly recorded with pen and
paper and in some cases, with permission, they were audio
recorded.
During the following phase, proposed solutions for dealing with the general ﬁndings were developed and implemented in a prototype. Finally the prototype was used in a
qualitative validation of the results.
V. R ESULTS
Several ﬁndings could be drawn from the ﬁeld study,
however in this paper we focus on the issues concerning
the navigation between overview and details and alarm
management.
A prototype was created in order to test and verify the proposed solutions during the development phase and in order to
get qualitative response from end-users. The prototype was
developed with C# as programming language and Windows
Presentation Foundation (WPF) was used for the graphical
user interface. The GAV Framework [9] provided us with
the parallel coordinates control component.

Figure 3. Selection of one alarm in the alarm list automatically displays
the matching SLD and the device causing the alarm is highlighted. Other
alarms related to the same device is also highlighted in the list

The geographical overview could also be coordinated with
the alarm list and then a selection of one alarm in the
list would highlight the related station in the geographical
overview. Figure 4 demonstrates that the coordination should
also work in the opposite direction and a selection of a
station in the geographical overview would highlight the
related alarms in the alarm list and the matching SLD would
be displayed in the SLD view.

A. Overview and details
Having an overview of the situation in the power grid has
been highlighted by basically all types of users as critical
and the most common views chosen for that purpose are the
alarm list, in combination with single line diagrams (SLD).
To have a complete overview the operators also have to ﬁnd
detailed information in many different views and it takes a
lot of time and effort to just ﬁnd the right views and place
them on the available displays. One operator commented on
moving from one alarm in the list to the station SLD and
to ﬁnd the right device is one of the most time-consuming
tasks that operators face. Even if this statement came from
a single operator it could be conﬁrmed by observing other
operators.
Another observation was a problem with the current
function that takes the user directly from one alarm to the
corresponding device on an SLD. The new view is opened
on top of the alarm list and the user has to rearrange the
views on his available displays to avoid hiding important

Figure 4. Substation selection in geographical overview highlights alarms
in alarm list and displays the corresponding SLD with the alarming devices
highlighted

The ﬁeld studies also revealed a need to show more
information about alarms in some kind of overview. This

122

relevant things directly”. Even if this statement came from
one single operator the observations of the others conﬁrmed
this issue. These ﬁndings underpin the need for having good
situation awareness.
Because of the complexity of the system it is difﬁcult
to have all needed information in one single view. Instead
the operator has to navigate through different disconnected
views and put the pieces of information together to a complete picture. The alarm list view is, for example, suitable
for identifying the most recent alarms, since it is usually
sorted chronological, and get more detailed information
about them. But to ﬁnd out where the alarms are located
the operator has to ﬁrst look at the alarm list and then ﬁnd
the interesting alarm on the geographical overview or on the
SLDs. Thus, to understand where the most recent alarms are
located the operator has to put information from the different
types of views together and this is a cognitively demanding
process.
By coordinating the displays the operator can easily
answer the following questions: Where are the most recent
alarms? How are alarms distributed in the power grid? Is
there a speciﬁc part of the grid that is affected? The operator
can select an alarm in the list and the geographical display
highlights the station having the alarms selected and the
operator can directly see where those alarms are located on
the SLD.

was speciﬁcally mentioned by operators in American control
rooms. Several operators explained that when they receive a
new alarm they have to ﬁnd the right information in different
places and often scroll down large tabular lists before they
know what to do and how they should act. One operator
would like to be able to extract more information from the
overview and mentions which device has caused an alarm
as an example. Today, he can only see that information
in the SLDs if he zooms in on the right area. Also other
operators said that details about devices are hard or slow
to ﬁnd. According to one operator, the SLD should show
the details about breakers already in that view instead of
another level of windows on top of a station’s SLD. Others
suggested that if the station name is clicked, the operators
should see more detailed data on that station.
The above ﬁndings are all related to overview and details
on demand and these problems could also be solved with the
implementation of multiple and coordinated views since it
provides a direct relation between the overview and details
about objects and devices. Instead of mapping detailed
information onto the geographical overview display or onto
the SLDs, making them more cluttered, the user can easily
ﬁnd more information about an object by selecting it on
the overview or SLD. The coordinated detailed view would
then show more information about the object, see Figure 5.
If the user selects another object the detailed view would
automatically display the related information.

Coordinated views also solve the problem of cumbersome
exploration of various lists in the system. The alarm list is
one example but there are many more. The items in the lists
usually refer to one object in the system and the normal
procedure is to navigate from one item in the list to a detailed
view of the object in the SLD. This is done either using
a function reached through the context menu that appears
when right-clicking on the item or with a direct link. As a
result the ﬁrst view, the list, is either hidden or replaced by
the new view, the SLD. The user must therefore re-arrange
the views in order to monitor the list and get more detailed
information at the same time or use backward and forward
interaction to switch between the list and the details. If the
user wants more information about another item in the list
the same procedure must be performed again and this makes
exploration of information a time consuming process.
Thus the proposed solution of implementing multiple and
coordinated views is addressing both the problem with detailed views hiding the overview and the cumbersome way of
navigating between overviews and details. The solution also
addresses the problem of information scattered in different
places in the system and the need to navigate through a
number of views to build a mental model of the situation.
Multiple and coordinated views support the operator in the
sensemaking process by providing an intuitive way to explore data from different views and understand relationships
among data.

Figure 5. Selection of a device on SLD automatically display its detailed
information view

Another problem that operators expressed is that they
”cannot measure disturbance” in general. The overall disturbance must be deduced by using a number of different views
of the system, which is cumbersome. One operator also said
that ”we have to read all values in SLDs instead of seeing

123

alarms but also that they need an intuitive way to identify
the alarms that they should focus on.

B. Alarm management
One of the most critical issues that was found from the
ﬁeld studies were the information overﬂow that operators
experience in critical situations. One operator described a
speciﬁc situation when he received over 60 pages of alarms
in 30 seconds. During that situation they missed important
alarms about a transmission line that had a high load.
A major event in the system can be followed by a large
number of alarms and events reported and the only view that
operators can rely on in that situation is the alarm list. From
the alarm list the operator needs to prioritize and ﬁnd the
root cause or causes of the problems and understand how
the current situation can be resolved. Thus a large portion of
the operators’ daily work is going through pages of alarms.
It was also observed that too many alarms seems to make
operators regularly ignore some of them and they need to
trust their experience to identify the alarms that are essential.
The need to manually narrow down alarms was expressed by
several operators. In every control room except one, it was
speciﬁcally mentioned that alarm ﬁltering must be improved
from their existing implementation.
Even if the users clearly expressed the need to narrow
down the alarm list they also highlighted the fact that it is
risky to ﬁlter alarms and ﬁltering rules must be considered
carefully since it is crucial that operators not miss important
information. It is not possible to only look at the order of the
alarms to detect the root cause alarm and ﬁlter out the rest.
The alarm limits may also have been conﬁgured incorrectly,
which makes it risky to use as the only ﬁltering attribute.
Today each alarm is traditionally represented with a row
in the list and has a number of different attributes that
are divided in different columns. Examples of attributes are
time, type and priority. The alarm list can be sorted by the
different attribute columns and there is also a possibility to
ﬁlter the list by entering limits to the attributes in a separate
dialogue window. This functionality is not used according to
the ﬁeld studies and one explanation for that is that operators
are afraid of missing important information. For example,
if the list is ﬁltered to only show alarms of priority 13, there is a risk that important information is passing by
without notice since alarm limits may have been calibrated
incorrectly. Each alarm that is reported to the alarm list has
to be acknowledged by the operator to tell the system that it
has been noticed. Only when it has been acknowledged and
when the cause of the alarm has been cleared it disappears
from the list.
One comment from an operator was: ”Every alarm counts
in some way”. This comment indicates that operators somehow use alarms that they, at ﬁrst impression, seem to ignore.
Even if the operator acknowledges some alarms without
any further analysis they are still used in the creation of
the mental model of the situation. Observations show that
operators need the information hidden in the vast amount of

Figure 6. Parallel coordinates display showing alarm items as horizontal
lines crossing alarm attributes values mapped to the vertical parallel axes

Thus operators need a more efﬁcient and interactive way
of ﬁltering alarms without the risk of removing important
information. The proposed solution is to coordinate the
alarm list with a visualization technique that also can be
used for interactive ﬁltering of the alarm list. The suggested
technique is parallel coordinates, see Figure 6, since it also
can reveal hidden patterns in the huge number of alarms.
In the parallel coordinates display, each alarm attribute is
represented by a parallel axis and each alarm is represented
with a line crossing through the vertical axis at the alarm’s
corresponding attribute value. From this view it is possible
to explore alarm patterns and ﬁnd out if there seems to be
a correlation between some of the attributes, for example
alarm type and time.

Figure 7. Interactive visual ﬁltering of alarm list using the sliders in the
coordinated parallel coordinate graph

Figure 7 demonstrates how the alarm list can be narrowed
down by using the sliders on the vertical axis, in the
parallel coordinate graph, representing the alarm attributes.
Depending on the situation the user can have the option to
either remove or fade the ﬁltered alarms from the list and
from the parallel coordinates display. The reason why the
ﬁltered out alarms should be faded out instead of removed
is the risk of losing important information that is hidden in
the alarms. The user can focus on a selection of the alarms
but still keep the overview of all alarms and identify patterns.

124

Parallel coordinates is not a suitable representation for all
alarm attributes. The location of the object that is sending
the alarm is, for example, better shown on a SLD or on
a geographical map. The solution with coordinated views
solves this issue since an SLD and a geographical map can
be coordinated with the parallel coordinates display and the
alarm list, see Figure 8. Then the operator can carry out
ﬁltering operations by selecting regions of the map or of
the single line diagram and look at alarms only from that
speciﬁc region.

objectives with the qualitative analysis of our proposed
solutions was to ﬁnd out if the end-users understand the
visualization technique and how it can be used. Observations
of the users while trying out the prototype, together with
verbal feedback and the answers in the questionnaires show
that users understand the parallel coordinates display. They
started to discuss how it could be used for representing other
types of data in the system. One operator said: -”I am a part
of a group that meets every week to discuss alarm patterns
and parallel coordinates would therefore be very good for
us. I mean having this tool for ﬁguring out what the data is
trying to tell you.” Another statement made by an operator
was: -”The parallel coordinates would be very good; it
would be possible to use this in real time.” These statements
indicate that the visualization technique is understood and
can probably be used for identifying patterns in the alarms.
Another identiﬁed issue were the need to narrow down
the number of alarms in the alarm list. The proposed
solution, using parallel coordinates for representing alarms
and providing a visual way to ﬁlter the coordinated alarm
list, was evaluated in a quantitative and qualitative user
study. Preliminary results, so far, indicate that the parallel coordinates display coordinated with the alarm list
outperformed the alarm list alone in terms of execution
time, correct answers to tasks and other usability attributes,
in particular for tasks rated as difﬁcult. The user study
did not compare ﬁltering alarms and selecting a subset of
alarms in the parallel coordinates display alone. Thus the
improved performance cannot be derived from only the
parallel coordinates display but in coordination with the
alarm list. However, subjective user responses were recorded
and comments about the alarm list’s strength when it comes
to sequential sorting and the level of details in comparison
with the parallel coordinates display were mentioned. This
implies that the solution of coordinating multiple views
support the user in the sensemaking process by providing
a way to combine the strength of both representations.
Section III demonstrates the tendency to believe that new
visualization techniques are the solution for problems with
situation awareness. Visualization techniques play an important role but a single view containing all possible information
an operator needs, to have complete situation awareness,
would be to cluttered. The evaluation of colour contours
showed, for example, that the combination of colour contours and numerical values had the worst performance [13].
When they were separated each of them was effective but
for different situations. This underpins the fact that the best
solution is to create visualizations that are effective for
representing some aspect of the data and coordinate them
together to build a complete mental model of the situation.
Adoption of the concept of multiple and coordinated
views opens up a new way for exploring information and
supporting the operators’ sensemaking process to build situation awareness, not only from one view but from several.

Figure 8. A coordinated geographical view provides a way to interactively
ﬁlter out alarms based on regions

Thus, the ﬁnal solution to coordinate the alarm list with a
parallel coordinates display, a geographical overview and/or
a SLD provide the operator with an intuitive way of exploring many alarms and detecting patterns. It addresses
the need for narrowing down the number of alarms so that
operators can focus on speciﬁc areas without the risk of
losing important information.
VI. D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
The ﬁeld studies have shown that today the sensemaking
process of reaching situation awareness is cumbersome.
Operators are required to put pieces of information together
from disconnected views in the system and the navigation
between overview and details is especially challenging.
The developed prototype was presented to end-users during three focus groups meetings in USa, India and Denmark
(including end-users from the Nordic countries). During the
focus group session the end-users had the opportunity to try
out the proposed interactive visualization techniques. The
qualitative feedback from the end-users was gathered and
will be used to reﬁne the proposed solutions.
Overall the users were impressed by the proposed solutions and asked if they will be implemented in the real
system. The users were also asked to ﬁll in a questionnaire
about how they felt about the different solutions. The answers from the questionnaire, in combination with verbal
feedback, indicate that the multiple and coordinated views
and parallel coordinates, in particular, have the potential to
enhance the way operators interact with data in the system.
High learning threshold is usually listed as one of the
major drawbacks of parallel coordinates. Thus one of the

125

This makes it promising to continue to develop customized
visualization strategies for efﬁcient identiﬁcation of speciﬁc
aspects of the system and by coordination ﬁnd relationships
between them.
The proposed solutions are based on results from ﬁeld
studies in the power grid system domain. It is possible that
the proposed solutions could be applicable to other human
supervisory control systems, used in other domains, where
data and information is spread over a vast amount of various
views, and where operators need intuitive way of navigating
between overview and details.
Based on the results obtained in this work we will continue to investigate how multiple and coordinated views in
combination with existing and new visualization techniques
can improve operators’ sensemaking process to achieve
situation awareness in human supervisory control systems.
Qualitative and quantitative evaluations of the proposed
solutions in real world situations are discussed as the next
step, both in the power grid system domain and in industrial
process control.

[6] R. R. Hoffman, B. Crandall, and N. R. Shadbolt. Use of the
critical decision method to elicit expert knowledge: A case
study in the methodology of cognitive task analysis. Human
Factors, 40:254–276, 1998.
[7] Robert Hutton, Gary Klein, and Sterling Wiggins. Designing
for sensemaking: A macrocognitive approach. In Sensemaking Workshop, CHI’08, 2008.
[8] A. Inselberg. The plane with parallel coordinates. The Visual
Computer, 1(4):69–91, 1985.
[9] M. Jern, S. Johansson, J. Johansson, and J. Franz´en. The
gav toolkit for multiple linked views. In Proceedings IEEE
International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views
in Exploratory Visualization 2007, pages 85–97, 2007.
[10] G. Klein, B. Moon, and R. Hoffman. Making sense of
sensemaking 1: Alternative perspectives. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 21:70–73, 2006.
[11] G. Klein, B. Moon, and R. Hoffman. Making sense of
sensemaking 2: A macrocognitive model. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 21:88–92, 2006.
[12] T. J. Overbye, , and J. D Weber. Visualization of power
system data. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual International
Conference on System Sciences, 2000.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We wish to thank the project leader Dilip Kota for arranging the ﬁeld study and making things happen and Martin
Naedele, Claus Vetter and Magnus Larsson for supporting
this work.
We would also like to thank Missy Cummings and her
researchers in the Humans and Automation Laboratory
(HAL) at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), and
Matthew Cooper at Link¨oping University for valuable input
and discussions.
This work was partly supported by the ABB Industrial
Software Systems program and partly by the Swedish Research Council in the Linnaeus Centre CADICS.

[13] T. J. Overbye, D. A. Wiegmann, A. M. Rich, and Y. Sun.
Human factors aspects of power system voltage contour
visualizations. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 18:76–
82, 2003.
[14] T.J. Overbye, E. M. Rantanen, and S. Judd. Electric power
control center visualization using geographic data views.
In REP Symposium on Bulk Power System Dynamics and
Control - VII, Revitalizing Operational Reliabilityi, pages 1–
8, 2007.
[15] T. B Sheridan. Telerobotics, Automation, and Human Supervisory Control. MIT Press, 1992.

R EFERENCES

[16] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for information visualizations. In VL ’96: Proceedings
of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, pages
336–343, 1996.

[1] M. Q. Wang Baldonado, A. Woodruff, and A. Kuchinsky.
Guidelines for using multiple views in information visualization. In Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced
visual interfaces, pages 110–119, 2000.

[17] H.S. Smallman, M. St. John, H.M. Oonk, and M.B. Cowen.
Information availability in 2d and 3d displays. Computer
Graphics and Applications, IEEE, 21(5):51 –57, 2001.

[2] X. Bei, C. Yuksel, A. Abur, and E. Akleman. 3d visualization
of power system state estimation. In IEEE Mediterranean
Electrotechnical Conference, pages 943–947, 2006.

[18] J. D. Weber and T. J. Overbye. Voltage contours for power
system visualization. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
15(1):404–409, 2000.

[3] M. R. Endsley. Toward a theory of situation awareness in
dynamic systems. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 37:32–64, 1995.

[19] D. A. Wiegmann, T. J. Overbye, S. M. Hoppe, G.R Essenberg,
and S. Yan. Human factors aspects of three-dimensional
visualization of power system information. In IEEE Power
Engineering Society General Meeting, 2006.

[4] F. L. Greitzer, A. Schur, M. Paget, and R. T. Guttromson. A
sensemaking perspective on situation awareness in power grid
operations. In Power and Energy Society General Meeting—
Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st
Century, IEEE, pages 1–6, 2008.

[20] S. Yan and T. J. Overbye. Visualizations for power system
contingency analysis data. IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, 19(4):1859–1866, 2004.

[5] R. R. Hoffman. Protocols for Cognitive Task Analysis.
Technical report, State of Florida Institute for Human and
Machine Cognition, May 2005.

[21] C. E. Zsambok. Naturalistic Decision Making. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 1996.

126

