2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation

A Task Based Performance Evaluation of
Visualization Approaches for Categorical Data Analysis
Sara Johansson Fernstad and Jimmy Johansson
C-Research, Link¨oping University, Sweden
{sara.johansson, jimmy.johansson}@itn.liu.se
ogy, chemistry and medicine; some examples being census
data, organism classiﬁcation data, DNA sequence-based
data and molecular data. Efﬁcient visualization methods
can facilitate and speedup analysis considerably, and so
the development of efﬁcient methods for visual analysis of
categorical data is an important issue within information
visualization.
Two main approaches have been suggested for visual
analysis of categorical data. One is to represent each category with a numerical value (quantiﬁcation) and then analyse using visualization methods commonly employed for
numerical data (from here on this approach will be called
QuantViz). The other approach is to employ visualization
methods speciﬁcally designed for the characteristics of categorical data (from here on called CatViz).
Although a range of methods for visual analysis of categorical data are available we cannot assume that all are
useful and facilitate analysis and, even more, we cannot
assume that all methods are equally useful for all types
of tasks. Without proper evaluations of the usability of
methods within speciﬁc task contexts, there is nothing but
presumption to guide analysts as to which method to use.
While quantiﬁcation has been suggested several times as a
method for efﬁcient analysis of categorical data, very little
evidence of its usefulness has been presented and no formal comparisons between quantiﬁcation methods and visualization methods for categorical data have, to the best
of our knowledge, been made.

Abstract
Categorical data is common within many areas and efﬁcient methods for analysis are needed. It is, however, often difﬁcult to analyse categorical data since no general
measure of similarity exists. One approach is to represent
the categories with numerical values (quantiﬁcation) prior
to visualization using methods for numerical data. Another is to use visual representations speciﬁcally designed
for categorical data. Although commonly used, very little guidance is available as to which method may be most
useful for different analysis tasks. This paper presents an
evaluation comparing the performance of employing quantiﬁcation prior to visualization and visualization using a
method designed for categorical data. It also provides a
guidance as to which visualization approach is most useful
in the context of two basic data analysis tasks: one related to similarity structures and one related to category
frequency. The results strongly indicate that the quantiﬁcation approach is most efﬁcient for the similarity related
task, whereas the visual representation designed for categorical data is most efﬁcient for the task related to category
frequency.
Keywords— Categorical Data, Quantitative Evaluation,
Usability Studies, Parallel Sets, Quantiﬁcation

1

Introduction

Over the past decades the availability of complex multivariate data sets has increased within a variety of domains.
A major challenge for data analysts is to discover patterns
and to gain understanding and knowledge from the structures within the data. Different kinds of data have different characteristics that need to be taken into consideration
when deciding which method to use for analysis. One data
type which requires specialized analysis methods is categorical data. For categorical data there exists no similarity measure comparable with that of numerical variables.
Due to this, the analysis of categorical data is often not
as straightforward as for numerical data and fewer generic
methods are available. Nonetheless, categorical data are
common within many areas such as social sciences, biol1550-6037/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2011.92

1.1

Contributions

Through a usability study we now make a ﬁrst attempt
to evaluate the effectiveness and efﬁciency of employing
quantiﬁcation of categorical data prior to visualization. We
also aim to provide an initial step of guidance in terms
of establishing the usability of the two approaches in the
context of performing basic analysis tasks. This is approached by comparing the performance of analysis using
a QuantViz method with the performance using a CatViz
method, while carrying out a number of tasks, details of
which can be found in section 4.1.1. In this context performance is deﬁned as a combination of accuracy and re80

sponse time. The main contribution of this paper is then a
performance evaluation providing:

Havre et al. [7], where the polylines are spread over additional axes and sorted to display category frequencies and
to avoid data overlay. The CatTree method [12] is an example of a tree-map based visualization for representation of
hierarchically structured categorical data. In the Attribute
Map View [14] categorical values are represented within
attribute rows by rectangles whose sizes are relative to category frequency, and in the TreemapBar [8] bar charts are
combined with tree-maps by embedding a tree-map visualization inside the rectangular space of the bars.
To conclude, CatViz methods are mostly designed for
visualization of category frequencies and their efﬁciency
is often highly dependent on data set size and structure.
To the best of our knowledge no formal comparison has
been made between the majority of CatViz methods and
due to this the selection of method to use in this study is
based on our subjective opinion that Parallel Sets (ﬁgure 1)
is the CatViz method whose efﬁciency is least affected by
data set size, being able to display approximately as many
variables as parallel coordinates.

• A formal comparison of two methods for visual analysis of categorical data.
• An experimental study in the context of two basic data
analysis tasks.
• Guidance as to which method may be most useful for
different types of tasks.
It is worth noting that although the main goal of the
study is not to compare the performance of one visual
representation with another (e.g. parallel coordinates [9]
vs. Parallel Sets [13]), but to compare one way of visually analysing categorical data with another (QuantViz vs.
CatViz), the results of a comparison of a speciﬁc set of
visualization methods is not generalizable to all available
visualization methods. Hence, the results of this study are
only true for the speciﬁc visualization methods and tasks of
this study. This is a ﬁrst step in evaluating the performance
of quantiﬁcation as a method for visualization of categorical data and has to be followed by additional evaluations
focusing on other aspects before any general conclusions
can be drawn.

1.2

2.2

Several algorithms usable for quantiﬁcation of categorical data have been suggested. One of the more common being Correspondence Analysis (CA) [6] which is a method
identifying associations between the cells of a frequency
table. Tenenhaus and Young [22] describe how a number of
different methods for quantiﬁcation, such as Multiple Correspondence Analysis, Optimal Scaling and Homogeneity
Analysis, all lead to the same equation. Hence, they are one
method with a number of different names and will all be referred to as CA throughout the remainder of this paper. In
Cuadras et al. [3] three methods for quantiﬁcation are compared; CA, an approach using the Hellinger distance and a
log ratio approach. They conclude that although CA and
the Hellinger distance approach sometimes provide similar results, CA is the best due to a range of properties,
whereas the log ratio approach often provides quite different results from the other two. Shen et al. [20] presents a
framework for mapping categorical data to numerical values through calculation of similarities between data items
and a reference set. The effectiveness of their method is
compared with the effectiveness of other methods in the
context of clustering and visualization. Ma and Hellerstein
[15] presents a technique for ordering of categorical data,
using a combination of clustering and domain semantics.
In Rosario et al. [19] methods for numerical representation
of categories using CA are presented. Two different CA
computations and an arbitrary quantiﬁcation with uniform
spacing are compared for a number of categorical data sets
using parallel coordinates. Johansson et al. [11] extended
the quantiﬁcation approach to mixed data sets by incorporating information about relationships among numerical

Paper Overview

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 presents related research and in section 3 the design decisions of the study are described and motivated.
Section 4 describes the study and presents the results,
which are ﬁnally discussed in section 5.

2

Related Work

This section provides an overview of research in the
areas of categorical data visualization, quantiﬁcation and
performance evaluation.

2.1

Similarity Measures and Quantiﬁcation

Visualization

Most visualization methods for categorical data are
based on tables of category frequencies (contingency tables). The fourfold display [4] is one example where the
cell frequencies of two-by-two tables are represented by
quarter circles with size relative to frequency. Other examples are for instance the mosaic plots and mosaic matrices [4] where multivariate tables are represented by tiles
whose sizes are proportional to the cell frequencies. In
a Cobweb diagram [23] the categories are represented as
individual nodes that are pairwise linked together using
lines whose widths represent the deviation from independence of the category pair frequency. Parallel Sets [13]
(described in more detail in section 3.2) has a layout similar to parallel coordinates where the categories of a variable are represented with a set of boxes. Another example using the layout of parallel coordinates is presented by

81

variables into the process, and included the possibility of
interactive modiﬁcation to make use of the domain knowledge of expert users. Evaluating the performance of different quantiﬁcation methods is not within the scope of this
paper. We used CA in the study since it has been suggested
several times as a method for quantiﬁcation of categorical data, it is a generic method not designed for speciﬁc
tasks such as clustering, and since a previous evaluation
by Cuadras et al. [3] picked it out as a good quantiﬁcation
method compared to some other methods.

2.3

Evaluation

Different approaches can be taken to the evaluation of
visualization methods, mainly depending on the objective
of the study. In Plaisant [16] four main areas for evaluation in information visualization are listed; 1) controlled
experiments comparing design elements, 2) usability evaluation of a tool, 3) controlled experiments comparing two
or more tools, and 4) case studies of tools in realistic settings. The study presented in this paper can be deﬁned as a
controlled experiment comparing two approaches to visual
analysis and is, hence, most closely related to Plaisant’s
ﬁrst and third areas. A large number of studies have been
performed within those evaluation areas and a full review
is beyond the scope of this paper. In this study the performance of two visualization methods is compared in the
context of speciﬁc tasks, deﬁning performance as a combination of accuracy and response time. This is a common
approach for quantitative evaluations and some previous
examples are presented in for instance Stasko et al. [21]
where the performance of two space-ﬁlling visualization
methods for hierarchical data is compared, and in Plaisant
et al. [17] where SpaceTree, a tree browser based on node
link diagrams, is compared with Microsoft Explorer and a
Hyperbolic tree browser. Similarly Johansson et al. [10]
investigated the ability of humans to perceive relationships
in 2D and 3D parallel coordinates and in Vrotsou et al. [24]
a comparison was made between the performance using a
2D representation and a 3D representation for visual analysis of time-geographical data.

3

Figure 1: In Parallel Sets the variables are represented as
horizontally laid out parallel axes. The categories within
the variables are represented by vertical boxes with width
corresponding to category frequency.

Figure 2: The multiple views used to represent quantiﬁed
data, including a scatter plot matrix, a table lens and parallel coordinates. Colouring and table lens sorting is in this
ﬁgure performed according to the leftmost variable.
the QuantViz approach while a single view is used for the
CatViz approach. This is however a carefully considered
decision based on the following:

Design Decisions

1. Using multiple views facilitate analysis if the views
complement each other. However, the use of multiple
views increase the perceptional burden by demanding
coordination of several sources of information.

Due to the fundamental differences between the
QuantViz and CatViz approaches, a major concern during
the design of this study has been to make decisions in terms
of design in a way that makes it possible to perform a fair
comparison, while not removing the basic differences and
beneﬁts of any of the methods. As CatViz method Parallel Sets is used (ﬁgure 1, described in detail in section 3.2)
and the quantiﬁed data is visually represented using a multiple views set-up of three common visualization methods;
parallel coordinates, table lens [18] and scatter plot matrix
[1] (ﬁgure 2, described in detail in section 3.1). It might
appear as an unfair comparison using multiple views for

2. Visualization methods for numerical data have different strengths and weaknesses and may complement
and strengthen each other in a multiple view system.
3. Visualization methods designed for categorical data
are based on category frequencies. They generally
have the same strengths and weaknesses and hence
do not complement and strengthen each other in the
same way as methods for numerical data may.

82

enhancement used is displaying the category names next
to the axes of the parallel coordinates to provide a link between the numerical representation of a category and its
name. The layout rules used when preparing screen shots
of this method are as follows:

Our aim has been to present all methods used in the study
as advantageously as possible. The beneﬁt of using multiple views depends both on visualization methods and the
task at hand. For the tasks performed in this study we found
no CatViz method that would complement Parallel Sets in
a favourable way since all methods focus on category frequencies. Hence, using a single view was considered most
beneﬁcial for the CatViz approach. For the QuantViz approach on the other hand we could clearly appreciate that
the features of for instance a table lens, which is able to
display category frequencies, would complement the features of parallel coordinates in an advantageous way. Similarly a scatter plot matrix is able to display all pairwise
correlations concurrently, which is not possible in parallel coordinates or table lens. Hence, using multiple views
was considered most beneﬁcial for the QuantViz approach.
Another important issue was to avoid performance differences appearing due to interactive differences and features
within the speciﬁc tools used in the study. To assure this the
participants were presented with pre-prepared screen shots
of the tools and were, hence, not allowed to interactively
explore the data. Through this the individual differences
between the tools were reduced as much as possible without removing the basic differences and beneﬁts of any of
the visualization methods. The visualization methods used
and the layout rules employed when creating screen shots
will be describe in the two following sections.

3.1

1. Colouring is in all views performed according to the
categories of the leftmost variable.
2. When tasks relate to one speciﬁc variable that variable
is positioned to the left and sorting of rows in the table
lens is performed according to it.
3. When tasks relate to two speciﬁc variables those are
positioned as the two leftmost variables. Sorting of
rows in the table lens is performed according to the
second variable.

3.2

Parallel Sets

Parallel Sets [13] (ﬁgure 1) is a visualization method
for analysis of categorical multivariate data where the variables of the data set are represented by horizontal parallel
axes. Instead of displaying individual data items Parallel
Sets focus on displaying category frequency. Within each
variable the categories are represented by vertical boxes
whose width corresponds to the relative frequency of the
category. The width of the bands stretching between the
categories of adjacent variables represent the relative frequency of a combination of categories. For this study
a publicly available implementation of Parallel Sets has
been used (http://eagereyes.org/parallel-sets). All screen
shots of Parallel Sets within the paper have been created
using this implementation, displaying synthetic data sets
designed for this study. The tool’s available features of reordering variables as well as categories have been used to
prepare screen shots as follows:

Quantiﬁcation and Visualization

CA was used as quantiﬁcation method, as this is a commonly used method for quantiﬁcation purposes. CA is used
for analysis of frequency tables where each cell represents
the frequency of a combination of categories and it identiﬁes similarity between cells by extracting independent dimensions in the table, using singular value decomposition.
The ﬁrst independent dimension, which explains most of
the variance within the frequency table, is used as numerical representations of the row categories in the frequency
table [6]. A multiple views layout is used for visualization (ﬁgure 2), including a scatter plot matrix, a table lens
and parallel coordinates. These methods are commonly
available and complement each other, and are hence considered to provide a good representation of beneﬁts using
the QuantViz approach. In general the QuantViz approach
aims to perform analysis as if the data would have been numerical. Based on this the visualization methods employed
for QuantViz in this study are used as if the data were numerical and hence basic implementations of the visual representations has been used. Although the visual representations could have been extended with additional features facilitating categorical data analysis, this is not used since the
method would then no longer be a pure QuantViz method
but a combined QuantViz/CatViz method. The only visual

1. Colouring is performed according to the categories of
the topmost variable.
2. When tasks relate to one speciﬁc variable, that variable is always positioned as the top variable, and when
tasks relate to two speciﬁc variables, those variables
are always positioned as the two top variables.
3. For all variables the categories are internally ordered
according to frequency, with highest frequency to the
left and lowest to the right.

4

The Study

The aim of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness and
efﬁciency of utilizing quantiﬁcation followed by visualization for analysis of categorical data. More speciﬁcally, we
want to evaluate the performance when carrying out basic
data analysis tasks using the quantiﬁcation approach compared to carrying out the same tasks using Parallel Sets.

83

Table 1: A data set including three variables (X, Y, Z) and
six data items. If analysing the similarity of the three categories in variable X categories A and B are considered
more similar to each other than they are to category C.
This is true since the items belonging to categories A and
B belong to the same categories in variables Y (D) and Z
(F and G), whereas the items belonging to category C in
variable X belong to a different set of categories in variable
Y (E) and Z (H).
Item
1
2
3
4
5
6

X
A
A
B
B
C
C

Y
D
D
D
D
E
E

is motivated by the fact that the ability to efﬁciently perform the basic tasks is fundamental for the ability to efﬁciently perform more complex tasks. The overall task of
data analysis is to identify structures and patterns within
data. Most patterns, such as correlation and clusters, can
be deﬁned in terms of similarity. Hence, the most relevant
general task to focus on are, in our opinion, the identiﬁcation of relationships in terms of similarity. Additionally,
when it comes to analysis of categorical data the frequency
of categories, i.e. the relative number of items belonging
to speciﬁc categories or combinations of categories, is often of major interest and is, as mentioned previously, the
main property of focus in categorical data visualization.
Based on this, the tasks of this study are separated into two
classes: 1) identiﬁcation of category frequencies, and 2)
identiﬁcation of similarity patterns. Within the two classes
questions are asked relating either to structures within one
variable or structures between two variables (from here on
called 1VQ and 2VQ respectively). To be more precise,
four tasks are deﬁned as follows:

Z
F
G
F
G
H
H

Table 2: An example data set including three variables (X,
Y, Z) and six data items. If analysing the similarity of the
three variables, variable X and Z are considered more similar to each other than they are to variable Y . This is true
since the data items belonging to the three categories in
variable X belong to one category each in variable Z, and
vice versa. Whereas they are spread over the two categories
in variable Y .
Item
1
2
3
4
5
6

4.1

X
A
A
B
B
C
C

Y
D
E
D
E
D
E

• Frequency task, 1VQ: Which category in variable X
is the most common?
• Frequency task, 2VQ: Which combination of categories in variables X and Y is the most common?
• Similarity task, 1VQ: Which two categories in variable X are most similar to each other?

Z
F
F
G
G
H
H

• Similarity task, 2VQ: Which variable is most similar
to variable X?
In terms of similarity the following deﬁnitions were used;
1. Two categories are similar if they (in general) belong
to the same categories within all (or most) variables
in the data set (example displayed in table 1).
2. Two variables are similar if the category combinations
for the variables are clearly separated, that is, if the
data items of each category in variable X (in general)
belongs to only one category in variable Y, and vice
versa (example displayed in table 2).

Method

To evaluate the performance the participants of the
study carried out a number of tasks (described in detail
in section 4.1.1) using the two visualization approaches.
Performance was measured in terms of accuracy and response time, which were recorded for all tasks and stored
in log ﬁles. Questionnaires were used to receive the subjective opinion of the participants in terms of difﬁculty of
performing tasks and preference of visualization method.

4.1.1

4.1.2

Materials

The tests were carried out on an HP EliteBook 8540p
laptop with an Intel i5 2.53GHz CPU, 4 GB RAM and
an Nvidia NVS 5100M graphics card. An external Dell
20” monitor was used, set to a resolution of 1680 x 1050
pixels. The participants were presented with screen shots
of the visualization methods together with the task to perform, included in ﬁgures of size 1100 x 800 pixels. The experimental environment used was designed in Matlab. To
retain full control over relationships in the data synthetic
data sets were created using Matlab. A total of 32 data sets

Tasks

The tasks used in the study were selected to represent
the basic elements of typical data analysis tasks, both speciﬁc to categorical data analysis and more general tasks.
We focus solely on the basic elements of the tasks, which

84

visual representations were described in detail as well as
the basic concept of quantiﬁcation. Furthermore, the rules
used for screen shot layout was described. The concepts
of frequency and similarity in the context of the study was
also explained, and the basic task types were presented to
the participants together with example images displaying
how the structure asked for can be identiﬁed using each of
the analysis methods. The explanations and example images were printed out and made available throughout the
test. The participants were told that their response time
would be measured and that they should try to answer as
quickly as possible but to maintain high accuracy.
The test itself was performed individually and consisted
of a training period and the experiment. The training period included a small number of test tasks using both analysis types and was used as a means for getting familiar with
the experimental environment, methods and tasks. During
the training period the participants were encouraged to ask
questions to make sure they had understood the tasks. The
experiment consisted of four separate phases, as described
in section 4.1.3, where the participant was presented with
8 tasks and screen shots. Once the answer to the task was
found the participant pressed a button, the screen shot was
hidden and an interface for submitting the answer was displayed. For each task the response time was recorded from
when the screen shot was displayed until the answer button was pressed. The answers provided, as well as response
time and data sets used, were stored in log ﬁles. When a
phase was ﬁnished a pause screen was displayed, allowing
a break between the phases, and the participant was asked
to answer two questions; 1) Did you ﬁnd it difﬁcult or easy
to answer the questions using the visualization method?
2) Did you ﬁnd it more difﬁcult to answer the questions
when the number of variables and number of categories
increased? The questionnaire also encouraged the participants to provide additional comments on the method used
and tasks performed. When all four phases were ﬁnished
the participants were asked to answer a ﬁnal questionnaire,
including questions as to which analysis type the participant preferred using for each task type.

were created, 16 designed for frequency related tasks and
16 for similarity related tasks, half of which where smaller
data sets including three to four variables and three to ﬁve
categories within each variable, and half being larger data
sets including six to seven variables and six to eight categories within each variable. The data sets were designed to
provide relatively clear answers to the tasks.

4.1.3

Experimental Design

The study was designed as a 2-factor within-subject
design, where the two factors were type of analysis
(QuantViz vs. CatViz) and type of task (Frequency vs.
Similarity). The four separate experimental phases were
hence:
1. QuantViz + Frequency
2. QuantViz + Similarity
3. CatViz + Frequency
4. CatViz + Similarity.
The presentation order of the four phases was counterbalanced using a Latin-square procedure [5], resulting in four
different phase orders. The participants were randomly assigned to one of the four phase orders, assigning equally
many participants to each.
Performing the tasks of this study includes interpretation of fairly complex visual representations, and hence
some visualization experience was set as a requirement
for participants. Due to this the participants were 15 researchers and students within areas related to visualization,
aged between 22 and 35 years. Each participant performed
32 tasks in total (8 per phase), and no data set was used
more than once per participant, avoiding that any structures asked for had been identiﬁed by chance during previous tasks. The presentation order of data sets and questions
was randomized within each phase. However, since each
task type includes two different kinds of questions (1VQ
and 2VQ) and since the data sets were of different sizes,
the randomization was limited by a certain level of control.
During each phase it was ensured that equally many 1VQ
and 2VQ were asked, and that half of each question type
was asked using a smaller data set and half using a larger
data set. No major performance differences were expected
due to data set size and type of question, thus they were not
treated as factors within the experimental design. However,
information on size and question type was recorded to be
able to identify unexpected results related to this.

4.1.4

4.2

Result

This section will present the results of the study in detail. Results are reported both in terms of performance
measures and questionnaire answers.

4.2.1

Performance

The measured data were initially not normally distributed. Due to this the response time was logarithmically
transformed prior to statistical testing, and a repeated measures ANOVA [5] was carried out on the logarithmically
transformed data, using an α value with a signiﬁcance of
p < 0.05. For accuracy a Friedman test was used for signiﬁcance testing, since this data could not be logarithmi-

Procedure

To assure that all participants possessed the basic
knowledge needed to be able to interpret the visual representations, an initial introduction was held for all participants, either in small groups or individually. The introduction was in the form of a small scripted lecture where the

85

Table 3: Average response times in seconds for the four phases, overall average at the top and below split into one and two
variable questions. Standard deviation is displayed within parentheses.
Overall
1VQ
2VQ

QuantViz + Frequency
26.73 (14.42)
13.91 (10.58)
39.56 (21.63)

QuantViz + Similarity
16.15 (7.75)
16.40 (9.68)
15.90 (7.38)

QuantViz + Freq.
QuantViz + Sim.
CatViz + Freq.
CatViz + Sim.

Min
2
6
4
4

Max
8
8
8
8

Q1
4
8
8
6

CatViz + Similarity
32.45 (15.67)
27.04 (11.88)
37.85 (22.67)

Table 5: Descriptive statistics of the measured accuracy for
the four phases separated into one and two variable questions. The maximum number of correct answers is 4.

Table 4: Descriptive statistics of the measured accuracy for
the four phases, displaying median, minimum, maximum,
1st quartile and 3rd quartile. The maximum number of
correct answers is 8.
Median
4
8
8
6

CatViz + Frequency
10.55 (5.12)
7.45 (3.31)
13.66 (7.02)

Q3
4
8
8
7

Q + F + 1VQ
Q + F + 2VQ
Q + S + 1VQ
Q + S + 2VQ
C + F + 1VQ
C + F + 2VQ
C + S + 1VQ
C + S + 2VQ

cally transformed into a normal distribution. A post-hoc
test was performed on accuracy, using pairwise comparisons according to Conover [2], to identify which phases
are signiﬁcantly different from each other.

Median
4
0
4
4
4
4
3
3

Min
2
0
3
3
4
0
2
1

Max
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

Q1
3
0
4
4
4
4
2
3

Q3
4
1
4
4
4
4
4
4

ing QuantViz for frequency tasks and CatViz for similarity tasks, whereas there was no signiﬁcant difference between using QuantViz for similarity tasks and CatViz for
frequency tasks. These results indicate performance differences depending on the combination of visualization type
and task type, with higher performance using CatViz for
similarity tasks and QuantViz for frequency tasks. However, looking more closely into the results it appears as if
question type also had a strong inﬂuence on performance.

The two factors of the study were visualization type
(QuantViz vs. CatViz) and task type (Frequency vs. Similarity), resulting in four separate phases. Average response
times of the phases are displayed in the top row of table
3 and the statistics of accuracy are displayed in table 4.
In terms of overall response time, the average time for the
two visualization methods were equal, as displayed in ﬁgure 3, and statistical analysis reports no signiﬁcant effect
of visualization type, F (1, 14) = 3.112, p < 0.099. However, there is a signiﬁcant effect of task type, F (1, 14) =
52.998, p < 0.001, with frequency tasks being performed
almost 25 % faster than similarity tasks, as displayed in
ﬁgure 3. Furthermore, statistical analysis reports a signiﬁcant interaction effect between visualization type and task
type, F (1, 14) = 122.007, p < 0.001. This is also visible
in ﬁgure 3 with similarity questions being performed considerably faster using QuantViz whereas frequency tasks
are performed faster using CatViz. Accuracy results generally agree with response time, with high performance for
similarity tasks using QuantViz and for frequency tasks using CatViz, as visible in table 4 and from the box plots
in the left part of ﬁgure 4. Statistical testing conﬁrms
that the difference between the four phases is signiﬁcant,
χ2 (3, N = 15) = 32.929, p < 0.001. Furthermore,
post-hoc testing shows a signiﬁcant difference between us-

The two bottom rows of table 3 display the response
times of the question types, showing a noticeable difference between performing 1VQ frequency tasks and 2VQ
frequency tasks using QuantViz. A similar relationship is
identiﬁed for 1VQ and 2VQ frequency tasks using CatViz.
The difference between 1VQ and 2VQ for similarity tasks
is however not as explicit. Similarly, the difference in
terms of accuracy between the question types is noticeable, as displayed in table 5 and in the right part of ﬁgure 4. Most obvious is the difference between 1VQ and
2VQ frequency tasks using the QuantViz approach. Here
the accuracy of 1VQ is almost as high as the accuracy of
performing frequency tasks using CatViz, whereas the accuracy of performing 2VQ frequency tasks using QuantViz
has a median value of zero. Statistical testing of response
time, with three within-subject factors; visualization type
(QuantViz vs. CatViz), task type (Frequency vs. Similar-

86

Response time (sec)

Num accurate

30

8

4

6

3

4

2

2

1

Num accurate

26
22
18
14
10
6

Figure 3: Average response time in seconds for visualization type (left), task type (centre) and the four combinations of task and visualization types (right).

Q+ 1
F VQ
2V
Q
Q+ 1
S VQ
2V
C+ 1 Q
F VQ
2V
Q
C+ 1
S VQ
2V
Q

Q+
F
Q+
S
C+
F
C+
S

C+
F
C+
S

F

S
Q+

Q+

qu
e
Sim ncy
ila
rity

Fre

Qu

ant

Vi
Ca z
tV
iz

2

Figure 4: Box plots displaying number of accurate answers
for the four phases (left) and phases divided based on question type (right). The red lines represent median values.
1VQ frequency tasks using QuantViz is almost as good as
the overall performance of frequency tasks for CatViz. In
terms of data set size, no major performance differences
were found for any of the measures.

ity) and question type (1VQ vs. 2VQ), shows signiﬁcant effects for task type, F (1, 14) = 64.137, p < 0.001, and for
question type, F (1, 14) = 137.625, p < 0.001. Furthermore, the interaction effects where signiﬁcant for visualization type and task type, F (1, 14) = 121.208, p < 0.001,
task type and question type, F (1, 14) = 43.758, p <
0.001, and visualization type, task type and question type,
F (1, 14) = 13.584, p < 0.002, indicating that the performance difference in terms of response time is affected
by the question type as well as by visualization and task
type. Due to this additional statistical testing was performed separating the data into two sets based on task
type. For frequency tasks signiﬁcant interaction effects
were found between visualization type and question type,
F (1, 14) = 22.587, p < 0.001, whereas no signiﬁcant interaction effects were found for similarity tasks. In terms
of accuracy, statistical testing shows signiﬁcant difference
between the conditions in table 5 with χ2 (7, N = 15) =
57.555, p < 0.001. The post-hoc test showed a signiﬁcant
difference between 1VQ and 2VQ for frequency tasks using QuantViz, but no signiﬁcant difference between 1VQ
and 2VQ for any of the other phases. Worth noting is
also that there were signiﬁcant differences between performing 2VQ frequency tasks using QuantViz and both
question types for frequency tasks using CatViz, whereas
there were no signiﬁcant differences between 1VQ frequency tasks using QuantViz and frequency tasks using
CatViz, indicating that the overall difference between performing frequency tasks using QuantViz and CatViz may
mostly depend on the low performance of 2VQ for frequency tasks using QuantViz, whereas the performance of

4.2.2

Questionnaires

The questionnaire answers strongly implied that CatViz
was the preferred method for performing frequency tasks,
as stated by twelve of the participants, and that QuantViz
was the preferred method for performing similarity tasks,
as stated by fourteen participants. Tables 6 and 7 provide
more information on the participants opinions regarding
the visualization approaches and tasks. Table 6 displays
the number of participants ﬁnding it easy to solve the tasks
for the four phases and table 7 displays the number of participants who found the tasks more difﬁcult as the data set
size increased.
Some participants found it both difﬁcult and easy performing the tasks. Using QuantViz for frequency tasks a
main comment on this was that it was easy for 1VQ (i.e.
ﬁnd the most common category in variable X) but difﬁcult
for 2VQ (i.e. ﬁnd the most common combination of categories in variables X and Y). Regarding the increase in difﬁculty as the data set size grew, comments indicate that this
was mostly true for 2VQ. Comments from the participants
regarding using the QuantViz approach for similarity tasks
indicate that the difﬁculty mentioned by some participants
was mainly due to examples where more than one variable
could be interpreted as similar. Using CatViz all participants found it easy to answer the frequency tasks, and most
did not ﬁnd the tasks more difﬁcult as the data set size increased. An explanation made as to why it was easy to use

87

Table 6: Number of participants for each phase who found
it easy to perform the tasks. Numbers within parentheses
are total number of participants either ﬁnding it easy or
both difﬁcult and easy.
Frequency
Similarity
Total

QuantViz
3 (8)
12 (14)
15 (22)

CatViz
15
4 (10)
19 (24)

Table 7: Number of participants for each phase who found
it more difﬁcult to solve tasks when data set size increased.
Numbers within parentheses are the total number of participants either ﬁnding it difﬁcult or both difﬁcult and easy.

Total
18 (23)
16 (24)

Frequency
Similarity
Total

QuantViz
12 (14)
8
20 (22)

CatViz
4
15
19

Total
16 (18)
23

this visualization approach was that the answers were obvious due to size and variable sorting. When it came to performing similarity tasks using CatViz a comment made as
to what made it difﬁcult was that it was almost impossible
to follow the bands between the variables as they spread.
Regarding increase in number of variables and categories,
the main comment was that more bands, colours and categories generated more clutter.

egorical data, nor to all visualizations of quantiﬁed categorical data. However, it can be seen as an initial attempt
to compare the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the two visualization approaches; not aiming to ﬁnd an ultimate solution as to how categorical data is best analysed visually,
but aiming to provide guidance as to which method might
be most useful for a speciﬁc type of task and to encourage
further evaluations of the two approaches.

5

Acknowledgements

Discussion and Conclusions

In general the performance results, both in terms of accuracy and response time, agree well with the subjective
experiences reported by the participants through the questionnaires. For similarity related tasks a majority preferred
using QuantViz, which was also the visualization approach
for which the recorded performance was best for similarity tasks. For frequency related tasks on the other hand,
a majority of participants preferred using CatViz, which
also agrees well with the recorded performance. A result worth emphasizing is that when the tasks where split
up into questions concerning the frequency of categories
within one variable or a combination of categories in two
variables, the performance was noticeably higher for the
one variable questions using QuantViz. This was also mentioned by several participants who found the one variable
questions easy during this phase, whereas two variable
questions were perceived as more difﬁcult. In terms of data
set sizes no major performance differences were found.
However, the participants reported an increase in perceived
difﬁculty as the size increased. More speciﬁcally, a majority of participants experienced an increase in difﬁcult for
phases that were generally not perceived as easy, as can
be identiﬁed through the inverse relationships between tables 6 and 7. Possibly the limitations of both approaches
became more obvious as the tasks got more difﬁcult.
As a ﬁnal point of discussion it is important to again emphasize that although the study presented in this paper aims
to compare the two main approaches to visual analysis of
categorical data, and not to compare two visualization tools
or two visual representations, the results can not be directly
generalized to all visualization methods designed for cat-

We would like to thank Camilla Forsell for her kind advice on study design and analysis of results. This work was
partly supported by the Swedish Research Council in the
Linnaeus Centre CADICS and by the Visualization Programme coordinated by the Swedish Knowledge Foundation.

References
[1] Richard A. Becker and William S. Cleveland. Brushing scatterplots.
Technometrics, 29(2):127–142,
1987.
[2] William Jay Conover. Practical Nonparametric
Statistics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1971.
[3] Carles M. Cuadras, Daniel Cuadras, and Michael J.
Greenacre. A comparison of different methods for
representing categorical data. Communications in
Statistics – Simulation and Computation, 35:447–
459, 2006.
[4] Michael Friendly. Visualizing categorical data: Data,
stories, and pictures. In Proceedings of the TwentyFifth Annual SAS Users Group International Conference, 2000.
[5] Anthony M. Graziano and Michael L. Raulin. Research Methods: A Process of Inquiry, 7. ed. Pearson
Education Inc., 2010.
[6] Michael Greenacre. Correspondence Analysis in
Practice, 2. ed. Chapman & Hall, 2007.

88

ing Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, pages
109–116, 2004.

[7] Susan L. Havre, Anuj Shah, Christian Posse, and
Bobbie-Jo Webb-Robertson. Diverse information integration and visualization. In Proceedings of SPIE,
the International Society for Optical Engineering,
pages 60600M.1–60600M.11, January 2006.

[17] Catherine Plaisant, Jesse Grosjean, and Benjamin B.
Bederson. Spacetree: Supporting exploration in large
node link tree, design evolution and empirical evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, pages 57–64, 2002.

[8] Mao Lin Huang, Tze-Haw Huang, and Jiawan Zhang.
Treemapbar: Visualizing additional dimensions of
data in bar chart. In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Information Visualisation,
pages 98–103, 2009.

[18] Ramana Rao and Stuart K. Card. The table lens:
merging graphical and symbolic representations in
an interactive focus + context visualization for tabular information. In Proceedings of Human factors
in computing systems: celebrating interdependence,
pages 318–322, 1994.

[9] Alfred Inselberg. The plane with parallel coordinates.
The Visual Computer, 1(4):69–91, 1985.
[10] Jimmy Johansson, Camilla Forsell, Mats Lind, and
Matthew Cooper. Perceiving patterns in parallel coordinates: Determining thresholds for identiﬁcation
of relationships. Information Visualization, 7(2):152–
162, 2008.

[19] Geraldine E. Rosario, Elke A. Rundensteiner,
David C. Brown, Matthew O. Ward, and Shiping
Huang. Mapping nominal values to numbers for
effective visualization. Information Visualization,
3(2):80–95, 2004.

[11] Sara Johansson, Mikael Jern, and Jimmy Johansson. Interactive quantiﬁcation of categorical variables in mixed data sets. In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Information Visualisation,
pages 3–10, 2008.

[20] Zhi-Yong Shen, Jun Sun, Yi-Dong Shen, and Ming
Li. R-map: mapping categorical data for clustering
and visualization based on reference sets. In Proceedings of the Conference on Advances in knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 992–998, 2008.

[12] Erica Kolatch and Beth Weinstein.
Cattrees:
Dynamic visualization of categorical data using
treemaps. http://www.cs.umd.edu/class/spring2001/
cmsc838b/Project/Kolatch Weinstein/index.html,
May 2001.

[21] John Stasko, Richard Catrambone, Mark Guzdial,
and Kevin McDonald. An evaluation of spaceﬁlling information visualizations for depicting hierarchical structures. International Journal of HumanComputer Studies, 53(5):663–694, 2000.

[13] Robert Kosara, Fabian Bendix, and Helwig Hauser.
Parallel sets: Interactive exploration and visual analysis of categorical data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(4):558–568,
2006.

[22] Michael Tenenhaus and Forrest W. Young. An analysis and synthesis of multiple correspondence analysis, optimal scaling, dual scaling, homogenity analysis and other methods for quantifying categorical multivariate data. Psychometrika, 50(1):91–119,
1985.

[14] Zhicheng Liu, John Stasko, and Timothy Sullivan.
Selltrend: Inter-attribute visual analysis of temporal
transaction data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 15(6):1025–1032, 2009.

[23] Graham J. G. Upton. Cobweb diagrams for multiway contingency tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series D (The Statistician), 49(1):79–85,
2000.

[15] Sheng Ma and Joseph L. Hellerstein. Ordering categorical data to improve visualization. In Proceedings
of IEEE Information Visualization Symposium Late
Breaking Hot Topics, pages 15–18, 1999.

[24] Katerina Vrotsou, Camilla Forsell, and Matthew
Cooper. 2D and 3D representations for feature recognition in time geographical diary data. Information
Visualization, 9(4):263–276, 2010.

[16] Catherine Plaisant. The challenge of information visualization evaluation. In Proceedings of the Work-

89

