Collaborative Geographic Visualization: Enabling shared
understanding of environmental processes
1

1&2

Isaac Brewer, Alan M. MacEachren,

2

2

Hadi Abdo, Jack Gundrum, George Otto

2

1

GeoVISTA
Center, Department of Geography, Penn State University
2
Center for Academic Computing, Penn State University
isaacbrewer@psu.edu; alan@geog.psu.edu; www.geovista.psu.edu

ABSTRACT
Most work with geospatial data, whether for
scientific analysis, urban and environmental
planning, or business decision making is carried out
by groups. In contrast, geographic visualization
environments and related geographic information
technologies have been built and assessed only for
use by individuals. In this paper, we describe a
prototype same-time/different-place collaborative
geovisualization environment. Next, we outline an
approach to understanding use and usability and
present results of interviews with domain experts
about the ways in which collaborative geovisualization might enable group work at a distance. Finally,
we present goals for futher research.

1 INTRODUCTION
Recent conceptual and technical developments in Geographic Information Science (GIScience) (e.g., (Kraak and
MacEachren 1999, Mark 1999)), and in information technology (e.g., (Brown et al. 1999, Flanagan et al. 1997)),
suggest that we are on the cusp of a substantial increase in
the role of maps, images, and computer graphics as mediators of collaboration – in a range of contexts including environmental and urban planning, resource management,
scientific inquiry, and education. Many potential scientific,
educational, and decision-making applications for geovisualization, specifically, involve small groups working together on a problem solution; yet, existing tools support use
only by individuals. The prototype geovisualization environment we report on here is designed to support sametime/same-place as well as same-time/different-place collaboration among scientists as they explore complex spatiotemporal information. Such environments have potential
application to regional and local planning/decision-making,
scientific research conducted by distributed inter/intradisciplinary teams, and web-based education.
We consider collaborative geovisualization to involve a
committed effort on the part of two or more people to use
geovisualization tools to collectively frame and address a
task involving geospatial information. Our approach draws
upon a diverse multidisciplinary literature dealing with
group (multi-participant) work and visualization. See, for
example: Roschelle and Teasley 1995, Snowdon and JääAro 1997, Schönhage, and Eliëns 1998, Brodlie et al. 1998,
Greenhalgh and Benford 1999, Horrocks, et al 1999. For

research on group work with geospatial data specifically,
see: Armstrong 1993, MacEachren in press-a, MacEachren
in press-b, Nyerges 1999. Somewhat surprisingly (considering that GISystems use visual, map-based interfaces),
attention to the role of visual displays as mediators for geospatial collaboration has been limited (see Armstrong and
Densham 1995, for one initial effort).
Our focus here is on geovisualization to mediate and enhance collaborative knowledge construction among environmental scientists. The prototype described below is designed to facilitate collaboration among users who are exploring time series of climatic (or similar environmental)
data through shared dynamic (animated and interactive)
displays. We expect that many of the collaborative visualization issues raised in this context will be common to a
range of information visualization applications.
We begin, below, with an overview of the initial collaborative prototype developed. Then, we discuss human-centered
design for different place collaborative visualization environments and present results of a user task analysis that
uses our prototype to prompt discussion. We conclude with
brief comments on future directions based on these results.

2 AN INITIAL PROTOTYPE
The initial prototype collaborative geovisualization environment allows multiple users to view and manipulate multivariate climatic data simultaneously and, thus, to share
knowledge as they identify space-time patterns and processes (figure 1). A map view allows collaborators to manipulate a 3-D depiction of precipitation and temperature as
it varies with terrain. Users are able to control parameters
of a time series animation as well as the color scheme used
to represent the data. The latter controls allow users to focus the group’s attention on particular data ranges.
The prototype is constructed from a set of Java/Java3D
tools. These include:
• VisAD, a Java class library for interactive and collaborative visualization of numerical data developed by Bill
Hibbard, see: www.ssec.wisc.edu/~billh/visad.html.
• DEMViewer, a Java digital elevation model viewer for
ArcGrid ASCII export files, developed by Ugo Taddei,
see: www.geogr.uni-jena.de/~p6taug/demviewer/demv.html.
• Our own extensions for data queries, time referencing,
and networking.
In order to create a collaborative environment, it was necessary to build a mechanism to support communication

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

Figure 1 Prototype collaborative geovisualization environment, one user’s view.

among different computers. The mechanism developed,
TalkServer, is a JAVA application for communicating userinitiated events among networked collaborative applications. It was written by Hadi Abdo of the Visualization
Group in the Penn State Center of Academic Computing.
TalkServer listens on a predetermined port of a server for
new connections from client applications. For each new
socket connection detected, TalkServer creates a TalkServerThread (TST) to communicate with the connected
client application. When a TST receives subsequent messages from its client application that indicate changes that
will affect other clients in the collaborative session, the
messages are relayed to the TalkServer. TalkServer then
requests that all TSTs update their corresponding clients
accordingly. Our current implementation does not yet include a method to keep animations synchronized as they
run on different machines. Any action to stop, step, or restart the animation, however, re-synchronizes the views.
One of our foci in the prototype is on temporal query and
display tools designed to help users explore both linear and
cyclic components of information (figure 2). The Java implementation developed for this prototype extends from our
previous work on controls for temporal aspects of spatiotemporal visualization environments (Edsall et al. 1997,
MacEachren et al. 1999). Here, we implement a cyclical

legend that supports queries at different temporal scales. In
the example, the legend is set to select 4 years, 4 months,
and 11 days each month. The time-line tool supports selection of consecutive and non-consecutive times. We are extending the hierarchically structured time line in two ways.
First we are implementing support for multi scale selection
(e.g. by year, season, month, day). Second, we have developed and are implementing methods for graphically constructing temporal averages across selected temporal
ranges.
The temporal (and other) query tools are linked to an object-oriented database that supports complex range queries
on space, time, and attribute. The database implements the
data representation component of the “Pyramid” data
model developed by other research team members (Mennis
et al. in press).
The environment described is evolving. We have recently
adapted the environment for display in an ImmersaDesk
using an inexpensive game controller to interact with the
3D display. Over the next few months we anticipate completing the following additional extensions:
• Build more robust links to our database implementation;

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

structured interviews with environmental science domain
experts to explore their current and potential use of maps
and dynamic visual displays in research collaborations.
First, we discuss the interview process. Next we present
results.

3.1 Interviews with domain experts
Six domain experts were interviewed. All are potential users of the collaborative environment described above. The
interviews were designed to sketch a picture of multidisciplinary environmental science collaborations and the current and potential role of geovisualization as a mediator for
those collaborations. The expert participants are geographers with a research emphasis in environmental science
(either climatology or hydrology) and who are active participants in multidisciplinary projects. Three are faculty and
three are their senior graduate students. None had used the
prototype previously. Four participants were interviewed
individually with one pair interviewed together.

Figure 2 Cyclic and linear temporal query controls

• Develop more flexible and complete interaction -- e.g.,
improved color scheme selection and focusing tools;
• Add the time scale and temporal averaging tools described to allow users to apply moving averages and create composite weeks, months, or years;
• Experiment with more than two collaborators;
• Compare same and different place collaboration.

3 HUMAN-CENTERED DESIGN
One goal for our research is to design an effective and
flexible system that can support group work on environmental science research mediated through dynamic geovisualization displays. We are addressing this goal using a
four-step human-centered system design process, modeled
on that proposed by Gabbard et al. (1999) for development
and evaluation of virtual environments. The steps they delineate are: (1) user task analysis, (2) expert guidelinesbased evaluation, (3) formative user-centered evaluation,
(4) summative comparative evaluation. This multistage
evaluation process helps refine the system and its components and reveals usability concerns early in the system
design process, so that such problems can be eliminated
prior to resource intensive, formal user testing.
We have begun to adapt this multistage approach for use
with collaborative visualization environments. Here, we
present the first stage, a user task analysis that will serve as
a blueprint for prototype refinement and a benchmark for
subsequent formal evaluation. Specifically, we use semi-

Hour long interview sessions were organized around an
interview guide that included four sections and a series of
potential questions used to prompt discussion. The goal
was to obtain insights from the participants about the aspects of research collaborations that might be facilitated by
geovisualization tools and about the kinds of visualization
tools that might be needed. Thus, the prepared interview
guide was not allowed to dictate the focus of the interview
(simply to steer it) and most interviews addressed a subset
of the potential questions, sometimes delving into unanticipated topics.
Section one: Before viewing the prototype, each participant
was asked to discuss their typical research collaborations.
Specific attention was directed to the role of maps, images,
and dynamic visual displays in facilitating aspects of that
collaboration and to the kinds of maps that are (or might
be) used (e.g., static versus animated, grid cell versus polygon, large versus small scale).
Section two: Next, the prototype geovisualization environment was demonstrated and used to help focus discussion
on specific issues. Participants were prompted to discuss
the ways in which dynamic maps could be used to mediate
discussion during research collaborations. Issues raised
specifically in our prompts included: drawing attention,
joint control, shared views, and usefulness of maps within
and between disciplines.
Section three: The third section of the interview focused on
group size. Specifically, participants were prompted to
speculate on characteristics of computer displays that support or impede use by groups of different size. Issues raised
were alterations to the desktop environment that might be
needed for use by larger groups and the relative merits of
large wall displays versus large table-top displays.
Section four: Finally, the ability of the prototype to support
collaboration by individuals working on different computers (perhaps in different research labs) was demonstrated on side-by-side machines. This demonstration was

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

used to prompt discussion of how being separated in location might influence the nature of collaboration with, or
mediated by, a display.

3.2 Results
Section one: Prior to viewing the prototype, when
prompted to discuss the ways maps have facilitated collaboration or might do so, most participants mentioned the
role of maps in providing a context within which scientific
discussion takes place. One participant suggested they we
“can’t communicate (spatial characteristics) without a
map.” Most saw map displays as mediators for different
data sources and scales of analysis. One participant pointed
to the role of map displays as vehicles for posing 'what-if'
questions and three noted the role of maps in representing
temporal information (in time series analysis, query by season, smoothing over time, or finding cycles and trends).
Across the group, there was general consistency in a focus
on map displays that are multivariate, multiscale, and that
depict change over time.
Section two: Comments on five issues are summarized:
• After seeing the prototype and being asked to comment
on aspects of the dynamic display relevant for successful
collaboration, most attention was focused on the ability to
interactively change the data variables being displayed or
to control characteristics of the time series display (e.g.,
changing the pace of an animation). The ability to focus
on specific data ranges was also cited as a way to share
understanding of observed features.
• Most participants used gestures (pointing circling, etc.) to
draw our attention to features and felt that tools that facilitate “drawing attention” were crucial. Suggestions included: the mouse pointer for indicating locations, drawing tools for highlighting features, support for zooming
and focusing, and separate windows within which each
user can control emphasis.
• A common theme across users was that maps help to
provide a context for sharing ideas across disciplines and
that general reference information (boundaries, roads,
etc.) provide the framework for that context.
• When asked about the advantages or disadvantages of
providing joint interface controls, most participants recognized a possible need to do so, but also noted the potential for resulting conflict. Solutions included a turnbased approach and separate windows for each user. Two
participants explicitly expressed the idea that having a
single person in control would be best.
• Some differences in map/display use across disciplines
were noted. Among the more important were the different
spatial and temporal scales that disciplines emphasize and
the need for collaborative environments to support methods to relate those scales. In addition, one participant
noted that physical scientists treat maps as a component
in process modeling while social scientists consider maps
to be presentational devices.
Section three: When asked about scaling up to larger
groups, one participant advocated using linked desktop machines for each individual user and suggested that a large
(wall) screen would be useful only if group members each
had a desktop machine linked to it. Most other participants

assumed a larger screen would be used and focused on the
advantages and disadvantages of shared control. The need
to zoom in and out to deal with visual acuity ranges was
also noted. Other issues considered were the need to distinguish (visually on the display) among users interacting at
any one time. Color coding of user representations was
proposed. When asked whether a wallboard-like display or
a workbench-like display was preferable, most users favored the workbench orientation due to the ease with which
multiple users can gather around and the sense of active
participation it generates.
Section four: Five issues were raised in relation to support
for work at different locations:
• Facilitating dialogue - For dialogue, all but one participant favored voice (with telephone considered less convenient than digital audio). The other participant preferred voice translated to text displayed in an unobtrusive
window. Minicams were also proposed.
• Group member behaviors - The ability to know what others were doing, not just the outcome of actions, was
raised by most participants. The lack of this feature in the
prototype may have prompted this observation. Color
coding of the representation for each user was suggested
by a pair of participants as a way to recognize who is taking what actions. Two other participants suggested a split
screen with windows for each user as an alternative (or
complement) to this. The need to represent actions of
multiple users simultaneously was also raised (specifically in relation to the time wheel query control – with
the suggestion that it be rendered in 3D with one layer for
each user). Another important issue noted by one participant is that, in many geographic applications (e.g., regional planning), it is important to know not only who
each group member is, but also where they are from.
• Drawing the group’s attention - The most common suggestions were to use the mouse (again, color coded for
users) or to include electronic whiteboard drawing tools
that allow each user to circle or otherwise annotate features. One participant considered the ability to save selected displays to be important and another suggested that
making it possible to flash a region or object on and off
might be necessary to draw the groups' attention.
• Private work - When asked about the need for a private
workspace (not seen by the group), all participants responded that this aspect was important.
• Asynchronous collaboration - Only four of the participants were asked about asynchronous collaboration. All
suggested the need for some form of activity logging and
the ability to replay the log. Two, however, pointed out
that they would not want to view everything that a collaborator had done, thus some tool to annotate or otherwise highlight the most important parts of an analysis
session would be needed.

3.3 Discussion
Results of interviews highlighted questions that require
subsequent research. These include how to: (1) support
joint control of displays by multiple users, (2) represent
users and their behaviors, and (3) integrate verbal with visual communication for different-place collaboration.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

• develop a theoretical understanding of the cognitive and
social aspects of both local and remote collaboration mediated through display objects in a geospatial context;
• assess the advantages and disadvantages of extending
methods of interactive geographic and information visualization methods (developed for single users) to collaborative settings versus designing new methods to meet
unique characteristics of group work;
• examine the role of different kinds of visual representations (realistic versus abstract, animated versus static) in
geocollaborative settings.

Flanagan, J., T. Huang, P. Jones, and S. Kasif. 1997. National Science Foundation Workshop on Human-Centered Systems: Information, Interactivity, and Intelligence, July 2, 1997 edition
www.ifp.uiuc.edu/nsfhcs/final_report/toc.html.
Gabbard, J. L., D. Hix, and J. E. I. Swan. 1999. User-centered design and evaluation of virtual environments. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications Nov/Dec:51-59.
Greenhalgh, C., and S. Benford. 1999. Supporting rich and dynamic communication in large-scale collaborative virtual environments. Presence 8:14-35.
Horrocks, S., N. Rahmati, and T. Robbins-Jones. 1999. The development and use of a framework for categorising acts of collaborative work. Proc. 32nd Hawaii Inter. Conf. on System Sciences,
Maui, HI, Jan. 5-8, 1999, CD, 13 pp.
Kraak, M.-J., and A. M. MacEachren. 1999. Visualization for exploration of spatial data. International Journal of Geographical
Information Science 13:285-287.
MacEachren, A. M. in press-a. Cartography and GIS: Extending
collaborative tools to support virtual teams. Progress in Human
Geography .
MacEachren, A. M. in press-b. Cartography and GIS: facilitating
collaboration. Progress in Human Geography .
MacEachren, A. M., and I. Brewer. submitted. Conceptual framework for collaborative geovisualization.
MacEachren, A. M., R. Edsall, D. Haug, R. Baxter, G. Otto, R.
Masters, S. Fuhrmann, and L. Qian. 1999. Virtual Environments
for Geographic Visualization: Potential and Challenges. Proc.
ACM Workshop on New Paradigms in Info. Vis. and Manipulation, Kansas City, KS, Nov. 6, 1999, pp. 35-40.
Mark, D. Editor. 1999. NSF Workshop Report -- Geographic Inforamtion Science: Critical Issues in an Emerging Crossdisciplinary Research Domain. Washington, DC: NSF.
Mennis, J., Peuquet, D., and Qian, L. in press. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 14(6).
Nyerges, T. 1999. Progress in spatial decision making using geographic information systems, in Geographic Information Research: Trans-Atlantic Perspetives. Edited by M. Craglia and H.
Onsrud, pp. 129-142. London: Taylor & Francis, Ltd.
Roschelle, J., and S. D. Teasley. 1995. The construction of shared
knowledge in collaborative problem solving, in Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. Edited by C. O'Malley, pp. 6997. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Schönhage, B., and A. Eliëns. 1998. A Flexible Architecture for
User-adaptable Visualization. Workshop on New Paradigms in
Information Visualization and Manipulation (NPIV '97), Las
Vegas, Nevada, 10-14 November 1997, pp. 8-10.
Snowdon, D., and K.-M. Jää-Aro. 1997. A subjective Virtual Environment for collaborative information visualization. Virtual Reality Universe '97, Santa Clara, CA, April 2-5, 1997.

REFERENCES

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The task analysis presented here represents the first stage in
a longer term effort to develop a human-centered collaborative geovisualization environment. Our prototype is designed to support tasks that users currently cannot undertake, collaborating at a distance with, and about, dynamic
visual displays. Thus, standard user task analysis is not appropriate. We found that a modified task analysis, using an
initial prototype to prompt discussion, was an effective way
to generate input needed to support design decisions. We
are now working on a second stage prototype and will use
progressively more focused assessment methods for refinement.

4 CONCLUSIONS
The project reported here is complemented by our related
effort to develop, assess and refine a conceptual framework
for collaborative geovisualization (MacEachren and Brewer
submitted). Our goal is to use this framework to structure a
systematic program of research focused on understanding
the interrelationships among cognitive, social, and technological aspects of geovisualization-facilitated collaboration.
An anticipated product of the overall research program
(that links the conceptual framework with design,
implementation, and assessment of prototypes) is a theory
of geocollaboration that supports prediction (and testing of
predictions) about the applicability of different collaborative geovisualization tools in different application contexts.
Based on our work thus far, we have identified the following research challenges that must be met to make effective
collaborative geovisualization possible, to:

Armstrong, M. P. 1993. Perspectives on the development of group
decision support systems for locational problem-solving. Geographical Systems 1:69-81.
Armstrong, M. P., and P. J. Densham. 1995. Cartographic support
for collaborative spatial decision-making. Auto Carto 12,
ACSM/ASPRS Technical Papers, Vol. 4, Charlotte, NC, Feb. 27 March 2, 1995, pp. 49-58.
Brodlie, K. W., D. A. Duce, J. R. Gallop, and J. D. Wood. 1998.
Distributed Cooperative Visualization. State of the Art Reports
at Eurographics98, pp. 27-50.
Brown, J. R., A. van Dam, R. Earnshaw, J. Encarnação, R. Guedj,
J. Preece, B. Scheiderman, and J. Vince. 1999. Human-centered
computing, online communities and virtual environments. Computer Graphics 33:42-62.
Edsall, R., M. Kraak, A. MacEachren, and D. Peuquet. 1997. Assessing the effectiveness of temporal legends in environmental
visualization. GIS/LIS '97, Cincinnati, Oct. 28-30, pp. 677-685.

Support provided by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
grant # R825195-01-0 and by the National Science Foundation
grant #9978052. Our thanks go to the following colleagues for
their parts in data preparation and implementation of the prototype: Mike Wheeler, Amy Griffin, Daniel Haug, Jeremy Mennis,
Diansheng Guo, Masahiro Takatsuka.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

