Creativity, Complexity, and Precision: Information Visualization for
(Landscape) Architecture
Monika Büscher, Dan Shapiro

Michael Christensen, Preben Mogensen, Peter Ørbæk

Department of Sociology
Lancaster University
Lancaster, LA1 4YL, UK
+44 1524 65201

Department of Computer Science
University of Århus
DK-8200 Århus C, Denmark
+45 8942 5626

{m.buscher, d.shapiro}@lancaster.ac.uk

{toby, pmogensen, poe}@daimi.au.dk

ABSTRACT
Drawing on ethnographic studies of (landscape) architects at
work, this paper presents a human-centered approach to
information visualization. A 3D collaborative electronic
workspace allows people to configure, save, and browse
arrangements of heterogeneous work materials. Spatial
arrangements and links are created and maintained as an integral
part of ongoing work with ‘live’ documents and objects. The
result is an extension of the physical information space of the
architects’ studio that utilizes the potential of electronic data
storage, visualization, and network technologies to support work
with information in context.

Keywords
Information visualization, architecture, work materials, context,
spatio-temporal order, electronic workspace

1.

INTRODUCTION

Design professions are seldom considered to benefit from
information visualization (see, however, [9]). While scientists,
stock traders, or logistic managers draw upon vast stores of fairly
uniform data, architects and others concerned with aesthetic
design assemble and assess a heterogeneous array of information.
Textual definitions of building standards or plant specifications
are considered alongside technical detail drawings; sketches and
concept drawings; photographs, or models that explore aesthetic
features such as color, shape, texture, or lighting. It is difficult to
see how such a diverse range of information could usefully be
made amenable to information visualization techniques.
However, the visualization of automatically recognizable patterns
in huge volumes of data – based on statistical analysis or
interpretation of file meta-data such as date stamps, author, or size
– is only one aspect of the newly emerging discipline of
Information Visualization. The World Wide Web has been a spur
to the imagination with a view to visualizing information
differently. In effect, a ‘next generation of graphical user
interfaces’ has become possible [10]. Innovative activity focuses
on several core questions: How to increase the volume of

information that can be displayed? How to aid orientation? What
kinds of visualizations suit which kinds of information? How do
these questions relate to issues of human perception? How can we
extend the possibilities to manipulate information, and support
collaboration? How could information visualization dovetail with
the potential of ubiquitous computing and augmented reality?
These issues are highly relevant for aesthetic design professions.
Drawing on ethnographic studies of landscape architects and
architects at work within Desarte1, we are designing a system that
attempts to address these core issues in a way that is directly
aimed at supporting architectural work. In the following sections
we provide a brief synopsis of ethnographic observations drawing
on work on a particular landscape architecture project, selectively
discuss developments in information visualization systems in this
light, and describe a system we have developed.

2.

CREATIVITY, COMPLEXITY, AND PRECISION

‘The Deep’ (Fig. 1) is a new aquatic visitor attraction on the north
east coast of England. Its design is being developed and
coordinated by a group of architects. The landscape architects are
one amongst many professional partners called in to deal with
particular aspects of this ambitious project. Also involved are
ecologists, engineers, a quantity surveyor who deals with overall
cost estimates for materials, and a specialist interior design firm
who create museum displays and exhibition designs, which also
have an influence on the design of the exterior space.
This constellation of different perspectives generates a vast
amount of information. There are ca. 800 paper documents, and
the folder containing the landscape architects’ electronic work
files alone contains over 500MB in ca. 150 documents. One of the
principals explains that ‘only about 20% of our time on this
project is spent on design. The rest is eaten up by information
work – waiting for information from others, providing
information, exchanging information and liaising with others at
meetings, sifting through the weekly gamut of information only
some of which is relevant for us’. Retrieval is supported by
categorizations such as ‘engineers’ reports’, ‘environmental
assessment’, ‘architects’ drawings’, etc., and other structuring
conventions that reflect, for example, the time order of
documents. However, the process of relating a whole host of
parameters to specific design issues gives rise to another order of
1

DESARTE: The Design of Artifacts and Spaces is supported by the
European Community (Esprit LTR 31870). Partners are Technische
Universität Wien (A), Århus University (DK), Architekturbüro R.
Lainer (A), Casella (UK), Lancaster University (UK), Mjølner
Informatics (DK) and Use-It (A). We thank our colleagues for their
contributions to ideas in this paper.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

information structure with more flexible and dynamic
categorizations. A snapshot of ongoing work to produce layout
and detail drawings will illustrate this point.

Vic, who has reduced-size copies on his desk, but occasionally
walks across to measure exact dimensions. On many occasions
this gives rise to a discussion of constraints and possibilities.
Joanne knows that there will be cuts to the budget which are likely
to affect the exterior space. She anticipates them by organizing the
design in such a way that whole self-contained parts can be scaled
down, preferably in the specifications rather than the drawings,
which would be labor intensive to change. A copy of the quantity
surveyor’s report on her desk, stacked together with the
specifications document prepared by engineers, help her in this
strategic move. The specifications determine exactly how, for
example, paving blocks have to be laid for the ‘rumble strip’,
whether they are to be filled in with mortar or, more cheaply, with
sand, and other details. Joanne also has a special collection of
product information catalogs in a box that duplicate some of those
in the general trade literature library. Having both specifications
and the quantity surveyor’s
report open at the pages relating
to rumble strips, she determines
a ‘favorite’ paving block and a
less costly alternative. Some
pages of this product catalog
find their way onto Vic’s desk,
to enable him to draw
dimensions precisely to scale.

Figure 1: The metaphor ‘The Deep Plaza’ captures some of the
landscape architects’ concepts. Prints of fossils or marine
animals’ footprints integrated into the hard surfaces, as well as
patterns that reflect the themes and experiences inside, are to
provide an atmospheric setting for the museum.

2.1 Working On ‘The Deep’
Joanne and Vic are working
together. Joanne sketches
details on her drawing board
(marked ‘o’ in Fig. 2). A
‘rumble strip’ is one
example. It introduces rough
paving into a road before
and after a pedestrian
crossing. Vic translates these
notes into AutoCAD files.
Their workspaces are only a
few meters apart, and each contains a desk with a computer
complemented by shelves, drawing boards, and other surfaces.
There are documents and drawings everywhere – on the screens,
the desks next to the computers, the drawing boards, and on the
floor. Some of these are being generated in the course of work;
others have been assembled from various places within the
physical and the electronic information space.
Joanne has a collection of layout
drawings on the drawing board
to her left (‘x’ in Fig. 2). She
checks how her details affect the
layout and vice versa. To do so,
she turns from one drawing
board to the other, bringing her
sketch with her. The layout
drawings are also a resource for

Joanne is also the project
coordinator for The Deep. As
well as the documents that are
directly relevant for her current
task, she has a timeline for the
project pinned up on her wall,
and a folder where information
relevant to project coordination is
continuously updated. She receives a number of letters and faxes
that need to be included in this folder while she is working on the
details. This activity is only marginally related to the work she is
currently doing, yet it shares the same workspace. It is one
example of a ‘layering’ or archaeology of physical information
spaces, where each layer contains separate, often unrelated, but
individually meaningful spatio-temporal assemblies of materials.

2.2 Spatio-Temporal Order
If we examine this sequence of activity with a view to how it
might inform the potential of electronic approaches to information
visualization, it is striking how the meaning and relevance of work
materials to the current task find expression in their organization
in time and space. Assemblies such as stacks, piles, and materials
collected in a box indicate that they belong together. But more
ephemeral groupings, such as the sketches located in relation to
specific places in the layout drawings, or the combination of
specifications, cost estimate, and product catalog, also importantly
document meaningful relationships between things.
The spatio-temporal order of material assemblies is expressive of
relations between documents and objects, and of their meaning
and significance for the task at hand. This is an important resource
for the organization of individual and cooperative work. In fact, in
some respects, the configuration of materials is doing the work.
However, in the physical world this spatio-temporal order is a
somewhat recalcitrant ally. It is both ephemeral and persistent,
with advantages and disadvantages:

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

ephemeral

persistent

positive

negative

Objects can be
assembled and arranged
relatively easily for
different purposes

Objects are returned to
their locations, or buried
under a continuous flurry
of objects on the move

Things once placed stay
put unless someone
moves them

The
space
cluttered

3.

Spatio-temporal configurations of materials dynamically and
publicly document their interconnectedness. The digital
world provides only very limited equivalents – icons and
windows in an easily-cluttered two-dimensional interface.

4.

Relationships between arrangements of working materials
express another level of interrelations. If individual, e.g. taskrelated arrangements are thought of as a ‘first-order’ visualspatial organization, then combinations of such arrangements
can be thought of as a ‘second-order’ organization.

becomes

There are procedures that deal with the disadvantages of
persistence, that ‘weed out’ irrelevant information, or information
that has been incorporated into the design in a ‘definite’ form.
However, eventually, many dynamic assemblies are dissolved due
to the constraints of physical space, either deliberately or by
accident through becoming jumbled. This is an important resource
lost. Projects often stretch over long periods of time, with long
breaks in-between where a set of documents that summarizes a
stage of work is handed over to others – for example for a public
inquiry. Eventually the architects get to continue the work. It
would be useful if some of the spatio-temporal order that was
constructed while the work was going on was still available.

3.

'Explorer' content search, for example. However, context
support is limited to showing the directory structure.

INFORMATION VISUALIZATION

A basic requirement for effective information visualization is an
extension of screen space. Some approaches mainly utilize two
dimensions. Distortion-oriented techniques such as fisheye views
(e.g. [8]) or the Perspective Wall [9] greatly increase the amount
of visible data whilst allowing for dynamic transitions between
detail and context. Recent advances in technology, and
approaches that draw parallels to perception in real-world
information spaces, have pushed information visualization into
3D. More complex features that are bound up with people’s
situated discretion, e.g. a document’s significance in a specific
context, have also become a focus for information visualization.
An early example here is WorkscapeTM [1]. Ballay reports plans to
enable documents to ‘acquire a … light-weight association with
others just by being “put with” them’, while Card et al. [5]
translate semantic proximity into spatial proximity in the Web
Forager and Web Book.
The activities of one or several people within large information
spaces have featured more prominently in the work of, for
example, [2]. Populated information terrains make 3D information
visualizations ‘inhabitable’ and constitute a different approach to
information visualization. However, although these approaches
begin to explore the possibilities of exploiting people’s actions
within information spaces for information visualization purposes,
there is little support for working directly with information. Yet, it
is the work that is done with information that gives rise to
meaningful assemblies, as we have seen in our fieldwork example.
If we consider the practices of our design professionals with a
view to supporting visualization through technology, we can
distinguish four kinds of information management resources.
These are useful orientations rather than hard and fast distinctions
because users will in practice weave them into a seamless whole:
1.

Meta-data, such as a document’s date, or a project title are
used as filing principles and can be automatically detected
and used to govern presentation in the digital world.

2.

Content serves to generate categorizations. However, these
categorizations are not fixed and permanent, but depend on
the context of work. Access is currently supported through

The targeted and highly context dependent character of dynamic
arrangements of work materials means that there is little if any
prospect of usefully automating either the selection or the
configuration of materials. The digital world is potentially well
equipped, however, to capture the traces of this self-organization
by users. It is the flow of the work itself that generates visible
order, order that could become available as a ‘save-able’ and
share-able resource for work in a digitally-supported world. When
it comes to combinations of arrangements, the affordances of
physical spaces are powerful but limited in scope. Arrangements
targeted at particular tasks can be conserved and combined by
multiplying workspaces, within the limits of the space and
furniture available. For cooperative working, arrangements can be
shared by two or more people working on the same one, or by
individual but related workspaces being inter-visible within an
office.
The visualization design philosophies applied respectively to
these information resources can be thought of as automation,
search, trace, and summation/subsumption. The Manufaktur
system addresses all of them, though in what follows we
concentrate on the third and fourth, which are its more original
aspects.

4.

MANUFAKTUR

The system we are designing builds on our observations of the
informational affordances of physical workspaces, and the
practices that design professionals have built up around them. It is
conceived of as a digital ‘craft workshop’ or Manufaktur that
extends and augments the physical workspace, enabling people to
transpose familiar ways of creating dynamic order in the physical
environment. Whilst mitigating some of the difficulties that arise
from the constraints of the physical environment, Manufaktur also
introduces new features that go beyond current practice, such as
linking facilities, and support for spatio-temporal configurations
of documents and objects in a three dimensional ‘desktop’
environment (Fig. 3). These configurations are enhanced by the
potential of electronic technologies. They can be saved, searched,
shared, copied, and displayed in different ways.
Documents and 3D objects can be inserted in 3D workspaces,
where they are displayed and updated. They can be arranged and
grouped in relation to the task at hand. In the workspace in Fig. 3
an AutoCAD drawing is grouped together with a word document
that lists drawings sent to the client and three image files, for
example. A billboard carries a sketch of 'The Deep', a photograph,
a recently received letter, and the overall timeline for the project.
A workspace is the basic mechanism for creating and
manipulating collections of objects in Manufaktur. Workspaces
are sets of references to objects in a certain spatial order: the same
object may thus be present in many workspaces. Workspace

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

Figure 3: A Manufaktur Workspace
membership is visualized in several ways: by spatial proximity,
color and naming (visible on the frame, which also carries the
document title). Documents are ‘live’ in the sense that double
clicking launches the document in its respective application, and
changes to it will be updated within Manufaktur in near real time.
Figure 3 is a view of a workspace created to show a number of
workspace below it. It is decorated with a 3D icon that can be
used to identify the workspace even when the proxy is closed.
Objects stick to the plane of the billboard but can be removed by
pulling a little harder than usual. At the top center a 3D model of
a building (a 3D Studio file) is inserted into the workspace. Also
present as part of the workspace is a camera that can be shared
between several collaborating users.
Workspaces may also contain endpoints: representations of link
anchors on document-objects. By integrating and extending the
Webvise [6, 7] hypermedia system, we enable linking capability
to parts of document-objects residing within Manufaktur.
To illustrate the use of proxy and workspace objects, consider a
workspace containing a billboard sub-workspace. The proxy
object corresponds to “the nail on which the billboard hangs”, and
‘lives’ in the main workspace. The workspace object is the board
itself, and the objects within the billboard workspace snap to this
board. Manipulation of the proxy, e.g. moving it, will affect how
the billboard workspace behaves in the outer workspace.
Manipulating the workspace object, e.g. by resizing it, will affect
the content of the workspace, and will be reflected in all
workspaces that make reference to this billboard. We describe the
use of workspaces within workspaces in detailed scenarios in [4].
Separating the proxy object from the workspace object supports
separate interaction with both ends of the reference and allows
multiple references to the same workspace. Open references to the
same workspace are visualized by synchronized representations of

features of Manufaktur. The three cylinders at the top with the
downwards-pointing cones are proxy objects referring to
embedded workspaces. The workspace on the left containing five
documents is an example of a glass box workspace. The proxy in
the middle of the figure is closed, and thus the workspace referred
to is not shown. The proxy on the right refers to the billboard
the included workspace. Moreover, as workspaces may be large
and contain many objects, including them directly may produce
cluttered and unwieldy workspaces. We alleviate this problem by
letting the proxy objects have various states of openness. If a
proxy object is closed it is represented visually by a single 3D
cone showing only that ‘here is a reference to another workspace’.
A fully open workspace shows all the objects of the included
workspace within the including workspace. Workspaces may refer
arbitrarily to each other via the proxy objects except that circular
references are caught: the system forbids the complete opening of
a proxy that would result in a circular reference.
Technically, the Windows 2000 version of Manufaktur uses OLE
linking and DCOM monikers to communicate with external
applications to support live documents within the 3D workspaces.
DirectX retained mode is used to maintain and draw the 3D
scenes. An external SQL database serves to maintain the
persistent shared state of workspaces. The SGI and Linux version
of Manufaktur builds on IRIS Performer and OpenGL and is less
integrated with external applications due to the lack of COM
technology on those platforms. However, it interoperates with the
Windows version through the shared SQL database, and allows
interaction with workspaces and their objects in stereo on a TAN
Holobench.
Manufaktur represents a radical approach to information
visualization compared to that found in most collaborative virtual
environments [3]. As opposed to emphasizing representations of

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

avatars for users, our emphasis is on the representation of
materials with which people are working, and the actions they are
taking with them. Contextual spatial arrangements of materials are
used as a resource for mutual awareness of ongoing work, and
Manufaktur supports real-time collaborative, distributed work
across platforms, seeking to facilitate users’ collective selforganization of spaces embodying the trajectory of their work.
Besides support for the creation of relations through spatial
arrangements, Manufaktur also provides navigational link services
through integration with and extension of the Webvise hypermedia
system developed at the University of Aarhus. Webvise provides
linking capability between parts of documents in external
applications. This means that, e.g., Word documents stay in Word
format and links are created and followed from inside Word. The
links have multiple endpoints and are directional (can be followed
both forward and backward). The link structure is maintained
outside the linked documents, thus facilitating browsing and
searching mechanisms as well as linking to and from documents
to which one does not have write access.
Searching and sorting through heaps of documents based on
textual patterns is already well supported by standard search
mechanisms. A document found in this way may have links to
relevant Manufaktur workspaces, and simply clicking on the link
in the document will bring up relevant workspaces. This partly
obviates the need for a specific text search mechanism within
Manufaktur itself.
A 3D environment like this not only makes it possible to have
many documents visible at the same time, but it also, by spatial
proximity, makes it possible to indicate the (changing) relevance
of a document for work-in-progress, and its relation to other
objects. Our fieldwork examples show the problematic and messy
ways, familiar to us all, in which layers of meaningful spatial
arrangements crowd in on each other. This problem can partly be
avoided in Manufaktur as a result of three features. First, there can
be multiple workspaces, each targeted at a particular project or
sub-project; these can be closed or minimized and later returned
to, either to cope with a short-term interruption or with longer
breaks in the life of a project. Second, as document objects within
Manufaktur are references to the real documents (CAD
documents, Excel spreadsheets etc.), copying the references does
not create multiple different document versions. In contrast to the
physical world, simply copying a document object from one
workspace into another allows the same document or drawing to
exist in several places at once. Third, through reference to other
workspaces, complete contextual arrangements can be embedded
into a new context. The consequence is that users can, in effect,
inhabit as many ‘parallel universes’ in relation to their work as
they care to create. This raises important and interesting questions
for the fieldwork and our professional partners: ‘What kinds of
configurations of separate materials (first-order arrangements), but
also several collections of materials in different workspaces
(second-order arrangements) are there and how are they used?’
These questions are best addressed through use of Manufaktur in
real work. We are currently implementing it at our partners’
studios. In the meantime, we draw upon scenarios of use
developed in interdisciplinary workshops and on the basis of our
fieldwork to inform the further design of Manufaktur.

5.

CONCLUSION

In this paper we have argued that it should be part of the remit of
information visualization to get close to real settings of work

practice. On the basis of ethnographic fieldwork examples and
scenarios, we distinguished four kinds of information
management resources for the purposes of organization and
visualization, each with corresponding philosophies of design and
means of technical realization. We described Manufaktur, a
system that provides a 3D visual information space and captures
the ‘first-order’ traces of the self-organization of users in
arranging visual materials in that space. We identified how it can
be important to users to manipulate these workspaces as a whole
and to relate them in various ways. We described some of the
powerful and flexible ways in which Manufaktur supports
interconnections between workspaces.

6.

REFERENCES

[1] Ballay,
J.M.
1994.
Designing
Workscape:
An
interdisciplinary experience. Proceedings of CHI'’4, ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
Boston, pp. 10-15.
[2] Benford, S., Bowers, J., Fahlen, L., Mariani, J., Rodden, T.
1994. Supporting cooperative work in virtual environments.
The Computer Journal Vol. 37, No. 8, pp. 651-68.
[3] Büscher, M., Christensen, M., Grønbæk, K., Krogh, P.,
Mogensen, P., Shapiro, D., Ørbæk, P. 2000. Collaborative
Augmented Reality Environments: Integrating VR, Working
Materials, and Distributed Work Spaces. Proceedings of
CVE2000.
[4] Büscher, M., Christensen, M., Mogensen, P., Shapiro, D.,
Wagner, I. (forthcoming). Context and Awareness in a
collaborative virtual work space for (landscape) architects.
Human-Computer Interaction.
[5] Card, S.K., Robertson, G.G., York, W. 1996. The Web Book
and the Web Forager: An Information Workspace for the
World Wide Web. Proceedings of CHI’96, ACM Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, pp.
111-117.
[6] Grønbæk, K. and R.H. Trigg 1999. From Web to Workplace:
Designing Open Hypermedia Systems. MIT Press: Boston
Massechussets.
[7] Grønbæk, K., L. Sloth, and P. Ørbæk 1999. Webvise:
Browser and Proxy support for open hypermedia structuring
mechanisms on the WWW. Computer Networks - The
International Journal of Computer and Telecommunications
Networking 31: p. 1331-1345.
[8] Lamping, J., Rao, R. 1996. The Hyperbolic Browser: A
focus+context technique for visualizing large hierarchies.
Journal of Visual Languages and Computing. Vol. 7, No. 1,
pp. 33-55. Reprinted in: Card, S.K., Mackinlay, J.D.,
Shneiderman, B. 1999. Information visualization. Using
vision to think. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufman, pp.
381 –408.
[9] Mackinlay, J.D., Robertson, G.G., and Card, S.K. 1991. The
Perspective Wall: Detail and context smoothly integrated.
Proceedings of CHI’91, ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, New York, pp. 173-180.
[10] Shneiderman, B. 1997. The next generation of graphical user
interfaces: Information visualization and better window
management. Displays Vol. 17, pp. 125-29.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2000 (InfoVis'00)
0-7695-0804-9/00 $10.00 @ 2000 IEEE

