2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Beyond knowledge visualization usability:
toward a better understanding of business diagram adoption
Sabrina Bresciani, Martin J. Eppler
University of Lugano (USI), Switzerland
{sabrina.bresciani@lu.unisi.ch, epplerm@gmail.com}
organizations (especially for supporting decision
making). To understand the relevance of diagrams in the
business world, we consider examples that have become
widely used and recognized, if not a standard, in business
administration classes and in strategic analysis tasks
within companies. Such examples include the BCG
Matrix, Gartner’s Hype Curve, Porter’s Five Forces,
Technology Roadmaps, Mind Maps, or Flow charts, etc.
In figures 1to 3 we show two examples of such famous
diagrams (the Hype Curve and the Five Forces diagram)
and one lesser known diagram, an argument map.

Abstract
Information visualization research typically focuses
on the formal aspects of specific graphic solutions in
terms of their thinking and/or communication support.
This type of analysis often focuses on quantitative
diagrams and emphasizes their attributes for specific
tasks. Our contribution, by contrast, focuses on
qualitative visual solutions and the factors that
contribute to their wider diffusion. As many knowledge
visualization solutions have not achieved wider use, the
question of which factors foster diagram adoption
seems to be a particularly relevant but underresearched topic. In this paper we develop and discuss
three dimensions that foster knowledge visualization
adoption: perceived ease of use, perceived usefulness
and perceived authority. We base our analysis on the
Technology Adoption Model by Davis and the Perceived
Characteristics of Innovations by Rogers. We illustrate
these dimensions and their items through examples of
business diagrams that have received wide recognition
and we contrast them with negative examples.

The theoretical bases of our analysis are to be found
in Davis’ Technology Acceptance Model [5] and Rogers’
Diffusion of Innovations theory [6]. Davis found two
main drivers of technology acceptance: “perceived
usefulness” and “perceived ease of use”. In particular,
perceived usefulness as a scale is measured with the
following items: work more quickly, job performance,
increase productivity, effectiveness, makes job easier,
useful. Ease of use is composed of: easy to learn,
controllable, clear & understandable, flexible, easy to
become skillful, easy to use. We also take Rogers’
Diffusion of Innovation theory into consideration, which
classifies “attributes of innovation”, namely: rate of
adoption, relative advantage, compatibility, complexity,
trialability and observability.
We have chosen to base our analysis on Davis’ and
Rogers’ theories because they have been extensively
validated and because they seem particularly relevant for
the analysis of diagram adoption as an innovative
business practice. However, these two useful and seminal
theories, to our knowledge, have never been applied to
the study of diagrams. In the next section, we propose a
classification of key factors that support the success of a
diagram in the business world, focusing in particular on
diagrams that function as a support for discussion and
decision making and not just mere presentation. In the
third section, we provide illustrative examples of both
successful and unsuccessful diagrams in the
organizational context, with the aim of comparing and
extracting relevant items. Finally, in the last section, we
discuss the implications of our findings, the limitations
of our approach and provide a conclusion.

Keywords: knowledge visualization, business
diagrams, Technology Acceptance Model, Diffusion of
Innovation, visual representation

1. Introduction
Business meetings in organizations are increasingly
supported by information and knowledge visualizations
that help aggregating and synthesizing information.
Diagrams are used to facilitate discussions with the goal
of making better and more efficient decisions. There is a
vast body of literature containing analyses of the efficacy
of visual representations of large quantities of data [1-4].
However, thus far, few researchers have examined the
adoption of visualizations that represent mostly
qualitative information (such as options, scenarios,
arguments, strategies, relations, etc.). In this paper, we
focus on identifying critical factors that foster the
adoption of such diagrams in organizations. We aim to
provide a first set of factors to take into consideration
when developing or improving diagrams to be used in
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.13

480
474

now more than 60’000 websites covering Novak’s
concept mapping method, listed in Google).

2. Key factors fostering diagram adoption
Based on the application of Davis’ and Rogers’
theories to the context of diagram adoption, we were able
to identify twelve possible factors that may influence the
success of a diagram in terms of its adoption by users in
organizations. We have classified these factors into three
main dimensions: perceived usability, perceived
usefulness and perceived authority. The first two
categories are taken directly from Davis’ Technology
Acceptance Model [5]. His model stipulates that
perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use are the
fundamental determinants of user acceptance. We apply
his strong and consistent findings in technology
acceptance to the specific area of diagram adoption.
However, we recognize – based on the insights of
Roger’s theory of innovation diffusion and its emphasis
on communication – that there is another important
category to be considered, which we name perceived
authority of a diagram. This dimension consists of the
prominence of the endorsers, the rigor and explicitness of
the diagram’s methodology and the promotion activities
for the diagram [7]. We argue that these three
dimensions play a crucial part in the adoption process of
diagrams and that they all need to coexist together to
allow the wide adoption of a diagram.
This implies that if a diagram is useful, but its
usability is low and it is not supported by any promotion
or branding effort, then it is unlikely that it will achieve a
substantial diffusion or adoption. An example of this is
3D visualization, which has been hyped for a long time,
but never achieved diffusion because of the intrinsic
difficulties in manipulating 3D space. Another example
are causal loops diagrams (system dynamics), which are
very powerful tools, but have not been widely adopted,
as they are rather complex to create and understand, and
require extensive training. Similarly, even diagrams with
high usability, but that are not especially useful for a
purpose, are very unlikely to become widely adopted. An
example is the flow chart: vastly adopted in engineering
and computer science, it failed to be attractive as a
support for strategic decisions, as the visualization is
extremely schematized, not natural, and forcing the users
to externalize basic or obvious implicit steps. Finally the
promotion and diffusion of innovation principles apply to
diagrams as well: diagrams could be useful and usable,
but if there is no proper communication of their benefits,
or no authoritative endorsers (in terms of people and
brands), it is very unlikely that a diagram can achieve
widespread use. A positive example of this effect can be
seen in the wide spread adoption of mind mapping and
mind mapping software. Mind maps were first made
famous by the bestselling books of Tony Buzan [8] that
had great mass appeal. Buzan thus became a public
authority on creativity and note taking which in turn
facilitated the adoption of mind mapping in
organizations. Another example is Novak’s Concept
Mapping method [9] which received authority not only
through the credentials of its originator, but also through
numerous scientific evaluation studies [10, 11] (there are

This reasoning could also be validated empirically in
future adoption case studies or experiments (see the final
section).
In more detail, the three dimensions can be
decomposed into twelve key factors. In the next table
(Table 1) we provide a schematic classification of the
factors and subsequently a definition and a description
(with references) of each dimension and factor specific
to the diagram context.
Perceived
Usability
1. Easy to
understand

Perceived
Usefulness
5. Allows to
work faster

Perceived
Authority
9. Name and
promotion
(branding)

2. Easy to learn

6. Improves job
performances

10. Prominent
endorsers

3. Content
categories
relevance
4. Aesthetic
value

7. Immediate
insights

11. Documented
methodology

8. Adaptability to
tasks

12. Positive
network effects

Table 1 Classification of key factors influencing
diagram adoption

Perceived Usability: “The degree to which a person
believes that using a particular system would be free of
effort” (original definition in [5]).
1. Easy to understand: little previous knowledge is
required [5, 6, 12, 13]
2. Easy to learn: the operations with the diagram
are easy to manipulate [5, 14]
3. Content categories relevance: the pre-defined
categories structure the content meaningfully
[15]
4. Aesthetic value: the diagram is a pleasure to the
eye [16]
Perceived Usefulness: “The degree to which a person
believes that using a particular system would enhance his
or her job performance” (original definition in [5]).
5. Allows to work faster: the diagram helps to
focus on relevant aspects and speeds up the
analysis process [5]
6. Improves job performances: the diagram helps
augment reasoning and coordination processes
in terms of their quality [5, 6]
7. Immediate insight: the predefined form of the
diagram leads to the emergence of free riders,
475
481

8.

Google and is not included in most business software
packages). It is, however, supported by a few educational
software tools, both commercial (e.g., IBIS argument
map) and non-commercial ones (e.g., Araucaria). An
argument map visualizes the structure of an
argumentation, which is typically composed of premises,
conclusions, objections, rebuttals, etc. The aim of
argument mapping is to externalize individual thinking
and reasoning processes in order to reflect on them
(something of extreme value to any organization). In the
following table (Table 2) we schematically compare the
three diagrams with the twelve previously outlined
factors.

changes in perspective, or new insights into a
problem [15] [17]
Adaptability to task: the diagram can be easily
adapted to a specific usage [18]

Perceived Authority: the degree to which a person is
confident that using a particular system is a good choice
(our definition).
9. Name and promotion: the name is innovative,
clear, short, and informative, and designates its
main function [19]; the diagram is promoted
through relevant channels
10. Prominent endorsers: the diagram is backed and
promoted by a respected person or institution
with a large audience [20], or a famous and
trusted brand
11. Rigorous methodology: the rules for the
development, production and use of the diagram
are rigorous, consistent and transparent [3]
12. Positive network effects: the peer use of the
system increases its perception regarding
reliability and usefulness. Innovators start to use
the system, setting the trend and creating useful
diagram templates for the user community [6]

Figure 1 Gartner Hype Cycle

3. Illustrative examples
We now provide examples on how the previously
defined key factors can be used. Two positive cases
contrast with a negative one, specific to the business
context.
The first example is the Hype Cycle diagram (Figure
1), which is a conceptual representation produced by the
analyst and consulting firm Gartner, depicting the
assessment and life cycle of technologies: it serves as an
evaluation tool for investors and IT specialists [21].
Hype Cycles offer a snapshot of the relative maturity of
technologies, IT methodologies and management
disciplines [22]. They characterize the typical
progression of an emerging technology, from overenthusiasm through a period of disillusionment to an
eventual understanding of the technology's relevance and
definitive role in a market or domain.
The second case is Michael Porter’s Five Forces
diagram (Figure 2), a visualization representing Porter’s
framework of the five main forces in any industry that
determine the competitive intensity and therefore
attractiveness of a market. The five forces are: suppliers,
customers, new entrants, substitutes and the industry
itself (competition) [23]. It is a model used for industry
analysis and business strategy development, commonly
used in companies and taught in any business course at
universities.
Finally, the negative example we consider is
argument mapping (Figure 3), which has thus far not
received wide use in business contexts (as it is not taught
in Business schools, achieves a much lower ranking in

Figure 2 Porter’s Five Forces

Figure 3 IBIS Argument Map

476
482

Perceived ease of use
1. Easy to understand

2.Easy to learn

3.Content categories
relevance

4.Aesthetic value

Perceived usefulness
5.Allows to work faster

6. Improves job
performances

7.Immediate insight

8.Adaptability to tasks

Perceived authority
9.Name and
promotion
10.Prominent endorsers

11.Rigorous
methodology

12.Positive network
effect

Positive example I:
Gartner Hype Cycle

Positive example II:
Porter 5 Forces

Negative example:
Argument Map

The standard 2D
coordinate format and
its few labels are easy to
understand
Basic knowledge of
innovation diffusion is
helpful but not
mandatory
The well worded phases
of a typical hype
provide a useful
orientation framework
The space is all filled
with information (text,
color, shapes)

Straightforward box and
arrow format with clear
relationships among the
few elements
Basic knowledge of
industrial economics is
helpful, but not
mandatory
The five forces capture
key players and their
relationships within an
industry
The few items are
visualized in a very
simple manner

Knowledge of linguistics or
argumentation is needed to
understand the many
elements
Understanding argument
schemes is a prerequisite

The diagram synthesize
several information
pieces in few elements
on the curve
It allows for quick
comparisons so
decisions can be taken
efficiently
Just looking at the
relative position, it is
easy to compare
technologies

The framework provides
a guidance to the most
relevant elements to be
considered
The diagram provides a
guide to consider only
the relevant items

The process of making
explicit every argument
increases the amount of
time needed
Very accurate analysis are
enabled but require a
considerable time
investment
One can see whether pro or
contra arguments dominate,
but it is necessary to read
the texts and deduce overall
implications
Can be used for reasoning
and argumentation
regarding any task or
context

It is task specific: it can
be applied to different
technology areas (within
IT)
The name is short,
descriptive and
distinctive.
Gartner is the biggest IT
analyst company and it
uses hype curves in
many of its reports
Gartner has issued
several white papers
explaining the
underlying methodology
It is used by most of the
major companies in the
world and has become
part of the business
language

The predefined form
structures the relevant
information providing
quick insights on what
dominates an industry
It is task specific
(industry analysis), but
additional forces can be
added
The name designates the
components and recalls
Porter’s popular theory
Michael Porter is a
Harvard Business
School professor and as
such highly visible in
the field
The background is
described in detail in
Porter’s book on
competitive strategy
The Five Forces are
basic knowledge that is
taught in any BA or
MBA class worldwide

The categories capture
abstract concepts that may
not be familiar to lay people
Symbols and colors provide
a playful look

Various names are used:
dialogue/ argument map,
IBIS map, Toulmin chart
There are no famous
endorsers in the business
community

The method is well
documented, but
inaccessible to business
because of its jargon
They are often only used by
scholars although the use in
educational contexts is
increasing

Table 2 Schematic comparison of three diagrams based on 12 key adoption factors

477
483

From these three examples, we can see that the first
two diagrams are strong in all three factors of perceived
usability, usefulness and authority, while the third
example, the argument map, is rather weak in all three.
First, argument maps can be used to represent any kind
of reasoning, but they require a considerable amount of
time to make the heuristics people normally use explicit.
This process can eventually lead to a more precise
schema, but requiring a significant time investment,
creating a conflict regarding usefulness. Second,
usability is low, as familiarity with argumentation
schemes is necessary to understand and use argument
maps, while this is not the case with the first two
examples, which are understandable without extensive
background knowledge. The many names to address
argument maps and the lack of world renowned
endorsers have not helped the adoption of the diagram
either, whilst the Five Forces are widely discussed in
Porter’s own seminal book, and Gartner is using the hype
cycle as a standard tool to inform its clients.

Future research should thus focus on validating and
expanding the identified adoption factors. Possible
methods to conduct such studies include experiments
(e.g., testing for isolated effects, such as perceived
diagram authority on propensity to use), case studies or
longitudinal adoption studies (in order to examine
changes over time in the identified twelve factors).
Another future research challenge is to translate the
identified adoption factors into more specific guidelines
for diagram and software developers and promoters.
Information and knowledge visualization are two
fields with great potential, as demonstrated by numerous
innovations over the last twenty years. To realize this
potential, and to bring it to users in organizations,
however, it is not sufficient – we have argued in this
paper – to only conduct usability evaluations for new
applications. Communicative aspects, such as the
perceived or portrayed specificity or authority of a visual
solution must also be evaluated, and subsequently
positioned and signaled in the right manner. Addressing
these ‘market’ issues will ultimately move the discipline
of visualization forward and will enable it further to
make a relevant and recognized contribution to solving
today’s challenges.

Finally we can notice that the adaptability to
different tasks is low in the successful examples and high
for the generic tools of argument maps. This could mean
that less flexibility (i.e., less degrees of freedom) actually
increases the usability and the usefulness (specificity for
an activity) and may therefore be conducive to diagram
success.

References
[1]

Shneiderman, B. The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type
Taxonomy for Information Visualizations, in IEEE
Visual Languages. Boulder, CO. 1996.
[2] Ware, C. Information Visualization (2nd Edition). San
Francisco CA, Morgan Kaufmann. 2004.
[3] Tufte, E.R. The visual display of quantitative
information. Cheshire, Connecticut, Graphic Press. 1986.
[4] Lurie, N.H. and C.H. Mason. Visual Representation:
Implications for Decision Making. Journal of Marketing,
71(1): 160-177. 2007.
[5] Davis, F. Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use,
and User Acceptance of Information Technology. MIS
Quarterly, 13(3): 319-340. 1989.
[6] Rogers, E.M. Diffusion of Innovations. 5th ed. Free
Press. New York: Simon & Schuster. 2003.
[7] Eppler, M.J. and M. Will. Branding Knowledge.
International Journal of Brand Management, 8(6): p.
445-457. 2001.
[8] Buzan, T. The Mind Map Book: How to Use Radiant
Thinking to Maximize Your Brain's Untapped Potential.
Plume. 1996.
[9] Novak, J.D. Learning, Creating, and Using Knowledge:
Concept Maps As Facilitative Tools in Schools and
Corporations. Lawrence Erlbaum. 1998.
[10] Markham, K.M.; Mintzes, J.J.; Jones, M.G. The concept
map as a research and evaluation tool: Further evidence
of validity. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 31,
(1): 91-101. 1994.
[11] Roth, W.M., Roychoudhury, A. The concept map as a
tool for the collaborative construction of knowledge: A
microanalysis of high school physics students. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 30 (5): 503-534. 1993.

4 Conclusions
Our contribution aims to increase the understanding
of the factors that drive diagram adoption in
organizations. We have identified twelve adoption
factors based on two existing seminal theories and we
have applied these factors to qualitative diagrams,
including positive and negative examples.
The theoretical contribution of our work is to be
found in the advancement of diagram understanding (in
the business context), specifically their factors of
adoption. Moreover, we have extended the application of
Davis’ categories on the perceived ease of use and
perceived usefulness to the area of information
visualization. We also introduced the category of
perceived diagram authority, which is significant in
sustaining diagram adoption in organizations. Our
contribution to the practice of information visualization
is to provide guidelines or factors to be considered
during the creation, adaption or the distribution of new
visualization applications.
The limitations of our research include the scope,
which has been limited to analyzing diagrams in the area
of strategic analysis in business settings, the small
sample of diagrams considered, and the lack of empirical
validation. In addition, we have applied inherently broad
and abstract dimensions (those of Rogers and Davis) to a
new, specific context, namely the use of qualitative
business diagrams.

478
484

[12] Buergi, P. and J. Roos. Images of Strategy. European
Management Journal, 21(1): 69-78. 2003.
[13] van Vijk, J.J. Views on Visualization. IEEE Transaction
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(4): 421432. 2006.
[14] Shneiderman, B. Designing the user interface: strategies
for effective human-computer interaction 3rd ed.
Reading, MA Addison-Wesley. 1998.
[15] Blackwell, A.F. et al. Cognitive dimensions of notations:
design tools for cognitive technology, in Cognitive
Technology M. Beynon, Nehaniv, C.L., Dautenhahn, K. ,
Editor. Springer: Berlin: 325-341. 2001.
[16] Cawthon, N. and A. Vande Moere. Qualities of Perceived
Aesthetic in Data Visualization. CHI 2007, San Jose,
USA. 2007,
[17] Bresciani, S., A.F. Blackwell, and M. Eppler. A
Collaborative Dimensions Framework: Understanding the
Mediating Role of Conceptual Visualizations in
Collaborative Knowledge Work. In: Proceeding of the

[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]

[22]
[23]

479
485

Forty-First Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences (HICSS 2008), Hawaii. 2008.
Star, S.L. and J.R. Griesemer. Institutional Ecology,
'Translations' and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and
Professionals in Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate
Zoology, 1907-39. Social Studies of Science, 19 (3): 387420. 1989.
Kapferer, J.N. The new Strategic Brand Management.
London: Kogan Page. 2004.
Lovelock, C. and J. Wirtz. Service Marketing. Upper
Saddle River NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. 2004.
Bresciani S., Eppler M.J. Gartner's Magic Quadrant and
Hype Cycle. ECCH Case Study, Reference no: 908-0291. 2009.
Feen, J. Understanding Gartner’s Hype Cycles, 2007,
Gartner Research, ID Number: G00144727. 2007.
Porter, M., Competitive Strategy. New Edition ed. New
York: Free Press. 2004.

