2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

The ETH Value Lab and Two Software Tools for Knowledge Creation in Teams
Remo Burkhard, Christian Schneider, Michael Meier
ETH Zurich, Chair for Information Architecture, vasp datatecture GmbH
{burkhard@arch.ethz.ch, christian.schneider@arch.ethz.ch, Michael.Meier@vasp.ch}
Abstract
This article discusses three tools that allow making
collaboration and decision-making more effective. It
presents insights from working in the “ETH Baugarten
Value Lab”, a new research space with five touch
displays. First, the article introduces this lab. Then, it
introduces two software tools to support communication
and group decision-making. The first tool is targeted at
urban planners, the second at managers.
We found that (1) the lab fascinates and engages the
users, (2) that not many software tools are available for
such a setting and that those tools are not very user
friendly, (3) that people underestimate the time to design
suitable workshops. We have found in various workshops
that our two tools seem to go in the right direction, which
states that “less functinality is more”.

Figure 1. The “ETH Baugarten Value Lab” has
five large touch displays to leverage knowledge
creation.

Keywords: Knowledge Visualization, Value Lab, Future
City Designer, Risk Visualization

The emphasis of this article is on tools that facilitate
the PROCESS of creating knowledge in teams by
mapping information on a touch display.
Why is it important to create such maps
TOGETHER? First, it is a way to reduce complexity.
Second, it aligns people to a shared understanding. Third,
it makes the implicit knowledge explicit. We have
experienced in our professional projects creating Big
Pictures for leading Swiss companies that if a group of
people develops a visual representation together, they will
accept it, understand it and adhere to it far better and
stronger. In contrast, if they are not actively involved,
they will study a nicely designed and aesthetic Big Picture
but they do not see it as “their own baby”.
After seven years of visually facilitating such
processes by sitting in board rooms with our laptops,
moderating, facilitating and interactively drawing more
than 100 different maps we started to envision an ideal
situation, where the client could design the maps without
our help. The process would then be less time consuming,
cheaper and customers would not depend on us. So we
got more and more interested in inventing the ideal space

1. Introduction
In this article we report on first experiences working
in the newly developed “ETH Baugarten Value Lab”
(Figure 1).
People love maps because they present an overview
and details. From the last centuries‘ research we have
gained a good understanding of the mapping of
information. Since the last forty years we also gained a
body of knowledge about ways to map information with
the computer for purposes such as the navigation of
information spaces or the exploration of data. This
mapping of information most often aims at creating a
PRODUCT. However, the mapping of information is also
a very powerful tool for speeding up the PROCESS of
creating NEW knowledge in teams. Research in this area
has been pushed to the periphery, in fields such as
Knowledge Visualization, Concept Mapping or Visual
Thinking. Research is especially rare when it comes to
specific application areas in business.

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.68

475
469

and the ideal software that could replace us, and the result
is presented in this article.
First, we will discuss a new hardware setting, the
“ETH Baugarten Value Lab” which was opened before
the end of 2008. Second, we will discuss two software
tools for two different application areas: Urban Planning
and Management.
In conclusion, the research question of this paper is
how to leverage the creation of knowledge in groups by
using interactive Big Pictures on touch displays.

3. Hardware: “ETH Baugarten Value Lab”
The “ETH Baugarten Value Lab”1 is a new research
and teaching facility for knowledge creation in groups. It
has been donated by the Swiss based foundation named
“Baugarten Stiftung”.

3.1 Concept
Baugarten Stiftung wanted to donate a “classroom of
the future”. This space had to re-invent the idea of a
classroom and set new standards for knowledge creation
in groups.
Conceptually, we wanted to create an architectural
space with daylight, high ceiling, large interactive touch
displays and a videoconferencing system. The design
imperative was to create both a functionally and
aesthetically superior designed space. People should both
feel comfortable and have easy to use technical tools to
leverage the PROCESS of creating knowledge in teams.

2. Context of this Work
This article is the direct consequence of our previous
works introducing Knowledge Visualization [1] as a
research area in which people investigate the use of
complementary visual representations to transfer
knowledge between at least two people.
We proposed a systematic framework and named it
“Knowledge Visualization Framework” [2-4]. It stressed
the importance of a COMPLEMENTARY use of different
visualization techniques and tools. It also stressed that
both computer-based and non computer-based techniques
should be combined. Examples of computer-based
methods are Information Visualization (IV) software,
Computer Aided Design (CAD) software, Visual
Analytics tools, Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
applications, simulation tools, computer animations,
computer games, virtual worlds, movies and many more.
Examples for non-computer based visual methods are
storytelling, metaphors, sketching, dreaming, imagination
of scenarios, physical models (e.g. wooden city model),
and others.
The reason for using different methods is simple:
each method has different advantages and serves different
purposes, such as the analysis and exploration of
information (e.g. GIS, IV), the visualization of scenarios
(e.g. CAAD, Traffic Simulations), the purpose of making
the invisible visible (e.g. MRI, MRT), the function of
getting attention (e.g. advertising), reducing complexity
(e.g.
information
design),
clarifying
thoughts,
communicating information to different people (e.g.
Knowledge Visualization), informing and educating
people (e.g. information graphics, animations, movies and
games) or creating cultural or aesthetic values.
Finally, during the “Visualization Summit 2007” [5]
we brought together the different visualization
communities which defined the mid-term research
questions and challenges. These can be summarized with
two main directions: (1) Improving the visual knowledge
transfer and knowledge creation in business and (2)
helping to plan, design and manage sustainable future
cities [5].
In the next section the ETH Value Lab will be
introduced.

3.2 Technical Implementation
The ETH Baugarten Value Lab (Figure 1) is located
in the new “Branco Weiss Information Science
Laboratory” at ETH Zurich in Switzerland. The concept
has been previously described in [6], [7], [8].
The spatial dimensions of the architectural space are
about 6m in width, 10m in length and 6 m in height. The
lab consists of a multi touch table and a multi touch
board, HD video projectors and a video conferencing
system. We developed the table and the board in close
collaboration with external suppliers. The interactive table
consists of two 65-inch LCD displays (resolution of each
display: 1920x1080 pixels) with an optical touch overlay.
The table also has two buttons to adjust its height. The
interactive board uses the same technology but consists of
three 82-inch LCD displays (resolution of each display:
1920x1080 pixels). We have chosen LCD-screens and not
a rear projection system as used for example by Jeff Han
(www.perceptivepixel.com) because rear projections have
disadvantages such as daylight sensibility, noise, service
costs for lamps. Our room also had a limited size that did
not call for the rear projection construction. The whole
system is connected via fibre-optical cables to a central
server in the basement of the building. On this server we
have currently three operating systems installed:
Macintosh OSX 10.5, Windows XP/Vista and Linux. The
basic configuration provides the user two modes: either he
or she uses the five screens as (1) ONE virtual desktop or
as TWO virtual desktops (e.g. for running a Windows
operating system on the board and a Macintosh OS on the
table). Additionally, three HD projectors, a video
conferencing system and a Dolby surround system are
1

470
476

http://www.valuelab.ethz.ch

installed. The video projectors can present information
from an external notebook, from any of the touch screens
or from the videoconferencing system.
The ETH Value Lab was launched in October 2008.
It has been and will be used in research and teaching
within ETH. It will also be used for collaboration with
other national and international universities and prime
industrial and commercial partners.

4.1. Description of the Tool
The Future City Designer (Figure 2) was
programmed with Adobe Flex 3 and runs as a Desktop
Application in the Adobe AIR environment. After starting
the tool by double clicking on a desktop icon one can see
the blank background and a navigation panel at the
bottom.

3.3. Software
The donation by the “Baugarten Stiftung” was
directed at building the hardware, not at developing
software. Therefore we have engineered it in a way that
the three supported operating systems allow to run any
available software. Since January 2009 we have tested a
series of research tools and commercially available tools
such as: Google Earth, Google Map, Microsoft
PowerPoint,
Let’s
Focus
(www.lets-focus.com),
BumpTop (www.bumptop.com),
“CityEngine”
(www.procedural.com),
Adobe
Illustrator
(www.adobe.com), Snowflake (www.natural-ui.com/).
We were very surprised that there are only very few tools
available. Additionally, we gained experience by working
with webbased tools such as www.oskope.com,
www.stixy.com, www.secondlife.com. Finally, we
experimentend with plug-ins such as Cooliris
(www.cooliris.com) and FoxTab (www.foxtab.com).
When we wanted to conduct two workshops, one for
urban planners and one for business managers we could
not find any adequate software tools. First, we did not
find a tool that would allow to add reference maps and to
superimpose individual media elements such as images,
movie clips and texts and furthermore allow to resize,
reposition these elements intuitively on a touch screen.
Second, we did not find a tool which is customized for
typical team meeting situations in both SME and large
organizations.
We
think
that
Let’s
Focus
(ww.letsfocus.com) is currently the best tool for such
purposes, but we discovered that the tool offers too many
options and features for our rather specific tasks and the
main drawback is that it is currently designed to be a
desktop application. It is therefore not very easy to use on
a touch screen.
Next, we will describe the two tools we have
developed.

Figure 2. Picture of the ETH Value Lab
(www.ia.arch.ethz.ch)
The icons at the bottom serve as buttons and are big
enough so they can be easily clicked them with fingers.
From left to right the functions are: Selecting objects,
loading a project, saving the current project with all
related media, enlarging the window to full screen mode,
loading images/movies to the preview window on the
right hand side of the menu bar, loading background
image (in Figure 2 the loaded background image shows a
map of Asia), removing the background image (resulting
in a blank canvas), drawing with a pen (colors and
thinkness of the lines can be adjusted), adding a text,
editing an existing text, deleting objects, moving to the
next “slide” (where you can load another background
image and position other media elements) and finally an
icon to enlarge selected media from the thumbnail
preview area item to a full screen view.

4.2. Use Case: Urban Planning
We used the tool to compare the creative economies
of Singapore and Zurich.
To do so, them we first did a research study in both
countries and mapped the findings on static maps.
Additionally, we integrated meaningful photographs and a
few movies to illustrate the two countries’ most
meaningful creative spaces. To compare the two
economies we used the three screens of the board as
follows. On the left screen was the Future City Designer
Application with the maps from Singapore in the
background and superimposed photos and movie clips

4. Software: Future City Designer
The first software tool is targeted at urban planners.
The research question is how the discussion of urban
scenarios and decision making can be propelled in the
ETH Baugarten Value Lab. This tool was developed by
the
Chair
of
Information
Architecture
(http://www.ia.arch.ethz.ch) at ETH Zurich.

471
477

from creative spaces in Singapore. On the right screen we
did the same for creative spaces in Zurich. In the middle
screen we used the Future City Designer with thematic
maps from the whole East Asian region. On the two
displays of the interactive table we used Google Map and
again the Future City Designer for visually supporting the
brainstorming session and the collection and spatially
meaningful positioning of them.

risks, opportunities and growth potential of a company.
Our vision was to make it as simple as possible, so people
can intuitively use it without training. The target group
are managers both in SMEs and any other larger
organization, ranging from governmental agencies, NGOs
to multinational enterprises.

4.3. Discussion and Findings

The tool currently consists of five modules, which
can be selected through the tabs on the top of the window.
Figure 3 shows the application with the module for risk
assessment. The tool has been programmed with Adobe
Flex AS4.

5.1. Description of the Tool

We found that the tool is useful to discuss urban
scenarios. We have tested it with about 50 people but
have not done a proper evaluation or semi-structured
interviews. However, this is not in the focus of this paper.
From a conceptual perspective we found that the
tool makes a lot of sense. In Value Lab tours we presented
the tool and a lot of people wanted to buy the tool. But it
is programmed as a research prototype and not intended
to be sold as commercial software. We are not yet
satisfied with the user interaction and want to optimize it,
so that it becomes more intuitive to use.
From a technical perspective we found that the
Adobe Flex/AIR approach is a good technology. We
identified two problems. First, performance limitations
when large files are loaded. Second, the Adobe Air
Runtime currently limits the canvas size to 2880 pixels,
which does not allow us to render a canvas for our large
pixel space of 5760 pixels in length (three times 1920
pixels).
From a user perspective we found that an average
user has to be quite skilled to be able to format the media
to run smoothly. For an average application one has to
downsize the movies and to optimize the files for
webresolution. For pictures this can be easily done with
Adobe Photoshop, but for movies it is not as easy and
quite time consuming. We also found that people need to
have experience as workshop moderators to know how
they are going to use the tool effectively. And when they
know how the workshop should be held they should not
underestimate the time for its detail planning, because a
well designed process and clear goals are important for a
successful discussion.

Figure 3. Risk Map Module from the “Big Picture
Tool” (www.vasp.ch)
Below, each module’s title are buttons to save, print,
edit preferences and buttons to navigate to the next or
previous view. Below these icons are the three main
frames. In the first frame on the left the users elaborate
the main topics where risks can appear. In the middle
frame the risks are illustrated. Here, each iceberg
represents a risk, which can be resized and repositioned.
The third frame is used to collect actions, which have to
be put in place to manage the identified risks.
In the left and right frame the users can add items by
adding slider bars consisting of a title on the top of the bar
and an interactive slider below. The user can adjust the
name and start and end value of each slider by clicking on
the edit button. He or she can also use the finger to adjust
the value of the slider. Within all three frames the user
finds buttons at the bottom, for example to add new items
(slider-bar or iceberg), edit the data per item (such as title,
start or end value, description), change the position of the
item, resize the iceberg or delete items. At the bottom is a
field for detailed descriptions for each item. The
descriptions are rendered once an object is selected.

5. Software: Big Picture Tool
The second software tool is targeted at managers. The
research question is how a management cockpit for touch
display settings would look like. The program was
developed by vasp datatecture GmbH2.
We envisioned a tool as simple to use as “Snag-it”
(http://www.techsmith.com/). However, the aim is not to
capture pictures, but to capture the strategy, projects,

5.2. Use Case: Risk Visualization

2

Remo Burkhard is a founding partner of vasp datatecture
GmbH and works for both the company and ETH Zurich
472
478

desktop computers and, secondly, because they offer too
many features which causes distractions in workshops.
The multi-touch application we discovered was mainly
for browsing through image collections. That was the
reason why we felt the need for new tools. Therefore, we
presented the “Future City Designer” and the “Big Picture
Tool”.
In our continuing evaluation we will look at the ideal
software setting and workshop design. In this context the
ETH Baugarten Value Lab may become an ideal
prototypical cockpit for simulating future sustainable
cities.

In this section we discuss how a team uses the Risk
Module to create a Risk Map, which is a risk
visualization. We have chosen this module because
Eppler and Aeschimann pointed to “the need for better
communication through visualization in risk management
and to the surprising fact that there is not a lot of
literature or research available on the topic” [9].
Scenario: A team with for instance five people meets
for one hour in the ETH Baugarten Value Lab. The
moderator starts the application and selects the Risk
Module. The first ten minutes the group brainstorms
about the main topics where there could be major risks
(e.g. strategic risks, operational risks, market risks,
reputational risks...) and add for each topic a slider bar.
They also add a description for each slider bar. Then they
use the slider to rate the potential with values from 0 to
10. Next, they discuss one after the other and think about
risks that can emerge for each topic. For each risk they
add an iceberg to the central view by clicking on the
iceberg button. The users then position the risk to the
correct position in the matrix with the two dimensions
(probability and impact). Then they resize the iceberg to
show the relative importance of it in comparison with the
other icebergs. When they have gone through all the
topics and have collected all risks they switch to the third
phase. In this phase they discuss actions which have to be
put in place to manage the biggest risks. They than use the
finger to move the slider and visually assess the time
necessary for finalizing the project. Finally, after an hour,
the group reviews the mutually elaborated Risk Map and
prints it as a poster. They then agree on the date for the
next meeting where they will review this map. Then they
go for a coffee and pin up the poster map in a central spot,
so that they can see it every day.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Baugarten Stiftung for
donating the ETH Baugarten Value Lab.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

5.3. Discussion and Findings
[5]

We have tested the tool with a larger client and
presented it to a few people. Everyone was very excited
about our software and wanted to buy it. In a project with
a CFO of a large Swiss company we currently test the
acceptance. So far we did not get negative feedback and
will continue to fine tune the tool and later sell it.

[6]

[7]

6. Summary
In this paper, we have argued for the benefits of using
interactive visual representations for the creation of
knowledge in groups and for decision-making. We have
opened the debate on how new tools can reach beyond
current best practices. We have found that the Value Lab
with the interactive display is a suitable environment to
create such mutually elaborated visual maps, either on the
interactive table or the board. We have also reported that
the currently available software tools are not very useful
for touch displays because, firstly, they are designed for

[8]

[9]

473
479

R. Burkhard. Learning from Architects: The Difference
between Knowledge Visualization and Information
Visualization. In Proc. Eighth International Conference
on Information Visualisation (IV 2004), 2004, pp. 519524
R. Burkhard. Towards a Framework and a Model for
Knowledge Visualization: Synergies between Information
and Knowledge Visualization. In Knowledge and
information visualization: Searching for synergies. LNCS
3426, S.-O. Tergan and T. Keller, eds., Springer-Verlag,
2005.
M. Eppler and R. Burkhard. Knowledge Visualization. In
Encyclopedia of Knowledge Management, D. Schwartz,
ed., Idea Press, 2005.
M. Eppler and R. Burkhard. Visual Representations in
Knowledge Management. In Journal of Knowledge
Management, vol. 11, no. 4, 2007, 112-122.
R. Burkhard, et al. Visualization Summit 2007: Ten
Research Goals for 2010. In Information Visualisation
Journal, no. 6, 2007, 169–188.
J. Halatsch and A. Kunze. Value Lab: Collaboration in
Space. In Proceedings of 11th International Conference
Information Visualization (IV'07). IVS, IEEE, 376 - 381.
July 2007.
R. Burkhard and G. Schmitt. “Visualizing Future Cities in
the ETH Value Lab. New Methods for Education and
Learning,” Mixed Reality in Architecture, Design, and
Construction, Wang and Schnabel, eds., Springer, 2009.
J. Halatsch, et al. “ETH Value Lab - A framework for
managing large-scale urban projects. 7th China Urban
Housing Conference, Faculty of Architecture and Urban
Planning, Chongqing University, Chongqing. 2008.
M. Eppler and M. Aeschimann. Envisioning Risk A
Systematic Framework for Risk Visualization in Risk
Management and Communication, ICA Working Paper
#5/2008. University of Lugano (USI), 2008.

