2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

BrowseLine: 2D Timeline Visualization of Web Browsing Histories
Orland Hoeber
Department of Computer Science
Memorial University
St. John’s, NL, Canada A1B 3X5
hoeber@cs.mun.ca

Joshua Gorner
Faculty of Engineering & Applied Science
Memorial University
St. John’s, NL, Canada A1B 3X5
gorner@engr.mun.ca

Abstract

location bar. In most modern browsers, an auto-complete
feature provides a list of pages from the history that match
the terms entered. This lightweight search feature can be
very effective when users are able to remember specific details about the title or URL of the page they are seeking.
However, when users are unable to recall such information,
this feature is of limited value.
Our preliminary studies have found that people who are
seeking to re-find a previously viewed Web page use the
history features provided by the Web browser as a last resort. More commonly, when they are unable to recall specific details about the page they are seeking, they attempt to
re-trace the steps they took to arrive at the page. Examples
include people re-constructing their Web search queries, or
attempting to follow the links from some known starting
point. Clearly, the success of these methods depends heavily on the ability of the user to recall the details of their past
browsing activities.
In this work, we propose a visual representation of Web
browsing histories, based on a novel two-dimensional timeline metaphor. Our fundamental hypothesis is that while
people may not be able to remember the exact details of a
Web page they wish to re-find, they may be able to remember how much other Web browsing they were doing at the
time, and an approximate time interval during which they
first viewed the page. For example, one might recall that
they viewed a page sometime last week, in the afternoon,
and that it was one of the pages found during a Web search
activity. BrowseLine supports the visual identification of
these temporal features of the browsing data, allowing the
user to easily jump to the location in the browsing history
to evaluate the viewed pages in more detail. See Figure 1
for a screenshot of the system. The details of the design and
features of BrowseLine are outlined in this paper.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief overview of related work on visualizing browsing histories. A characterization of the data
and the tasks is provided in Section 3. Section 4 outlines
the key features and implementation details of BrowseLine.

Re-finding previously viewed Web pages in browsing histories is often a difficult task, due to the incomplete and
vague knowledge people have about the information they
are seeking. In this paper, we present a visual interface
for the task of re-finding Web pages within browsing histories. BrowseLine employs a novel two-dimensional timeline
metaphor, allowing users to visually identify temporal patterns within their browsing histories. These visual patterns
can be matched to the users’ recollection of their browsing activities, allowing them to jump to a time interval in
their browsing history for further investigation. Preliminary
evaluations of BrowseLine have found that users can readily grasp the two-dimensional timeline representation, and
can use the system effectively to re-find previously viewed
pages.

1

Introduction

Maintaining and viewing Web browsing histories has
been an important part of browsers as early as NCSA Mosaic [1]. Some studies have suggested that over 80% of the
pages viewed by Web users are ones they have previously
visited [4]. While many of these page views are of wellknown or bookmarked sites, there is a clear need for people to be able to easily re-find a page they have previously
viewed. The goal of this research is to support this activity
in a visual manner.
The history mechanisms in modern Web browsers commonly employ a list-based representation of the information. These interfaces often include interactive features that
allow the users to re-sort the pages based on title, URL,
and view date. However, they have the same problems as
most other list-based representations: users must evaluate
the textual contents in a sequential manner.
An alternate method for users to re-find Web pages is
to start typing the title or URL of the page in the browser
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.19

156

Figure 1. A screenshot of BrowseLine. Note the main timeline view (left) and the timeline navigation
view (right). The yellow indictor at the top of the timeline navigation view shows where/when the
main timeline view is focused.

Section 5 elaborates on how different patterns of browsing
produce different visual patterns in the system. The results
of a preliminary evaluation are summarized in Section 6.
The paper concludes with a summary of the contributions
and an outline of future work in Section 7.

2

coverage [8], as well as in seminal works on visual design
[16]. There are limited examples of using temporal representations for Web browsing histories. WebView [3] included a chronological ordering of the page views, in addition to a tree-based layout. Unfortunately, the temporal
ordering in this system does not provide any visual cues
with respect to the intervals between page views. In the
History-Centric Browsing (HCB) system [14], two coordinated timelines are used: one shows only Web searches
(which are used as guides); the second shows all the page
views between these search activities. No evidence is given
as to whether the intervals between Web searches is a useful
method for re-finding Web pages.
A common feature among alternate browsing history
representations is to include thumbnails of the viewed pages
[2, 3, 6, 7, 9]. This feature allows the user to visually
identify a page, taking advantage of the human capacity to
quickly recognize previously viewed images [15, 17]. Other
features that have appeared in these systems include filtering [7], domain stacking [7], graphical indications of the
number of page views [3], and zoomable views of the information space [9]. We have included some aspects of all of
these features in the design of BrowseLine.

Related Work

A number of visual approaches to representing browsing
histories have been documented in the literature. In this
section, we highlight those techniques that have influenced
the design of BrowseLine.
Given the connected nature of the Web, many systems
that have endeavuored to provide a graphical representation
of browsing histories have done so using a tree-based representation [2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 9]. While trees are an effective
means for showing the paths of browsing activities, it is not
clear whether following these paths provides sufficient support for re-finding previously viewed pages. As such, we
rejected the use of tree-based representations in favour of
following a timeline metaphor.
The visual representation of timelines have been explored within the domains of medical data [12] and news

157

3

Data and Task Characterizations

Before we provide more detail on the design of BrowseLine, it is useful to specify and characterize features of the
data to be represented, as well as discuss the task of refinding previously viewed Web pages. This analysis has
guided the development of the two-dimensional timeline
that forms the primary contribution of the system.
We characterize the data generated from the browsing
activities of a single user as bursty. That is, people don’t
normally view Web pages in a regular pattern. Instead, they
may view many pages over a short period of time (e.g.,
when searching the Web), or view pages once in a while
over the course of the day (e.g., checking Web-based email),
or view a small collection of pages at seemingly random
times (e.g., browsing activities). As such, the data is often
sparse, with numerous short intervals of browsing activities
that are of varying density (from one page to tens of pages).
The user-oriented task that is the focus of this research
is to re-find some previously viewed Web page. If the user
is able to fully specify the page they are looking for, there
is no need to use the browsing history; the user can simply
enter the URL into the browser, select the page from their
bookmarks, or navigate to the page from some known starting location. As such, our focus is on those situations where
the user has incomplete or vague knowledge about the page
they are seeking.
While the user may not remember the title of the page,
the URL, nor the steps taken to get to the page, we postulate that they will often be able to recall vague temporal
information as well as the approximate density of browsing
activity when the page was viewed. Therefore, our goal in
designing BrowseLine is to support users in re-finding Web
pages given these vague and incomplete specifications of
their information need.

4
4.1

Figure 2. The two-dimensional timeline preserves the space-time relationship on the
vertical dimension, but breaks it on the horizontal dimension to produce a dense packing
of the data.

nal dimensions (see Figure 2). In the current implementation for representing Web browsing histories, the microtime slots encompass one hour of data; however they could
be arbitrarily large or small depending on the features of the
data. The macro-time slots run in the vertical direction, with
movements up representing positive movements in time.
The micro-time slots run in the horizontal direction, with
movements to the right representing positive movements in
time.
Within the macro-time dimension, the spacing of microtime slots preserves the relationship between vertical space
and time. That is, a pair of time slots that are four hours
from one another are presented four vertical space units
away. If there are no data elements between the pair,
the spacing is preserved. However, within the micro-time
dimension, the relationship between horizontal space and
time is not preserved. That is, the page views within the
one-hour micro-time slot are pushed together and presented
in a sequence rather than a true timeline. The result is essentially a temporal histogram.
Preserving the space-time relationship in the macro-time
dimension, but breaking it in the micro-time dimension, follows from our hypothesis that a user’s ability to recall when
they performed their browsing activities will only be accurate at the macro-time level of detail. That is, people will be
able to recall general notions of the time during which they
were browsing the Web (e.g., “sometime in the afternoon”,
“around 10:00 PM”, or “shortly after work”), but will not
be able to recall the exact time of a page view nor the time
between page views. As such, we preserve the space-time
relationship at the level of detail that the users will be able
to recall (macro-time), and make more efficient use of the
space at the level of detail that they will not be able to accu-

Key Features of BrowseLine
Two-Dimensional Timeline

The primary design element in BrowseLine is the use
of a novel two-dimensional timeline representation. Traditional timeline representations array the data points along a
single dimension. While this can be very effective when
there is a nearly continuous data stream over time (e.g.,
news articles [8]), there are difficulties when the data is
sparse, yet bursty. With sparse data, one might choose to
compress the timeline in order to pull the data points closer
together. However, this becomes very problematic during
the bursty intervals where there are a large number of data
points to represent within a compressed time interval.
Our solution to this problem is a two-dimensional timeline, representing macro-time and micro-time as orthogo-

158

rately remember (micro-time).

4.2

Domain Stacking

Even though choosing not to preserve the space-time relationship in the horizontal dimension results in a more efficient use of horizontal space, vertical scrolling may still
be required when someone views a large number of pages
during the course of a single micro-time slot. To address
this problem, we have included a method for performing
domain stacking.
For each unique domain viewed during a given microtime slot, a single object is included on the horizontal timeline. When subsequent pages are viewed within this same
domain, they are stacked on top of the previous page views.
Different shades of blue on a perceptually ordered scale
(light to dark) are used to represent how many pages are included in each stack. The stacks include the domain icon
provided by the Web page, as well as the domain name
(which may be trimmed due to space limitations). Clicking on the stack reveals the details of the individual page
views (as described in the following section).
While this domain stacking has the negative effect of taking pages out of the order in which they were viewed, we
don’t foresee this being a problem for users. We hypothesize that when people are recalling their browsing histories,
the interactions within a single Web site are combined into
a single cognitive cluster. Therefore, rather than preserving
the true ordering of page views, stacking the domains upon
one another more closely matches the user’s mental model
of their browsing activities.

4.3

Figure 3. A view of the thumbnails and metadata, after clicking on a domain stack.

4.4

Timeline Navigation View

The timeline navigation view is an abstract, zoomed-out
view of the two-dimensional timeline, providing a coordinated view of the information space [13]. Approximately
four days can be viewed at once within this view, as opposed to 10 hours in the main timeline representation. Small
rectangular icons are used to represent the domain stacks
within each micro-time slot; the colour of these icons is coordinated with the colours of the domain stacks, providing
orientation cues to the viewer.
A yellow indicator within the timeline navigation view
shows where in the macro-time dimension the main timeline
view is focused. Clicking or dragging this indicator allows
the user to easily jump to a location within the timeline that
is of interest. Further, as users scroll the main timeline view
in the normal manner, the indicator is dynamically updated.

Thumbnail and Meta-Data

4.5

When a domain stack is clicked, a list of the pages contained within the stack are displayed in a drop-down window (see Figure 3). For each page viewed, a thumbnail of
the page is shown, along with meta-data that includes the title, URL, view date, and view time. This list supports both
the visual recognition of a previously viewed page, as well
as the browsing of the textual meta-data. Clicking on the
thumbnail opens the target page in the browser.
The ability to browse the pages within a domain stack is
expected to be more efficient than browsing within the complete list of page views. Because many of the pages will
have similar visual layouts (having come from the same domain), the user will be able to easily identify whether this is
the domain they are seeking, and quickly reject it if this is
not the case. Further, due to the relatively small number of
page views within the domain stack, the user will be able to
quickly scan the list, either finding the page they were looking for, or moving on to investigate another domain stack or
another location in the timeline.

Domain Filtering

A final feature that we believe will support the users in
re-finding previously viewed pages is the domain filter. As
users type portions of a domain name in the filter textbox, a
visual indication is provided to highlight those domains that
match the filter. The matched domain stacks are rendered
with a dark border, and all other domain stacks are faded
away. This occurs in both the main timeline view as well
as the overview. The resulting effect is that the matched
domains“pop out” of the display due to the high luminance
contrast between foreground and background; the opposite
effect occurs with the unmatched domains.

4.6

Implementation

The BrowseLine prototype has been implemented as an
extension to the Firefox Web browser. The interface is
generated using XUL (XML user interface language), CSS

159

(cascading style sheets), and JavaScript [10]. All data except for the thumbnails are retrieved from the internal Firefox browsing history management system.

5

Visual Patterns of Browsing

high-density burst over a short
period of time (e.g., Web search)

Our design goal for including the zoomed-out timeline
navigation view within BrowseLine was to support users in
visually identifying patterns within their browsing activities. We have categorized three such patterns that may be
common in users’ browsing habits. These are depicted in
Figure 4.
A high-density burst of browsing activity over a short
period of time will be represented by a horizontal line of
domain stacks in the timeline navigation. The type of Web
use activity that will produce such a pattern includes Web
searching and browsing over multiple domains. If the user
is wishing to re-find a page they viewed as part of a Web
search, this visual pattern will be of interest.
A medium-density burst of browsing activity over an extended period of time will appear as a vertical line of domain
stacks. Within this burst, the pattern will include multiple
horizontal domain stacks. Such patterns will be produced
by users making extended use of an online service, such as
Web mail, online gaming, and Web video services. If the
user wishes to re-find a page from an online video service,
this visual pattern will be of interest.
A low-density burst of browsing activity over a short period of time will appear as a single domain stack without any
others nearby. Such pattens may appear when the user follows a link from an external application such as an instant
messaging client or a desktop email client, or when they
manually type a URL into the browser. If the user wishes
to re-find Web pages that were viewed independent of any
other browsing activities, this visual pattern will be of interest.
In each of these cases, once the user visually identifies
a pattern that represents their recollection of the browsing
activity that coincided with the page they wish to re-find,
they can jump to that location in the timeline by clicking
in the vicinity of the pattern. Then, within the main timline view, the user may browse the domain stacks, view the
thumbnails and meta-data to find the desired page.

whether the participants were able to grasp the nature of
the two-dimensional timeline metaphor, and whether they
found BrowseLine to be effective for re-finding previously
viewed Web pages.
While there was discussion about a number of minor
bugs the participants found, the general sense of the system was positive. The participants didn’t have a problem
with the two-dimensional timeline representation, nor the
fact that the micro-time dimension broke the space-time correspondence. They all liked the ability to visually identify
patterns of browsing activities. A number of additional features and changes were recommended, all of which will be
considered for future versions of the system. Half the participants indicated that they are planning on continuing to
use BrowseLine; the other half indicated that their reason
for not wanting to continue to use it was due to the load
times when the browsing history is long. We are currently
working to resolve the issue with the load time.

6

7

medium-density burst over an
extended period of time
(e.g., Web mail)

low-density burst over a short
period of time (e.g., viewed links)

Figure 4. Different visual patterns in the timeline navigation view indicated different patterns of Web browsing activity.

Preliminary Evaluations

Preliminary evaluations of the BrowseLine prototype
were conducted with four graduate students in an informal setting. The students were asked to install and use
the system for a period of one day, and then participate in
a focus group discussion about the system. Our primary
purpose in conducting this focus group was to determine

Conclusions & Future Work

In this work, we have introduced BrosweLine as a
method for supporting users in the task of re-finding Web
pages in their browsing histories. The primary contribution of this work is the use of a two-dimensional timeline
to represent data at macro-time and micro-time levels of detail. A timeline navigation view provides a zoomed-out rep-

160

resentation of the temporal characteristics of the browsing
history, supporting the visual recognition of patterns that
match the users’ recollection of their browsing activities.
Once an approximate area in the timeline is identified, users
can quickly jump to this location and evaluate the contents
of the domain stacks as they seek to re-find a Web page.
Although our preliminary investigations have provided
positive feedback, there remain a number of unverified hypothesis that guided the design of BrowseLine. A comprehensive user evaluation in a controlled laboratory setting is
currently in the planning stages. Field trials and real-world
user evaluations are also under consideration.
Other future work for BrowseLine includes merging the
the timeline navigation view and the main timeline representation using a focus+context technique similar to WaveLens [11], making improvements and refinements to the
interface, and releasing the BrowseLine Firefox extension
to the public. We are also investigating applying the twodimensional timeline representation to other domains with
a strong temporal aspect, such as medical informatics, news
feeds, email, and blog entries.

[8] S. Havre, E. Hetzler, P. Witney, and L. Nowell. ThemeRiver:
Visualizing thematic changes in large document collections.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1):9–20, 2002.
[9] R. R. Hightower, L. T. Ring, J. I. Helfman, B. B. Bederson,
and J. D. Hollan. PadPrints: Graphical multiscale Web histories. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology, pages 121–122,
1998.
[10] Mozilla Foundation.
The joy of XUL.
Online
(https://developer.mozilla.org/en/The Joy of XUL),
September 2007.
[11] T. Paek, S. Dumais, and R. Logan. Wavelens: A new view
onto internet search results. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2004.
[12] C. Plaisant, B. Milash, A. Rose, S. Widoff, and B. Shneiderman. Life Lines: Visualizing personal histories. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 221–227, 1996.
[13] J. C. Roberts. State of the art: Coordinated & multiple views
in exploratory visualization. In Fifth International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization, pages 61–71, 2007.
[14] Y. Shirai, Y. Yamamoto, and K. Nakakoji. A history-centric
approach for enhancing Web browsing experiences. In CHI
’06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 1319–1324, 2006.
[15] L. Standing, J. Conezio, and R. N. Haber. Perception and
memory for pictures: Single-trial learning of 2500 visual
stimuli. Psychonomic Science, 19(2):73–74, 1970.
[16] E. Tufte. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information.
Graphics Press, 2nd edition, 2001.
[17] C. Ware. Information Visualization: Perception for Design.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2nd edition, 2004.

Acknowledgements
This research has been made possible through the first
author’s Discovery Grant and the second authors Undergraduate Student Research Award, both provided by the
Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC).

References
[1] M. Andreessen. NCSA mosaic technical summary. Technical report, National Center for Supercomputing Applications, February 1993.
[2] E. Z. Ayers and J. T. Stasko. Using graphic history in browsing the World Wide Web. In Proceedings of the Fourth International World Wide Web Conference, pages 11–14, 1995.
[3] A. Cockburn, S. Greenberg, B. McKenzie, M. Jasonsmith,
and S. Kaasten. WebView: A graphical aid for revisiting
Web pages. In Proceedings of the OZCHI’99 Australian
Conference on Human Computer Interaction, 1999.
[4] A. Cockburn and B. McKenzie. What do Web users do?
an empirical analysis of Web use. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 54(6):903–922, 2001.
[5] P. D¨omel. WebMap: a graphical hypertext navigation tool.
In Proceedings of the Second International World Wide Web
Conference, pages 785–789, 1994.
[6] E. Fr´econ and G. Smith. WebPath - a three-dimensional Web
history. In Proceedings of the 1998 IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, pages 3–10, 1998.
[7] R. Gandhi, G. Kumar, B. Bederson, and B. Shneiderman.
Domain name based visualization of Web histories in a
zoomable user interface. In Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Applications, pages 591–598, 2000.

161

