2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Visual Perception of Parallel Coordinate Visualizations
Harri Siirtola, Tuuli Laivo, Tomi Heimonen, and Kari-Jouko Räihä
Tampere Unit for Computer-Human Interaction (TAUCHI)
Department of Computer Sciences, FIN-33014 University of Tampere, Finland
{harri.siirtola, tuuli.laivo, tomi.heimonen, kari-jouko.raiha}@cs.uta.fi
Abstract

of data dimensions (in practise limited only by the display
width). A parallel coordinate plot effectively “flattens” a
multidimensional data set into a two-dimensional image.

Parallel coordinates is a visualization technique that
provides an unbiased representation of high-dimensional
data. The parallel configuration of axes treats data dimensions uniformly and is well suited for exploratory visualization. However, first-time users of parallel coordinate visualizations can find the representation confusing and difficult to understand. We used eye tracking to study how
parallel coordinate visualizations are perceived, and compared the results to the optimal visual scan path required to
complete the tasks. The results indicate that even first-time
users quickly learn how to use parallel coordinate visualizations, pay attention to the correct task-specific areas in
the visualization, and become rapidly proficient with it.

X

Y

Figure 1: The idea of parallel coordinate plots: use of parallel axes layout instead of orthogonal one. The four points
on the left are represented by the four lines on the right.

Keywords— Parallel coordinate visualizations, eye tracking, perception of visualization

1

Y

X

Introduction
Encountering parallel coordinate visualizations for the
first time can be an alienating experience, especially if the
person has a negative attitude towards mathematical or statistical graphics. We have repeatedly observed this phenomenon in our undergraduate information visualization
courses, both in the class and via lecture diaries. However,
interactive exploration of parallel coordinate plots often
overcomes this initial attitude, and the chance for graphical discovery provided by interaction is soon appreciated.

Exploratory data visualization as an approach requires
more flexibility from a visualization technique than solutions that are tailored to specific data and tasks. Perhaps
the most important requirement for exploratory visualization is the uniform treatment of data dimensions, which is
offered only by few visualization techniques. The parallel coordinate plots technique [2] treats all data dimensions
equally, displays them simultaneously, and the number of
dimensions is limited only by the available screen real estate. In addition, parallel coordinate plots can be turned
into an efficient interactive visualization by constructing
a software tool, or parallel coordinate browser, to explore
them. These software tools usually implement a number of
interaction techniques that facilitate the acquisition of insight into data, such as brushing, highlighting, drill-down,
and visual queries with logical connectives AND, OR, and
XOR.
The fundamental idea in parallel coordinate plots is to
use parallel coordinate axes instead of the standard orthogonal Cartesian layout (Figure 1). When the standard axes
layout is exhausted already by three-dimensional data, the
parallel layout can in theory handle an unlimited number
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.25

In our earlier experiment [11], we observed that participants learned to use parallel coordinate visualizations
surprisingly rapidly. This suggests that although the visualizations based on the parallel coordinate plots are seen
abstract and alienating by first-time users, their immediate usability is still quite good. This study focusses on the
visual perception of parallel coordinate visualizations by
using eye tracking equipment to capture the gaze behavior
of participants. By inspecting how the parallel coordinate
visualizations are perceived, we hope to uncover whether
users focus their attention to the relevant areas while performing a task and how these scan paths correspond to the
optimal, task-specific order of area visitation.
3

2

Related work

3.1

Nine participants were recruited for the study via a student organization’s mailing list. They received two cinema
tickets as compensation for their participation. Potential
participants were screened to have at least some experience
with data graphics (creating graphs with MS Excel or similar software was deemed adequate experience). For seven
participants, the capture of gaze data was successful, and
their data was further analyzed. These seven participants
(3 female, 4 male) were 24–30 years old.

The idea of parallel coordinates was developed by Inselberg [1] (please see [11, 10] for a thorough review) and further revised by him and his colleagues. The use of parallel
coordinate plots in interactive visualizations has been studied widely, including our own work on direct manipulation
of parallel coordinates [9] and interaction with parallel coordinates [11]. In the latter article, we described an experiment where sixteen database professionals performed a set
of query tasks both with the SQL query language and a parallel coordinate browser. Those results show that although
many of the participants had doubts about the usefulness of
parallel coordinate visualizations, they could perform tasks
more efficiently with the visualization interface than with
their familiar database query language.
The use of gaze analysis to study information visualizations has recently become more popular as eye tracking equipment allows unobtrusive gaze tracking. Spence et
al. [12] did a comparison of different RSVP visualization
modes by utilizing gaze analysis. They found that visualization techniques significantly affected users’ gaze behaviour. Eye tracking analysis complements findings from
more traditional measures, such as error rate, and provides
actionable eye movement data for design and research.
Pirolli et al. [6] studied the effect of “information scent”
on Hyperbolic Tree Browser. With two eye tracker studies, they concluded that the performance of the system was
highly affected by proximal cues to the value of distal information.
Johansson et al. [4] studied a new visual quality metric, “acceptable distortion of patterns”, in context of parallel coordinate visualizations and noisy data sets. They
explored the users’ ability to recognize patterns in parallel
coordinate visualizations as the data became increasingly
noisy. The recognition of patterns in parallel coordinate
plots is demanding, as the familiar shapes appear different
in the parallel world. They suggest limits for pattern recognition both with respect to level of noise in the data and to
the maximum number of variables.

3

Participants

3.2

Materials

A Java applet version of PCE was used in the tests
(available for experimenting at http://www.cs.uta.
fi/~hs/pce/, Java source available upon request). The
applet runs within a Web browser and presents a data set
as a parallel coordinate plot. The user can brush and highlight the polylines by creating and combining manipulable graphical constraints on them. The applet and all its
features are used with a mouse. The Cars data set [8] is
hard-coded in this proof-of-concept prototype. The data
set contains the name and eight other attributes of 406 cars
manufactured between years 1970 and 1982, originating
from the Consumer Reports magazine.
Tobii T60 Eye Tracker integrated into a 17-inch flat
screen monitor (1280x1024 pixel resolution) was used to
capture eye movement data in the tests. Tobii Studio software (v1.1.25) was used to set up, execute, and analyze the
test. The test computer had MS Internet Explorer 7 Web
browser running under MS Windows XP operating system.
In addition to Tobii equipment, a USB Web camera was
used to record audio from the test situation.
The eye movement and mouse data was post-processed
in Tobii Studio into fragments containing the tasks, and
Areas of Interest (AOI, Figure 2) were defined. Then the
fixation data based on the AOIs was computed and with
videos clips containing a gaze path overlay were produced.
The fixation filter settings used in the analysis were Tobii Studio default values, where the maximum radius of
fixation is 50 pixels and the minimum fixation duration is
100 ms – i.e., fixations less than 50 pixels apart in space
and 100 ms apart in time are fused together. We used in
the analysis the following eye movement metrics. The last
two of these are commonly used [3], whereas the first is
specific to our analysis:

Experiment

In an earlier experiment [11], 16 database professionals carried out eight tasks with an SQL query interface and
eight tasks with a Parallel Coordinate Explorer (PCE) program [9]. In this study, we used the same experimental
setup, but without a comparison to the SQL interface. Eye
tracking device was used to capture participants’ gaze data,
especially their fixation targets and lengths. A fixation occurs when the person maintains his or her gaze on a single
location for a certain period of time, and it can be used as
an approximation for the person’s focus of attention [13].

Fixations Before: the number of fixations before fixating on a certain AOI.
Fixation Duration Mean: the average duration of fixations on a certain AOI.
Fixation Count: the number of fixations on a certain
AOI.

4

These metrics allow us to inspect how the participants’
attention was distributed, assuming that their attention is
where they are looking at. For each task, we can easily
define the set of AOIs that the user must at least look at
to carry out the task. Then we can inspect from the gaze
data how many fixations they accumulated before they entered one of the mandatory AOIs (Fixations Before), how
their fixations are distributed between mandatory and nonmandatory areas (Fixation Count). and how long are the
fixations in these areas (Fixation Duration Mean).
The participants performed the following nine tasks:

of 9 fixation points. The calibration was repeated as necessary. After the calibration, the Web browser with PCE
applet was launched and the participant was asked to describe what they see. Finally, the participant was allowed
to experiment with the applet for a maximum of three minutes.
Following this experimentation, the participant was introduced to fundamentals of parallel coordinates: they are
a graphical way to represent data sets; they include vertical parallel axes, which represent the attributes; and unlike
orthogonal coordinates, parallel coordinates present multidimensional data in one view. Also some basic information concerning the PCE applet was provided: selections
on the axes are made by “brushing”, the selections can be
moved by dragging and resized by dragging the triangles
on each end of the selection (see Figure 2); “Background”
option makes the unselected cases visible; “Remove” button clears all selections made; and “Combiner” menu provides options, like AND and OR, to combine selections.
The participant was given a list of attributes which were to
be used through the whole test. Before moving on to the
actual tasks the participant was advised to read aloud the
task and also to tell the answer aloud. Thinking aloud was
not required.
The tasks were presented one by one below the PCE applet in the Web browser (Figure 2, the TASK area). The
participant used the “Next task” button to move to the next
task upon task completion. Tasks were considered to have
started when the task description and the applet were visible and ended when the participant clicked on the “Next
task” button. After performing all tasks, the participant
was asked to fill out a questionnaire about subjective opinions concerning the applet, its usage, and the tasks. Finally,
the participant was provided with the compensation.

0. How many American cars are there in the data set?
1. How many cars have a four or six cylinder engine?
2. What is the average mileage for the six-cylinder
cars?
3. How would you describe the cars that weigh over
4500 pounds?
4. What is the origin of the six-cylinder cars that were
manufactured in 1971?
5. Which Japanese cars have the best acceleration?
6. What else is common to the most powerful, best accelerating, and heaviest cars in the data set?
7. How many non-American cars are there in the data
set?
8. What is the most common number of cylinders for
cars manufactured in 1973?
Task 0 was always performed first as a practice task but
the participants did not know this. The presentation order of the subsequent eight tasks was counter-balanced using a balanced Latin Square design to eliminate order effects. The tasks were selected from the 16 tasks used in the
previous experiment (except task 7 that was added for this
study), based on the task types (simple selection, multiple
selections, and exploratory). All tasks except 3 and 6 had
an unambiguous answer.

3.3

4

Results

According to the pre-test questionnaire, the participants
examined graphical presentations once a week or less frequently, and formed graphical presentations once a month
or less frequently. Only one of the participants said he confidently knows what a parallel coordinate plot is.
Participants were requested to describe what they saw
in the parallel coordinate visualization before carrying out
tasks. Two of the participants had seen parallel coordinate visualizations before and were familiar with the representation. Other participants described the visualization
as follows:

Procedure

In the beginning of the session, the purpose and outline
of the experiment were explained to the participant. Next,
the participant was asked to sign an informed consent form,
and fill in a background information questionnaire. At this
point, the participant was also told that the used data set included information about cars manufactured between years
1970 and 1982.
The participant was seated before the eye tracking device at a distance of 50 cm and requested to be as stationary as possible throughout the experiment. Next, the eye
tracker was calibrated using a standard Tobii calibration set

• “Some kind of a hassle in a tabular form . . . some
values about cars?”
• “This is hard to find out. . . no way to acquire a quick
overview . . . probably there are some variable names
up there, and the values are shown at the lines?”

5

CAR

MPG

CYL

DISPL

HP

WEIGHT

0-TO-60

YEAR

ORIGIN

CAR.1

CAR.2

CAR.3

TASK
MENU
How many American cars are there in the data set?
Next task

Figure 2: Areas Of Interest (AOI) used in the analysis and their naming conventions. Each area is named after the axis and
divided into three parts: top of the axis (1), axis itself (2), and bottom of the axis (3), e.g. CAR.2 is the first vertical axis
from the left. In addition, shows a visual query where all the six-cylinder cars have been highlighted (triangles at the CYL
axis) and the one with the smallest engine displacement has been selected (a Volvo diesel, values shown below the axes
labels).

Figure 3: Heatmap of fixation counts for task 8, “What is the most common number of cylinders for cars manufactured in
1973?”

6

• “This is some kind of line diagram . . . every vertical
and horizontal line is some kind of a measurement?
Seems to be data about cars.”
• “This is a mess, I do not understand it at all!”
• “There is some kind of a graph of each car
. . . according to those characteristics?”

As an example of a fixation heatmap, Figure 3 shows the
heatmap for task 8, or “What is the most common number
of cylinders for cars manufactured in 1973?”. Areas where
users looked at are darker (ranging from green to red via
yellow in color).
Figures 4–6 show the values of three aspects of fixation
data: the median number of fixations occurring before the
participant fixated within one of the AOIs for the first time,
the fixation duration means (in seconds) in an AOI, and
the median count of fixations within an AOI. These metrics are represented as AOI by Task balloon plots (package
gplots, [7]) where numbers are replaced with correspondingly sized circles.

Figure 5: Balloon plot for AOI by Task: Fixation duration
means in an AOI. The mandatory AOIs for a task have a
grey background.

In Figure 4, the gray background in a cell indicates an
AOI that must be first attended to solve a task, i.e. in making the initial query. In Figures 5 and 6 the gray background shows all the AOIs that must be attended to in a
course of the task. In exploratory tasks, T3 and T6, that
encompasses most of the areas of interest.

Figure 6: Balloon plot for AOI by Task: Medians of fixation counts in an AOI (larger value is better). The mandatory AOIs for a task have a grey background.

Table 1 presents a summary of the fixation data per task:
the total sum of fixation durations on a task, the sum of durations on the mandatory areas, and the percentage of time
spent in mandatory areas.

Figure 4: Balloon plot for AOI by Task: Medians of fixations before entering an AOI (smaller value is better). The
mandatory AOIs for a task have a grey background.

7

were also more of them, yet another indication that participants paid attention to where they were supposed to.
One interesting detail is our rehearse task (T0) which
all participants did as their first task, outside the counterbalancing. Data for the task 0 is included in Figures 4–6,
and it shows that the participants paid attention to the correct parts of the visualization right in the beginning, after
very short training. This supports the idea that the immediate usability of parallel coordinate visualizations is quite
good.
The data also nicely reflects the characteristics of the
data and the tasks. For tasks 3, 5, and 6, Figure 6 shows
that there are fixations over most AOIs, even if the counts
for the task-critical areas are the highest. For tasks 3 and
6 this follows naturally from the formulation of the tasks,
which calls for a free-form characterization of the result
set and encourages exploration of several attribute values.
In the case of task 5 this is an indication of the conceptual challenge caused by the acceleration attribute, leading
participants to look for confirmation for their interpretation
from the values of the other attributes.
This experiment and earlier research provide evidence
that even the first-time users of parallel coordinate visualizations quickly learn the concept and are able to make at
least simple visual queries. But why does this visualization
technique work so well when users initially describe it as
complex and even unappealing? One explanation offered
by cognitive psychology [14, p. 41] is in the mechanisms of
visual search: the use of elementary shapes (lines) and their
orientation (vertical axes vs. often non-vertical data items),
motion (as the constraint ‘sliders’ are moved), and the spatial grouping (patterns formed by the selected polylines).
The parallel coordinate visualization takes advantage of
these basic mechanisms. Another, interesting perspective
is provided by evolutionary psychology [5][14, p. 36]: our
brain is adapted to the conditions of our most long-term
and primary environment of evolutionary adaptedness: the
African savanna. We may be extremely sensitive to predators lurking behind trees – or data items appearing behind
parallel axes.

Table 1: Summary of fixation data per tasks.
Task
T0
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8

5

Total
fixation
time
369,6
777,5
656,3
825,3
790,2
788,3
1106,6
299,7
857,9

Time in
mandatory
AOI’s
277,5
653,3
586,7
438,5
436,7
495,6
644,2
252,5
788,9

% of total
75,1
84,0
89,4
53,1
55,3
62,9
58,2
84,3
92,0

Discussion

The descriptions of the parallel coordinate plot given by
the participants prior to interacting with it are in line with
our earlier experiences. Those who had seen the visualization before did not have problems recalling the idea, and
some of those who saw it for the first time considered it
“messy” or “a hassle”.
The fixation data in Figures 3–6 shows convincingly
that the participants did mainly look at the correct, taskspecific AOIs. As an example, this is apparent when looking at the data for task 8, or “What is the most common
number of cylinders for cars manufactured in 1973?”. In
order to complete the task the user has to look at the AOIs
of YEAR.1–3, CYL.1–3 and MENU. The year 1973 has
to be selected from the YEAR.2 area, the cylinder number has to be brushed from the CYL.2 area, and finally, the
amount of cars having this number of cylinders has to be
read from the MENU area. In addition, it might be necessary to check the axes names (YEAR.1, CYL.1) and to
verify the limits of current selections (CYL.1/CYL.3 and
YEAR.1/YEAR.3). As an overview, Figure 3 shows the
fixation heatmap for task 8 over all participants. It is evident that their visual attention is where it should be.
Figures 4–6 shed more light on the visual perception
process for task 8. First, Figure 4 shows that the important
areas were found quickly. For task 8 (as for essentially all
tasks), the balloons with grey background are small, meaning that the gaze did not wander around in other areas before hitting the areas that needed to be attended to in order
to solve the task. Figure 5 shows that the middle part of
the axes drew longer fixations than either the top or bottom
area, represented by the bigger balloons. This reflects the
fact that the interactive part in the middle required more
intense attention than the static values at the ends, which
could be quickly read. Finally, Figure 6 shows that the fixations in the important areas were not only longer; there

Conclusions
Visualizations based on parallel coordinate plots are often regarded as an expert-only technique; too difficult for a
casual user to take advantage of. The experiment described
in this paper – as well as the earlier experiment – contradict
this assumption, and show that the immediate usability of
parallel coordinate visualizations is surprisingly good. Parallel coordinate visualizations should certainly be among
those tools that are offered to office workers once the mainstream software houses realize the benefits of information
visualization approach.

8

Acknowledgments

[7] R Development Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. http://www.
R-project.org/, 2009.

This work was supported by the Academy of Finland
(project 1129300).

References
[1] A. Inselberg. The plane with parallel coordinates. The
Visual Computer (Special issue on Computational
Geometry), 1:69–97, 1985.

[8] E. Ramos and D. Donoho. The 1983 ASA data exposition dataset: Cars. http://lib.stat.cmu.
edu/datasets/cars.data (accessed 27 Feb
2009), 1983.

[2] A. Inselberg. Trends in Interactive Visualization,
chapter Parallel Coordinates: Interactive Visualization for High Dimensions, pages 49–78. Springer,
2009.

[9] H. Siirtola. Direct manipulation of parallel coordinates. In IV’2000: Proceedings of the International
Conference on Information Visualization, pages 373–
378. IEEE Computer Society, 2000.

[3] R. J. K. Jacob and K. S. Karn. Eye tracking in humancomputer interaction and usability research: Ready
to deliver the promises. In The Mind’s Eye: Cognitive and Applied Aspects of Eye Movement Research,
J. Hyönä, R. Radach and H. Deubel (Eds.), pages
573–605. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2003.

[10] H. Siirtola. Interactive Visualization of Multidimensional Data.PhD thesis, University of Tampere, 2007.

[4] J. Johansson, C. Forsell, M. Lind, and M. Cooper.Perceiving patterns in parallel coordinates: determining
thresholds for identification of relationships.Information Visualization, 7(2):152–162, 2008.

[12] B. Spence, M. Witkowski, C. Fawcett, B. Craft, and
O. de Bruijn. Image presentation in space and time:
errors, preferences and eye-gaze activity. In AVI ’04:
Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced
visual interfaces, pages 141–149. ACM, 2004.

[11] H. Siirtola and K.-J. Räihä. Interacting with
parallel coordinates. Interacting with Computers,
18(6):1278–1309, 2006.

[5] S. Kanazawa.The Savanna Principle.Managerial and
Decision Economics, 25:41–54, 2004.

[13] R. Stiefelhagen, J. Yang, and A. Waibel. Estimating
focus of attention based on gaze and sound. In PUI
’01: Proceedings of the 2001 workshop on Perceptive user interfaces, pages 1–9. ACM, 2001.

[6] P. Pirolli, S. K. Card, and M. M. Van Der Wege. The
effect of information scent on searching information:
visualizations of large tree structures.In AVI ’00: Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces, pages 161–172. ACM, 2000.

[14] C. Ware. Visual Thinking for Design. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2008.

9

