2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Interactive Visualization of Weather and Ship Data
Patrik Lundblad, Oskar Eurenius, Tobias Heldring
National Center for Visual Analytics (NCVA)
Link¨oping University, Sweden
patrik.lundblad@itn.liu.se, oskeu009@student.liu.se, tobhe335@student.liu.se
Abstract

to future weather development and warnings of extreme
weather factors. With weather forecasts and voyage information provided by the European Centre for MediumRange Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) [3] and SMHI [4]
shipping companies can monitor fleets using highly interactive visual representations visualizing weather parameters and detailed voyage information. Using a geographic
map visualization together with a parallel coordinates plot
(PCP) brings great possibilities when exploring the data.
SWIM was designed with the following tasks in mind:

This paper focus on the development of a tool for Ship
and Weather Information Monitoring (SWIM) visualizing
weather data combined with data from ship voyages. The
project was done in close collaboration with the Swedish
Meteorological and Hydrological Institute (SMHI) who
also evaluated the result. The goal was to implement a
tool which will help shipping companies to monitor their
fleet and the weather development along planned routes
and provide support for decisions regarding route choice
and to evade hazard. A qualitative usability study was performed to gather insight about usability issues and to aid
future development. Overall the result of the study was positive and the users felt that the tool would aid them in the
daily work.

• Detailed monitoring of voyages based on planned and
reported waypoints.
• Easy exploration of weather forecast according to
both geographic positions and along routes.
• Using a PCP together with a geographic map visualization to find interesting voyages according to
weather parameters.
• Using highly interactive linked visual representations
to facilitate exploration of data.

Keywords— Voyage Analysis, Weather Visualization, Geovisual Analytics, Visual Data Exploration and Analysis, Usability Evaluation.

1

Introduction

In this paper a section about related work will be presented in section 2 followed by a conceptual description
of SWIM in section 3. In section 4 a usability evaluation
is presented and discussed and the paper is concluded with
conclusions and discussions of ideas for future work.

Visualizing multiple data sets from different sources
represents a major challenge for the future. Using data fusion [1], [2] to visualize integrated spatial and temporal
data it is possible to gain insight and retrieve information
that would otherwise have to be obtained using much more
time consuming methods.
One subject area of particular interest is the shipping industry where the need of being able to draw accurate conclusions and make well planned decisions regarding routes
and weather factors are important. There are a large number of variables affecting the success of every sea voyage
performed by vessels such as cargo ships. Important aspects being considered are speed, safety and costs because
of their direct impact on the voyage performance. Weather
factors are the main concern when considering these aspects and therefore shipping companies consult meteorologists about weather information and route optimization.
SWIM was created to aid shipping companies monitoring vessels according to forecasted weather development along planned routes (figure 1). The tool provides
support for decisions regarding route choice with respect
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.38

2

Related Work

Visualization of spatio-temporal data has been the subject of several recent research papers, see [5] for an
overview. GeoVista Studio [6] and CommonGIS [7] are
general systems which support exploratory data analysis
with decision-making and Andrienko and Andrienko has
illustrated other motivating approaches in earlier papers
[8], [9]. According to Jern and Franz´en most of these systems lack support for analyzing simultaneously multiple
attributes data and spatio-temporal behavior [10] and as
a response a generic ”GeoAnalytics” visualization (GAV)
[11] toolkit is introduced. Jern et al. emphasize the advantages and need of multiple linked views (MLVs) for
dynamically exploring time-varying, geographically referenced and multivariate attribute data. Parallel coordinates
379

Figure 1: The SWIM overview. In the world map ships are visualized using glyphs and their routes are plotted as lines. Significant
wave height is displayed using an iso-surface where warmer color indicates higher waves. The current time step can be changed
using the time slider positioned underneath the world map. Using the weather parameter menu to the left the user can select
which parameter to visualize and which representation to use. At the bottom weather parameters are plotted in the parallel
coordinates plot.

[12], [13], [14], [15] with embedded visual inquiry methods that serve as a visual control panel for dynamically
linked and coordinated views is a well-known visualization
technique for multivariate data [16].

process and may provide additional insight into the underlying information. Operations such as filtering, dynamic
queries [19] and selections applied simultaneously in different views when affecting not only the same information
but more effectively collections of different data is pointed
out by Roberts as more interesting and an important aspect
to consider.

In VISPER [17] multi-dimensional, multi source, timevarying and geospatial information from voyage analysis is
represented to facilitate decision-making. Therefore Lundblad et al. propose the use of common InfoViz visual representations for multivariate data together with geographic
mapping to aid users in their work examining voyage performance.

Spirkovska and Lodha presented AWE - Aviation
Weather Data Visualization Environment [20] which was
designed to meet an urgent need of critical weather element visualizations. AWE focuses on interactive graphical
displays of these weather elements such as, meteorological
observations and terminal area forecasts and maps them
onto a cartographic grid specific to the pilot’s interest.

Roberts [18] provides a review of multiple linked-view
tools, methodologies and models, discusses related challenges and ideas, and provides some rudiments for coordination within a geovisualization context. In accordance
with Roberts linking and relating information in one view
to that of other views will assist the user in the exploration

Song et al have designed an integrated atmospheric visual analysis and exploration system for interactive analysis of weather data sets [21]. These tools provide meteorol-

380

ogists with new abilities to analyze their data and answer
questions on regions of interests, ranging from physicsbased atmospheric rendering to illustrative rendering containing particles and glyphs.
In accordance with Dorneich et al. challenges lie in
effectively integrating voyage and weather information in
the same tool to facilitate decision-making [22].

3

Reported positions are combined with planned waypoints to form a list used to visualize voyages routes in
the world map view. This list of waypoints contains an
average of 30 positions for an entire route. The position of
ships at different time steps are estimated via interpolation
where the time of last reported position, the time at
selected time step and the estimated time of arrival are
used to estimate the distance traveled between the last
reported position and the position of the arrival port.

SWIM

SWIM is developed using the GeoAnalytics Visualization (GAV) Framework [23] and is a tool shipping companies can use to monitor voyages and receive up to date
weather forecasts corresponding to their routes.
SWIM will on startup automatically find the latest weather forecast delivered by the ECMWF. SWIM
presents three different modes. In the first mode a selection
of static weather parameters are presented in a weather parameter menu sorted according to priority level, e.g. basic
weather, advanced weather and extra weather. The second
mode presents a searchable list menu with all active voyages retrieved from the SMHI database. In the third mode
focus lies on one or more selected voyages with detailed
information presented.
In SWIM the users are given the possibility to study
weather data cohering with voyage information in different views. A view represents a visual representation
displaying selectable data with possibilities of interaction
and filtering.

3.1

3.3

Figure 2: World map view visualizing significant wave height
and wind. The significant wave height is visualized using an
iso-surface where warmer color indicates higher waves. The
wind is represented by wind arrow glyphs where the orientation shows the wind direction and the glyph shows the wind
strength. Ships are shown using a ship glyph and their routes
are drawn with lines.

Gridded Binary Format (GRIB)

The input weather data used by SWIM is in GRIB
(Gridded Binary) [24] format which is a mathematically
concise data format commonly used in meteorology to
store weather data. It is developed and standardized by the
World Meteorological Organization (WMO). The GRIB
format is used world-wide by meteorological centers for
numerical weather prediction output and serves as an efficient solution of transferring large volumes of digital gridded weather data.
In our work focus lies on GRIB files originated from
ECMWF.

3.2

World Map

The main view is the world map where all weather parameters originating from corresponding GRIB files can be
presented according to selection in the weather menu. Options are provided on how to visualize a parameter, e.g.
iso-line, iso-surface, glyph or numerical values. Routes
with their corresponding ships are also visualized in the
world map. The ships are represented by ship glyphs which
are positioned and rotated according to an interpolation
based on their pre-planned waypoints, reported positions
and present time (figure 2). For these features to be useful it is necessary to look at not only the spatial variables
but also temporal aspects. Each GRIB file consists of a selection of weather parameters with corresponding weather
data for a certain date and time. SWIM reads and stores a
ten days forecast consisting of 31 binary GRIB files with
a forecast time interval of 6 hours the first 5 days and an
interval of 12 hours the later 5 days. This enables the temporal aspect to be taken into account and it is represented

Voyage Data

Data retrieved for each of the approximately one hundred voyages includes ship information such as operator,
ship name and ship type. Voyage specific information includes time of departure and estimated time of arrival, port
of departure and port of arrival as well as a list of waypoint positions. Lastly, reports delivered on a daily basis
are retrieved which includes current positions, speed and
performance as well as weather observations at reported
positions.

381

by a forecast time slider. This slider can be positioned at
any of the 31 forecasts which effectively enables the user to
view weather changes and ship movement over time (figure
3). Routes with corresponding ships that at a specific time
index has reached its final destination is marked as inactive
and grayed out. The world map view with selected weather
data visualized and chosen voyages plotted will work as an
effective support to monitor several vessels simultaneously
over a period of time.

3.4

Parallel Coordinates Plot

The PCP view displays all the voyages with loaded
parameters for the selected time step. Each voyage is
represented as a line in the PCP where each axis corresponds to a specific weather parameter (figure 5). This
view gives the user an overview of the weather for all the
voyages at a specific time step. Advancing the time slider
will update the PCP with new data, namely weather data
for each voyage at the new time step. Lines are colored
according to the parameter value of the selected axis.
Which parameter to use for coloring can be chosen by
clicking the header the parameter axes. The colors of the
lines are linked to the color of the ships in the world map
view.

Figure 3: The left side shows wind wave height as an isosurface, ships visualized using ship glyphs and their routes
as lines. The right side shows the same map area with the
time slider advanced 48 hours.
Figure 5: Time step parallel coordinates plot. The lines can
be selected, filtered by moving the sliders on each axis and
colored by clicking the header of the parameter.

To facilitate usage of the world map view and maximize
performance a series of graphics optimizations has been
implemented. With a resolution of 240 longitude and 120
latitude grid points it is necessary to use a level of detail
functionality to keep the world map useful and not cluttered when changing the map zoom. With a maximum of
29040 data points on the data grid we use eight levels of
detail based on a mean value calculation with respect to all
interesting neighbors of each visible grid point (figure 4).

3.5

Voyage Time Graph

When in the voyage information mode the voyage
time graph gives the user an overview of how the weather
will develop along the planned route of the selected
voyage without the need of moving the time slider. Each
parameter is represented as a line in the voyage time
graph and each vertical axis represents a different time
index according to additional hours added to the forecast
creation date (figure 6). Each parameter is normalized
according to predefined values in order to enable the
different parameters to be plotted together. Straight lines
near the bottom of the plot indicate stable and calm
weather along the route for the forecast period. Curvy
lines however indicate varying weather conditions and
high peaks indicate extreme weather parameter values.

Figure 4: The left side shows significant wave height as an isosurface and mean wave direction as a regularly spaced arrow
glyph. The right side shows the greater detail of the glyph
representation received when zoomed in.

Another important optimization feature is the active
rectangular window we use to keep track of the current
visible part of the world map. Using this functionality
gives a performance advantage where weather parameter
visualizations are only calculated and rendered if inside the
active rectangular window. Zoomed in this optimization
saves computational power and speeds up the interaction.

Figure 6: Ship time graph visualizing weather parameters
along the selected route. Each line represents a weather parameter where the x axes represents time and the y axes represents parameter value. The static coloring of the lines are
predefined for each weather parameter.

382

Hiding uninteresting voyages is achieved by using the
filter sliders in the PCP. Filtered lines will be completely
hidden as well as the corresponding voyages in the world
map view. For example, the user can adjust the filters
to only show voyages whose ships are exposed to a
significant wave height above 5 meters (figure 9). When
advancing the time slider the filter value is saved and only
voyages whose ships are experiencing a significant wave
height above 5 meters will be displayed at each time step.

Figure 7: Highlighting in the World Map view. The left side
shows the map before selection and the right side after.

3.6

Linked interaction

At start up all voyages are displayed in the world map
which provides an overview of routes and ship positions.
Highlighting one or several voyages is important when exploring data. In the world map view all the voyages except
those highlighted will be slightly transparent preventing interference with highlighted voyages (figure 7). In the PCP
lines of highlighted voyages will be selected. In the voyage information tab text information will be presented for
highlighted voyages and the voyage time graph will display
data for one of the highlighted voyages.
Different approaches for how to highlight voyages are
presented to meet different user needs. An interesting voyage can for example be selected by clicking on it in the
world map. To highlight a voyage according to name the
ship list with its search function can be used.
The PCP which presents weather for all voyages for a
specific time step can be used to spot voyages experiencing harsh weather conditions and by clicking on a line the
corresponding voyage will be highlighted.
When a specific geographic area is of interest the selection area tool can be used. When the selection area tool is
activated the user is presented with a circular area on the
world map positioned according to mouse position. The
size of the selection area can be manually set and when
clicking a position in the world map all voyages traveling
through that area at any point during the forecast period
will be highlighted (figure 8).

Figure 9: Filtering using time step parallel coordinates plot.
In the world map significant wave height is visualized using
an iso-surface. The left side shows parallel coordinates plot
with corresponding map before filtering. The right side shows
filtering of ships according to significant wave height.

4

Usability Evaluation

For further and future improvements of SWIM a
formative evaluation was performed on the tool. The
purpose of the evaluation was to explore qualitative
usability issues with respect to visual representation and
interactive representation [25] and to gather opinions
regarding potential use and future development without
intentions to do measurements.

4.1

Participants

A selection of marine meteorologists and master
students from the Media Technology and Engineering
program [26] formed a group of six participants. The
marine meteorologists had knowledge and experience
in meteorology and ship routing and the MSc students
had knowledge in information visualization, usability
and design. Their occupations and respective domain
knowledge was assumed to give insightful information
regarding usability issues of SWIM.

Figure 8: Selection area tool. The left side show the world
map view with ships and routes where the grey circle is the
selection area tool. When using the selection area tool ships
that travel through the selected area at any time during the
forecast period will be highlighted as shown on the right side.

4.2

Procedure

Each session lasted nearly an hour. First the participant
was given a demonstration of the tool and its functional-

383

ities. This was done to minimize the risk of misinterpretation as well as first time user misses since the intended
users are a small number of people using the tool regularly.
For the same reason the participants were given answers
and explanations to all their questions about SWIM and its
functionality during the test.
After the demonstration the participant was given the
control of the tool and was encouraged to explore some of
the functionality earlier demonstrated. A number of tasks
that was prepared beforehand were presented to the user in
random order. The intention was not to evaluate the participant’s success of the specific tasks but simply to guide
the user and encourage exploration. Throughout the evaluation a guide sat beside the participant actively discussing
thoughts and opinions regarding the tool and a third person
documented the important parts of the discussion.
The last part of the evaluation consisted of a general
discussion based around the criteria stated by Freitas et al.
[25].
Visual Representations were discussed according to the
following selection of criteria: Data density, limitations,
visual/spatial orientation, data dimensions, relevant information, reference context, occlusion, display of detail and
logical order.
Interactive Representations were discussed according
to the following selection of criteria: filtering, selection of
objects, search and querying, control of level of detail and
viewpoint manipulation.

map view as smooth and natural. However, comments
where made about not being able to connect weather parameters to a specific route instead of regularly spaced
grid-points. All found the spatial organization of visual
representations as well thought-out and easy to interpret.
The ability to choose different visualization methods for
certain weather parameters in the world map and therefore being able to combine different representations was
pointed out as well designed and important. The marine meteorologists requested functionality where the user
would be automatically warned about voyages whose ships
are affected by extreme weather situations rather than having to gain that insight during manual exploration. All participants agreed that the information displayed in the map
view was relevant but additional information was requested
in specific situations such as more detailed voyage information in the ship tool tip.

4.3

All participants pointed out the difficulty of comparing
weather values for different time steps. One participant
suggested maximum and minimum axis values of the Time
Step Coordinates Plot spanning over the entire forecast period as opposed to being time step specific. Participants
also described the variety of selection methods to highlight
a unique voyage as well implemented and the different approaches as good complements to each other. The Selection Area tool was especially appreciated by the marine
meteorologists who saw advantages with the tool enabling
exploration of geographical areas.

With regard to the interactive representation a difference
was noticed between the marine meteorologists and the
MSc students in discovering interaction possibilities. The
MSc students which are skilled using visualization techniques based on brushing, picking and filtering found it
easier to discover and use these features. The marine meteorologists requested additional descriptions of the visual
representations. However, even though the chosen target
group is a small number of people using the tool regularly we found it possible for people without previous experience of similar techniques to embrace the fundamental
ideas with a short introduction.

Results

The marine meteorologists had limited previous experience working with visualization tools in comparison with
the MSc students which were skilled using these tools. On
the other hand the marine meteorologists had significant
experience with weather data and route optimization tools
and these differences were observed when studying the results of the usability evaluation.
All participants completed the prepared tasks without major complications and the overall opinions describe
SWIM as a tool with many possibilities. Direct data manipulation and filtering based on dynamic queries immediately changing the displayed view and additional linked
views was greatly appreciated. All participants and especially the marine meteorologists described the possibility
to filter voyages in the world map view according to criteria in the PCP as useful. During the evaluation the participants also pointed out both known and previously unknown issues and discussions about certain criteria regarding visual and interactive representation brought to light
strengths and weaknesses of the tool.
With regard to the visual representations, participants
experienced the built in level-of-detail functionality in the

The voyage time graph was described by all as a powerful technique to quickly gain insight of weather development along a specific route. Comments were however expressed regarding carefully choosing normalization values
for each parameter to avoid misinterpretation. Participants
also requested an explanation of the colors of weather lines
in the voyage time graph. The time slider was described
by all participants as natural and appeasing to use. A more
distinct representation of elapsed hours of the weather forecast was pointed out as a valuable addition. When selecting
a single voyage requests about a go-to-ship functionality
was expressed, automatically focusing and positioning the

384

5

view over the ship corresponding to the selected voyage in
the world map.
Suggestions of improvements and additions to the GUI
were given. One of those, a feature pointed out missing
by the majority of the participants, was the ability to undo
steps in the interaction.

Future Work

For future development of SWIM more automation
could be built into the tool. The tool could present a list
with voyages meeting certain criteria for harsh weather
conditions. Using this feature investigation of risky voyages could start immediately without the need of first filtering according to criteria. To easily compare weather values of different time steps for all voyages a second time
graph could be implemented were weather development
over time could be shown displaying one weather parameter and all or a selection of voyages. This would facilitate discovering of voyages experiencing the most extreme
weather parameter value during the entire forecast period.
The ability to use presets of user customizations, filtering criteria and standard parameters to read would increase
the dynamics and speed when using the tool.
In the future the amount of active voyages will increase
and within a few years SWIM should be able to handle up
to 3000 voyages and would then benefit from using track
analysis methods [28] [29].
Shipping companies regularly evaluate the performance
of their ships by evaluating reports along the routes,
weather factors and other variables of interest to determine if the voyage was performed as planned [17]. To
facilitate this work SWIM could be extended to support
post voyage analysis. Using the time slider to view past
time steps and presenting reported data and waypoint specific weather SWIM could be a useful tool for this purpose.

Conclusions
This paper presents SWIM which is a tool to explore
multi-source, time-varying and geospatial data. SWIM allows weather forecast data and voyage information to be
analyzed using an interactive map view linked to a PCP
and time graph. Using SWIM analysts at shipping companies can monitor ship voyages and weather development
along planned routes. Voyages whose ships are being exposed to harsh weather can easily be brought to focus and
detailed route specific weather and voyage information can
be retrieved.
A qualitative usability evaluation was performed with
a selection of six participants. Discussing and exploring
the tool with each participant resulted in useful feedback
regarding functionality and design issues. All participants
completed the prepared tasks without major complications
and the overall opinions describes SWIM as a tool with
many advantages and interesting functionalities compared
to similar tools in the same domain.
In summary, especially appreciated features were:
• The world map view with interaction possibilities
such as highlighting, smooth zooming, brushing and
weather parameter visualization options.
• The PCP with the possibility to filter and distinguish
voyages according to weather criteria, presenting results immediately in the world map view.
• The voyage time graph which gives an overview of
weather development along planned routes of selected
voyages.
• The ability to view and interact with the geospatial
data in linked views with several highlighting possibilities.

Acknowledgments
This applied research case study was carried out by
National Center for Visual Analytics (NCVA) [27], ITN,
Link¨oping University, in close collaboration with SMHI
which supplied data and domain expertise. The research is
in part funded by the ”Visualization Program” coordinated
by the Swedish Knowledge Foundation.
A special thanks to SMHI Global Product Manager
Lennart Cederberg and VITA Professor Mikael Jern.

Using a PCP proved to be a powerful tool to filter and
explore data in the world map view. Discovering voyages
which fulfills certain weather criteria is an import feature
which is made possible using the filtering and picking techniques of the PCP. The synergy between geovisualizataion
(map) and information visualization (PCP) was demonstrated and evaluated as useful.
The both known and previously unknown issues regarding visual and interactive representation that brought
to light strengths and weaknesses during the evaluation
will constitute the foundation for further development.

References
[1] L. A. Treinish, ”Visual data fusion for applications
of high-resolution numerical weather prediction,” in
2000 IEEE Visualization Conference, 2000, pp. 477480+594.
[2] M. Mandiak, P. Shah, Y. Kim and T. Kesavadas, ”Development of an integrated GUI framework for postdisaster data fusion visualization,” in 2005 7th International Conference on Information Fusion, FUSION, 2005, pp. 1131-1137.

385

[3] European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) url: http://www.ecmwf.int/.

[17] P. Lundblad, M. Jern and C. Forsell, ”Voyage analysis applied to geovisual analytics,” in 12th International Conference Information Visualization, IV08,
2008, pp. 381-388.

[4] Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute
(SMHI) url: http://www.smhi.se.

[18] J. C. Roberts, ”Exploratory visualization with multiple linked views,” Exploring Geovisualization, pp.
159-180, 2004.

[5] W. M¨uller and H. Schumann, ”Visualization methods
for time-dependent data - an overview,” in Proceedings of the 2003 Winter Simulation Conference: Driving Innovation, 2003, pp. 737-745.
[6] GeoVista
Studio
http://www.geovistastudio.psu.edu.

[19] B. Shneiderman, ”Dynamic queries for visual information seeking,” IEEE Software, vol. 11, pp. 70-77,
1994.

url:

[20] L. Spirkovska and S. K. Lodha, ”AWE: Aviation
weather data visualization environment,” Comput
Graphics (Pergamon), vol. 26, pp. 169-191, 2002.

[7] CommonGIS url: http://www.commongis.de.
[8] G. Andrienko and N. Andrienko, ”Visual exploration
of the spatial distribution of temporal behaviors,” in
9th International Conference on Information Visualization, iV05, 2005, pp. 799-806.

[21] Y. Song, J. Ye, N. Svakhine, S. Lasher-Trapp, M.
Baldwin and D. S. Ebert, ”An atmospheric visual
analysis and exploration system,” IEEE Trans. Visual.
Comput. Graphics, vol. 12, pp. 1156-1164, 2006.

[9] N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko, ”Interactive visual
tools to explore spatio-temporal variation,” Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual
Interfaces AVI 2004, pp. 417-420, 2004.

[22] M. C. Dorneich, O. Olofinboba, S. Pratt, I. Wilson and C. Herbster, ”An experimental evaluation of
weather avoidance using route optimization as a decision aid,” in 2002 IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 2002, pp. 608-612.

[10] M. Jern and J. Franz´en, ””GeoAnalytics” - exploring spatio-temporal and multivariate data,” in Information Visualization 2006, IV06, 2006, pp. 25-31.

[23] GAV Framework url: http://vita.itn.liu.se/GAV.
[24] National Center for Environmental Prediction url:
http://www.nco.ncep.noaa.gov/pmb/docs/on388/.

[11] M. Jern and J. Franz´en, ”Integrating InfoVis and geo
vis components,” in 11th International Conference
Information Visualization, IV 2007, 2007, pp. 511518.

[25] C. M. D. S. Freitas, P. R. G. Luzzardi, R. A. Cava, M.
A. Winckler, M. Pimenta and L. P. Nedel, ”On Evaluating Usability of Information Visualization Techniques,” AVI’02: Proceedings of Advanced Visual Interfaces, 2002.

[12] G. Grinstein, M. Trutschl and U. Cvek, ”Highdimensional visualizations,” Proceedings of the 7
SIGKDD Workshop on Visual Data Mining (KDD2001)Th, pp. 1-14, 2001.

[26] Media
Technology
and
Engineering,
Link¨oping University, Campus Norrk¨oping url:
http://www.medieteknik.nu.

[13] J. Blaas, C. P. Botha and F. H. Post, ”Extensions
of parallel coordinates for interactive exploration of
large multi-timepoint data sets,” IEEE Trans. Visual.
Comput. Graphics, vol. 14, pp. 1436-1443, 2008.

[27] National Center for Visual Analytics NCVA url:
http://ncva.itn.liu.se.
[28] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, S. Wrobel ”Visual Analytics Tools for Analysis of Movement Data,” ACM
SIGKDD Explorations, 2007, v.9 (2), pp.38-46.

[14] A. Inselberg, ”The plane with parallel coordinates,”
The Visual Computer, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 69-91, 1985.
[15] E. J. Wegman, ”Hyperdimensional data analysis using parallel coordinates,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, vol. 85, no. 411, pp. 664-675,
1990.

[29] S. Rinzivillo, D. Pedreschi, M. Nanni, F. Giannotti,
N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, ”Visually-driven analysis of movement data by progressive clustering,” Information Visualization, 2008, v.7 (3/4), pp. 225-239.

[16] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, ”Construction Parallel
Coordinates Plot for Problem Solving,” Smart Graphics ’01 (Pergamon), 2001.

386

