2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Exploring asynchronous online discussions through hierarchical visualisation
V´ıctor Pascual-Cid1,2 and Andreas Kaltenbrunner1,2
1
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
2
Barcelona Media - Innovation Centre, Barcelona, Spain
victor.pascual@upf.edu, andreas.kaltenbrunner@barcelonamedia.org

Abstract

easy task because those systems are usually proprietary and
restricted, asynchronous online discussions leave a public
trail that contains the contributions of the participants.
The analysis of such conversations may enable, for instance, the discovery of hot topics and appealing subjects
to boost up the community. Furthermore, researchers may
benefit from that information to study the behavioural patterns behind such conversations and to interpret the social
aspects of online debates.
Asynchronous online discussions may be categorised depending on its structure into single-threaded and multithreaded conversations. Single-threaded discussions are
usually embedded in digital newspapers or in blogs, and
provide just one thread of comments. This characteristic
makes the conversation difficult to be followed by a human
reader because there is no physical structure and replies
to certain comments are not easy to be found. For the
same reasons, automatic systems may have to run complex
content-based techniques to discover the structure of the
conversations. On the other hand, multi-threaded conversations usually provide indentation or adequate titles that denotes when a comment arises as a reply of another text. Two
examples can be found in Figure 1, where the left subfigure
shows an screenshot of Slashdot.org and the right one an example of a SourceForge discussion panel. In this examples
the reader may observe the existence of a clear structure,
that makes it easier to follow the different threads that were
originated from the primary post. However, large debates
originate countless pages with comments cumbersome to
be navigated, making difficult the understanding of a whole
conversation.
Due to the large amount of information existing in online discussions, Information Visualisation techniques have
been widely used to develop visual interfaces that ease the
exploration and understanding of this kind of data. An example of Social Visualisation was proposed in [1], where
authors introduced Chat Circles, an interface for depicting
synchronous conversations that enables the discovery of the
role of chat participants. The authors also presented Loom
which is a system for creating visualisations of the partic-

We introduce a highly customisable Social Visualisation
system for exploring online discussions through visual representations of conversation threads. The tool provides
users with an interface that allows the navigation and exploration through the often intricate structure of online discussions. Apart from being useful for readers and participants of these forums, the interactive capabilities of our
system makes it appealing for social researchers interested
in understanding the phenomena and intrinsic structure of
online conversations. We also show a use case where we
applied the tool to visualise discussions from Slashdot.org,
showing its capabilities to represent new, in this case Slashdot specific, metrics. The visual representation of discussion threads has arisen as a complement for supporting investigation, as it helps to understand such large amount of
information and contributes to the generation of new research ideas.

1

Introduction: Social Visualisation

Understanding patterns of human behaviour is one of the
main foci of interest in sociology. In that sense, the appearance of the Internet has revealed new paradigms for
analysing social behaviour, based on the study of online
discussions. However, the amount of data present in these
systems is usually overwhelming, reason why Information
Visualisation techniques have arisen as a good approach to
support social researchers.
The term “Social Visualisation” was introduced in [1] as
the visualisation of social information for social purposes.
According to that definition, Social Visualisation may be
understood as the representation of both, the structure of
the participants of a social network and their interactions
within the community.
Such interactions may be found in asynchronous (blogs,
wikis, newsgroups, mailing lists) or synchronous form
(chats). While collecting information from chats is not an
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.14

191

Figure 1. Web interfaces of conversations in Slashdot (left) and SourceForge (right).
ipants and interactions in a threaded Usenet group, where
posts and comments are represented as connected dots in
the space. Moreover, they also classify posts according to
its “mood”, generating coloured visual patterns.
Conversation Map [7] is another system designed to enable scientific and non-scientific users to visually analyse
online conversations [8]. It combines the visualisation of
social and semantic networks using node-link diagrams.
The tool has three different frames dedicated to the visualisation of the underlying social network of a thread, its
semantic relations based on discussion themes and a display
area where individual threads are shown.
While previously presented tools give an overview of the
discussion activity within a community, another trend has
been the representation of author activity. In that sense,
PeopleGarden [13] represents an original approach for depicting the behaviour of online communities. This system
was based on the representation of every author in the community as a flower whose petals are ordered and coloured
according to post attributes such as number of replies or
posting time. Although such an organic metaphor provides
an interesting overview of a community, it may fail when
tackling very large communities with thousands of users.
Focusing on author activity rather than on discussion
structure, [11] introduces two visualisations to support social awareness in online spaces called Newsgroup Crowds
and Authorlines. These visualisations emphasise the social
aspects behind the contributions of users to the community
rather than the patterns that can be extracted from the discussion structures itself. Specifically, Newsgroup Crowds
is a scatter plot that enables the understanding of the ac-

tivity of participants in a given newsgroup during a period
of time. The plot visualises an author’s activity by depicting her number of active days and her average of posts per
thread. Likewise, Authorlines represent a visualisation of
the activity of a single author, showing the number of contributions to the community during one year through vertical
bars made up of sized circles that represent the controversy
(number of replies) generated per every author’s comments.
Finally, the impact of using visualisations to support social researchers was analysed in [12], where the authors
were assisted by three visualisations (Authorlines, graph
representation of ego networks and histograms of the neighbour degree distribution) to generate hypotheses on how to
identify signatures of social roles.
These tools provide Social Visualisation by means of depicting author behaviour as well as the whole cloud of contributions in online discussions. However, one might miss
important aspects of human behaviour when only analysing
the general picture of online discussions. But surprisingly,
little work has been presented regarding the representation of single conversations, perhaps with the exception
of [10], where a vertical tree not suitable for representing
very large debates was used. To overcome this limitations,
we present here an interactive tool which allows to investigate the smallest details of conversation threads while at the
same time improving the standard representation of forum
threads as a whole.
Hence, the goals of our tool are both, enabling researchers to analyse a single conversation, and offering a
visual interface to support discussion participants and readers to explore its contents.
192

Figure 2. Discussion map of a Slashdot conversation. One dimensional bars represent posting time
while shades of grey (colours in the original application) represent the score of the post.

The next section is dedicated to the presentation of our
visual system for exploring online discussions, introducing
its visual capabilities and browsing interactions to ease the
understanding of complex discussions. Following, we will
introduce a case study to show how our system can be applied to a very well known discussion site, to end up with
the conclusions and future steps of our work.

2

Our system uses a crawler to collect conversations from a
target site, and transforms each conversation in a GraphML
file used as input to the visualisation system. Such a system
is an adaptation of the work presented in [6], with some design considerations based on the needs of social researchers.
Likewise, the system takes advantage of the hierarchical
properties of online conversation structure, where posts may
be considered as nodes and edges correspond to the replying relation between them. Hence, we use the main post as
the root of a tree and its direct replies are considered part of
the first level. Following replies are located in deeper levels, and so forth. The provided “discussion map” follows
the Information Seeking Mantra [9], providing an overview
of the discussion tree based on the Radial Tree, proposed
in [2], and a set of interactions that provide details on demand. Thus, the main discussion post is placed in the centre
of the tree, while its comments surround it in a concentric
and nested manner, allowing the discovery of hot topics, or
user-to-user debates, which can be easily identified as outliers in the hierarchy. Figure 2 represents a screenshot of the
user interface of our system. While the Radial Tree depicting a conversation thread is shown within the main frame,
the right part contains controls to interact with the visual
attributes and legends.

Visualising online discussions

In [12], Welser et al. showed how visualisations assisted
researchers in the analysis of social aspects of online discussions. However, as we have already seen, most of the existing visual systems address the problem of visualising all the
posts and comments within a community, discouraging the
analysis and navigation through single multi-threaded conversations. Such discussions may have a large amount of
user contributions and represent a good source for analysing
and understanding social behaviour by itself.
Typical web interfaces of newsgroups and forums use
pagination and nesting as a way for enabling the navigation
through multi-threaded conversations (Figure 1). Nevertheless, more complex approaches are also used where nonhigh rated comments are collapsed by default, leaving more
screen space to valuable contributions. However, pagination and indentation are still inefficient when representing
highly discussed posts with several hundreds, or even thousands of comments.

The tool has been provided with the typical set of interactions like panning and zooming. Furthermore, detailed
information such as author of the text, time stamp, and body
of every comment are provided when hovering a node.
193

users may select any available metric, and apply it to visual
attributes of nodes in the tree. Such metrics may be defined
in a configuration file, and may refer to attributes existing in
the GraphML file. The system collects all the metrics and
assigns its value according to the selected visual attribute,
which can be one of the following:
Size: by default, the two dimensional area of the nodes is
chosen to represent the values of the selected metric.
However, large populated conversations may generate
cluttered representations. To get rid of this problem,
the system is able to represent items in one dimension,
generating bars whose height depends on the metric.
Location: this visual attribute refers to the ordering of
child nodes. The system locates every child in the
same order as it has been visited by the crawler. However, the random nature of posts in a discussion may
avoid the possibility to generate visual representations
suitable to be compared across different posts. We then
propose, for instance, the usage of a metric such as the
total number of children per node to sort the radial tree.
Hence, spiral representations may arise, facilitating the
visual comparison of different threads.

Figure 3. A tooltip information box enables
users to see all the details of a comment.

Figure 3 is a snapshot of a thread with more than 200
comments, which can be read through the tooltips. The system also provides a link to every comment in the forum’s
original web interface.
Although the radial tree helps in building a mental map
on how a discussion has evolved, it may be also of interest
for sociologists or web researchers to focus their attention
on a specific debate (which corresponds to a sub-tree in our
hierarchy). This can be done by dragging a node to the centre of the tree. That interaction triggers an animation [14]
that pleasantly relocates the nodes that are part of the subtree rooted at the dragged node, and hides the rest of the
tree, helping the user to preserve her mental map and focusing on a sub-thread of the discussion. Furthermore, the system has a built-in search engine that enables the highlighting of posts relevant to a query defined by the user. Contrary to current search engines that show an ordered list of
relevant comments, our system locates and highlights them
in the discussion map, providing feedback not just on how
many posts are relevant to the query, but also allowing the
discovery of how many comments they have provoked.
The highlighting system also offers several modes aiming at focusing users interests and assisting in the discovery
of information. For instance, it provides the highlighting of
the path from a desired node to the root to help identifying
a specific thread of the discussion. Another feature of this
system is to illuminate the comments written by the same
author, allowing to discover easily whether an author has
been active in a conversation or not, or to identify all the
contributions of a specific participant.
Our tool supports in-depth analysis by allowing the dynamic mapping of comment features into a set of visual attributes. This is, the user interface provides a panel where

Shape: different symbols may be applied to the desired
metric. This visual attribute is specifically useful when
dealing with ordinal or category information.
Colour: the system has two different palettes, one for
quantitative values and another for ordinal or nominal
ones. They can be dynamically defined by the user.
Finally, each level in the tree is depicted using a circle to
reinforce the notion of depth. It also visualises a balanced
depth measure in the form of a variant of the h-index h proposed in [2] as a measure of the degree of controversy of
a post. This value represents the maximum nesting level i
which has at least h > i comments. To integrate this measure on the system, the depth corresponding to the h-index
of the conversation is depicted with a red circle. When only
a sub-thread of the discussion is visualised the measure is
recalculated dynamically only for the corresponding subtree.

3 Use Case: Visualising Slashdot discussions
Slashdot is an example of a website which facilitates
multi-threaded online discussions. It was created at the end
of 1997 and has ever since metamorphosed into a website
that hosts a large interactive community capable of influencing public perceptions and awareness on the topics addressed. The site’s interaction consists of short-story posts
that often carry fresh news and links to sources of information with more details. These posts incite many readers to
194

comment on them and provoke discussions that may trail
for hours or even days. The comments can be nested when
users directly reply to a comment. This way the discussions
can typically reach a depth of 7 but occasionally even depths
of 17 have been observed. The structure of this discussion
trees has been analysed in detail in [2].
Although Slashdot allows users to express their opinion
freely, moderation and meta-moderation mechanisms are
employed to judge comments and enable readers to filter
them by quality. The moderation system was analysed in
[4], and gives an integer between -1 and 5 to every comment, being 5 the highest score.
This use case is based on news posts and the corresponding comments collected from Slashdot by a web-crawler in
form of raw HTML-pages in September 2006. The collected posts were published between August, 2005 and August, 2006 on Slashdot. More details on the data and its retrieval process can be found in [3]. This raw data has been
transformed into GraphML files.
We use this files as input of our visualisation tool, which
then is able to represent general features of online discussions as well as some Slashdot specific metrics like comment score.
By now, our system extracts and calculates five different
features per comment:
Score: an integer value between -1 and 5, indicating the
comment’s score obtained from Slashdot’s moderation
system. The mapping of this metric into suitable symbols improves the whole understanding of the hierarchy, generating a symbol hierarchy that allows to easily identify the location of top rated comments in the
discussion, and to understand how debated they have
been.
Time since post: represents the number of minutes since
the initial post of the discussion has been published. It
enables the creation of representations that provide a
general feeling on how the discussion has evolved in
time and allows to focus ones attention on a specific
group of early or late posts.
Time since parent: similar to the Time since post, but the
elapsed time is relative to the parent of the comment.
This metric also allows the exploration of the evolution
of the discussion in time. For instance, it may illustrate
how long the users last in replying to a post.
Maximum Children’s Depth and Total number of children:
reinforce the notion of how much controversial a comment has been in terms of how many comments it has
originated
Comment length: long comments may intrinsically incorporate more ideas, and hence, may be another interesting and easy to collect metric of a post.

Figure 4. A sub-thread from a conversation.
Score is represented with shape and colour
while items size denotes comment length.
All the posts from a single user in this subthread are also highlighted, which enables to
see its participation in several different discussions.

Figure 4 shows a subthread dynamically filtered from a
larger conversation. Moreover, the picture shows how shape
can be applied according to a metric, in this case, the score
of the comment.
Due to the visual representations based on the user highlighting and the visual representation of the h-index, researchers have been inspired to focus on the role of dialog
chains in the discussions, which are far more common than
expected before visualising the discussions with our tool.
This chains are produced when two users start to reply to
each others messages several times, often reaching a depth
far greater than the h-index of the discussion.

4

Conclusions

Online discussions have arisen as one of the most common ways for getting knowledge from other users. Hence,
such discussions are an interesting source for analysing human behaviour. Its hierarchical structure provides a clear
organisation that enables participants and researchers to understand how a discussion has evolved. However, large conversations are difficult to be followed using the typical pagination existing in forums, newsgroups and so forth.
In this paper we have introduced a system for visualising
online discussions based on their hierarchical representation. Our tool aims at enabling readers, conversation participants and researchers to navigate through the often intricate
discussion structure, allowing the customisation of the vi-

195

References

sual items according to a set of comment features. The main
benefit of our system is the creation of an interactive map of
the conversation that may help understanding on how the
discussion has evolved or how controversial it has been.

[1] J. Donath, K. Karahalios, and F. B. Vi´egas. Visualizing
conversation. In HICSS ’99: Proceedings of the ThirtySecond Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences-Volume 2, page 2023. IEEE Computer Society,
1999.
[2] V. G´omez, A. Kaltenbrunner, and V. L´opez. Statistical analysis of the social network and discussion threads in slashdot.
In WWW ’08: Proceeding of the 17th international conference on World Wide Web, pages 645–654. ACM, 2008.
[3] A. Kaltenbrunner, V. G´omez, A. Moghnieh, R. Meza,
J. Blat, and V. L´opez. Homogeneous temporal activity patterns in a large online communication space. IADIS International Journal on WWW/INTERNET, 6(1):61–76, 2008.
[4] C. Lampe and P. Resnick. Slash(dot) and burn: Distributed
moderation in a large online conversation space. In CHI ’04:
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems, pages 543–550. ACM Press, 2004.
[5] V. Pascual. Visualising Slashdot, 2009. http://caw2.
barcelonamedia.org/node/42.
[6] V. Pascual and J. C. Dursteler. Wet: a prototype of an exploratory search system for web mining to assess usability.
In IV ’07: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
Information Visualization, pages 211–215. IEEE Computer
Society, 2007.
[7] W. Sack. Conversation map: a content-based usenet newsgroup browser. In IUI ’00: Proceedings of the 5th international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, pages 233–
240. ACM, 2000.
[8] W. Sack. Discourse diagrams: Interface design for very
large-scale conversations. In HICSS ’00: Proceedings of the
33rd Hawaii International Conference on System SciencesVolume 3, page 3034. IEEE Computer Society, 2000.
[9] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type
taxonomy for information visualizations. In VL ’96: Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages,
pages 336–343. IEEE Computer Society, 1996.
[10] M. A. Smith and A. T. Fiore. Visualization components
for persistent conversations. In CHI ’01: Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, pages 136–143. ACM, 2001.
[11] F. Viegas and S. Smith. Newsgroup crowds and authorlines:
visualizing the activity of individuals in conversational. System Sciences, Jan 2004.
[12] H. T. Welser, E. Gleave, D. Fisher, and M. Smith. Visualizing the signatures of social roles in online discussion groups.
The Journal of Social Structure, 8(2), 2007.
[13] R. Xiong and J. Donath. Peoplegarden: creating data portraits for users. In UIST ’99: Proceedings of the 12th annual
ACM symposium on User interface software and technology,
pages 37–44. ACM, 1999.
[14] K. Yee, D. Fisher, R. Dhamija, and M. Hearst. Animated exploration of dynamic graphs with radial layout. In INFOVIS
’01: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization 2001, page 43. IEEE Computer Society, 2001.

Our system aims at contributing to the discipline of Social Visualisation by complementing existing tools, offering
visual approaches to analyse a discussion in detail. In that
sense, we have shown a use case from Slashdot, providing
some preliminary conclusions that show the benefits of the
exploratory capabilities and visual mappings of our tool, as
well as the discussions map, which enables final users to get
an understanding on the whole conversation.
Our tool may also be easily adapted to permit the representation of a conversation in real time, being an interface
for enhancing the engagement of users to the discussion.
The tool is especially useful for researchers working in
the analysis of social interaction in online forums. Visual
inspection of the forum conversation is very important when
identifying new phenomena or finding interesting relations
between structure and variables. This task is often cumbersome using standard visualisation tools our just numerical
analysis. Once identified a certain interesting characteristic
with our tool in specific discussions, an exhaustive analysis
can be performed to proof the generality of the findings.
Our main hypothesis is that the discussion map combined with the exploratory capabilities of our system may
improve the readability of the conversation as it depicts the
whole conversation in the same display, facilitating the understanding of the impact of every comment and allowing
the access to hot discussions and relevant posts according
to user interests. The future steps of our work will include
an exhaustive evaluation to prove our hypothesis, and to discover how the system may influence the behaviour of readers and participants while navigating through discussions.
Furthermore, refining the approach presented in [10]
where the entire user relations network is visualised, we
will include the representation of ego-networks and other
user interactions in our platform. This will help to avoid
the usual cluttered representations of large social networks,
and still provide a general picture of user relations. The final goal of our research is to provide researchers with a full
solution for analysing online communities
A demo of our tool can be found in [5].

5

Acknowledgements

This work is partially supported by the Grant TIN200615536-C02-01 of the Ministry of Science and Innovation of
Spain and C`atedra Telef`onica de Producci´o Multim`edia.
196

