2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Visualising the Query Space of the Image Collection
Tijana Janjusevic and Ebroul Izquierdo
Multimedia and Vision Research Group
School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering
Queen Mary, University of London
Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK
{tijana.janjusevic,ebroul.izquierdo}@elec.qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

the query formulation process. In the observed multimedia
system, the content is organised into semantic concepts and
the query space is the set of concepts selected by the user.
Several systems propose interfaces with the idea of
graphical representation of the query space. In well known
systems VIBE [6] and InfoCrystal [10] concept intersections are visualised based on the words used for defining the
query. In these system, an user initialises the query by specifying a small number of key-words and subsequently, the
system displays documents containing the specified set of
terms in a graphical concept space. Visualisation paradigm
used in InfoCrystal is derived from Venn diagram representation with the objective of overcoming a number of limitation on presented concepts imposed by Venn’s method.
Size, colours, icon position and shape are used to combine
classes and the number of the documents belonging to each
of them. The drawback of this interface is the non-intuitive
or rather confusing visualisation of the concept space.
However, considering the fact that the user query based
on terms (predefined key-words or free text) is in general
specified by using not more than 4 elements [3], limiting
the user in number of selected concepts in order to simplify
the user interface can be considered a justified trade-off. A
number of systems use Venn diagrams as an aid for navigation through large data collections. In work presented in [2]
each document is defined by one or more labels and the user
is allowed to select the maximum of 3 labels for specifying
the query. Document sets defined by the selected labels are
visualised in form of 3-contour Venn diagram displaying
the relations between sets. This method enables the user to
see how the classes of the query set relate to each other. In
[11] the authors use diagrams for representing the results of
n queries, where the value of n is from 1 to 5. Each query is
associated with a contour and the formulation of the query
is performed by selecting the zone of interest.
The work presented here employs Venn diagrams to visualise the relations between concepts filtered by the user as
relevant to a specific query. To examine the content of the

In this paper, we propose an information visualisation
solution for multimedia retrieval based on semantic concepts defined in an image database. The proposed visualisation approach utilises concept map, Venn diagram and
Fisheye distortion to enable effective and efficient visualisation of image database. In addition, the proposed approach
enables displaying the local and global views of the collection subset, selected as relevant by the user. The proposed
solution is evaluated on Corel 700 dataset with 10 semantic
concepts for the following user actions: exploratory browsing, querying and detecting patterns.

1. Introduction
The exploration of large information spaces has remained a challenging task despite proliferation of the
database management systems, which incorporate state-ofthe art multimedia retrieval algorithms. In order to facilitate rapid and reliable user navigation in large image repositories, recent research attention in multimedia and computer vision community has been focused on developing
automatic algorithms for semantically organising the image
collections. One of the current, main challenges in multimedia retrieval is the visualisation of a collection structure
to enable the user to initially define and implicitly modify
the query based on the level of the satisfaction with the retrieved results. Among many investigated solutions, smart
interfaces have the ability to support the users in actions related to navigation such as: exploratory browsing, querying
and detecting patterns. The use of visualisation tools such
as proximity encoding, colour encoding, size mapping, dynamic presentations, and user-controlled selections can aid
the user in efficient exploration of large information spaces
[1]. In this paper we address the issue of enhancing the ability of users to access information by graphically visualising
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.69

86

query concepts we employ Fisheye distortion [9], a technique that is particularly well suited for quick overview of
huge number of the displayed items. Distortion of the data
elements in the display is applied according to their distance
from the focus, while easy navigation is obtained by showing the map of the selected concepts supporting the movements through the distorted space.
The paper is organised as follows: in Section 2 the
method and structure of data organisation is presented; in
Section 3 an overview of the proposed visualisation solution is given; and conclusion and future work are stated in
Section 4.

(Flower, Grass, Rock, Water, Building, Car, Cloud, Elephant, Lion and Tiger). Considering the fact of possible
miss-classification of data items, tabular form is not an optimal presentation solution. Since user query can be defined
as a need for finding a small set of data items in large data
collection relevant to users information needs [4], we propose the intuitive visualisation which uses the existing classification results. In the proposed solution, all classification
units are initially displayed so that user can initialise the
query by directly selecting relevant concepts.

2. Structuring the multimedia collection

The interface prototype allows the user to specify the
information needs by choosing the M concepts of interest
among the K existing concepts in the database (shown in
the Figure 1).

2.2. Query formulation

Research in human perception of image content [7] examines the importance of semantic cues for efficient retrieval. Relevance feedback mechanism is one of the common approach for including human perception thus improving the performance of the retrieval system as discussed
in [8] and [5]. Another retrieval method considers the
approach of grouping the images into semantically meaningful classes or concepts. A successful categorisation of
classes can greatly enhance the performance of contentbased image retrieval systems by filtering out relevant from
irrelevant images. In this paper we focus on the later approach and discuss the initial implementation of the interface for image retrieval based on semantic concepts defined
in the image database.

Figure 1. Display of existing concepts in the
database; ToolTip indicates the semantic label
of the concept.

2.1. Classification of images
In the observed image database, all data items are sorted
within certain number of categories. In this work we visualise the classification results obtained using algorithm described in [12]. Defined classes (or concepts) are mutually
overlapping which implies that one image can belong to one
or more categories.
F
1
0
0
1
0

G
0
1
1
0
0

R
0
1
0
0
0

W
1
1
0
1
0

B
0
1
0
0
1

C
1
1
0
1
1

C
1
1
0
0
1

E
1
1
0
1
0

L
1
1
0
0
1

T
1
1
0
1
1

Ideally, if the user finds the concept that perfectly defines
specific query, the relevant content would be found just by
examining the items of the selected set. In real situation, the
results of the classification algorithms are not ideal and the
detected semantic concepts can not cover wide range of user
query specification. Using information visualisation we aim
at enabling the user to retrieve the relevant content even in
case of the miss-classification of the items, or in case query
can not be specified selecting a single concept. In case when
within the K existing concepts no concept corresponds to
the query, the choice of several concepts filters the relevant
image groups from the entire collection.

Image
img1
img2
img3
img4
img5

3. Query space visualisation

Table 1. Example of the classification results
presented in a tabular form

The visualisation of the classes filtered by the query, enables user to see the distribution of images among the selected concepts and the concepts overlap consequently. Presenting this information we can assist the user in finding and
understanding the patterns in the organisation of the image

This type of collection structure can be presented in a
simple tabular form, as shown in Table 1, where the images are labelled according to the concepts they belong to

87

collection. This information can also give an additional insight into the content and enable the change of the direction
in the retrieval process, if required. The proposed interface,
shown in the Figure 5, enables the user to visualise the information related to the M concepts selected from the database.
The displayed information refers to the size of each concepts, number of common data items between concepts and
overview of the related content itself.
The interface prototype consists of 3 different views:
concept space, visualisation of M concepts selected by the
user, content space, display of the data items/images belonging to the selected concepts and diagram space, where
the size and the inter-relational information of the chosen
concepts is shown in form of a Venn diagram. The initial implementation of the interface presented here, visualises an example of classification results performed on the
database containing 700 images from the Corel collection.

content space, the dot icon is moving between the concepts
in concept map accordingly (Figure 5).

3.2. The content space
For enabling the user to quickly explore the content of
the M selected concepts, we visualise all the images from
the selected subset in the left part of the interface. This
is done in order to enable user to quickly go through the
data items without changing the view. Displaying all the
images would mean reducing their size to the point when
visual information would be lost. On the other hand keeping
the meaningful size in terms of the content, would produce
an overflow of information on the screen. For this reason
we employ interactive distortion technique which visually
modifies the space in which the content is mapped. As user
moves the mouse through the content space, the images are
enlarged when pointed on by the user. This way user can
quickly browse through the content and decide if the content
of the selected set satisfies his requirements or not.
For easier exploration, layout algorithm is designed to
follow the position of the concepts in the concept map described in Section 3.1. We observe all possible combinations of concepts and their intersections as separate sets to
visualise. In case user selects M=3 concepts we will have 7
sets to map into visualisation space. Initially we allocate the
space for pure concepts, or in other words for the data items
that belong exclusively to concept Ci . The area allocated to
visualise the content of this concept is given by the formula:

3.1. The concept space
In general, concept map is a simple graphical representation of complex information. In the proposed visualisation,
basic version of concept map is used for displaying the subset of the image collection filtered by the user query.

ACi = Atot ·

NCi
Ntot

(1)

where ACi is area dedicated for visualisation of the concept
Ci , Atot is the total available visualisation area, NCi is the
number of data items belonging only to the concept Ci and
Ntot is total number of data items in the collection. The
allocated area is represented as a circle with the radius Ri
proportional to the ACi where the data items are positioned
randomly within the circular area with radius Ri , using bivariant normal distribution with parameters:

Figure 2. Concept map of the query space
consisting of 3 concepts: water, rock and
grass
Once user selects M concepts to start the retrieval process, related concept map is created. Generated map contains all selected concepts represented with an image icon
from the concept set. This part of the interface serves for
overview and navigation during exploration of the displayed
content.
As an interactive tool for exploring the content, we employed distortion as described in Section 3.2. Since we observed that this approach can cause lost of orientation for
user while exploring the distorted space, the spatial position
in the content space is mapped into the concept map in form
of a dot icon. As user moves and explores the items in the

σxi = σyi =

Ri
3

(2)

µxi = xCi

(3)

µyi = yCi

(4)

where the xCi and yCi are x and y coordinate of the centre
of the concept Ci , respectively. The random layout within
the designated area is chosen for two reasons: first, mapping the content of each concept in the designated areas preserves the information of the similar and dissimilar items,
and second, randomly placing items in each area reduces
the computational complexity of mapping algorithm. Using

88

bi-variant normal distribution, the 99.7% of images will be
located within the radius of the area which 3σ, while the
remaining ones will be randomly placed at the distance Ri .
Each concept Ci has a bary-centre specified as:
→
−
C i = (xCi , yCi )

67 images
belong to
concept Water

4 images
belong to
concepts Water
and Rock

(5)

Centre of concept C representing intersection zone between
M concepts Ci , where i = 0, 1, . . . , M − 1 are calculated as
bary-centres between the core concept positions according
to:
→
−
M −1
→
−
i=0 NCi C i
C =
(6)
M −1
i=0 NCi

2 images
belong to all 3
concepts

The size of the area allocated for the set is again obtained using Equation 1. Depending on the value of the layout zone
radius for each concept, we obtain more or less visible distinctive groups between data. Smaller radius will produce
more overlapping between the items displayed but the content organisation will be visible more clearly. Large value
of the radius will produce wider spread and better overview
of the information carried by the content, without the interaction with image items. As already mentioned, preserving the global overview in case of described layout is difficult and for this reason we provide additional navigation
support using the concept map. The layout and interaction
approach, applied for displaying images, aim primarily at
providing an insight into the content of the selected query
set.

Figure 3. Venn diagram displaying distribution of content for 3 concepts: water, rock
and grass

construct and draw simple Venn diagram. In theory, even
more than 4 contours can be represented using Venn diagrams although the graphical representation is somewhat
complex.

4. Conclusions and future work

3.3. Concept relations

This paper propose the information visualisation solution for image retrieval from the database organised into
semantic concepts. Classification algorithm produces the
structure of overlapping concepts where images can belong
to one or more classes. We aim at providing the intuitive visual method for specifying and examining the results of the
user query specified over such image collection. Displaying interconnection between the concepts in the diagram,
we aim at displaying important information regarding organisation of the items in the selected concepts. Distortion
browsing provides a quick overview of the content and informs the user if to change the observed database subset.
Concept map serves as an overview of the selected classes
and provides information on the current position since the
distortion can negatively affect orientation in the display.
Future work is focused on performing extensive user
evaluation of the proposed solution both in means of visualisation and retrieval performances. Among other things,
the tests will asses the constraint on number of concepts for
query initialisation. The improved interface implementation
will in particular aim at emphasising the case when single
concept is selected as relevant. We plan to analyse the information user requires in such situation and what type of
information can be provided by the multimedia system.

For visualising relations and overlapping between the filtered concepts we use diagram representation. Each zone,
created by the diagram contours, corresponds to a specific
set of data items. Venn diagram is a graphical representation of M sets obtained using the M closed curves, where
all intersection areas are displayed even if the intersection
is an empty set. In the original Venn diagrams, empty areas are displayed as shaded. Instead of shading the area, we
consider labelling each zone with number corresponding to
size of the specific set. This is considered as more intuitive displaying method. The same observation was stated
by the users familiar with the common performance results
of classification algorithms. Their comments suggested that
seeing the number of items in other concepts might suggest
where to look next if miss-classification of content is evident.
The Figure 3 shows the case in which the user used 3
concepts to specify the query. The label with the number in
the zones indicates the number of items in the set. As previously stated, since users mostly formulate key-term queries
with no more than 4 terms we limit the number of the query
concepts to maximum of 4. This approach enables us to

89

Figure 4. Screen shot of the interface displaying space of the 3 query concepts: water, rock and
grass

References
[8]

[1] C. Ahlberg and B. Shneiderman. Visual information seeking: tight coupling of dynamic query filters with starfield
displays. In Proc of CHI ’94, pages 313–317, New York,
NY, USA, 1994. ACM.
[2] M. A. Hearst. Using categories to provide context for fulltext retrieval results. In Proc. of RIAO, Octobar 1994.
[3] B. J. Jansen, A. Spink, J. Bateman, and T. Saracevic. Real
life information retrieval: a study of user queries on the web.
SIGIR Forum, 32(1):5–17, 1998.
[4] G. Marchionini. information seeking in electronic environments, 1995. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
[5] C. Nastar, M. Mitschke, and C. Meilhac. Efficient query
refinement for image retrieval. In Proc. of CVPR ’98, page
547, Washington, DC, USA, 1998. IEEE Computer Society.
[6] K. Olsen, R. Korfhage, K. Sochats, M. Spring, and
J. Williams. Visualization of a document collection with
implicit and explicit links: The vibe system. Scandinavian
Journal of Information Systems, pages 79–95, 1993.
[7] T. V. Papathomas, T. E. Conway, I. J. Cox, J. Ghosn, M. L.
Miller, T. Minka, , and P. N. Yianilos. Psychophysical stud-

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

90

ies of the performance of an image database retrieval system.
In Proc. of SPIE, 1998.
Y. Rui, T. Huang, M. Ortega, and S. Mehrotra. Relevance
feedback: a power tool for interactive content-based image
retrieval. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for
Video Technology, 8(5):644–655, Sep 1998.
M. Sarkar and M. H. Brown. Graphical fisheye views. Commun. ACM, 37(12):73–83, 1994.
A. Spoerri. Infocrystal: A visual tool for information retrieval. In Proc. of Visualization ’93, pages 150–157, Oct
1993.
J. Thivre, M.-L. Viaud, and A. Verroust-Blondet. Using
euler diagrams in traditional library environments. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 134:189 –
202, 2005. Proc. of the First International Workshop on Euler Diagrams.
Q. Zhang and E. Izquierdo. Combining low-level features
for semantic inference in image retrieval. EURASIP Journal
on Advances in Signal Processing, 2007.

Figure 5. Distorted view of the concept space while browsing the content; two arrows indicate the
movement of the user’s cursor and the corresponding movement of the red dot icon in the concept
space

91

