2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Some Results for Drawing Area Proportional Venn3 With Convex Curves
Peter Rodgers
University of Kent
p.j.rodgers@kent.ac.uk

Jean Flower
Autodesk

Gem Stapleton
John Howse
University of Brighton
{g.e.stapleton,john.howse}@brighton.ac.uk
species distribution [5] and medicine, for example when
visualizing the results of online medical surveys [7].
Well known shapes, such as triangles [1] and rectilinear
curves [4] have been used to draw Venn diagrams. In
particular, circles are considered an effective way to
visualize area proportional Venn and Venn-like diagrams
[1][3][6][8]. However, it is known that circles cannot
always be used to achieve exact proportions for the
regions of a Venn3 diagram [4]. In general, it would be
useful to know which area specifications can be
represented by diagrams with particular shapes.
In this paper, we take some steps in exploring which
shapes can used to draw area proportional Venn3
diagrams. In particular, we look at convex curves. This is
motivated by, firstly, the observation that Venn diagrams
are often more usable if they are drawn with convex
curves. Secondly, we note that many (if not all) of the
desirable shapes for curves are convex, so that if a nonconvex curve is needed for a data set, then the diagram
cannot be drawn with such a desirable shape.

Abstract
Many data sets are visualized effectively with area
proportional Venn diagrams, where the area of the
regions is in proportion to a defined specification. In
particular, Venn diagrams with three intersecting curves
are considered useful for visualizing data in many
applications, including bioscience, ecology and
medicine. To ease the understanding of such diagrams,
using restricted ‘nice’ shapes for the curves is
considered beneficial. Many research questions on the
use of such diagrams are still open. For instance, a
general solution to the question of when given area
specifications can be represented by Venn3 using convex
curves is still unknown.
In this paper we study symmetric Venn3 drawn with
convex curves and show that there is a symmetric area
specification that cannot be represented with such a
diagram. In addition, by using symmetric diagrams
drawn with polygons, we show that, if area specifications
are restricted so that the double intersection areas are
no greater than the triple intersection area then the
specification can be drawn with convex curves. We also
propose a construction that allows the representation of
some area specifications when the double intersection
areas are greater than the triple intersection area.
Finally, we present some open questions on the topic.

C
196

Keywords--- Venn diagrams; diagram layout
74
100

1. Introduction
Venn diagrams [10] are a widely used method for
visualizing intersecting data sets. Often, the data comes
with cardinality information and so might best be
visualized using area proportional Venn diagrams. Here,
the data set forms an area specification, as the areas of
the regions of the diagram are proportional to the
relevant numerical set cardinalities. In figures 1 and 2,
area proportional Venn3 diagram are shown, with the
data values written inside the regions. Applications
where such diagrams are used include: bioscience, for
example when visualizing lists of intersecting biological
identifiers [6]; ecology, for example when visualizing
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.93

74

196

A

74

196

B

Figure 1: Convex, symmetric Venn3
Venn3 diagrams are surprisingly complex to reason
about, so we restrict the problem to manageable size by
considering symmetric Venn3 diagrams with rotational
symmetry of order 3 and reflection symmetry of 3 axes,
673
667

ܴ ൌ Զሺሼ‫ܣ‬ǡ ‫ܤ‬ǡ ‫ܥ‬ሽሻ െ ሼ]ሽ is the set of all region
descriptions for any Venn3 diagram and ‫ݓ‬ǣ ܴoԹା ‫׫‬
ሼͲሽ is an area specification. If

for example as seen in Figure 1. Conversely, a nonconvex, non-symmetric diagram is shown in Figure 2.

C

‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܣ‬ሻ ൌ ‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܤ‬ሻ ൌ ‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܥ‬ሻ
‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܤܣ‬ሻ ൌ ‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܥܣ‬ሻ ൌ ‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܥܤ‬ሻ
then w is a symmetric area specification. In this
paper we use ܽଵ , ܽଶ and ܽଷ to be the three data values for
a symmetric area specification where:

A

B

ܽଵ ൌ ‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܣ‬ሻ ൌ ‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܤ‬ሻ ൌ ‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܥ‬ሻ
ܽଶ ൌ ‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܤܣ‬ሻ ൌ ‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܥܣ‬ሻ ൌ ‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܥܤ‬ሻ
ܽଷ ൌ ‫ݓ‬ሺ‫ܥܤܣ‬ሻ

Figure 2: Non-convex, non-symmetric Venn3

Given an area specification, w, we say that a Venn
diagram, ݀, represents w if, for each region, r, the area
of r is ‫ݓ‬ሺ݀݁‫ݏ‬ሺ‫ݎ‬ሻሻ, where ݀݁‫ݏ‬ሺ‫ݎ‬ሻ is the description of rǤ
Venn3 diagrams are dimensionless, which implies that
there is relative size for each region of ݀.
If a Venn3 diagram, ݀, has rotational symmetry of
order 3, and reflection symmetry with 3 axes, then ݀ is
symmetric. It is trivial to show that a symmetric Venn3
diagram has a symmetric area specification.
A convex symmetric area proportional Venn3 is
shown in Figure 1 where the area specification is
ܽଵ ൌ ͳͲͲ, ܽଶ ൌ ͹Ͷ and ܽଷ ൌ ͳͻ͸.

After defining our terms in Section 2, we go on in
Section 3 to outline a proof that some symmetric area
specifications cannot be drawn with any convex
symmetric Venn3 diagram. In sections 4, 5 and 6, we
state some conditions relating diagram areas which can
be realised with convex Venn 3, and we describe how to
construct a suitable diagram from an area specification.
In Section 6 we introduce a third diagram type that
extends the conditions found in Section 4. Section 7
gives some open questions, and finally Section 8 gives
our conclusions and further work.

2. Definitions

3. Some area proportions cannot be
represented by symmetric convex diagrams

Here we define some of the concepts that will be
used throughout this paper.
Venn diagrams are collections of simple closed
curves where every possible intersection between curves
is a non-empty, connected region. Venn3 is a Venn
diagram with exactly three curves. A Venn diagram is
simple if, at most, only two curves meet at a particular
point. We deal only with simple Venn diagrams in this
paper. A Venn diagram is convex if all of its curves are
convex.
For simple Venn3, there is only one topologically
distinct embedding [9], as shown in Figure 1. In fact this
figure shows a symmetric, convex Venn3 diagram. In
this paper we will label the curves with a fixed set of
labels: A, B and C. Regions of a Venn diagram are
described by exactly the labels of the curves that contain
them. For instance, the region inside all three curves is
described by ሼ‫ܣ‬ǡ ‫ܤ‬ǡ ‫ܥ‬ሽ. This region is called a triple
intersection, since it is the intersection of three curves.
Similarly, the three regions that are each contained by
two curves, such as ሼ‫ܣ‬ǡ ‫ܤ‬ሽ, are called double
intersections and the three regions that are each
contained by one curve, such as ሼ‫ܣ‬ሽ are called single
intersections.

In this section, we are concerned with the nonrepresentability of certain area proportions. In particular,
we will show that some area proportions are not
representable by a symmetric, convex Venn3 diagrams.
We are not the first to investigate non-representability,
and we first discuss a previous attempt at proving certain
area proportions could not be represented by a convex
Venn3 diagram.

3.1. Previous proof attempts
A significant study of area proportional Venn
diagrams was conducted by Chow, and a large number of
results can be found in [2]. Chow was interested in
whether there existed an area specification that could not
be represented by a convex Venn3 diagram. He
attempted to prove that this was indeed the case but,
unfortunately, his proof contains a flaw. In particular, he
sets up a symmetric area specification with the double
intersections having twice the area of the triple
intersection, thus making ܽଶ 'large' with respect to ܽଷ .
Then, he supposes that there is a Venn3 diagram
that represents this specification for any ܽଵ , thus treating
ܽଵ as a variable. He then considers the core of the
diagram; the core is the region (including its boundary)
consisting of the three double intersections and the triple
intersection. The argument then proceeds to suppose that
for each given value of ܽଵ , the core is not convex and,
therefore, the area of the convex hull of the core, less the
668
674

Combining these two bounds:

area of the core, is positive. He then incorrectly deduces
that the set of all such area differences (recall that ܽଵ is a
variable, so there is one such area difference for each ܽଵ )
has an infimum that is strictly positive. This is a key step
in his proof, since he uses the positivity of the infimum
to derive a contradiction. Chow’s insight, however, about
the relationship between the area proportions (making ܽଶ
large and ܽଷ small to force ܽଵ to have a positive lower
bound on its area) was correct, and is exemplified by our
result below. We note, though, that our proof that
follows relies on symmetry whereas Chow's proof was
aiming for a general non-representability result.

ʹ
ξ͵

Theorem There exists an area specification which
cannot be represented by a convex symmetric Venn 3
diagram.
Proof (Sketch) The idea of the proof is to show that, by
deriving some conditions on the triple intersection, we
sometimes have a non-zero lower bound on the area ܽଶ .
First, we define notation for points, angles and lengths as
illustrated in Figure 3:

y

1

ర

ξ͵

ඥͳ ൅ ܾଵ ൅ ܾଶ

4.1. When ࢇ૛ ൌ ࢇ૜
Figure 4 depicts a class of diagrams with ܽଶ ൌ ܽଷ .
Here, the triple intersection and double intersection
regions are equilateral triangles. We can choose x to be
any positive real number, moving the point P along the
axis of symmetry. As we change the value of x, we can
increase the area ܽଵ from zero to any value, and the
diagram remains convex throughout.

ܽଵ
ൌ ܾଵ
ʹ

ƥ

ʹξʹ

In the following three sections we discuss classes of
diagrams formed from three regular polygons. Firstly we
find some results for a limited set of values of ܽଶ .

ƪ

Ƽ
ܽଶ
ൌ ܾଶ ǁ
ʹ
z
Ƥ P

ʹξʹ

൑

4. A class of diagrams with ૚૜ ࢇ૜ ൑ ࢇ૛ ൑ ࢇ૜

S

Ʀ

ͳ

Taking ܾଶ ൌ ͳͲ shows that there is a lower bound
on ܾଵ and we conclude that there are area specifications
that cannot be represented by any convex symmetric
Venn3 diagram.
Note that our proof gives some conditions that allow
us to determine a area proportions that cannot be
represented by any symmetric, convex Venn3 diagram
(i.e. those for which the above inequality fails). Our
attention now turns to identifying area proportions that
can be represented.

3.2. A non-representability result

Q

ሺͳ ൅ ܾଶ ሻ ൅

R

x

P
x

O

C

Figure 3

A
The idea of the proof is to show that if ܾଶ is large,
then ‫ ݔ‬൅ ‫ ݖ‬is large compared to y. Convexity then means
that ܾଵ is bound below, so choosing a large enough ܾଶ
and a small enough ܾଵ gives an unrepresentable area
specification. Using convexity at the points P, Q and R,
we can derive constraints on the angles, for example
గ
ߟ ൑ . From these, we can derive constraints on the
ଶ
relationships between the lengths x, y and z in terms of
the areas:
‫ݔ‬൅‫ ݖ‬൑
‫ݔ‬൅‫ ݖ‬൒

ଶξଶ
ర

ξଷ
ଶ

ξଷ

Figure 4: Diagrams with ࢇ૛ ൌ ࢇ૜
We conclude that any area specifications with
ܽଶ ൌ ܽଷ can be drawn with a convex symmetric Venn
diagram. We now generalise this class of diagrams to
include some cases where ܽଶ ൏ ܽଷ .

ඥͳ ൅ ܾଵ ൅ ܾଶ

ሺͳ ൅ ܾଶ ሻ ൅

B

ଵ
ଶξଶ

669
675

૚

background to intersect above the diagram and convexity
would impose an upper limit on x.
Hence, using the class of diagrams shown in Figure
5, we can provide a convex diagram for any area

4.2. When ࢇ૜ ൑ ࢇ૛ ൑ ࢇ૜ .
૜

Figure 5 depicts a class of diagrams, where the
marked distances are constrained by the inequalities

ͳ
͵

constraint that satisfies ࢇ૜ ൑ ࢇ૛ ൑ ࢇ૜ .

‫ ݔ‬൒ Ͳ and ͳൗ͵ ൑ ‫ ݕ‬൑ ͳ

5. When ࢇ૛ ൐ ࢇ૜
As shown in Section 2, there are some area
specifications that cannot be drawn with a convex
symmetric Venn3 diagram. The undrawable cases have
large values of ܽଶ and small values of ܽଷ . The classes of
diagrams we have provided in Section 4 have ܽଶ ൑ ܽଷ .
In this section, we describe a class for drawing some
cases where ܽଶ ൐ ܽଷ . In these cases, ܽଵ has a non-zero
lower bound.

C

x

y

1

C

y

B

A
૚

Figure 5: Diagrams with ࢇ૜ ൑ ࢇ૛ ൑ ࢇ૜

x

૜

1

C

A

B

Figure 7: Diagrams with ࢇ૛ ൐ ࢇ૜
Figure 7 shows a class of diagrams similar to that of
Figure 5, but the points of the polygons that border the
triple intersection region are now free to be placed away
from the intersection (shown with a grey background in
Figure 7). We also impose the limits ‫ ݔ‬൐ ͳ and ‫ ݕ‬൐ Ͳ on
this diagram class.
It is clear that ܽଵ can be increased arbitrarily. For a
fixed value of ܽଶ there is a lower bound on ܽଵ and the
diagram which achieves this lower bound is shown in
Figure 8. The ratios of areas in these lower bound
diagrams, In fact, utilizing, geometry, we find that, when
ܽଶ ൐ ܽଷ the ratio ܽଵ ǣ ܽଶ ǣ ܽଷ is ‫ ݐ‬ଶ ǣ ‫ ݐ‬ଶ ൅ Ͷ‫ ݐ‬൅ ͳǣ ͳ. For
example, if we set ‫ ݐ‬ൌ ͳ and then scale the diagram so
that ܽଷ ൌ ͳ then ܽଵ ൌ ͳ and ܽଶ ൌ ͹.

B

A
૚

Figure 6: ࢇ૛ ൌ ࢇ૜
૜

The condition that ‫ ݕ‬൑ ͳ ensures that, for a fixed y,
we can decrease x to zero without violating convexity of
the contours.
ଵ
The condition that ‫ ݕ‬൒ ensures that, for a fixed
ଷ
value of y, x can be increased arbitrarily without
ଵ
violating convexity of the contours. When‫ ݕ‬ൌ , we
ଷ
obtain the family shown in Figure 6. Any smaller value
of y would allow the lines shown with a shaded

670
676

7. Open Questions
C

In this Section we pose some questions that arise
from this work and examine the consequences of
answering them.

t

1.

1
B

A

Does
there
exist
a
symmetric
area
specification that can be represented by a nonsymmetric Venn3 that cannot be represented by
a symmetric Venn3?

If the answer to this is no, then the result in Section 3
implies that there are area specifications that cannot be
represented with a convex Venn3 diagram.
2.
Figure 8: Minimal ࢇ૚ when ࢇ૛ ൐ ࢇ૜

The diagram class in Figure 8 is the best we have
formulated so far in terms of being able to find the
lowest value for the ratio ܽଵ ǣ ܽଶ when ܽଶ ൐ ܽଷ .
However, it needs to be shown that there is no better
diagram. If this can be shown, then the formulae that
results from the version of this diagram with lowest ܽଵ
(in Section 5) does not just indicate which diagrams can
be represented with convex curves, but becomes a
decision procedure for deciding whether an area
specification can be drawn with convex curves.

We note that if this diagram presents a minimal
ܽଵ with fixed ܽଶ and ܽଷ , then the formulae give a
decision procedure for indicating whether a symmetric
area specification can be drawn with convex curves
when ܽଶ ൐ ܽଷ .

6. When ࢇ૛ ൏ ૚૜ࢇ૜
In Sections 4 and 5 the diagrams were restricted to
൒ ͳ͵ܽଷ . Now we address the remaining cases,
whereܽʹ ൏ భయܽ͵ . Figure 9 shows a diagram class, similar
to that of Figure 3, however each curve has an extra
point, so that the triple intersection region forms a
regular hexagon.
ܽଶ

8. Conclusions
In this paper we have shown that there are some
symmetric area specifications that cannot be drawn with
area proportional symmetric Venn3 diagrams. We have
also found some results towards finding out which area
specifications can be drawn, and have provided
constructions for drawing the diagrams. We have also
posed two open questions. The first, if answered in the
negative means that, from the theorem in Section 3.2, we
could deduce that there are area specifications that
cannot be represented by convex Venn3 diagrams. If
both questions are answered in the negative, would mean
our techniques form a decision procedure for deciding
whether an area specification has a convex drawing, and
providing a construction for a such a area proportional
convex Venn3 diagram.
Further work clearly includes addressing the
questions we pose. However, this paper is limited to
symmetric diagrams, and to be of practical significance
we also need to investigate the non-symmetric
implications. We believe that the techniques in this paper
are easily applied to some non-symmetric are
specifications, and we will explore this issue in detail.
However, a longer term goal is to find an approach to the
problem of: given any area specification, is there a
convex Venn3 diagram with which it can be represented?
More generally, further work will look at Venn-like
diagrams, as diagrams that have regions with zero area

C
y
1

A

Does there exist a symmetric area specification
that can be represented by a convex Venn3
diagram that cannot be represented by the
classes shown in this paper.

x

B

Figure 9: Diagram class for ࢇ૛ ൏ ૚૜ࢇ૜
Here ‫ ݔ‬൑ ͳ and ‫ ݕ‬൐ Ͳ and we have diagrams where
ܽଶ ൏ భయܽଷ . Any area specification with ܽଶ ൏ భయܽଷ can be
drawn using a diagram from this class.

671
677

[3]

S. Chow and P. Rodgers. Constructing Area-proportional
Venn and Euler Diagrams with Three Circles. In Euler
Diagrams Workshop 2005.
[4] S. Chow and F. Ruskey: Drawing Area-Proportional
Venn and Euler Diagrams. Graph Drawing 2003. LNCS
2912: 466-477: 50.
[5] A. Coreau, J.-L. Martin. Multi-scale study of bird species
distribution and of their response to vegetation change: a
Mediterranean example. Landscape Ecol (2007) 22:747–
764. DOI 10.1007/s10980-006-9074-2.
[6] T. Hulsen, J. de Vlieg1, W. Alkema. BioVenn – a web
application for the comparison and visualization of
biological lists using area-proportional Venn diagrams.
BMC Genomics 2008, 9:488, doi:10.1186/1471-2164-9488.
[7] O. Lenz A. Fornoni. Chronic kidney disease care
delivered by US family medicine and internal medicine
trainees: results from an online survey. BMC Medicine
2006, 4:30, doi:10.1186/1741-7015-4-30.
[8] H. A. Kestler, A. Müller, T. M. Gress, and M. Buchholz.
Generalized Venn Diagrams: A new method of
visualizing complex genetic set relations. Bioinformatics,
21(6):733-739, 2005.
[9] F. Ruskey. A Survey of Venn Diagrams. Electronic J.
Combinatorics Dynamical Survey DS5, June 18, 2005.
[10] J. Venn. On the Diagrammatic and Mechanical
Representation of Propositions and Reasonings. The
London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine
and Journal of Science, 9 (1880) 1-18.

(commonly called ‘Euler diagrams’) can have radically
different embeddings than the familiar Venn3
embedding. In addition, work on area proportional
diagrams with more curves would be another important
avenue to explore.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Marc Brodsky for
communication that led to us reappraising previous
assumptions about convex diagrams. This work is
supported by the EPSRC under grants EP/E010393/1 and
EP/E011160/1 for the Visualization with Euler Diagrams
project, web site: www.eulerdiagrams.com.

References
[1]
[1]
[2]

J.R. Benson, D. Crist, P. Lafleur & B.A. Watson. Agentbased visualization of streaming text. I7 Information
Visualization Conference 2008 Poster.
J. Carroll. Drawing Venn Triangles. Technical Report
HPL-2000-73, HP Labs (2000).
S. Chow. Generating and Drawing Area-Proportional
Venn and Euler Diagrams. PhD Thesis. University of
Victoria, Canada. 2008.

672
678

