2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Changing the View: towards the theory of visualisation comprehension
Mark M. Shovman, Andrea Szymkowiak, James L. Bown, Kenneth C. Scott-Brown
University of Abertay Dundee, UK
m.shovman@abertay.ac.uk
information – are mental constructs, not physical
properties, and as such are difficult to define and
even more difficult to measure objectively1 –
difficult, but not impossible.
For more than a century, Cognitive Psychology
has generated, tested and refined models of various
mental processes, resulting in rigorous paradigms for
describing mental constructs in an objective,
measurable manner. Within this framework,
accounting for processes involved in Information
Visualisation comprehension becomes possible.
It has been noted that “Graphs are a recent
invention, and if they are an especially effective
method of communication, it is because they exploit
general cognitive and perceptual mechanisms
effectively”2 [2]. In that case, existing theories of
perception and comprehension may be applied to
describe graph comprehension, and any such
description may then be verified by established
methods developed within these fields. A coherent
account of the processes involved in the Information
Visualisation comprehension would then facilitate the
measurement of comprehension efficiency, which is a
key quality criterion of an Information Visualisation.
It might seem at this point that the authors fail to
notice the considerable influence Cognitive
Psychology already has on Information Visualisation.
This is not the case. Findings relating to human
perception, e.g. the amount of distinct colours a
human being is able to perceive, are commonly taken
into account when designing novel visualisations (e.g
[3]). Experimental methodologies developed for
assessing human perception can inspire experiment
design for Information Visualisation evaluation (e.g.
[4]). However, using cognitive theories to outline
processes
of
Information
Visualisation

Abstract
The core problem of the evaluation of
Information Visualisation is that the end product of
visualisation – the comprehension of the information
from the data – is difficult to measure objectively.
This paper outlines a description of visualisation
comprehension based on two existing theories of
perception: Principles of Perceptual Organisation
and the Reverse Hierarchy Theory. The resulting
account of the processes involved in visualisation
comprehension enables evaluation that is not only
objective, but also non-comparative, providing an
absolute efficiency classification. Finally, as a
sample application of this approach, an experiment
studying the benefits of interactivity in 3D
scatterplots is presented.

1. Introduction
A review of the methods currently used in
evaluating visualisation tools and techniques shows
they fall into the following major categories:
comparison of performance for similar tasks with
different visualisations; user evaluations; and case
studies [1]. None of these are perfect, mostly because
they are highly subjective and interpretationdependent [1]. Some objective measures exist in
comparison studies, but the problem with comparison
is that: (a) it becomes prohibitive in time when
considering more than a few items; (b) the sole result
of such a comparison is an order relation in a set; (c)
it could result in a non-linear ordering (A is better
than B, B is better than C, but C is better than A)
which may be difficult to interpret, and (d) it is often
difficult to generalise beyond the specific task.
The core problem, as various researchers have
pointed out [1][2][3][4], is that the object of
evaluation, i.e. the end product and the desired aim of
Information Visualisation are difficult to define. This
might be partly due to the qualitative difference
between the data and the information: the data is a
concrete measurable object, as is the visualisation;
information, on the other hand, is created while
actively engaging with the visualised data, and is
more related to comprehending the meaning of the
data. All these – comprehension, meaning, and

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.78

1

A similar problem can be observed in Computer
Graphics, where the drive towards photorealism has
hit the uncanny valley [5]. Apparently, the real
quality criterion of Computer Graphics is not
photorealism, but the perceived realism, the amount
of inner belief in the reality of a scene.
2
This claim has been also made about reading, and
has been receiving numerous supporting evidence
since then.
135

comprehension is, to the best of the authors’
knowledge, a largely underexploited area.

2. The pop-out of meaning
It is not that the theories of human perception are
unknown to Information Visualisation developers.
For example, the Laws of Gestalt [6] are widely
quoted (e.g. [3], [7]) – but these are almost a century
old. Meanwhile recent developments, even if highly
relevant, go relatively unnoticed. The Principles of
Perceptual Organization (PPO) [8] are not just a set
of loosely-connected laws. They are a coherent
account of perception as a process of parsing sensory
input into increasingly meaningful and abstract
objects through iterative processes of grouping,
figure-ground segregation and formation of illusory
contours [8]. Most importantly, these Principles come
with objective criteria of gestalt-ness – a vast
improvement over Wertheimer’s introspective
observation.
Another well-known theory of perception is
the Feature Integration Theory (FIT) [9]. It is based
upon an observation of what became to be known as
the ‘pop-out effect’. In some cases, a visual search
task for an ‘odd-one-out’ element in a stimulus array
takes longer for larger stimulus arrays; this effect is
considered a consequence of a ‘serial search’ for the
target. In other cases, the size of the stimulus array
does not affect reaction time at all; this has been
termed the ‘pop-out effect’ due to the subjective
perception of the odd-one-out ‘popping out’ at the
observer. According to the FIT, ‘pop-out’ happens
for ‘primitive features’ such as colour, orientation,
intensity, curvature and shape, that are detected in the
low-level3 visual areas, and does not happen for
combinations of such features, termed ‘feature
conjunctions’, that can only be perceived further up
the hierarchy of visuo-perceptual processing.
Since the early 1980’s there has been a growing
body of evidence incompatible with this theory,
showing ‘pop-out’ for objects differing in high-level
semantics, rather than low-level primitive features. It
has been shown that faces ‘pop out’ from buildings or
tools [10], (see Figure 1), and that within very similar
arrangements of ‘primitive features’, some exhibit
‘pop-out’, while others do not (see Figure 2).

Figure 1: pop-out of high-level features

Figure 2: feature conjunction ‘pop-out’. left:
serial search; right: ‘pop-out’
Recently, a theory has been proposed that
explains that evidence. Reverse Hierarchy Theory
(RHT) [11] dissociates between fast conscious
perception and low-level vision. The ‘pop-out’ effect
is attributed to the processes taking place in high
areas, where large receptive fields underlie spread
attention detecting categorical differences. The
search for conjunctions or fine discriminations, on
the other hand, is assumed to depend on re-entry to
low-level specific receptive fields using mechanisms
of serial focused attention [11].
RHT proposes that perception occurs in two
distinct stages. First, the ‘bottom-up’ perception,
leading to increasingly complex representations, is
automatic and implicit. Then the conscious decision,
originating at the hierarchy's top, gradually drives
attention downward as needed. Thus, our initial
conscious percept matches a high-level, generalized,
categorical scene interpretation. For later vision with
scrutiny, attention is focused at specific, active, lowlevel units, incorporating into conscious perception
detailed information available there. That two-stage
outlook at perception makes RHT highly relevant to
the question of Information Visualisation evaluation.

3. Visualisation Comprehension
Both PPO and RHT view perception as a process
resulting in the formation of high-level abstract
understanding of the sensory stimulus. When that
stimulus is a visualisation, it is reasonable to assume
that this high-level abstract understanding, ideally,
should be the information, i.e., the meaning of the
data.

3

In psychology, the sensory organs are often referred
to as the ‘bottom’ of the mind and consciousness and
reasoning – as the ‘top’

136

This, together with RHT’s distinction between
fast implicit ‘bottom-up’ and slow explicit ‘topdown’ processes, gives us a distinction between
efficient and inefficient visualisation – a quality
criterion. An efficient visualisation is one that allows
implicit perception of required information; in an
inefficient visualisation, the information has to be
searched for, explicitly, laboriously and slowly. A
good visualisation technique is one in which the
message ‘pops out’; in a bad one it can only be found
after one-by-one scrutiny.
As an added bonus, this criterion comes with its
own evaluation methodology that is objective,
repeatable and non-comparative. In other words, it is
possible to evaluate a visualisation tool or technique
that is standalone yet may be compared objectively
across independent experimental designs. This could
be done by gathering performance indicators, usually
response time, in relation to the amount of data
presented, and checking whether this relationship is
linearly increasing or constant.

A

C

B

Figure 3: A single 343-sphere stimulus. A&B: left
and right limits of rotation; C: side view with the
target outlier clearly visible. Note: the side view was
never shown to participants

4. A Sample Experiment

Full logs of mouse movement were analysed to
separate the time spent in rotating the target (the
interaction time) from the time spent moving towards
the target to respond, time spent watching the nonmoving scene, etc. Only the trials where the outlier
was correctly identified were analysed. The analysis
reported on here is the effect of stimulus set size on
interaction time (see Figure 4).

In the following section, the applicability of this
approach is demonstrated by evaluating the benefits
of interactivity in 3D visualisations. This particular
research question was partly inspired by Colin
Ware’s observation that “There has been little or no
empirical work on the role of depth cues in
perceiving structures such as clusters and
correlations in 3D” [3].
The experiment tested whether a ‘pop-out’ effect
occurs in a common information visualisation task,
i.e., outlier detection in a scatterplot, either with or
without interactive control over the viewing angle.
The apparatus was a standard office desktop PC with
an LCD screen and a USB mouse, running a custommade application written in Java with Java3D.
Participants (11f/9m) were asked to point out an
outlier in a cloud of multi-sized multi-coloured
spheres. In half the trials, the presented scene was
slowly rotating around the vertical axis within a 45°
aperture; in the other half, participants could use a
mouse to rotate the scene within the same limits
themselves.
In most cases, the outlier was defined by its
position – 3 standard deviations away from the mean
(see Figure 3). In some cases, though, the outlier was
defined by a different colour. These colour outlier
cases served as the positive control, since a clear
‘pop-out’ effect was expected consistent with
existing literature [12].
The stimulus set size was varied – 27, 64, 125,
216 or 343 spheres, keeping the density constant.
Colour outlier stimuli were in three sizes only – 27,
125 and 343 spheres. Each of the pre-generated 64
stimuli (40 with a position outlier and 24 with a
colour outlier) was shown twice to each participant,
once with interactive control of the rotation, and once
without.

A
B

C

Figure 4: Effect of stimulus set size on interaction
time. A: no interactivity; B: interactive rotation; C:
colour outlier
For the colour outlier trials (C), the number of
spheres had no significant effect on the interaction
time (a slant of 0.2msec/item) which indicates a clear
‘pop-out’ effect. However, for the position outliers a
significant effect of the number of spheres on
interaction time was found: an increase of
11.2msec/item (p<0.01) for interactive rotation (A)
and an increase of 6.6msec/item (p<0.01) for noninteractive rotation (B). A pairwise comparison of
performance of the same subject on the same
stimulus set in different interaction conditions shows
137

a significant benefit of the interactive rotation: it
takes, on the average, one second less to identify an
outlier in this condition (mean interaction time for
interactive rotation: 5419msec; mean interaction time
for automatic rotation: 6446msec; T-test p=0.01)
The experiment demonstrated that interactive
control of the 3D scene rotation improves interaction
time, but not to the extent that outlier detection is
immediate.
More
importantly,
the
results
demonstrated how the use of the ‘pop-out effect’
paradigm not only allows for comparison among
different visualisations, but also provides an absolute
efficiency classification for each technique on its
own.

[10] Tovee, MJ (1998) Is Face Processing Special? Neuron
21 1239-1242
[11] Hochstein S, Ahissar M (2002) View from the Top:
Hierarchies and Reverse Hierarchies in the Visual System.
Neuron 36(5) 791-804
[12] Pomerantz, JR (2006). Colour as a gestalt: Pop out
with basic features and with conjunctions. Visual Cognition
14(4-8) 619-628

5. Conclusion
We have presented an account of Information
Visualisation comprehension that is based on two
established cognitive models of perception and
comprehension – PPO and RHT. From this account,
an efficiency criterion can be derived: implicit
formation of the relevant information from the
visualised data. This criterion enables objective and
non-comparative
evaluation
of
any
given
visualisation technique based on the ‘pop-out’ effect.
The applicability of this approach has been
demonstrated with an example of assessing the added
value of interactivity in 3D scatterplots.

References
[1] Plaisant C (2004). The challenge of information
visualization evaluation, IEEE Proceedings of Advanced
Visual Interfaces 109-116
[2] Pinker S (1990). A theory of graph comprehension.
Artificial intelligence and the future of testing 73-126
[3] Ware C (2004) Information Visualization: Perception
for Design. Morgan Kaufmann
[4] Ware C (2003) Design as Applied Perception. HCI
Models, Theories, and Frameworks: Toward a
Multidisciplinary Science. Morgan Kaufmann
[5] Mori, Masahiro (1970). Bukimi no tani The uncanny
valley (K. F. MacDorman & T. Minato, Trans.). Energy
7(4) 33–35. (Originally in Japanese)
[6] Wertheimer M (1922). Untersuchungen zur Lehre von
der Gestalt. Psychological Research 1(1) 47-58
[7] Chen C (2004) Information Visualization: Beyond the
Horizon. Springer
[8] Pomerantz JR, Kubovy M (1986). Theoretical
approaches to perceptual organization: Simplicity and
likelihood principles. Handbook of perception and human
performance 2 1-46
[9] Treisman AM, Gelade G (1980) A feature-integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology 12(1) 97-136

138

