2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Visual Ontology-based Information Retrieval System
Leyla Zhuhadar, Olfa Nasraoui, Robert Wyatt∗
Knowledge Discovery and Web Mining Lab
Department of Computer Engineering and Computer Science
University of Louisville, KY 40292, USA.
l0zhuh01@louisville.edu, olfa.nasraoui@louisville.edu, robert.wyatt@wku.edu

Abstract

arate from the design of the information retrieval system.
The architecture of HyperManyMedia system can provide,
manage, and collect data that permits high levels of adaptability and relevance to the learner’s profile. In addition,
this system uses clustering techniques to divide the documents into an optimal categorization that is not influenced
by the handmade taxonomy of the colleges and course titles. To achieve this objective, an approach for personalized search is implemented that takes advantage of the
Semantic Web standards (RDF and OWL) to represent the
content and the user profiles. The framework consists of
the following phases: (1) building the semantic E-learning
domain using the known colleges and courses information
as concepts and sub-concepts, (2) generating the semantic
learner’s profile as an ontology from navigation logs that
record which lectures have been accessed, (3) clustering
the documents to discover more refined sub-concepts (top
terms in each cluster) than provided by the available cluster
and course taxonomy, (4) re-ranking the learner’s search
results based on the matching concepts in the learning content and the user profile, and (5) providing the learner with
semantic recommendations during the search process, in
the form of terms from the closest matching clusters of
their profile. The main focus of this paper is the implementation of a new tool that has been added to the platform that
allows learners to navigate visually the system. The tool
offers a hybrid approach to search for contents. Instead of
entering a simple search term and then recommending semantically related materials, the user can click on a node
in the graph (ontology) and then the tool will recommend
subgraphs based on the semantic relation between the term

The Semantic Web has been evolved as a key technology,
bringing new insights and solutions to well documented
problems in E-learning. The research field of Semantic
E-learning covers a wide range of research problems. In
this paper, we present an approach to visualize an ontology driven information retrieval system in the context of Elearning. This approach has been implemented on the HyperManyMedia1 platform, and is already being used by online students at WKU2 . The design of this work is based on
the following steps: (1) presenting the HyperManyMedia
domain as a tree consisting of concepts and subconcepts
where the leaves are the documents (lectures), (2) embedding Nutch search engine into the platform, (3) reconfiguring Nutch search engine to accommodate the semantic
search, (4) using Prefuse3 as a visual tool to present the
ontology as a graph, and (5) embedding the graph into the
platform as an applet so that learners can navigate visually
through the ontology of the domain by clicking on nodes.
Keywords— visualization, knowledge engineering, ontology, information retrieval

1

Introduction

HyperManyMedia is an information retrieval system
that utilizes ontologies as models to provide semantic information. This approach uses two different types of ontology, a global ontology model that represents the whole Elearning domain (content-based ontology), and a learnerbased ontology model that represents the learner’s profile. The implementation of the ontology models is sep∗ Director

of Distance Learning Office, WKU, USA.
We created this term to refer to any educational material on the web (hyper) in a format that could be a multimedia format (image,
audio, video, podcast, vodcast) or a text format (webpage, powerpoint).
2 Western Kentucky University, USA.
3 http://prefuse.org/
1 HyperManyMedia:

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.47

419

and the subconcepts underneath it. Any action from the
user on the graph is reflected in two locations: (1) the subgraph, and (2) retrieved pages. The rest of this paper is
divided into the following sections:

Figure 1: The Semantic Layers (Tim Berners-Lee) [3]

Section 2 (Background and Related Work): We give an
overview of ontology (knowledge representation), semantic web, in addition to semantic web for E-learning.
Section 3 (Methodology): This section presents the semantic domain structure and the representation of the semantic domain.
Section 4 (Implementation): This section presents the
process of building the HyperManyMedia ontology, then
adding the ontology to the search engine. It ends with designing a visual ontology search engine.

The proposed Semantic Web stack, in Figure 2. has
been gradually refined. W3C4 provides updates of the current status of the Semantic Web.

Section 5 (Conclusion): In this section we present the
novelty of our research and our contribution.

What has been accomplished?
All the following technologies are standardized URI, UNICODE, XML, RDF, RDFs and OWL:

2

• RDF (Resource Description Framework) is considered as the framework for the Semantic Web that allows the definition of triples.

Background and Related Work

• RDFs provides the vocabulary for RDF.
• OWL extends the RDF and provides the description
logic and the semantic reasoning.

“An ontology is an explicit specification and formal
specification of conceptualization of a domain of interest
[6].” [6] was the pioneer to use the ontology to represent knowledge among Artificial Intelligence systems. The
main goal of using an ontology in that work was to support:
(1) sharing and (2) reusing of formally represented knowledge in AI systems. To accomplish this,[6] had to define
a common vocabulary, then used it to represent the shared
knowledge. This included definitions of classes, functions,
objects, and the relationship among all of them–which is
an ontology.

As query language, SPARQL.
What has not been accomplished yet?
All the following technologies are not standardized yet:
• Trust layer (in progress).
• Digital Signature Layer (in progress).
• Rules (in progress).

More specifically, the Ontology represents the language
of the Semantic Web. Since the Semantic Web will not
replace the current Web, but will be built on top of it, a
new structure was needed to deal with this issue. The old
formal language, HTML needed to be preserved and a new
semantic language needs to be used, the Resource Description Framework (RDF). RDF encapsulates the Web Ontology Language (OWL) in a schema similar to the XML format and it lays on top of it. Tim Berners-Lee proposed the
following structure, illustrated in Figure 1.

• User Interface (in progress): This part is the most
crucial part that will link users to the Semantic Web.
It represents a layer on top of the Trust Layer. Many
different ideas have been proposed, but still no standardized technology has been approved yet.
The Semantics level increases from the bottom layer of
the Semantic Web stack, see Figure 1, towards the upper
layer. [4] mapped the relationship between these levels and

4 W3C: The main role of W3C is to guide us with the increasing levels of semantics and the related web technologies. In the following section, we
briefly summarize the current state of the Semantic Web :http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/

420

ontologies, and expressed this relation through the Ontology Spectrum, as illustrated in Figure 2. Looking at this
spectrum we can divide ontology levels into four distinguished categories: (1) Taxonomy, (2) Thesaurus, (3) Conceptual Model, and (4) Local Domain Theory. The semantic strength increases as we move from a lower category to
an upper one. The main objective of an ontology is making
the knowledge reusable and shareable, thus ontologies are
constructed from vocabularies and their meanings. In this
sense, we can compare this to the definition of an object
in object-oriented programming languages. When we define an object, this object represents a class and when we
execute this program we create an instance of this class.
Similar to ontologies we have general concepts that represent classes and specific items that represent instances, we
also have the relationships, properties, functions and rules
among these concepts, etc. A Taxonomy contains the structure of our domain represented as classes and subclasses,
with relationship between these classes/subclasses not defined in this level (weak semantics). A Thesaurus (RDFs)
moves the ontology to a higher level where the associations and hierarchical relationships are defined. Conceptual Model (Owl, UML, DAML, etc.) allows the definitions of class/subclass hierarchies. Finally, Local Domain
Theory (Modal Logic, First Order Logic, etc.) permits the
software to understand data semantically with the highest
level.

tional Semantic Web, i.e. how authoring tools can
be designed to provide educational content that is
shareable, reusable and interoperable. This research
proposed an ontology-driven authoring tools’ framework that the Educational platform can benefit from.
• [5] argued that an ontology supported learning process enhances the activities between faculty and
students in Web-based learning environments, and
surveyed the relationship between Artificial Intelligence in Education (AIED) and Web Intelligence
(WI), showing a strong evidence that the AIED field
can benefit from the core components of WI techniques, such as ontologies, adaptivity, personalization and software agents. One important aspect
of this benefit is that it can enhance the learner’s
comfort, especially from a personalization point of
view where WI techniques can be used to create a
learner model that can free the learner from the disturbance of manually discovering relevant materials
in an ontology-supported learning environment.
• [9] demonstrated a framework for ontology enabled
annotation and knowledge management in collaborative learning environments. The proposed framework provided personalization and semantic content
retrieval with the personalization aspect expressed
using ontologies that provided the relationship between learners and annotated content. These ontologies have later been used to discover similar content
and collaborators, thus query-by-annotation retrieval
system.

Figure 2: The Ontology Spectrum [4]

• [1] presented an ontology-based document-driven
memory in E-learning, that used two ontologies: a
generic ontology related to the domain of training in
general and a domain-specific ontology to deal with
the application at hand. The research was divided
into three domains: knowledge engineering, pedagogical design and Semantic Web, and utilized Topic
Maps in the representation in the learning memory.

2.1

• [8] presented an E-Learning web services architecture that can provide students with the following: registration, authentication, tutoring, questionanswer queries services and an annotated feedback.
The feasibility of this architecture has been tested
through different scenarios in the E-learning domain,
with the most interesting one being the capability of
the system to provide a semantic annotation of argumentation in student essays. Three different ontologies governed the system: learning materials ontology, annotation schema ontology and services ontology.

Semantic Web for E-learning

The Semantic Web has been evolved as a key technology, bringing new insights and solutions to well documented problems in E-learning. The research field of Semantic E-learning covers a wide range of research problems. Below, we cover some of the Semantic Web efforts
in the context of E-learning:
• The work proposed in [2] focused on the Educa-

421

• [7] proposed a framework for personalized Elearning in the Semantic Web where the hypertext
structures were automatically composed using the
semantic web services. The implementation of this
framework was on distributed educational hypermedia metadata, and the core of this work relied on
TRIPLE, a logic-based query language for the Semantic Web. This framework utilized reasoning
rules to provide personalized hypertext relations between the domain and the learner, in this context,
they designed three different ontologies: (i) user
ontology to track the user’s activities, (ii) domain
ontology to present the resources and the relationships among them, and (iii) observation ontology,
to model the learner’s interaction with the hypertext
system. In the following sections we are going to
describe the design and the implementation of our
approach.

3

direction (upper concept), they can just click back to go to
the parent node. In this way, the users are not restricted to
the design of the system, and can freely navigate between
concepts and relations that are represented by the ontology.

3.1

Semantic Domain Structure

Let R represent the root of the domain which is represented as a tree, and Ci represents a concept under R. In
this case:
R = ∪ni=1 Ci
where n= Number of concepts in the domain
Each concept Ci consists either of sub-concepts which
can be children (Ci = ∪m
j=1 SCji ) or of leaves which are the
actual lecture documents (∪lk=1 dki ).

Methodology
Ci =

HyperManyMedia is a structured information retrieval
model, it considers a user who is interested in a specific information (document/lecture), under a specific topic, with
a specific media format. The information is organized in a
hierarchy of classes which group concepts under domains
and classify this information in an ontology-like structure. This system identifies the domain that the user has
recently visited and shows the semantic relation between
the query that the user wrote and the concepts underneath
it. Showing the users the structure of the domain helps
shorten the browsing time to find specific information; in
addition, it alerts the user to the availability of other concepts similar to what they are interested in. This allows
the users to see the global context of the domain instead
of just the information that they are looking for. This system uses an ontology recommendation structure. When a
user queries for specific information, the retrieval system
brings the resources related to this query and also shows the
user all the concepts/subconcepts related to the submitted
query. Building the ontology is done separately and does
not affect the organization of the repository. The process
of navigating through the ontology can be understood as a
traversal of a directed graph. The linked nodes of the graph
represent concepts that are semantically related. When the
user hits a node in the ontology, the user can see the children nodes under that concept. If the users are interested in
navigating through the deeper level of the hierarchy, they
can continue navigating through these nodes, and at the
moment they are interested in navigating in the opposite


 Ci = ∪m
j=1 SCji


∪lk=1 dki

if Ci has subconcepts
leaves

We encoded the above semantic information into a treestructured domain ontology in OWL, based on the hierarchy of the E-learning resources. The root concepts are
the colleges, while the subconcepts are the courses, and
the leaves are the resources of the domain (lectures). Each
node (non-leaf) holds the following information: <parent
node, concept node, visited node, child node>, while a
leaf node holds <parent node, visited node, document,
nil>. Refer to our previous work in [11, 14] for detailed
information.

3.2

Representing the Semantic Domain

As of November 2006, Western Kentucky University5
hosted a HyperManyMedia open-source repository of lectures6 . These resources (lectures) are available in different formats: text, power-point, audio, video, podcast, vodcast, and rss. Designing the domain semantics from this
platform is based on the hierarchical structure of these resources. The HyperManyMedia platform contains eleven
different concepts (colleges): “English”, “Social Work”,
“History”, “Chemistry”, “Accounting”, “Math”, “Consumer and Family Sciences”, “Architect and Manufacturing Sciences”, “Engineering” and “Communication Disorders”. Each concept (college) contains a different number of sub-concepts (courses), and under each sub-concept
(course), the learning object represents a leaf of this tree.

5 http://www.wku.edu
6 http://blog.wku.edu/podcasts

422

which provided us with visualization tool to build the structure of HyperManyMedia ontology. Figure 3. shows the
design of HyperManyMedia ontology in Protégé.

4.2

Adding the Ontology to Nutch Search Engine

The HyperManyMedia search engine uses combination
of Vector Space Model (VSM) and Boolean Model to find
the most relevant documents for a query submitted by a
user. The score of query q for document d is related to
the cosine-distance similarity between the document and
query vectors in a Vector Space Model (VSM).

cos(x.x ) =

xT · x
xT .x
= √
√
T
|x|·|x |
x x· x

Tx

where x ∈ R|V| x and x are vector-space representations of two documents, T the ’transpose’ operator and
xT · x indicates the dot product between two vectors.
It uses several refinements on VSM by extending the
Boolean vector model and adding weights associated with
terms and fields. HyperManyMedia’s scoring is influenced
by the sum of the score for each term of a query. For each
field, the score is the product of the following factors: Its
"tf", "idf", and index-time boosting. The score is computed
as follows,

Figure 3: Hierarchical Structure of HyperManyMedia Ontology

4

Implementation

HyperManyMedia search engine is an extended version
of Nutch7 search engine, which is an open source information retrieval system. We modified Nutch by adding
plugins to support a multi-model search interface, such
as metadata search [12, 13] and semantic search [11, 14]
mechanisms. This paper is concerned with our recent visual interface that has been added to HyperManyMedia: A
Visual Ontology-based Interface. The following sections
describe the implementation of this interface.

4.1

Score(q, d) = coord(q, d) × queryN orm(q) ×

(tf (tind)×

2

df (t) × t.getBoost() × norm(t, d))

The semantic search engine in HyperManyMedia is governed by the RDF/OWL file that contains the complete ontology structure of the domain.

Building HyperManyMedia Ontology

Recently, a variety of knowledge-based framework applications became available that support modeling ontologies. Two applications are the most famous: Protégé8
and Altova9 . Protégé is an open source ontology editor
and knowledge-based framework that supports two ways of
modeling ontologies: (1) Protégé-Frames, and (2) ProtégéOWL editors. Altova is an industry-based modeling tool
with graphical data mapping, data transformation, and
data integration tool, Altova supports mapping of XML,
database, flat file, EDI, Excel 2007 (OOXML), XBRL, and
Web services formats. Protégé was used in this research

User Navigation Scenario: When a user submits a query,
the semantic search engine uses the above scoring algorithm to retrieve the most relevant documents that contain that query, in addition, it maps
the query to the ontology file (it maps every concept/subconcept that contains this query), then, in
case that concept/subconcept is found, the search
engine recommends the user with semantically related concepts/subconcepts to this specific query, as
shown in figure 4.

7 http://lucene.apache.org/nutch/
8 http://protege.stanford.edu/
9 http://www.altova.com/

423

Figure 4: Visual Ontology Search

Figure 5: Protégé Schema

4.3

Designing a Visual Ontology-based Search
Engine

The following example illustrates part of the OWL
schema in Prefuse (Building a graph) :
1. The upper part of the Xml file contains nodes and
their attributes, as shown in Figure 6.

We added a visual ontology search interface to the HyperManyMedia platform that allows the user to navigate
through the domain ontology by clicking on nodes. The
complete graph represents the E-learning ontology, and
each node represents a concept or subconcept. We used
Prefuse as a visualization toolkit to visualize our ontology
search engine.
The Prefuse Visualization Toolkit is a Java-based toolkit
for building interactive information visualization applications. It supports a rich set of features for data modeling,
visualization, and interaction. It provides optimized data
structures for tables, graphs, and trees, a host of layout and
visual encoding techniques, and support for animation, dynamic queries, integrated search, and database connectivity. Prefuse uses the Java 2D graphics library, and is easily
integrated into Java Swing applications or web applets. Its
XML format is based on nodes and relationships.
Figure 6: Prefuse XML Schema

Our goal is to visualize the Protégé output using
Prefuse. However, this transformation was not an easy process since Prefuse schema is not compatible with Protégé
output, Figure 5 shows the output of Protégé.

2. The lower part of the XML file contains the edges of
the graph, as shown in Figure 7.

424

The applet takes the XML file name as parameter
from the URL of the Visual search engine webpage
and loads the corresponding graph and its nodes.
The initial page loads the applet which lists all the
departments as nodes of an ontology graph, as shown
in Figure 9.

Figure 9: Initial Visual Ontology
Figure 7: Prefuse XML Schema

3. When a learner clicks on a node the following happens:

After converting the ontology schema to work with
Prefuse, we followed the following steps:

• The retrieval system considers the concept/subconcept in this node as a query and the
results of the search engine are based on this query.

1. Uploading the OWL graph into Prefuse and running
it as an applet on top of the HyperManyMedia platform.

• The graph underneath that specific node becomes the
root of the graph and all concepts underneath the
node are updated.

2. Embedding the visual ontology on top of our search
engine, as shown in Figure 8.

• This procedure repeats till the user reaches the end
of the graph.
The user can navigate through the graph (ontology) up and
down, the upper hierarchy level represents an upper concept of the current node, the lower hierarchical level represents a subconcept of the current node, as shown Figure 8.
This platform is available in 10 . In addition, all the programs
we developed to implement the Visual Ontology Search Engine
will be available on the same website.

5

Conclusion

The main objective of this paper was to present an approach to build a visual ontology information retrieval system. Our approach has been implemented on the HyperManyMedia platform, and is already being used by online
students at WKU. We found that using Protégé framework
with Nutch 0.9 facilitates the design of the ontology without the need of a hard-coded structure and also limits the
possibilities of making errors. Our future plan is to extend

Figure 8: Visual Ontology Search

10 http://161.6.105.103:8084/nutch-0.9/visualsearchvisual-search.jsp?
11 MIT

lang=en&query=departments&submit=Search

OpenCourseWare: http://ocw.mit.edu/OcwWeb/web/home/home/index.htm
12 Berkeley Webcast: http://webcast.berkeley.edu/

425

the HyperManyMedia ontology using Protégé application.
Also, we are going to merge our repository with as many
external open source resources as we can accommodate,
such as MIT OpenCourseWare 11 and Berkeley Webcast
12
.

6

[7] N. Henze, P. Dolog, and W. Nejdl. Reasoning and
Ontologies for Personalized E-Learning in the Semantic Web. Educational Technology & Society,
7(4):82–97, 2004.
[8] E. Moreale and M. Vargas-Vera. Semantic Services
in e-Learning: an Argumentation Case Study. Educational Technology & Society, 7(4):112–128, 2004.

Acknowledgments

This work is partially supported by the National Science
Foundation CAREER Award IIS-0133948 to Olfa Nasraoui.

[9] S.J.H. Yang, I.Y.L. Chen, and N.W.Y. Shao. Ontology
Enabled Annotation and Knowledge Management for
Collaborative Learning in Virtual Learning Community. Educational Technology & Society, 7(4):70–81,
2004.

References
[1] M.H. Abel, A. Benayache, D. Lenne, C. Moulin,
C. Barry, and B. Chaput. Ontology-based Organizational Memory for e-learning. Educational Technology & Society, 7(4):98–111, 2004.

[10] Leyla Zhuhadar and Olfa Nasraoui. Semantic information retrieval for personalized e-learning. Tools
with Artificial Intelligence, 2008. ICTAI ’08. 20th
IEEE International Conference on, 1:364–368, Nov.
2008.

[2] L. Aroyo and D. Dicheva. The New Challenges for
E-learning: The Educational Semantic Web. Educational Technology & Society, 7(4):59–69, 2004.

[11] Leyla Zhuhadar, Olfa Nasraoui, and Robert Wyatt.
A comparsion study between generic and metadata
search engines in an e-learning environment. In IKE,
pages 500–505, 2008.

[3] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, O. Lassila, et al. The
Semantic Web. Scientific American, 284(5):28–37,
2001.

[12] Leyla Zhuhadar, Olfa Nasraoui, and Robert Wyatt.
Metadata domain-knowledge driven search engine in
"hypermanymedia" e-learning resources. In CSTST
’08: Proceedings of the 5th international conference
on Soft computing as transdisciplinary science and
technology, pages 363–370, New York, NY, USA,
2008. ACM.

[4] M.C. Daconta, K.T. Smith, and L.J. Obrst. The Semantic Web: A Guide to the Future of XML, Web Services, and Knowledge Management. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. New York, NY, USA, 2003.
[5] V. Devedži´c. Web Intelligence and Artificial Intelligence in Education. Educational Technology & Society, 7(4):29–39, 2004.

[13] Leyla Zhuhadar, Olfa Nasraoui, and Robert Wyatt.
Dual representation of the semantic user profile for
personalized web search in an evolving domain. In
Proceedings of the AAAI 2009 Spring Symposium on
Social Semantic Web, Where Web 2.0 meets Web 3.0,
pages 84–89, 2009.

[6] T.R. Gruber. A translation approach to portable ontology specifications. KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION,
5:199–199, 1993.

426

