2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Multiple Visualizations of the Personal Promotion Histories of
Court Nobles in Japan
Mina AKAISHI
Faculty of Engineering
The University of Tokyo, Japan
akaishi@ailab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Taizo YAMADA
Historiographical Institute
The University of Tokyo, Japan
t yamada@hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Tetsuya ISHIKAWA
Historiographical Institute
The University of Tokyo, Japan
ishikawa@hi.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Koichi HORI
Faculty of Engineering
The University of Tokyo, Japan
hori@computer.org

Abstract

rence or non-occurrence of themes or topics. Timeline[1] is
a DHTML-based AJAXy widget for visualizing time-based
events.
For the visualization of multidimensional data, Inselberg
and Dimsdale introduced Parallel Coordinates [9], which
visualizes multiple data records as multiple poly-lines on
the same 2D plane at the same time. After their proposal,
many modified versions having a variety of additional features were proposed [5, 11, 4, 7, 6]. Time-tunnel [3, 10, 2]
visualizes multiple charts and can put them overlapped together. Therefore, if one chart is regarded as the visualization of one multidimensional data record, Time-tunnel can
be used as the same visual analysis tool as Parallel Coordinates.
In this paper, we propose the Personal Promotion Graph
(PPG-I) and Promotion Pattern Graph (PPG-II). PPG-I
shows personal promotion transitions for court nobles in
medieval Japan and PPG-II shows the typical promotion
patterns that existed in the Japanese government of the era.
These tools help users to interpret or analyze history from
various view points.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we discuss the concept of visualizing personal
promotion data. Then in Section 3 and 4, we describe the
tools that we have developed and examples of their implementation. Finally, in Section 5, we make some concluding
remarks.

This paper proposes methods of visualizing the personal
promotion records of Japanese government officials in medieval times.
Our research is aimed at developing multiple visualization tools that facilitate discovery of exceptional promotions
as a way of highlighting interesting or important factors behind historical events, or that enable comparison of various promotion patterns to aid in understanding the political background the period. We have developed the following tools for visualizing personal promotion records: (i)
the Personal Promotion Graph (PPG-I) enables visualization of the promotional transition of court nobles in medieval Japan, and (ii) the Promotion Pattern Graph (PPGII) shows various promotion patterns that help reveal typical patterns of promotion for court nobles in relation to a
particular period or family.
There are many techniques for visualizing data in different ways. These tools provide variations in viewpoints for
analyzing the political background of the era and help trigger consideration of different scenarios.

1

Introduction

Information visualization systems enable users to find
patterns, relationships, and structures in data and may help
confirm hypotheses or reaffirm existing knowledge.
For example, ThemeRiver[8] provides users with a
macro-view of thematic changes in a corpus of documents
over a serial dimension. It is designed to facilitate the identification of trends and patterns and the unexpected occur978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.46

2

Promotion Record and Necessity of Multiple Visualizations

In medieval Japan, the basic system of central government consisted of two officials and eight ministries.
578
572

rank

year

official

year
Figure 1. Personal promotion list extracted
from Kugyo-bunin.
Figure 2. Personal Promotion History of
"Masakata Minamoto".
Beneath the Emperor, who was the monarch, there were
an emperor’s reign official and an official in charge of matters relating to Shintoism, who was in charge of religious
aspects of the Imperial Court. The eight ministries shared
the administration with the emperor’s reign official.
There was an Imperial Palace guardsman, who was responsible for the Ministry of Justice. The Imperial Court
also included an administrative organization apart from the
two officials and eight ministries, and this was under the
direct control of the Emperor.
In addition, a business organization was set up under the
eight ministries. When an organization did not fit within
the structure, it was dealt with by establishing a managing
official to control it (there was no legal provision in the two
official system).
In the Japanese government, the office and rank was
systematically established based on legal system called the
Law Code. A system of office and ranking equivalency was
used to organize government officials for their ranking.
Kugyo-bunin is a set of historical records that provide a
directory of government officials. Kugyo means the families of highest court rank who dominated court society. Figure 1 is an extract from the Kugyo-bunin.
The technique of data mining is not always suitable for

analyzing historical data because the records of people of
historical interest are often not complete. Usually only part
of the data is available to access and no one has complete
coverage. Use of statistical techniques can lead to misunderstandings because of missing data or because a few but
important data can be buried by greater quantities of data.
We focused on finding small but significant sets of data.
The purpose of our research is to provide multiple visualization tools for discovering exceptional promotions as
a way of finding out interesting or important factors behind historical events, or of comparing various promotion
patterns to aid in understanding the political background
of the time. We have developed two tools for visualizing
personal promotion records: the Personal Promotion Graph
(PPG-I) enables visualization of the promotional transition
of court nobles in medieval Japan, and the Promotion Pattern Graph(PPG-II) display various promotion patterns to
typical patterns of promotion for court nobles based on the
Law Code system.
In section 3, we explain how to visualize a personal promotion history based on the office and rank system used in
medieval Japan. In section 4, we describe the mechanism
573
579

rank

Masakata
Minamoto
Kintoki
Fujiwara

year

official

Figure 4. Basic structure of promotion pattern
graph.

Masakata
Minamoto

of the PPG-II and give some examples of its application.

are interested in such anomalies.
The view can be changed interactively. By sliding the
mode change lever to the left, the PPG-I shows his promotion record according to a rise in rank. In the same way, by
sliding the lever to the right, the PPH-I shows his promotion
according to the office he held.
Figure 3 shows promotion data for two of the nobles who
appear in Figure 1. It is easy to see that Noble Masakata
Minamoto took a longer time to be promoted to the top than
Noble Kintoki Fujiwara.
PPG-I has functions to highlight the occurrence of exceptional or special appointments and to compare several
promotion transition patterns.

3

4

Kintoki
Fujiwara

year
Figure 3. Personal Promotion History of two
court nobles.

Visualization of Personal Promotion History

Figure 4 shows the basic structure of a promotion pattern graph (PPG-II). The standard layout depends on the
office and rank equivalency table. Officials and administrations are arranged horizontally. The vertical axis indicates
rank. In the upper layer, nodes are arranged according to the
constraints of the standard layout layer. The nodes include
position names and the links indicate a promotion from one
node to another. The size of the node indicates the number
of people who held the position.
Figure 5 shows PPG-II for the record in Figure 1. The
top part of Figure 5 shows Kugyo’s career as he moved from
office to office. The layout of the nodes is strongly constrained by the standard layout layer.
In contrast, in the bottom part of Figure 5, the nodes are
loosely constrained. If there is a path from one office to another, the relationship between these offices become closer

A court noble was appointed to the position of a government official which was equivalent to a ranking based on
the office and rank system.
Figure 2 shows a personal promotion graph (PPG-I) for
a court noble who was appointed as an ”Ushosho” 1 in the
1100s. The top part of Figure 2 shows the promotion transition for ”Masakata Minamoto”. Sometimes he was given a
lower position relative to his rank, while sometimes he got
a higher position than indicated by his rank. The bottom
part of Figure 2 represents his official position in relation
to the corresponding position and its corresponding rank.
In either case, such a situation indicated an irregular state,
which could have occurred for several reasons. Historians
1 Ushosho:

Visualization of Promotion Pattern

junior captain of the Inner Palace Guards of the Right

574
580

rank

STRONGLY constrained
by standard layout layer
Sangi

Ushosho
1100’s

office and administrators

Local
Officials

LOOSELY constrained
by standard layout layer
rank
Sangi
Ushosho

1400’

office and administrators
Figure 6. Promotion pattern graph for nobles who appointed "Ushosho" in 1100s and
1400s.

Figure 5. Promotion pattern graph for two
court nobles.

than between the other offices. For example, there is a wide
distance between ”Ushosho” and ”Sangi” 2 in the top figure
5. However, the bottom figure 5 shows there are only two
steps between them. The view can be changed interactively
by sliding the mode change lever. This method of visualization shows relationships between offices based on personal
movements.
Figure 6 shows a comparison between promotion pattern graphs for nobles who were appointed ”Ushosho” in
the 1100s and 1400s. In the 1100s, most careers started
from the posts of local officials, which were good positions
for making a profit. But in the 1400s, nobody first became a
local official. At that time, the Law Code system was crumbling and local officials were not controlled by the Central
Court. The visualization by PPG-II allows us to see the
change in the Japanese political systems over 300 years between 12c and 15c.
Figure 7 shows a comparison of the promotion pattern
2 Sangi:

graphs for Fujiwara and Genji family members, who were
”Ushosho” in 1100s. It shows that the Fujiwara family monopolized official positions close to the Emperor and Empress, such as the Imperial Regent or Administrator of the
Empress’s Household. This is a significant revelation, indicating that the Fujiwara family was very powerful at that
time.
PPG-II provides functions to visualize (i) patterns of
promotion rotation, (ii) actual relationships among offices
based on personal movements, and (iii) changes in promotion patterns at various periods or for families.

5

Conclusion

We have developed several visualization methods that
enable examination of data from different viewpoints, thus
revealing important historical events and facilitating analysis of background knowledge of the period. The Personal
Promotion Graph shows the promotion history of court no-

Councilor of the Imperial Court

575
581

[2] M. Akaishi and Y. Okada. Time-tunnel: Visual analysis tool for time-series numerical data and its aspects
as multimedia presentation tool. In Proc. IEEE InfoVis
2004, IEEE CS Press, pages 456–464, 2004.

Fujiwara Family

[3] M. Akaishi and Y. Okada. Time-tunnel: Visual analysis tool for time-series numerical data and its combinational variation. In Proc. of 1st International
Conference on Geometric Modeling, Visualization and
Graphics (GMVAG 2005), pages 696–1699, 2005.

Imperial
regent

[4] G. Falkman. Information visualization in clinical
odontology: multidimensional analysis and interactive
data exploration. In Artificial Intelligence in Medicine,
volume 22, pages 133–158, 2001.

Administrator of
the Empress’s
household

[5] Y.-H. Fua, M. Ward, and E. Rundensteiner. Hierarchical parallel coordinates for exploration of large
datasets. In Proc. IEEE Visualization ’99, IEEE CS
Press, pages 43–50, 1999.

Genji Family

[6] H. Graham and J. Kennedy. Using curves to enhance
parallel coordinate visualizations. In Proc. IEEE InfoVis 2002, IEEE CS Press, pages 10–16, 2003.
[7] H. Hauser, F. Ledermann, and H. Doleisch. Angular
brushing of extended parallel coordinates. In Proc.
IEEE InfoVis 2002, IEEE CS Press, pages 127–130,
2002.
[8] S. Havre, B. Hetzler, and L. Nowell. Themeriver: Visualizing theme changes over time. In Proc. of IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization, 2000.

Figure 7. Promotion Pattern Graph for
Fujiwara and Genji Families, who were
"Ushosho" in 1100s.

[9] A. Inselberg and B. Dimsdale. Parallel coordinates:
A tool for visualizing multidimensional geometry. In
Proc. IEEE Visualization 1990, IEEE CS Press, pages
361–378, 1990.

bles in the medieval Japanese government. The Promotion
Pattern Graph shows the typical course of promotion for
court nobles. Users of these tools can change visualization
mode interactively, which aids in highlighting interesting
and important occurrences.
In future work, we plan to integrate these tools with other
historical material and to evaluate the effectiveness of the
system more widely.

[10] H. Notsu, Y. Okada, M. Akaishi, and K. Niijima.
Time-tunnel: Visual analysis tool for time-series numerical data and its extension toward parallel coordinates. In Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization as Proc. of CGIV 05, IEEE CS Press, pages
167–172, 2005.
[11] H. Siirtola. Direct manipulation of parallel cordinates.
In Proc. Information Visualization IV’00, IEEE CS
Press, pages 373–378, 2000.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Ms. Tamaki Endoh (Histriographical Institute, The University of Tokyo) and Mr. Toshiyuki
Kikuchi (NorthGrid Corporation, Japan) for their constructive comments and technical support.

References
[1] Timeline: http://simile.mit.edu/timeline/.
576
582

