2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Slices of Time - Appraising the use of Dynamics in Design

Carol MacGillivray
Thames Valley University
{carol.macgillivray@tvu.ac.uk}
The order in which we access information, and how
the narrative flows is crucial to our understanding and
our level of engagement, and film makers, animators and
new media practitioners draw on a rich heritage of ‘tricks
of the trade’ to communicate narrative effectively. As we
move from static to dynamic images delivered through
the screen, graphic designers are also discovering how
these tricks can be translated to enhance visualization
and engage the eye of the viewer. If the medium is the
message, then we should not ignore the nuances
available to us by adding the dimension of time and
therefore dynamics to the field of Information
Visualization.
Design has always incorporated the idea of directing
the gaze. Artists strive to compose pictures that lead the
eye on a pathway and create an illusion of space through
overlapping objects. A key compositional goal is to hold
the viewer’s interest by keeping their gaze roving around
the canvas, in a harmonious quest that neither stalls nor
allows easy exit: the longer a viewer looks at an artist’s
painting, the more interesting that painting is to them and
the greater the communication.

Abstract
Dynamics, movement, kinetics, animation: So many
names for an area so frequently ignored in graphics.
Ephemeral by nature, such transient devices are
frequently ignored over the concrete and contextual. Yet
the screen has become the primary source for accessing
information and is ubiquitous in urban advertising,
stimulating graphics increasingly to include dynamics
and visual momentum in their design. This paper seeks to
reappraise the application of dynamics for
representation and appeal, drawing on implied dynamics
in static images, dynamics within the frame and dynamic
editing.
Using illustrative examples this paper discusses
whether a commonality of kinetic perception in dynamics
can be relied upon for engagement and appeal, and
offers a new conceptual model for event perception,
drawing on cognitive psychology, montage theory and
eye tracking technology.
The paper posits that motion is a primary perceptual
form and that its application in visualization boosts
gestalt comprehension.
Keywords--- Dynamics, Animation, Perception,
Cognition, Visualization

1. Introduction
“… Visual Explanations is about pictures of verbs,
the representation of mechanism and motion, process and
dynamics, causes and effects, explanation and narrative.”
[1]
Information Visualization routinely solves problems
of visual representation by layering shapes, forms and
colors aesthetically and conceptually to communicate
information and convey many signals, both general and
personal. This paper aims to discuss the effect of
dynamics on a viewer’s comprehension and assimilation
of data.

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.89

Figure 1 Taking the eye on a journey
The eye can be made to follow a given path; led in,
entertained with a focus of interest then allowed to pass
out of the frame. In the hands of a good artist, it is a
pleasing path where the eye is neither obstructed nor
604
598

audience is looking at any moment in time. To tell a
good story, a film maker must maintain the sequence and
flow of events progressively disclosing elements in a
clear and interesting way, ensuring that the storyline does
not stall.
Here there is a clear link between the craft of editing
a film and visualizing information. Both are as much
about what is left out (on the cutting room floor) as what
remains.
Consider
Harry
Beck’s
topological
interpretation of the London tube: A schematic diagram
that eliminates the unnecessary (such as geography and
real world placement) and redefines information
according to need. This is clearly a successful piece of
design and has been adopted throughout the world.
Good designers like good painters and film directors
do not shy away from acting as guides to the viewer’s
eye - it is essential to their crafts, however Web 2.0 has
brought us new ways to access information through
streaming and interaction and many modern media
designers are keen to throw off the shackles of imposed
narrative and explore handing the controls back to the
viewer. This has obvious attractions – of course we
should be free to control the order and speed with which
we access information, but the human brain struggles to
take in a full field of view, it is easily overwhelmed. We
need to conceptualize information in usable chunks in
order to process it effectively. Without the intimate
human guidance of a designer/artist director how do we
know where to steer our vision?
Britain has over four million CCTV cameras and it
has been calculated that each person is caught on camera
an average of three hundred times a day. But the video
quality monitored by these cameras is so low that they
need human guidance to control the cameras; zooming in
on suspects in order that the quality of information is
good enough for, say facial recognition. [6]
How then, do those that process the CCTV footage
know where to look to usefully navigate through such a
welter of complex information? Those that monitor the
surveillance monitors say they get a ‘feel’ for patterns of
behavior and with experience ‘instinctively’ know where
to point and focus their cameras.
Manipulation of these cameras turns them into
mechanical extensions of the searching human eye. What
signals and patterns can the surveyors intuitively be
picking up to boost their comprehension enough to be
useful? The answer lies in the human perception of
dynamics.

confused by being given two ways to go. By introducing
stops through aesthetic props, the gaze is corralled away
from corners that might ‘stall’ the eye. When the
inherent narratives within a painting are more complex
such as in the paintings of Uccello, Hogarth, and
Brughel, the spectator’s gaze is encouraged to dance
around aesthetically complex scenes, perceiving with
increasing comprehension a meta-narrative that sews
together relationships between people and landscapes.
The painting becomes a snapshot that captures, in a
single moment, the essence of a narrative flow.
Perception is an inexact science: When the eye is
fixed, attention is narrowly focused and information is
interpreted in depth. Our peripheral vision is chiefly used
to detect movement and ask questions – we are always
searching, scoping for where we should best look next.
Although the eye starts on a guided journey when a
painting is viewed, and frequently shares common paths,
as viewing duration progresses, the viewer’s eye begins
to rove in an increasingly less predictable way as a wide
range of personal and cultural contextual associations are
thrown up.
Julian Hochberg, [2] the great theorist and
experimenter in visual perception, believes that when we
choose where to look, we are in a continuous quest for
satisfactory answers to visual questions. He divided areas
of perceiving in two: schematic maps (what one will see
if one looks here or there) and schematic events
(contingent expectations of what one will see ‘when’ in a
changing visual world)
Hochberg ascribes an elective ability to the viewer,
saying: I cannot see how we can discuss when a viewer
elects to look, where he elects to look, and when he elects
to cease looking without conceding that he possesses
some form of mental structure about what he is looking at
(some schema, expectation, storage) that guides, sustains
and terminates activity. [3] But there is evidence that
when dynamics are added to the visual field, this elective
ability is compromised.
A team from Leeds Metropolitan University [4]
have developed unique eye tracking equipment which
enables them to record the eye movements of a film
audience and aggregate the finished result to reveal
hotspots and deviations drawing upon a common
viewing experience. In a fascinating experiment, the eye
tracks of four-hundred viewers of Hitchcock’s Vertigo
were combined into an aggregated visualization. The
resultant ‘heatmap’ was then re-laid over the film
producing an illustration of the collective visual
experience. They concluded that: The visual experience,
or where the attention is drawn, appears to be highly
controllable or subject to manipulation through
directorial techniques such as the use of deep/shallow
focus, approaches to editing, graphic matching and
camera movement. [5]
It is widely acknowledged that Hitchcock was a
master of audience manipulation on a macro level, but
this confirms how the film, Vertigo was crafted at a
micro level within shots by direction and between shots
through editing to guide where each member of an

2. Defining Dynamics
Combining visualization theory with animation and
film theory produces three nested definitions of graphic
or screen dynamics.
1) Movement within the frame - directing (or
misdirecting) the gaze with dynamics derived
from composition, structure or context.
2) Movement between frames - Live action,
animation, great for appeal, and engagement
3) Movement between place and/or time - editing.
599
605

Figure 4 shows the solid cube in both views. Side by
side, with solid surfaces it is easy to distinguish the ‘real’
from the unreal. The Necker cube in many books is
drawn from a 2d orthogonal view, although Figure 5
could easily be seen as a 2D graphic, with the contextual
prompt of the previous cubes, we might still interpret this
as a 3D object.

2.1 Movement within the frame
Although we have seen how the eye can be led
around a visual interpretation, it is also capable of being
trapped in a loop of confused disinformation. This was
explored by Op artists such as Bridget Riley.

Figure 5 Orthogonal Cube
But non-orthographic views show us how many
depth perceptual clues have been removed in order to
fool our eyes. Below is the same view of the same cube
built in virtual 3D, but here the camera is nonorthographic, allowing focal depth clues.
Figure 2 Movement in Squares. Bridget Riley
In the aptly named Movement in Squares the eye
becomes trapped on the indeterminate ‘folded’ edge as
the squares appear to recede as pages towards a book’s
spine. All ‘movement’ is created by visual dilemmas as
we struggle to interpret the artifice of the 2D painting.
The ambiguity of visual images such as the Necker
cube or the vase/two faces affords other ways of bringing
dynamics to our perception. The two ambiguities are
intriguing, but not as similar as one might first think.
Both involve visual tricks that allow two cognitive
interpretations. The cube below can be perceived to ‘flip’
its direction, although one can only hold one
interpretation at a time, both look plausible. [7]

Figure 6 Non-Orthographic Cube
Much of our perception is spent translating 3D
reality to the 2D of the retina and then back to 3D in our
mind’s eye. Because such an intensive process leaves
opportunities for interpretive mistakes, we are
unconsciously searching for depth clues all the time and
movement is the most powerful depth cue there is.

2.2 Movement between frames
Until the advent of computer 3D visualization it has
been difficult to experiment with visualization of
movement which has contributed to it being remarkably
under explored. The chief sources of analysis can be
found in animation practitioner text books, studies of
Laban dance language [8] and puppetry. Today’s
experimenters in perception can reproduce viewer
experiences and test them quantifiably as well as
qualitatively.
Due to the Phi phenomenon, humans perceive film
running at 25 frames per second as continuous action.
The Phi phenomenon describes the brain’s ability to
provide ‘inbetweens’ allowing us to tolerate these gaps
between frames and bring continuity to our perception by
providing an illusion of movement although there is none
actually there. [9] A good animator relies on this
phenomenon either consciously or subconsciously to
economize on work and maximize impact.

Figure 3 The Necker cube
However, that plausibility is unreal. The two
dimensional drawing is an orthogonal projection that
eliminates all depth clues.

Figure 4 Non-Orthographic and Orthogonal

600
606

Figure 7 shows a looped brand logo I created for the
Faculty of Arts at my university in London. The moving
graphic can be viewed here [14]
The loop has always been used in animation to
reduce workload, traditionally, for instance, characters
would walk in a walk cycle of approximately one second
carrying two strides and the background beneath the
cycle of painted cels would be pushed incrementally
under the rostrum camera to create the impression of a
traveling walk. With the looped graphics on the web,
there is a different sense created: the sense of
timelessness. These loops do not offer narratives, and
they spit in the eye of closure, the drivers for these loops
are to catch the eye and create brands, a long way
removed from the painstaking quality of movement
studied by the grand old men of Disney, or even the
relatively ‘new kid on the block’, Pixar.
In gauging animation’s continued appeal, the
importance of the qualia of movement is fundamental.
Animators traditionally judge movement qualitatively by
applying the twelve animation principles [15] and
bringing static images to life.

The Canadian animator, Norman McClaren
famously said:
‘It is not important what goes on each frame of film;
it’s the spaces between frames that are important.’[10]
This continuity allied to a clear and often graphical
aesthetic makes animation a seductive art form.
Animators such as MacClaren and Oskar Fischinger
explored animation as a form of ‘visual poetry’,
animating purely for colour, movement and line
combined with sound and music to create a holistic
emotional experience. Often there is no natural ‘break’
and the viewer is scooped up in the flow of movement
and carried on an out-of-body, dream-like journey
devoid of concrete context. Similar ‘trippy’ experiences
can be found in the films 2001: A Space Odyssey [11]
and Koyaanisqatsi. [12] (A fact not entirely unconnected
with the pervading fog of marijuana smoke through
which these films were first viewed on release in
cinemas.)
Contrary to popular belief, it is hard to construct
abstract time-based experiences. Just as with the Necker
cube, where we extrapolate 3D from 2D, given two or
more forms moving in time, we have a tendency to
implant a narrative and imbue objects with emotional
characteristics. As with Plato’s cave, we interpret an
entire world from the flickering shadows we see before
us. So it is of small surprise that television and film have
always striven forwards pushed by narrative to
incorporate change; pose questions and supply answers.
Even graphic logos for channels move from point a)
(chaos) to point b) (closure)
With the advent of the computer screen and the
alternate parallel, non-hierarchical structure that it
brings, we have now discovered new ways of tantalizing
the viewer on a micro and macro level: At the end of
2005 UK’s Channel 4 launched its set of ‘drive by’
idents. These logos are innovative in televisual terms;
there is anticipation as the viewer searches for closure
and a level of intrigue and uncertainty as there is no
conclusion, instead, the goal is traveled past leaving the
viewer vaguely dissatisfied. The viewer longs to reach
out and stop the image at the ‘correct’ moment, creating
an urge to interact and control. Channel 4 have now
translated the feeling to the concrete, with the exploded
logo sculpture outside their building in London. [13]
Computers have certainly brought along a different
dynamic: 3D is easily incorporated and the non
hierarchical nature of access and practical need for short
downloads means time can be looped and repeated such
as in the use of animated Gifs for emoticons and logos.

Figure 8 Movement Map

Figure 8 suggests a way of quantifying movement in
animation through mapping it onto the triangle above.
(This means movement of not just characters but also
objects with characteristics, in the world of animation
teapots dance and the wind can tickle)
Figure 9 Pugwash signature sea

Compare the signature movement of a Captain
Pugwash simplistic sea where two crescents circle each
other in a loop as in Figure 9 to the expressive Disney
sea that Pinnochio and Geppetto find themselves in when
swallowed by a whale (life quality). [16] Both are read

Figure 7 Looped logo
601
607

the trick of viewing a walk with their head at right angles
in order to judge bounce.) Watch television from your
bed with your head on its side is a disturbing experience,
but viewing a still picture from the side is not.
Furthermore, information is only gleaned through
foveal fixations, as our brains ignore all input when we
move our eyes. Look in a mirror and look from one eye
to the other will prove this. There is no movement or
sense of animation, just one state and then the next, just
as with the Necker cube. On average, the human eye
moves three to five times a second, (movements known
as saccades) which means that about 10-20% of the time,
the brain is ignoring signals.
A disproportionate amount of the visual cortex is
dedicated to processing information from the central part
of the retina, which amazingly, covers no more than one
degree of our visual field. That is equivalent to looking at
something about the size of your thumbnail at arms
length [19]
Even then, this central part has significant defects:
the rods and cones that detect light are hidden behind a
dense tangle of blood vessels and because of the siting of
the optic nerves (just off centre) a crucial area has no
rods and cones creating a blind spot. Moreover, visual
resolution tails off rapidly from this central region,
leaving our peripheral vision very poor for most things
other than detecting movement. We focus on an
astonishingly low 1% of things around us, with our
brains doing a lot of unconscious work to make a best
guess to fill in the holes. [20][21] Robert Solso [22]
suggests that this is because our eyes have evolved to
concentrate on central objects as they are essential for
survival (we need to throw a spear accurately to hunt etc)
whereas our long term survival depends on our
peripheral vision: Is that thing sneaking behind the
bushes something I can eat or will it eat me? [23]
So the outside of the eye raises perceptual questions
through movement, but otherwise leaves us free to focus
on what is more important (lunch).

easily as seas, but suppose we move from the animation
of emotion to the animation of instruction: attempting to
deliver a reading of ‘sea’ in terms of movement but
driven by data? Would such movement remain within
triangle’s apex? Data-driven movement is common in
digital art, it is not abstract movement or Tufte’s gestalt
movement of verbs; it combines the timelessness of the
loop with the welter of information available - at once
encompassing the vast and the small. Such database
kinetics where artists dynamically re-interpret huge
amounts of available information offers us a new way to
structure our experience of ourselves and the world. The
way information is ordered and organized becomes a
matter of artistic choice, but we are accessing a
reinterpretation of a permanent dynamic, not creating
movement, but allowing it to happen.

2.3 Movement between time and place
When principles of design replicate
principles of thought, the act of arranging
information becomes an act of insight. [17]
Even from film’s earliest incarnations, it is
extraordinary how easily an audience can travel across
time and space. How can such uprooting be so easily
assimilated? Perhaps because editing echoes how our
memories store events. We recall events in discrete steps,
emphasizing important events and dropping unnecessary
information. This makes editing great for conveying
information. Editing also allows the sound and picture to
counterbalance or juxtapose each other; we happily
accept the convention of voice over commentary or a
musical sequence that collapses time. It accomplishes the
Gestalt with ease combining two perceptions to create a
greater whole, and indeed takes it further by eliding what
has happened with what we expect to happen – I often
attend an urban cinema, and it is common for an
audience to shout out at characters ‘No, don’t go in
there!’ ‘He’s behind the door!’ etc. Editing keeps an
audience mentally agile, yet gripped.
As Paul Marchant et al discovered, [18] film makers
such as Hitchcock are so masterful that they can direct
where the majority of an audience is looking throughout
a movie, using tricks such as continuity editing and
shallow focus lenses alongside strong narratives. The
director/editor’s bag of tricks is endless in captivating the
audience; and the more concentrated the eye gaze, the
better the satisfaction and qualia of appeal.

3.1. Psychological Perception of Dynamics
Given the feeble compromised visual data available
to our brain from the retinal image, how can this paper
make a claim for motion to be primary perceptual form?
Because the visual input is so weak, we see things not as
they appear, but as they might be.
We (humans) can anticipate actions and imagine
things not immediately sensed. (we duck if a rock is
thrown at our head, we avoid snakes without having
been bitten) Thoughts are multidimensional; a simple
stimulus sets off profuse unconscious associations. The
brain parallel processes extensively. [24]
This Gestalt comprehension formed by combining
contextual meaning with a micro narrative (the rock is
heading this way) implicates dynamics as crucial to our
continuing perception of the world. There is a delay of
500 milliseconds from the physical print of an image on
the retina to an awareness of that image. During that time
the various aspects of visual information, such as colour,

3. Psychophysical Perception of Dynamics
Although our primary sense is sight, we actually see
very little. This is because we ourselves are dynamic; we
move too. Humans cannot detect visuals when the eye
moves. Anyone who has felt seasick can testify that
when movement and body sense don’t match, our bodies
have difficulty coping. In fact our brains have adapted to
screen out certain excess movements such as the
up/down bobbing movement as we walk. (Animators use
602
608

‘which would be both invisible, unimaginable and
potentially incomprehensible. Effectively, the animation
‘penetrates’ into the areas which cannot be
conceptualized and illustrated in any other form’. [32]
This dimension employs Wells’ penetrative
animation mingled with any amount of ‘real’ media, it
can be seamless and layered, and combine line and
surface. Already television weather maps are attempting
to simulate it, but they are doomed to failure – if we
cannot control the speed and direction of the zoom, the
familiar nausea kicks in. Television should stick to using
slow-motion and focus pulls allied to narrative to hold
our attention. You cannot surf by proxy.

depth, motion and form, are all processed separately and
at different rates in different parts of the visual cortex
before being combined and made available to the
conscious mind. [25][26]
Rudolf Arnheim [27] argues the case for formalism,
his idea of visual perception consisting of an experience
of visual forces that assist perception, eg handwriting
holds the movement inherent to writing when read, and
we carry that formalism with us when reinterpreting art
or any man-made image. New formalisms appear as
media changes: When cinema was without sound, or
color, different techniques were required to deliver
narrative. These techniques fall into disuse as we change
formalisms.
In the 1950’s there were a number of studies of
dreams that concluded that a middling to large majority
of those surveyed dreamed in black and white. Eric
Schwitzgebel [28] attempted to replicate these surveys
and found that in contemporary groups this was now
reversed, with a large majority claiming to dream in
colour. He concludes that the overwhelming influences
responsible were movies and television:
Black and white movies had other advantages over
the competing media of the time that may have compelled
comparison to dreams. They integrated visual imagery
with movement and narrative as no other medium
previously had been able. [29]
We are very adaptive; recent studies by
neuroscientists have shown that the brains of digital
natives (ie young adults who have grown up with the
computer as an integral part of their life) change with
persistent use of technology strengthening some brain
activity patterns. [30] The implications underlying these
two studies are significant. The medium may be more
than the message; it may be the redesigner of our
consciousness.

4. Conclusion
Our visual perception has evolved so that we might
survive, driven by needs such as hunting, finding food,
dodging danger, recognizing kinfolk, judging people’s
motives etc. [33] Creative exploration was an essential
ingredient in that quest to survive. Out on the periphery
of our vision, we detected movement, and that movement
in turn moved us to ask a question and change our focus
so that that question might be answered. We are
comforted by realism, but exhilarated by abstraction.
We witness events and organize what we perceive
consciously and subconsciously in any number of
combinations to arrive at gestalt principles of closure.
This is a level of comprehension as much about gutfeeling as cognition, and dynamics holds the key to
unlocking this consciousness. It is at once primeval and
sophisticated,
arousing
strong
emotions,
and
communicating complex thoughts whilst remaining
intuitive and inexplicable. It touches and transports us.
The making of moving images is becoming more and
more automated and perhaps a rich and persuasive
language or formalism is in danger of being lost or
perhaps we, as an audience, are becoming more
sophisticated, and new tricks are evolving to direct our
attention and guide us through the giant database of
information we can now access at the click of a mouse.

3.2. The New Dimension: Screen space subverted
Ever since Galileo invented the telescope,
technology has modified how we see, bringing to focus
the impossibly distant and the impossibly small. In 1946,
a rocket-borne camera gave us our first look at Earth
from beyond the atmosphere, the picture was grainy and
black and white but our perceptions were irrevocably
altered. Today we cruise Google Earth, happily zooming
in from beyond the planet to our street and home without
moving from our seats. Similarly we know that we can
conceptually visualize pictures that carry us on through
our normal vision to zoom through to the circulatory
system of a mite on our eyelash. These are not emotional
narrative tools but personalized informative ones. The
movement here is perpendicular to the screen, subverting
it as we surf a new dimension – crash zooming beyond
our physical limitations to layered information that is
time independent, and interactive.
These didactic forms of dynamics are best illustrated
by what animation evangelist Professor Paul Wells of
Loughborough University terms ‘penetration’ [31]
because here, dynamics are used to visualize processes

Acknowledgements
Figure 1: Melancholie I, Albrecht Dürer engraving 1514
(copyright in disuse)
Figure 2: Movement in Squares. Bridget Riley 1961.
(image accessed from
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bridget_Riley )
Figures 3-9: Author’s own

References
[1]

603
609

E.R. Tufte. Visual explanations: Images and quantities,
evidence and narrative. (Flyer blurb) Cheshire, Ct.
Graphics Press. 1997.

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

J. Hochberg. In the Mind’s Eye: Julian Hochberg on the
Perception of Pictures, Films and the World. Edited by
Peterson, M.A., Gillam, B. and Sedgwick, H.A. Oxford
University Press. 2007.
Ibid p.315
P. Marchant, D. Raybould, T. Renshaw, R. Stevens. Are
you seeing what I’m seeing? An eye-tracking evaluation
of dynamic scenes. Lansdown Symposium. ‘Completing
the Circle’. 2008
Ibid
The Royal Academy of Engineering report. Dilemmas of
Privacy and Surveillance: Challenges of Technological
Changehttp://www.raeng.org.uk/policy/reports/pdf/dilem
mas_of_privacy_and_surveillance_report.pdf March2007
R. L. Gregory. (Ed.). Oxford Companion to the Mind.
New York: Oxford University Press. 1987.
Rudolf Laban, dance artist and theorist
C. MacGillivray. How Psychophysical Perception of
Motion and Image relates to Animation Practice.
Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization. Aug
2007. Published by IEEE Computer Society 2008.
P. Wells. Understanding animation. Routledge. 1998.
S. Kubrick.1968.
G. Reggio. 1982.
http://sphericalimages.com/channel4/
http://carolmacgillivray.wordpress.com/category/rethinki
ng-logos/
J. Lasseter. Principles of Traditional Animation Applied
to 3D Computer Animation. Siggraph/ Computer
Graphics. July 1987.
W. Disney. 1940
E.R. Tufte. Visual explanations: Images and quantities,
evidence and narrative. (Flyer blurb) Cheshire, Ct.
Graphics Press. 1997.

[18] R. L. Gregory. Eye and Brain: The Psychology of Seeing.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1997.
[19] H.B. Barlow & J.D. Mollon The Senses. Cambridge
University Press. 1982
[20] D. D. Hoffman. Visual Intelligence: How We Create
What We See. New York: W. W. 2000.
[21] R. L. Solso. The Psychology of Art and the Evolution of
the Conscious Brain. Massachusetts, MIT Press. 2003
[22] Ibid p.254
[23] Ibid p.115
[24] R. Hawes. Vision & Reality: Relativity in Art. Lansdown
Symposium ‘Completing the Circle’. 2008.
[25] S. Zeki. A Vision of the Brain. London: Blackwell
Science. 1993.
[26] R. Arnheim. Art and Visual Perception: A Psychology of
the Creative Eye. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press. 1954/1974.
[27] E. Schwitzgebel, Why Did We Think We Dreamed in
Black and White? Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science, 33 (2002) p. 649-660.
[28] Ibid
[29] G. Small and G. Vorgan iBRAIN: Surviving the
Technological Alteration of the Modern Mind. New
York: Harper Collins. 2008
[30] P. Wells. Understanding animation. Routledge. 1998.
[31] P. Wells. Animation: Genre and Authorship. London:
Wallflower Press. 2002.
[32] S. Zeki. A Vision of the Brain. London: Blackwell
Science. 1993.

604
610

