2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Regeneration of the Traditional Folding Screen as Media Art
by Lenticular Technology
JuHyun Lee, Yoichiro Kawaguchi
Interfaculty Initiative in Information Studies, The University of Tokyo
lee.ju.hyun@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp, yoichiro@iii.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract

As another example, a work may be considered to be impossible to revive since it depends on recording formats
that no longer exist.
Let us put aside for the moment the presumption that
media art makes it possible to preserve and revive modern
works of art in digital form, in contrast to works of art that
had been created in the past. The preserving of art works in
digital form is facing much more preserving and reviving
difficulties than were faced in the analog case. At the same
time that technological innovations are providing needed
impetus in the field, it is now hard to preserve and reproduce media art works that were made only a few years ago.
Taking the cultural angle into consideration, this is not simply an issue of preservation and revival. Rather, it means
that the concept of media art itself is not establishing itself as a form of culture. In other words, in the near future
we are going to witness a major problem that will not be
possible to hand over to the next generation.
In the case of Japanese traditional art forms, there are
unique difficulties in preserving them as a form of culture or handing them down to future generations. In many
cases, if artisans who have transmitted their work from
generation to generation pass away, their skills will go to
the grave with them. This is the worst scenario that can
happen. Recognizing this serious crisis, the distinguished
computer graphics artist and University of Tokyo professor
Y.Kawaguchi realized the importance of preserving and reviving media arts and started doing research on this topic
in 1993. In this research, as a trial for the topic discussed
above, I have lumped Y.Kawaguchi’s work ”Festival” and
Asian folding screens together by using the technique described by the adjective ”lenticular”. I report on spectators’
reactions to this and based on the results obtained outline
further possibilities for it in the future.

In recent decades, rapid progress in technology and
changes in media environment have made it possible to
convey works of art to the masses, even if it is hard to preserve the meaning of an original work of art’s conception.
Such problems have occurred particularly with respect to
several Asian nations whose works of art have a long history, since they cause concern among lovers of such art
works as to whether or not they are willing to give up the
meaning of their entire culture. Japan is among the forefront of such nations, and is going through a period of trouble on whether it should give up its unique styles of art
as a result of changes in life-style. Consequently, Japan
is taking pains to determine how to preserve its cultural
traditions while at the same time taking steps in the right
direction to take its place as one of the member nations of
modern society. In our research work we have attempted
to graft traditional art and culture onto the new concept of
media technology to enlarge the field of media art and to
expresses works of art in the form of products that can be
used in day-to-day life, not simply as simple pieces of work
in which mass media has no interest. We also attempted to
find ways to adopt art works to media and to this day and
age, escaping out-of-date techniques or artisan’s skills that
remain useable today. We not only show the techniques involved in creating works of art but also analyze how the
media’s re-analysis of traditional art and culture affects
the public and makes it reassess the meanings of works of
art.
Keywords— Folding Screen, Traditional Art, Media Art,
Regeneration, Restoration, 3D Lenticular

1

Background of Study

Media art has been a genre that possesses the possibility of making various representations of art works through
progressing technology. On top of that, however, it has an
unusual sense for changes and what can be made of them.
As one example, a work may be outdated from the viewpoint of modern technology even it was made using technologies that were considered to be the latest at that time.
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.90

2

Method of Study

2.1
2.1.1

Folding Screen as Traditional Art
Folding Screen History

The first known type of folding screen was produced in
China. It is said that such screens first came to Japan as
550
544

a present from the ancient Chinese province of Silla, now
part of the Korean peninsula. They were widely used in
Japan throughout the Nara period (710-784) and were popularized as a work of art from the Azuchimomoyama period (1573-1603) through the Edo period (1603-1868).

2.1.2

Characteristics and Functions of Folding
Screens

Although their uses have changed along with changes in
lifestyle, there are three main characteristics of folding
screens that can be classified as follows.
First, since they are considered part of a building but
are not a fixed part of it, folding them up enables them
to be freely installed, removed, and transported to other
locations. Second, they function as space separators either indoors or outdoors. Because they do not separate
spaces completely, they can still be opened for connectivity purposes while depicting particular meanings or moods
on each space. Third, the horizontally directed paintings
drawn on them facilitate rhythmic eye movements and
therefore offer viewing pleasure to their appreciators.

The useful purposes of folding screens are to cover
someone or something so that others cannot see them, and
to serve as a windscreen and a shelter against cold. It is
said that the meaning of ”folding screen” includes the nuances of ”enclosing”, ”covering” and ”avoiding”. Besides
these practical purposes, however, they are also useful as a
means of separating and isolating specified spaces. Unlike
sliding screens, they can be folded up and removed from a
space easily. Thus they have traditionally been used as not
furnishings but rather as convenient fixtures.
At first, they were made from a single quire of paper,
but during the Muromachi period (1334-1573) it became
increasingly common to construct them from two quires of
paper. Pictures were drawn on them, with the same theme
or different themes being used for both quires. In more
modern times, they consist of six panels, with pictures representative of the four seasons or one continuous theme
drawn on them, to be viewed from right to left when the
screen is opened and spread out (Figure 1).

2.2

Folding Screens as Art Culture

”Festival”, a folding-screen work that Y.Kawaguchi unveiled in 1991, reminds audiences of the climax of a festival scene by using a strong color contrast for eye-catching
effect, with its lively changing form representing sheer activity. The works of Y.Kawaguchi, which use an evolutionary model of life, are famous as a motif that suggests that
life itself self-multiplies in cyberspace.
The method that Y.Kawaguchi independently developed
to construct a formative algorithm for the complexity of
life is called a ”growth model”. This method purports to
program the generation, growth and progression of shapes
from the standpoint of ”time art”, to successively generate these shapes under a fixed rule, and to aim to thoroughly formulate mathematization and construction principles through a mathematical idea. ”Recursive structure”
is an important concept of the growth model and is a simple
rule that repeats the concept in complex systems. Executing a genetic program into which the recursive structure is
integrated makes a computer generate the recursive images
in a manner such that the images continue to grow and multiply until the computer reaches the limit of its capacity in
this regard.
The object in ”Festival” also expresses the festival of
space as showing self-multiplying effects with its movements in cyberspace. The most outstanding characteristic
of this work of art is the natural harmony in the contrast
of powerful colors and organically changing forms. This
work was recreated as a three-dimensional space by employing lenticular technique and also by using a traditional
Japanese folding screen that can extend its use as a oneway display as well. One of Y.Kawaguchi’s reasons for
choosing a folding screen was surely because it is a timehonored, traditional, familiar item but also because its use
as a display provides diverse views based on the viewers’
physical position and because its v-shaped form enables

Figure 1: Folding Screen as Work of Traditional Art

545
551

continuity (in time) to the viewers to facilitate their overall
appreciation.

2.2.1

effects including moving display and deformation of an object. Therefore, Y.Kawaguchi’ works of art presenting life
that multiplies in cyberspace provide new characteristics
that the immersion feelings or attendance feelings can be
supplied to the appreciators who are able to view the back
part and the 3D space by using the lenticular technology
even in the 2D panel and also enjoy the animation effect at
real space sizes such as the wall and ceiling in comparison
with the 2D panel that a moment image is usually displayed
and the 3D space that a graphic animation is displayed.

Lenticular Technology and Its Application

Human beings normally calculate the coordination of different images that their right and left eyes catch and then
recognize their existence in 3D space. Lenticular technology(a technology for making moving or 3D images) displays this condition as a dummy and thus thwarts persons’
sense to form objects viewed in 3D space. Specifically,
separate images are produced for the right and left eyes and
a special semi-cylindrical sheet, called a ”lenticular lens
sheet”, is applied to the image surfaces so that the right
and left eyes catch different images (Figure 2).

2.2.2

Virtual Image : The image is seen further away from real image.
Real Image : The image is seen at the same position of the lens.
lenticular lens

Image

Virtual Image : The image is seen further closer
from real image.

The left eye

The right eye

Disparity

Each eye sees different image
(Images are inverted by
opertation of the brain)

Integration of Lenticular Technology and Folding Screens

Since the final choice of painting type was a fourpanel screen, four original images were selected from
Y.Kawaguchi’s works of animation. His four-panel screen
”Festival” is appropriate for presenting both the characteristics of folding screens and those of lenticular animation
effects. To maximize the lenticular effects for each image,
images should be chosen that are most likely to express
the depth of the reflected object and the depth of the surroundings. Also, to emphasize the 3D effect that lenticular technique provides, not only the two images for the
right and left side views of the object mentioned earlier
must be provided, but the additional continuous 15 images
from different camera positions must also be provided and
matched repeatedly (Figure 3).

Disparity
Images are combined to
one image at the brain.

Brain

Sense of perspective view by combining two images

Figure 2: Lenticular Structure
Preparation of images viewed from some positions besides the images for right and left eyes allows a display
to become more closed to an actual image. The lenticular
technology can display multiple image effects. Here, we
describe two characteristic image effects.
One image effect is the scenography and 3D space. This
can present the impressive 3D space so that an object can
be caught by your hand within easy reach and an object
seems to be located at the back part of the panel, and it can
also display both a far and near background with a deep
part produced on the image and an object viewed to move
toward you in the 3D space. The other image effect is animation (2D). Since changing of the viewing angle creates a
moving image on a panel, it can produce high eye-catching

Figure 3: Original four images used for folding screen (upper) Examples of multiple images created at the different
positions of camera for original images (lower)
As a simple repetitive match of images itself will not
create depth or three-dimensional effects of the image, a
cardboard shaped lenticular lens was set above (Figure 4).

546
552

This procedure, used in the case of four-panel images, was
applied for all the images displayed in folding screens so as
to complete the artwork. Lighting was set behind the work
to maximize the lenticular effects intended to be delivered
to the viewers (Figure 5).

Second, it creates a sense of reality from the attention,
perspective, and three-dimensional effects it produces and
enables animative expression through the story construction depicted on each panel. Third, it enables the same
work of art to be appreciated differently according to the
viewer’s position and the angle at which he or she observes
the work. These findings suggest that the characteristics of
folding screens are effective in media art creation. Combining these characteristics with media art can expand the
inherent limits of the latter.

~14, 15
~7~
1,2~

2.2.4

Utilizing Folding Screens in Media Art

An exhibition is the most likely place for displaying the
artistic uses of folding screens. Displaying a recreated
folding screen in an exhibition enables it to function not
merely as a space separator, but also as an explanatory
panel for an object placed in front of it (Figure 6). Additionally, not only in exhibitions but in real life, such screens
can be used as a modern interior item for creating a mood
that reflects the subtle nuances of the space in which it
rests.

Multi-Layered (side凛
Multi-Layered (front)

Figure 4: Fifteen piled images / Lenticular lens put on 15
piled images

Figure 5: ”Festival” folding screen display

2.2.3

Characteristics Obtained in Combining Folding
Screens and Lenticular Technique

Figure 6: Folding screen by using Lenticular technology
and Object for Exhibition

Above all, utilizing a folding screen as a wide screen enables it to function as a mobile display and maximizes
the level of attention and reality it commands as it separates a particular space from surrounding space while yet
maintaining connectivity. It also enables the expression of
animation (movement) when the screen is unfolded. To
summarize the features obtained by combining and analyzing these two characteristics, it first results in a wide-sized
screen with which to show the intended image.

The integration of a folding screen and media art enhances such characteristics and offers its viewers a fresh,
new experience in terms of the ”regeneration” of a previous work of art, and also can be expected to provide a new
approach towards the ”regeneration” of traditional art.
Furthermore, rather than exhibiting merely a temporary
effect, it is very likely to be passed on to succeeding gen-

547
553

erations in different forms in the field of media art and traditional art.

• Good

3

• Bad

• Neither

Appreciators’ Impressive Evaluations

I carried out an analysis of spectators’ evaluations on
this usage of folding screens as well as an experiment
pertaining to the restoration and revival of art mentioned
above. My hypothesis is that the failure of a work of art
to convey any sense of freshness to spectators can be attributed to the fact that it does not project any sense or
meaning of restoration or revival. To analyze the effectiveness of using the new 3D method in works of art in
making an impression on spectators, I prepared the opinion survey given below to assess subjects feelings on the
points of ”artistic viewing” and ”technical viewing” from a
2D vs. 3D comparative viewpoint. The works that subjects
were asked to assess were the conventional work ”Festival”
and a lenticular work (Figure 7). The participating subjects
were 24 students (both male and female) attending the University of Tokyo.
Information on the above two works of art was obtained
through the following opinion survey:

• Very bad
• Extremely Bad

4

Conclusions

Two types of tests, a parametric and a nonparametric
statistics test, were performed regarding the results obtained from the above opinion survey. In the parametric
test, the evaluation points were converted into an interval scale (Figure 8) and a display (2D/3D) The subjects’
evaluations of ”artistic viewing” and ”technical viewing”
were measured repeatedly to analyze the variance among
them. It was found that there was a substantial difference only regarding the main effect of the display (average value±standard deviation 0.55±0.76 (2D), 1.53±1.04
(3D), p<0.001).
Extremely good
Very good
Good
-0.09
0.00

viewer

Plane Display

-2.21

-2.21

Bad

Neither

0.76

1.67

2.55

0.00

viewer

Extremely Bad

Lenticular Display

Very Bad

Figure 7: ”Festival” plane display / ”Festival” lenticular
display

Figure 8: Conversion of evaluation points into interval
scale

Information of the above two works of art was obtained
through the following four questionnaires.

In the nonparametric test, a Wilcoxon rank-sum test was
made in the following two sets for 22 students with no loss.

• Describe your feelings of ”artistic viewing” for ”Festival” (plane display)

• Artistic viewing for ”Festival”
play/lenticular) (C3DART-C2DART)

(plane

dis-

• Describe your feelings of ”technical viewing” for
”Festival” (plane display)

• Technical viewing for ”Festival”
play/lenticular) (C3DTEC-C2DTEC)

(plane

dis-

• Describe your feelings of ”artistic viewing” for ”Festival” (lenticular display)

< Diffrence between Lenticular Display(3D) and Plane Display(2D) >

• Describe your feelings of ”technical viewing” for
”Festival” (lenticular display)

0.007
0.00

-2.678

-3.221

0.00

Artistic viewing
(C3DART - C2DART)

0.001
Technical viewing
(C3DTEC - C2DTEC)

Select one of the following seven step evaluations:
Artistic viewing
(C3DART - C2DART)

• Extremely good
• Very good

Technical viewing
(C3DTEC - C2DTEC)

Asymptotic Probability Value (both sides)

Figure 9: Asymptotic significance rate

548
554

The results indicate that, since the asymptotic significance rate is less than 0.05/4 = 0.0125 obtained from multicomparison according to Bonferroni correction (Figure 9),
there was a substantial difference in all the above sets. For
example, ”C3DART-C2DART” in Figure 9 shows the art
interval scale in a 3D display and a 2D display of a work
of art, respectively. The Figure 9 also shows a substantial
difference in the statistics obtained.
Therefore, the results for all the tests show a high tendency for the appreciators to feel ”good” about the 3D
work rather than the 2D work. This leads to the conclusion
that the 3D effect is recognized as a better way of displaying a work of art. The survey says 3D art work brings more
fun to them because of a sense of space that seems to pull
in when reaching out with hands and a sense of dimension
which can be felt differently based on where the viewpoint
is placed. And with regard to art and technical aspects, the
survey shows that people showed more interest in the final
product which they can see and touch by themselves than
the technical aspects of how it was produced.
As told above, considering that appreciators pay more
attention in enjoying the product as an art, not from technical aspects used for the process of the product, the result of
this survey concludes that 3D cubic effects can bring more
attention rather than 2D flat form.

5

traditional culture and hand it down to future generations
without resorting to cliche. Sound methods are needed to
preserve and inherit traditional art through the application
of high technology and studies on media-junctions suitable
for the present era must be continued.

Acknowledgements
This work was partly supposed by JST CREST and by
Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research(A) from Japan’s Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture.

References
[1] Y.Kawaguchi, ”Artistic Gemotional Screen Responds
as Living Entity”, International Space Development
Conference (ISDC), Los Angeles. 2006.
[2] Y.Kawaguchi, ”The Art of Gemotion in Space”, IV06
Information Visualization IEEE, pp. 658 - 663, London. 2006.
[3] Y.Kawaguchi,
”The
Art
of
YOICHIRO
KAWAGUCHI”, Growth Publishing. 2005.
[4] M. Emoto, K. Masaoka, M. Sugawara and Y. Nojiri,
”The Viewing Angle Dependency in the Presence of
Wide Field Image Viewing and its Relationship to the
Evaluation Indices”, Displays 27, pp.80 89. 2006.

Future Development

Through this research I was able to conduct two trials. One was on advancing media art by using hypertechnology, helping to restore and revive it as new work.
The other was combining the traditional art of folding
screens with media. In other words, the former is a new
means of restoring and reviving media arts and the latter
has the potential for creating new culture through the expansion of traditional art.
In future research, there are possibilities for joining traditional Japanese art forms with other types of art in different fields and for developing schemes to restore and revive
media art. One example of this would be combining a traditional type of Japanese building, such as a teahouse or
a temple, with a uniquely Japanese item of fashion, such
as a kimono or a fold-up type paper fan. Such a combination could result in new forms of consumer products that
incorporate both tradition and technology.
From the viewpoint of restoring and reviving media art,
old works could be converted into modern ones by changing them so that they meet the media standards of today. It
could also enable virtual reality content to be gradually applied to the real world. Moreover, it could result in various
attempts being made to generate a sense of communication between the public and three-dimensional sculptures
by expressing the latter as a synthetic art of sounds and images. Careful thought must be given on how to improve

[5] M.Saffir, ”A Comparative Study of Scales Constructed by Three Psychophysical Methods”, Psychometrika 2, pp.179 198.1937.
[6] T.Takeda, ”Japanese Primary Color Art (Vol. 4)”, Picture of Folding Screen, Shogakukan. 2000.
[7] S.Sakakibara, ”Enjoying the View of Folding Screen
(Let’s Go to Art Museum)”, Shinchosha Publishing.
1997.
[8] M.Yoshimura and H.Hosoma, ”History of Stereo-like
Media”, Peyolt Kobo. 1994.

549
555

