2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

The need for a Reconciliation Pedagogy:
educating for a more holistic, shared Australian Cultural Heritage.
Belinda MacGill and Theodor Wyeld
Flinders University, Australia
{ Belinda.MacGill@flinders.edu.au, Theodor.Wyeld@flinders.edu.au }

Keywords--Reconciliation,
Nationalism,
Racialisation, Indigenous, Pedagogy, Role-Play,
Cultural Identity.

Nation as a whole. Despite this noble goal, a more
familiar, sanitised, national identity that ignores or
silences the acts of violence perpetrated by the
pioneering colonialists, and continued in governance,
against the Indigenous peoples challenges a more open
reconciliation. Nationalism is the colonialists’ glorified
view of their occupation of another’s homeland,
perpetuated in the media and history books used in
schools.
While Media is one of the few vehicles for
providing an educative history of Australia’s cultural
heritage, its role in portraying Indigenous persons and
non-Indigenous alike has been to marginalise the
Indigenous history in favour of a predominantly white
history that glosses over transgressions of the past [6].
Too often an unbalanced view is presented in the media
with apparent impunity. To redress this imbalance the
Reconciliation movement aims to educate for a more
holistic, shared Australian Cultural Heritage. The key
issues that need to be addressed are: Nationalism,
Racialisation and Reconciliation. It is the contention of
the authors of this paper that, while mainstream media
tends to continue to promote a sanitised Nationalist view
the only other avenue to promote a more holistic
reconciliation argument – is for a broader, more
inclusive, shared cultural heritage directly through the
education system. Hence, this paper primarily addresses
the need for a ‘Reconciliation Pedagogy’. It provides an
overview of the issues raised and an outline for a tool for
use as a teaching aid in a Reconciliation Pedagogy.

Introduction

The Role of Media and Education

Reconciliation is concerned with social justice and
constructions of cultural identity. Globally, the
dispossession of Indigenous peoples of their land is
beginning to be recognised as more than a colonial act of
violence. Over time, it has also had the effect of
diminishing those people of their cultural identity when
their cultural identity is inextricably linked to their land
or the ‘country’ they belong to. In the Australian context,
recognition of prior land ownership has only recently
been formalised by various legal instruments.
Reconciliation in Australia is the central goal of an active
movement that aims to bring the occupying and prior
cultures together to enrich the cultural heritage of the

Visual representations in media and film have been
used as a strategic device to construct an Australian
nationalism. The Anglocentrism of Australian
Nationalism [7, p82] uses binary constructions that
maintain the dichotomy between Anglo and, what
Edward Said [8] coined, ‘the Other’. This is at the heart
of a racialist dogma. Anglo culture remains fixed, central
and is privileged in the Australian Nationalist debate.
The tension between Nationalism and cultural heritage
and the power of visual texts, including film and the
media to construct stereotypes that inform the ideology
of Nationalism underpin the need for an alternative
approach.

Abstract
Reconciliation is the process of reconciling
differences,
whether
they
be
historical
misrepresentations of cultural identity or any other site
of dissonance. In the Australian context, the role of
Media in portraying Indigenous persons and nonIndigenous alike has been to marginalise Indigenous
history in favour of a predominantly white history. A
‘Reconciliation Pedagogy’ aims to educate for a more
holistic, shared Australian Cultural Heritage. The key
issues
are:
Nationalism,
Racialisation
and
Reconciliation. This paper addresses the need for a
reconciliation pedagogy, providing an overview of the
issues raised and an outline for a tool for use as a
teaching aid. This is a position paper exploring the
potential of role plays to teach reconciliation in
Australia. It proposes that a transformative education
emerges through role play triggering empathy and
raising questions about Indigenous cultural heritage.
The relationship between games and learning is well
known [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. It is through supervised role play
games that we feel a more holistic shared, reconciliatory
cultural heritage knowledge can be shaped. This paper
concludes with some recommendations for the
implementation of a more inclusive reconciliation
pedagogy.

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 Crown Copyright
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.80

561
555

Perkins; and artists Vincent Serico and Tracey Moffatt.
Few non-Indigenous film makers engage in a sensitive
response to Indigenous sovereignty and rights with the
exception of Rolf de Heer and Peter Djigirr’s (2006)10
Canoes or Phillip Noyce’s (2002) Rabbit Proof Fence,
that attempt to overturn key issues relating to sovereignty
and social justice. What the regime of a nationalistic
ideological representations projects is an Australia that is
not a shared space, but a site of conflict.

It is the contention of the authors of this paper that a
Reconciliation Pedagogy in schools may be used as a
means to overturn the impact of racialisation that
continues to construct Indigenous people as ‘the Other’.
We argue that it is necessary to engage students in a
deeper understanding of a shared cultural heritage in
Australia that challenges the distorted elevation of an
homogenous Anglo Australian identity. Moreover, it
calls for a Reconciliation Pedagogy that engages students
to think critically about their location in history. It is
through the questioning process generated by students in
a Reconciliation pedagogy that a transformative
education emerges. The complexity of sovereignty is one
of the key issues needed to be understood before
reconciliation in Australia can be fully achieved. Whilst
this issue is thorny, it is situated at the core of
reconciliation. A method for addressing this in a
meaningful manner is through role play. Role play as a
pedagogical tool can be used to trigger empathy and raise
questions about Indigenous cultural heritage. But before
this can be addressed in detail the notion of Nationalism,
Racialisation and cultural identity need to be defined.

Nationalism
Whether intended or not, in an insidious manner,
Nationalism tends to silence the Indigenous voice and
violent history of the colonialists against the first
inhabitants. Nationalism is presented through visual
images of diggers (conscripted soldiers in the first and
second world wars) and squatters (pioneer settlers) as the
makeup of the ‘true’ (predominantly male) Australian
[9]. The power of such images has sustained Australian
nationalism for the last two centuries. Nationalism as an
ideological movement promulgated by cinematic images
such as Crocodile Dundee (bush pioneer/hunter goes to
NY) and Gallipoli (glorification of the charge on the
beaches of Turkey in the first world war) among other
such movies. They are considered typical Australian
movies. The latest instalment in this long history of
Nationalist portrayal is Baz Luhrmann’s (2008)
Australia. This film uncritically exploits the power
relations between Indigenous and non-Indigenous
representations. The perpetuation of the minority status
of Indigenous peoples is maintained by such portrayals.
The camera privileges colonists as the rightful owners of
‘their’ land and marginalises Indigenous people as less
than their non-Indigenous counterparts. Aboriginal
Academic Marcia Langton [10] argues such
constructions
call
for
more
inter-subjective
representations that are not conceptualized through the
binary of black/white, and challenges the accepted norms
of “hierarchical racialised systems of knowing that are
[more] characteristic of Australian colonialism” [11, p1].
However, in general the persistence of a white
hegemony remains largely unchallenged in Australian
fiction and film. The few exceptions are invariably
forced to adopt a polemic stance which prevents their
message entering the mainstream consciousness, such as
Indigenous writer, Ruby Langford; film maker, Rachel

Racialisation
Much of the portrayal of Australia as a site of
conflict in the Nationalist program emerges from an
inherent racialism. Racialism emerges from a racial
theory that applies quasi-scientific studies to examine
races as distinctly different, both physiologically and
psychometrically. Europeans who studied non-European

556
562

build a bridge between Indigenous and non-Indigenous
people. Reconciliation attempts to map a shared
Australian cultural heritage through acknowledging
historical events from both an Indigenous and nonIndigenous point of view. The aim of reconciliation is to
raise awareness and reverse the negative views that still
hold currency in the media portrayal of Australian
Indigenous peoples.

cultures as part of their colonial push from the sixteenth
century until the mid twentieth, did so in the name of a
science that was used to justify colonisation and the
exploitation of Indigenous peoples from an assumed
position of racial superiority [12].

The intersections between racialism, the media and
the construction of identity are a nexus that has led to the
misrecognition of Indigenous people in Australia leading
to their racialisation. Misrecognition is a distortion that
leads to an inequality of personhood [13, p25].
Misrecognition continues to occur on many levels due to
the privileging of a Western knowledge. Aboriginal
academic, Martin Nakata [14] argues that it is in the
construction of this knowledge and selective
historicizing that has continued to marginalize
Indigenous peoples in Australia.
Currently, in the early years of primary school,
‘Aboriginality’ is naively presented as a survey of those
few tangible artefacts that a non-Indigenous person is
best equipped to recognise an equivalent for from their
own cultural background. For example, dot painting
accompanied by summarised stories about the dot’s
meanings is an activity that children can engage in that
exposes them to Aboriginality. Conversely ‘Australia
day’ is celebrated by drawings of corked hats (bush
apparel used to keep the flys off the face), King Gees
(clothing for working class males) and the Australian
flag. The distinction between these two sets of images
sets up an incommensurate binary opposite between
Indigenous and non-Indigenous and typical of the sorts
of distinctions students encounter throughout their
education experiences. ‘Culture’ is the mediating term,
yet it is routinely uncontested. Anglo culture and visual
representations of diggers, squatters, barbeques and
corked hats are centralized while dot paintings are
positioned as the identity belonging to the Other [8].
Aboriginality is represented as difference in the
Australian schools curriculum. It largely ignores the
“dense history of racist, distorted and often offensive
representation of Aboriginal people” [10, p24].

Reconciliation
After more than two centuries of European
occupation of Australia, notions of reconciliation are
beginning to emerge as a mainstream mechanism to

Reconciliation in Australia began with the 1967
Referendum giving Indigenous Australians full

557
563

citizenship rights. This was followed by the 1991 Report
of the Royal Deaths in Custody leading to a formal State
response to Reconciliation. In 1991 the Reconciliation
Act was passed, and in 2001 the Council for Aboriginal
Reconciliation was established [15]. This council
developed a non-government body that is currently
called Reconciliation Australia. The most recent event to
promote reconciliation was Prime Minister Kevin Rudd’s
(February 13, 2008) Sorry speech which provides formal
recognition of the Stolen Generations (pre 1970’s
legislation that saw generations of young Aboriginal
children removed from their natural parents into State
run institutions or white foster homes. This policy was
founded on racialist stereotypes that constructed
Aboriginal parents as dysfunctional.
Aboriginal people have attempted to overturn these
stereotypes through embedding their perspectives and
“challenging [the] discipline of history itself” [16, pxx].
Indigenous voices have gained ascendency through the
reconciliation movement which is now a part of
Australia’s contemporary cultural heritage. Its
representational forms are many and varied: flags,
gatherings, tent city, events, motifs, subject of art,
speeches, and so on. However, on a deeper level, the
reconciliation movement is chequered by debates
between ‘symbolic reconciliation’ and ‘practical
reconciliation’ [15]. The question here is concerned with
sovereignty and the absence of a treaty. The issue of
sovereignty is often overshadowed in reconciliation
debates as practical outcomes for closing the gap are
seen as the most significant issue to be addressed.

The aims of a Reconciliation pedagogy is to address
the omissions and silences that have distorted
understandings of an inclusive Australian history. This
would go some way towards, overturning the current
“classroom discourse [that] represents [non-Indigenous]
hegemonic understandings and interpretations of ways of
being in and understanding the world” [18, p17]. The
philosophical premise of a Reconciliation pedagogy
stems from the emancipatory traditions in education.
Theorists’ concern from this tradition, namely [18, 19]
and others, include addressing the gap between the
idealized notion of equality and shifting consciousness in
regard to everyday discrimination. Woods [21, p67], an
Indigenous leader in education, argues that “Indigenous
studies at all levels of educational training and across
sectors are necessary for Australia to achieve
reconciliation.”
A reconciliation pedagogy is concerned with
equality of recognition of Indigenous people and
Australian cultural heritage in general. It is necessary to
overcome the narrow and often inaccurate historical view
presented by the Nationalist program. Nationalism’s
glorified view of the past; a view that holds little reality
for the Indigenous population, assumes that Australian
history is a white history [18]. A reconciliation pedagogy
would see the curriculum content of Australian history as
a contested site of many knowledges, Indigenous and
non-Indigenous alike [22].

The Politics of Culture
The tension in addressing the shift from a
Nationalist programme to one of reconciliation is
complicated by the politics of identity. Cultural identity
cannot be conflated into fixed binaries, rather it is a
virtual space that is lived, it is shaped by history and is
triggered by sensorial, experiential, intellectual and
phenomenological cues that are chosen by individuals
and groups. It is constructed over time and is embodied
through emotional pride in the feeling of belonging.
Western cultural identity is shaped by the
epistemological framework of belonging and owning
nationhood through citizenship and the ontological
certainties of its scientific underpinnings. This is
represented through visual images of diggers and
squatters and embodied through an Australian values
framework, such as ‘having a go’ and a ‘fair country’
(common colloquialisms related to mateship) and
materialist wealth. By contrast, Australian Aboriginal
cultural identity is often marginalized and resigned to
particular days, such as Sorry day. [23, p13] claims that
“Indigenous people are constantly reminded of our place
in this society by representations within the media; we
are to be tolerated but not valued.”
Many Indigenous people contest the mainstream
Media view and therefore their identity is often linked to
resistance against this misrecognition – a cyclical process
that further diminishes their protests as negative in the
media. Moreover, many Indigenous people ask ‘to whom
and why am I reconciling when my land was stolen?’

Education and Reconciliation
Despite attempts to include some form of
reconciliation in the national curriculum (since 2000) for
pre-tertiary students this has proven to be ineffective in
its current form. Teachers are either unable or unwilling
to embrace its core values and there is little training
available to address this. Moreover, despite the plethora
of material relating to Indigenous issues in school
libraries few teachers access this material in a way that
reflects a ‘Reconciliation Pedagogy’ per se. Hence, the
need for a more holistic reconciliation education in the
national curriculum is clear:
The silence within Australia’s education system
regarding the history of their country and the
treatment of Indigenous people leaves many
Australians unable to understand the contemporary
impact of past practices and the extent to which they
permeate contemporary institutions. A vast number
of Australians do not know any Indigenous people,
do not mix with Indigenous people socially; they
rarely live within Indigenous communities, whether
rural or urban. This lack of contact, coupled with a
lack of education about experiences and
perspectives, allow Indigenous communities to
become invisible appearing only to fulfill negative
(or positive) stereotypes [17, p76].

558
564

Hence, the issue that remains at the forefront when
exploring issues concerned with reconciliation is to
distinguish between the victors’ history, as it is
represented in the discursive regimes of nationalism, and
the recounting of significant events, places and actions
used in constructing a shared cultural heritage.
Arguably, formalisation of cultural heritage in
institutions such as museums, academia and legislation
applies equally problematic selection or omission
processes
as
the
Nationalist
program.
A
reconciliationalist’s historical analysis of Australia’s
history reveals sites of massacre, stolen generation,
deaths in custody and native title. All topics not
ordinarily considered salient in a sanitised history – such
as that promoted by the Nationalists. A Nationalist’s
historical analysis of Australia’s history is generated
through the understanding of erasure; the process of the
omission of unsavoury events and the elevation of an
Anglocentric viewpoint and its victories over the land.
The dominant Nationalist ideology has gained currency
primarily because it has greater access to the mainstream
media. Hence, it is vital to critique the way certain
stories are privileged in maintaining a white national
history. Analysing the ongoing effects of the praxis
between visual texts, values and a visual culture it is
possible to track how identity is linked to feelings of
belonging. [24] argue we live in a culture where cinema
plays a vital role in identity formation. The routinely
negative constructions of Indigenous identity in the sport
and media, such as the gang of 49 (a fictitious group of
supposedly Aboriginal youths terrorising the outer
suburbs of Adelaide in South Australia) have sustained
deeply held mis-trust by non-Indigenous people who
condense their debates into theories of racialisation.

In order for non-Indigenous peoples to understand
how the privileges they have encountered through their
locatedness, in particularly those of Anglo heritage who
operate as central inside the dominant culture, need a
common tool, or map, to cue them to a site of
reconciliatory understanding. We propose that the tool
for this map is a role play game. In this role play game,
students become the ‘situated knower’ in [25] terms; that
is, they engage in the game as characters and explore
complex issues concerned with colonisation and
invasion. The students occupy the position of knowing
through experience in a virtual context and face
challenges that make them ask questions, such as, ‘why
did this happen?’. More broadly, the game operates as a
reconciliation pedagogy through the use of standpoint
theory that offers a politically grounded agenda for “the
‘epistemic privilege’ of the ‘view from below’” [26,
p268]. This ‘view from below’ provides the
understanding that can be used to map appropriate
methods of recognition in order to overturn often
unconscious forms of oppression. As [13, p25] argues:
…a person's understanding of who they are, of their
fundamental defining characteristics as a human
being… [- their identity -] is partly shaped by the
recognition or its absence, often by the
misrecognition of others, and so a person or group
of people can suffer real damage, real distortion, if
the people or society around them mirror back to
them a confining or demeaning or contemptible
picture of themselves. Nonrecognition or
misrecognition can inflict harm, can be a form of
oppression, imprisoning someone in a false,
distorted, and reduced mode of being.
A reconciliation pedagogy attempts to overturn this
misrecognition in Australia towards Indigenous people.
Using a role-play game, students can engage in a playful,
risk-free environment where they can act out their own
involvement in a setting which fosters empathy with
alternative views. It provides an opportunity to create a
“broader politics of engagement” [20, p73] that
racialisation has historically denied the equality of
recognition of Indigenous sovereignty and personhood.

A Reconciliation Pedagogy
If the starting point for early primary school students
is to understand that Australia was invaded by colonists
and that this was not a peaceful accession then a
reconciliatory empathy may be invoked in their thinking.
History is never linear. It is formed by multifaceted
memories progressing over time in parallel. The
significance of particular events may present themselves
as more dominant than others but they can also be
selectively recalled as more significant, hence dominate
the way history is communicated. Hence, a reconciliation
pedagogy would be used to provide the triggers that
engage students in a deeper understanding of their
locatedeness inside a more integrated history. That is,
their responsibility to shift consciousness and move from
the stereotypes constructed by racialisation to a deeper
understanding of their own standpoint within a more
inclusive shared cultural heritage. This applies to the
Indigenous and non-Indigenous student alike. Their
locatedness informs their standpoint and positions the
lens by which they see their world. [25] Standpoint
theory can be used as a methodology and way of learning
how to see and understand one’s own otherness in a
shared cultural heritage.

Role Play Games
According to [4] and [5] tacit knowledge is directly
related to preconceived notions in learning outcomes.
Tacit knowledge can be used to expand students’ worldly
knowledge to shift preconceived ideas to accommodate
new ideas. Role play games are central in this shift in
understanding. Role play is a common part of the
development of a child’s early socialisation. It also leads
to worldly knowledge and prejudices. Using supervised
role play games in the classroom exposes students to
concepts and ways of thinking not ordinarily exercised
other than in an environment that promotes peer-group
prejudices. By guiding students through alternate views
they adopt a more self-critical stance in their questioning
of their own role in society.

559
565

[9]

Turner, G 1993, ‘Representing the nation’, National
fictions, 2nd ed, Allen & Unwin, St Leonards, pp. 107127.
[10] Langton, M., 1993, 'Well I heard it on the radio and saw
it on the television’: an essay for the Australian Film
Commission on the politics and aesthetics of filmmaking
by and about Aboriginal people and things, Australian
Film Commission, North Sydney.
[11] McConaghy, C., 2000, Rethinking Indigenous

A fun, risk-free environment where students have
the freedom to explore their own understandings and
inter-understandings with others fosters deep learning
and skills in social reflection. The relationships between
games and learning are widely discussed in the literature
[1, 2, 3]. Game-like exercises compel early learners into
seeking to understand the complex conventions and
contradictions of social interplay to develop what [2]
might have called 'a feel for the game'.
Arguably, a role play game using a game engine
could provide the visual cues in a temporal-spatial site
that facilitates an investigation into the complexities of
reconciliation. A role play game using a game engine is
only one option that is currently being explored.

education. Culturalism, colonialism and
politics of knowing, Post Pressed, Flaxton.

[12] McConnochie, K, Hollinsworth, D & Pettman, J 1988,
‘The meaning of race’, Race and Racism in Australia,
social science press, Wentworth Falls, pp-3-18.
[13] Taylor, C., 1994, ‘The politics of recognition’, in A
Gutmann (ed.), Multiculturalism. Examining the politics
of recognition, Princeton University Press, Princeton,
New Jersey.
[14] Nakata, M., 2004, ‘Indigenous Australian studies and
higher education’, The Wentworth Lectures, Australian
Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies,
viewed
online
2.1.2009,
http://www.aiatsis.gov.au/lbry/dig_prgm/wentworth/a352185_a.rtf.
[15] Nicoll, F., 2004, ‘Are you calling me a racist?’: Teaching
critical whiteness theory in indigenous sovereignty’,
Borderlands e-journal, vol. 3, no. 3.
[16] Attwood, B., 1996, ‘The past as future: Aborigines,
Australia and the (dis)course of history’, In the age of
Mabo, Allen & Unwin, Australia.
[17] Behrendt, L., 2003, Achieving social justice,

Conclusion
While Nationalism still dominates the Media
coverage of historical and contemporary encounters with
Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples in Australia the
negative views projected of Indigenous people will
continue. On the other hand, providing a Reconciliation
Pedagogy to the National curriculum will go some way
towards redressing this imbalance. By adopting a
supervised role-play mode in its delivery, students will
be able to explore the issues raised in a risk-free, fun,
environment at their own pace. The process shifts the
role of educator from instructor to facilitator. The goal of
reconciliation is to engender empathy among all parties
concerned. This cannot happen in the traditional topdown learning environment. Hence, we feel a role-play
reconciliation pedagogy is vital for a shared Australian
cultural heritage knowledge. By sharing our cultural
heritage in this manner many of the prejudices and
stigmas associated with the current racialist directed
Nationalist agenda will be critically addressed – this
would leverage the signifying hallmark of the free and
egalitarian society that Australia prides itself on.

Indigenous rights and Australia’s future, The
Federation Press, Sydney.
[18] Grundy, S., 1994, ‘Policy texts, contexts, and
subtexts: Continuing the conversation with Michael
Apple’, Curriculum Inquiry, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 362366.
[19] Freire, P., 1990, Pedagogy of the oppressed, trans. MB
Ramos, Continuum, New York.
[20] Giroux, H., 2005, Border crossings, cultural workers and
the politics of education, 2nd edn, Routledge, New York.
[21] Woods, D., 1998, ‘Racism, reconciliation, rights-the 3Rs
of Indigenous education in Australia today’ , Australian
Education Researcher, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 53-70.
[22] Henderson, D., 2005, 'What is education for? Situating
history, cultural understandings and studies of society
and environment against neo-conservative critiques of
curriculum reform', Australian Journal of Education, vol.
49, no. 3, pp. 306-319.
[23] Moreton-Robinson, A., 1988, ‘When the object speaks.
A
postcolonial
encounter:
anthropological
representations
and
Aborginal
women’s
selfpresentations’, Discourse, vol. 19, no. 3, pp.275-289.
[24] Deleuze, G., and Guattari, F., 1994, What is Philosophy?,
(trans.) Tomlinson, H., and Burchell, G., Verso, London.
[25] Harding, S., (ed.), 2004, 'Introduction: standpoint theory
as a site of political, philosophic, and scientific debate',
The feminist standpoint theory reader, intellectual and
political controversies, Routledge, New York, pp. 1-15.
[26] Davies, M., & Seuffert, N., 2000, 'Knowledge,

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

Hubbard, W., 1980, Complicity and Conviction: Steps
toward an Architecture of Convention, MIT Press,
Cambridge Mass, in Asia, Hu's Publisher Inc, Taipei,
pp277-286.
Bourdieu, P & Passeron, J 1990, Reproduction in
education, society and culture, Sage Publications,
London.
Dewey, J., 1957, Experience and Education, New
York: MacMillan.

[4]

Biggs, J. B., 1999, Teaching for Quality Learning
at University: What the Student Does. Society for
Research in higher Education.

[5]

Schon, D. A., 1983, The Reflective Practitioner, Basic
Books, Inc., Publishers, New York.
Schaffer, K, 1988, Women and the bush, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Willis, A-M 1993, Illusions of identity. The art of nation,
Hale & Iremonger, Sydney.
Said, E 1978, Orientalism, Pantheon, New York.

[6]
[7]
[8]

the

identity, and the politics of law', Hastings Women's
Law Journal, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 259-290.

560
566

