2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Visual Analysis of Overlapping Biological Networks
David C. Y. Fung
University of Sydney
dfun@it.usyd.edu.au

Seok-Hee Hong
University of Sydney
shhong@it.usyd.edu.au

Dirk Kosch¨utzki
Furtwangen University of Applied Sciences
dirk.koschuetzki@hs-furtwangen.de

Falk Schreiber
IPK and Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg
schreibe@ipk-gatersleben.de

Abstract

with one another to form the PIN. Also, special proteins
known as enzymes help transforming metabolites to another, hence, they are part of the MN.
The integration of all these networks forms a single huge
complex network. Because of the need to reduce complexity and also the limited availability of data, this large network is often divided into specific subnetworks, each dealing with a particular biological function. For example, MNs
are commonly broken down into separate parts (amino acid
synthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, and so forth) and then
into simple pathways. Most biological studies focus only on
one of these subnetworks or even pathways. However, this
approach suffers from the limitation that the connections
between different subnetworks or pathways are lost. As a
result, the probable function of a pathway is often deduced
from incomplete information.
Good visualization of overlapping networks can enable
integrated analysis, which cannot be supported by visualizing each single network independently. Furthermore, complex high level analysis can be supported by relating two or
more heterogeneous networks. More specifically, by representing a set of overlapping networks in a single visualization, we can enable visual analysis by highlighting important relationships between different networks, while emphasizing both the intersection and the difference.
In this paper, we present two methods for visualizing two
and three overlapping networks in three dimensions. More
specifically, we use 2.5D representation (i.e., drawing each
network in a two dimensional plane) to visualize a set of
overlapping networks, in order to minimize occlusion problem and ease navigation problem in three dimensions. We
also use inter-plane edges for highlighting the intersection
(i.e., shared nodes) between networks. Our methods aim to
achieve both drawing aesthetics (or conventions) for each
individual network, and an optimization criteria for minimizing the total inter-plane edge lengths in order to help the
understanding of the visualization.

This paper investigates a new problem of visualizing a
set of overlapping networks. We present two methods for
constructing visualization of two and three overlapping networks in three dimensions. Our methods aim to achieve
both drawing aesthetics (or conventions) for each individual network and exposing the common nodes between the
overlapping networks. We evaluated our approaches using
biological networks including protein interaction network,
metabolic network, and gene regulatory network, from the
bacterium Escherichia coli and crop plants to demonstrate
their usefulness to support biological analysis.

1

Introduction

In this paper, we study a problem of visualizing a set
of overlapping networks. Roughly speaking, two networks
overlap if they share a subset of nodes and/or edges. Note
that unlike temporal/evolution/dynamic networks, which
consists of a set of similar networks arising from one single
network, the overlapping networks may be heterogeneous,
i.e., consist of different types of networks.
Overlapping networks appear frequently in many application domains. Our research problem was originally
inspired by the current understanding of biological networks, which considers a biological network as a supergraph of heterogeneous but interconnected networks. Networks play a central role in the life sciences. They have
been used to represent, analyze, and visualize various biological processes, and several networks are employed frequently such as metabolic networks (MN), gene regulatory
networks (GRN), protein interaction networks (PIN), and
signaling networks. Often these networks share common
elements. For example, proteins are the result of gene expression which is regulated by the GRN. Proteins interact
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.55

Kai Xu
ICT Center, CSIRO, Australia
kai.xu@csiro.au

337

Our approaches are evaluated with three types of biological networks to support visual analysis of network integration of two overlapping metabolic pathways, and three heterogeneous biological networks (MN, PIN and GRN). An
integrated approach which considers the overlap between
specific networks can substantially improve biological analysis. The first example is the integration of two different
metabolic pathways. Biologists who are experts in specific
pathways may want to know if some pathways share common metabolites or reactions, and only by knowing the connections between pathways, one can gain an understanding
on the flow of metabolites through multiple pathways. In
this respect, the proposed visual analysis of the two overlapping networks in Section 5.1 demonstrates its usefulness.
Our second example is the integration of three different networks (MN, PIN and GRN). Each network represents one
type of molecular interactions. Biologists who come from
the background of complex systems or biophysics are often
more interested in the functional position of a pathway in
terms of systems architecture. In this respect, the proposed
visual analysis of the three overlapping network in Section
5.2 demonstrates its usefulness at a much larger scale.

2

work has a given fixed layout, was introduced [7]. In this
paper, we extend this approach to visualize two and three
overlapping networks with given two fixed layouts, and
conduct a detailed investigation into the biological analysis
of visualization.

3

Two Overlapping Network Visualization

In order to construct a 2.5D representation of two overlapping networks G1 and G2 , we use two parallel planes
P1 and P2 in three dimensions. More specifically, we draw
G1 and G2 with layouts L1 and L2 on the top plane P1 and
the bottom plane P2 respectively. Then inter-plane edges
that represent mappings of shared nodes between G1 and
G2 are added between P1 and P2 .
Note that L1 or L2 may or may not be given based on the
drawing convention of the specific network. For example,
PINs are commonly drawn with the force-directed method,
which does not have a fixed layout, whereas metabolic pathways are usually drawn with hierarchical or KEGG layout,
which is pre-defined.
When G1 and G2 both have fixed layouts, our main
optimization criterion is to minimize the total edge lengths
of inter-plane edges between P1 and P2 . In general, minimizing the total edge length is a well known optimization
criteria in graph visualization [3]. More specifically, this
can be achieved as follows:
1. Draw graph G1 (G2 ) with layout L1 (L2 ) on P1 (P2 ).
2. Add inter-plane edges between P1 and P2 .
3. Reduce the total length of the inter-plane edges by fixing
one drawing, and then rotate, scale, and translate the other.

Related Work

Complex biochemical processes in living beings constitute a number of networks which attracted visual analysis
methods to life sciences. Several authors deal with the visual investigation of PIN and MN [4, 10, 17]. In general,
these studies on biological processes only focus on a single network of an organism. The major problem of treating
these networks separately is that connections between these
processes, which clearly occur within living organisms, are
not represented in these single networks.
Several methods have been proposed to visualize a set
of similar biological networks in three dimensions [6, 21].
However, they are designed to visualize a set of similar networks that are of the same type and the difference among
them is small.
Overlapping networks occur in several application areas, and they have gained large interest recently. A force
directed method for drawing intersecting clustered graphs
which supports complex structures such as inclusion and
overlap between nodes and clusters was presented [15].
Similarly, a clustered graph based approach was used to address the pathway overlapping problem [5].
A multiple alignment approach was introduced to support biological network comparison [18, 19]. However, the
resulting drawing in two dimensions have edge-edge crossings and node-edge crossings, due to the use of matching
edges between the set of drawings.
Recently, a method for visualizing two overlapping biological networks using 2.5D representation, where one net-

While the first three steps are straightforward, the last
step is essentially an optimization problem for finding the
right amount of rotation, scaling and translation in order to
minimize the total edge length. Let G1 = (V1 , E1 ), G2 =
(V2 , E2 ), and Mv be a mapping between a vertex v1 ∈ G1
and v2 ∈ G2 which represents the overlapping information.
Without loss of generality, we fix L1 . Assume that (v2x ,v2y )
is the x and y coordinate of node v2 ∈ V2 . After rotating
G2 with angle θ, the new coordinate of v2 is (v2x cos(θ) −
v2y sin(θ), v2x sin(θ) + v2y cos(θ)).
After scaling k and translation (∆x , ∆y )—∆x and ∆y
are the x and y translation respectively—the new coordinate is (k(v2x cos(θ) − v2y sin(θ)) + ∆x , k(v2x sin(θ) +
v2y cos(θ)) + ∆y ).
The total inter-plane edge length of all edges connecting
G1 and G2 can be computed as S =
v2 ↔v1 ∈MV |v2 −v1 |,
where |v2 − v1 | is a distance between v2 and v1 . Note that
different distance metrics can be used, such as Euclidean or
Manhattan distance and that the choice of the metric will
have an impact on the final visualization. In the following
let α = v2x cos(θ)−v2y sin(θ) and β = v2x sin(θ)+v2y cos(θ).

338

For Euclidean distance the following holds: |v2 − v1 | =
(αk + ∆x − v1x )2 + (βk + ∆y − v1y )2 + (v2z − v1z )2 .
Because G1 and G2 are drawn in parallel to the x-y
plane, their distance along the z-axis is a constant d. Therefore, |v2 − v1 | =
(αk + ∆x − v1x )2 + (βk + ∆y − v1y )2 + d2 .
The total inter-plane edge length according to the
Euclidean distance can be computed as: S =
(αk + ∆x − v1x )2 + (βk + ∆y − v1y )2 + d2 .
v2 ↔v1 ∈MV
To achieve a good visualization, the value of S and
therefore the total inter-plane edge length should be minimized. To solve this minimization problem we used the
Nelder-Mead optimization method [14], a standard method
for solving nonlinear optimization problems. An implementation of this method is available in the Apache Commons
Mathematics Library, a Java library provided by the Apache
Software Foundation under the Apache License Version 2.0.
To compute the required values for θ, k, ∆x and ∆y , we integrated the library into GEOMI [1], a visual analysis tool
for large and complex networks, and invoked the optimizer
with an instance of the function S given above. In general,
a 2.5D visualization has less occlusion and is easier to navigate than a full 3D visualization. Further, GEOMI supports
basic interaction and navigation methods including zooming and panning, rotation and selection.

4

Three Overlapping Network Visualization

Let G1 , G2 , G3 be three overlapping networks. As with
the case of two overlapping networks, we use three parallel
planes P1 , P2 and P3 in three dimensions. More specifically, we first draw each Gi with layouts Li on the plane
Pi , i = 1, 2, 3, respectively. Then, inter-plane edges that
represent mappings of shared nodes between Gi and Gj are
added between Pi and Pj , where i, j = 1, 2, 3 and i = j.
As with the case of two overlapping networks, each representation can have variations depending on whether Gi
has a fixed layout Li , i = 1, 2, 3. In this paper, we present
one of the variation, the parallel plane layout with FixedFree-Fixed Case, where G1 and G3 have fixed layouts,
as we have specific application with biological networks:
the metabolic pathway and the GRN have fixed layouts,
whereas the PIN does not.
Suppose that G1 and G3 have fixed layouts L1 and L3 .
In this case, we need to compute a good layout of G2 ,
considering the fixed layout of G1 and G3 , in order to
minimize the total inter-plane edge length. A modification
of a force-directed algorithm can be used to produce a
reasonably good layout of G2 and inter-plane edges as
follows:
1. Draw G1 (G3 ) with a given layout L1 (L3 ) on P1 (P3 ).
2. Arrange planes Pi , i = 1, 2, 3 in parallel way.
3. Assign the initial position of node v2 in G2 using the

339

barycenter of the positions of its mapped nodes v1 in L1
and v3 in L3 .
4. Add inter-plane edges between planes P1 and P2 , and P2
and P3 to represent mappings, and model each inter-plane
edge as a zero-length natural spring (i. e. attraction force
only).
5. Draw G2 and the inter-plane edges using a force-directed
layout.
At step 3, by assigning a good initial position based on
L1 and L3 , it can help the force-directed layout of G2 at step
6 to converge quicker. At step 4, we add the zero-length natural spring for inter-plane edges, in order to reduce the total
edge length of inter-plane edges. Note that at step 5, this
force competes with other forces of G2 , which try to produce a good layout for G2 . As a result, the corresponding
nodes may not always perfectly aligned as a straight-line.
We have implemented the new layout using GEOMI [1].

5

Overlapping Biological Networks

We first present results for two overlapping networks.
We used the database MetaCrop [9] for constructing an
overlapping MN consisting of two metabolic pathways.
Metabolic reactions are organized in groups called pathways. Currently, 38 pathway diagrams are available in
MetaCrop documenting the metabolism of major crop
plants with high agronomical importance such as Hordeum
vulgare (barley), Triticum aestivum (wheat) and Oryza
sativa (rice).
From MetaCrop we extracted two pathways, the TCA
cycle and the Asparagine biosynthesis using the tool
VANTED [11]. In total the networks consist of 43 nodes
and 44 edges (TCA cycle) and 24 nodes and 26 edges (Asparagine biosynthesis). Metabolic pathways consist of two
kinds of nodes: enzymes and metabolites. Both node types
can overlap between different pathways. To construct an
integrated network, both pathways were combined. Every
metabolite in one pathway having at least one corresponding metabolite in the other pathway was connected to each
other by inter-plane edges. For enzymes, the same process
was applied. In total an overlap of 7 metabolites (fumarate,
malate, oxaloacetate, NAD+, NADH, 2-oxoglutarate, ATP)
and 2 enzymes (fumarate hydratase, malate dehydrogenase)
were detected.
Based on the fixed layouts of two metabolic pathways,
we computed a visualization of the integrated network by
applying the method described in Section 3. The result is
shown in Fig. 1 (right) with a viewpoint from the top. For
a comparison, see Fig. 1 (left) which shows the same pathways without performing the optimization.
From the top viewpoint, it is clearly comparable, that the
optimization resulted in a rotation (θ ≈ 270 degrees) and

Figure 1. The pathways for Asparagine biosynthesis (green) and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
(blue) for crop plants. (left) Both pathway are drawn with the coordinates provided by the database
MetaCrop. (right) The TCA cycle was fixed and the Asparagine biosynthesis pathway was scaled,
rotated and translated.

scaling (k ≈ 0.73) of the Asparagine biosynthesis pathway. Additionally, the optimization resulted in a minor
translation of the x and y coordinates (∆x ≈ −1.22 and
∆y ≈ 6.67). By this optimization the total edge length of
the edges for overlapping nodes was reduced from ≈ 25.24
to ≈ 22.43.
Using our method the overlapping parts between the two
pathways are easily recognizable and it becomes clear, that
Asparagine biosynthesis starts with some reactions of the
TCA cycle and is therefore dependent of the activity of this
pathway.
We now present results for three overlapping networks.
To understand how the GRN in E. coli regulates the MN by
influencing the physical organization of the PIN, we used
the three overlapping network visualization. This should
provide an overview on the different modes of interaction
within E. coli.
We used data sets downloaded from three public
databases to construct the overlapping networks. The GRN
data was downloaded from the RegulonDB database version 6 (accessed April 2008) [8] from which the largest connected component was extracted. This subset contains 1371
operons and 3030 interactions. Each operon is a DNA sequence encoding a protein. The MN data was downloaded
from the pathway section of the KEGG databases (accessed
June 2008) [13] from which the glycolytic pathway was
extracted. This subset contains 57 nodes and 62 edges,
of which, 29 nodes represent proteins (also known as enzymes) and the rest represent metabolites. The PIN data
was downloaded from the DIP database (accessed April
2008) [16] from which the largest connected component
was extracted. This subset contains 1434 proteins and 6567
interactions.
To construct the three overlapping networks, all net-

works are integrated as follows. For every protein that has
a corresponding node in either the glycolytic pathway or
the GRN, an inter-plane edge is added. The intersection
between PIN and GRN contains 250 proteins, and the intersection between PIN and the glycolytic pathway contains 7
proteins.
To better expose the highly connected proteins (also
known as hubs) that also have corresponding nodes in the
other two networks, the largest connected component in
the PIN is further reduced to the subnetwork consisting of
neighbors of the overlapping proteins. The final PIN being visualized contains 514 proteins and 807 interactions.
The largest connected component of the GRN is visualized
as it is in order to expose any protein-coding operons that
may have dual functionalities, i.e. proteins that can catalyze
metabolic reactions but can also function in gene regulation.
At the same time, the full gene regulatory hierarchy for controlling the organization of the PIN is also preserved in the
visualization. This enables us to deduce the control points
that regulate the flow of metabolites through the glycolytic
pathway and beyond.
Figure 2(left) shows the side view of the parallel plane
layout. Here, G1 represents the MN (blue), the glycolytic
pathway. G2 represents the largest connected component of
the PIN (green) and G3 represents the GRN (yellow nodes;
magenta edges). The layers are arranged in this order to
capture the current biological model that the formation of
PIN is being controlled by GRN and the MN is being operated by PIN.
The side view showed the direct connections between
these three networks. The fixed layout for G1 were computed by the KEGG coordinates whereas those of G3 were
pre-computed using the Kamada-Kawai layout [12]. The
parallel plane layout exposed the control hierarchy as a se340

Figure 2. (left) Three overlapping networks in the parallel plane layout (side view). (right) Network
topology of the central GRN protein crp. The yellow edges are the inter-plane edges between GRN
and PIN.

ries of layers. G1 contains the enzyme-mediated metabolite
flow in glycolysis. G2 contains the physical interactions
between proteins. G3 contains the flow of control in gene
expression from operon to operon.

neighbors aceF is also a high degree hub of almost comparable size (Figure 3(middle)). Both aceE and aceF are
protein subunits of pyruvate dehydrogenase multi-enzyme
complex which is a known junction point between glycolysis and alanine, aspartate, valine, leucine, and isoleucine
biosynthesis [22]. Figure 3(right) shows that only aceF has
a corresponding node in the GRN suggesting that it is the
point for regulating the abundance of functional pyruvate
dehydrogenase complexes within E. coli. This regulatory
mechanism effectively reduces the need for the just-in-time
production of every protein that make up a metabolic protein complex allowing the bacterium to shutdown or switch
on part of the MN rapidly [20].

By zooming into the visualization of G3 , six highly interconnected hubs (arcA, crp, fis, hns, ihfAB, and lrp) can
be identified. This is suggesting that they are the master
switches controlling the global state of the GRN. Visually,
crp appears to have the highest node degree which suggests
that it is the central GRN protein in E. coli (Figure 2(right))
and could exert the most extensive influence on the organization of the PIN. This observation agrees with the current
consensus that crp is the key hub in the E. coli GRN [2]. So
far, crp has been known to regulate more than 200 proteins
involved in a variety of biological processes such as carbohydrate metabolism, amino acid metabolism, ion transportation, energy production, and gene regulation [23]. The
on/off state of crp should therefore exert the highest impact
on not just the glycolytic pathway but probably the entire
MN.

In conclusion, the three overlapping network is visually more complex than the two overlapping network, but
the former can provide a more complete overview of the
organism’s molecular network. For this reason, the three
overlapping network allows more in-depth analysis than its
two overlapping counterpart. The two overlapping network
should be more suitable for investigating biological problems with a specific focus on a particular biological process.

Figure 2(right) also shows that crp does not have a corresponding node in G2 . Thus it does not require any protein
cofactors to facilitate gene regulation. Such a design will allow the bacterium to fine tune its PIN organization and MN
dynamics rapidly in response to any external environmental
challenges.

Biologists can use the two overlapping and three overlapping networks as a two step visual analysis process. One
possible use case scenario could be that the biologist uses
the two overlapping network to investigate how a signal
transduction network is being regulated by a GRN, followed
by the use of the three overlapping network to investigate
if the same GRN regulates proteins within the PIN but are
outside the signal transduction network. This should allow
the biologist to deduce hypotheses on how the signal transduction network controls cellular responses in relation to
cellular sensing.

Figure 2(left) shows that there are seven proteins (enzymes) from the glycolytic pathway that correspond to the
PIN as indicated by the inter-plane edges between G1 and
G2 . These proteins are aceE, frmA, agp, pgmA, ptsG, pykF,
and tpiA. Of these, aceE (DIP:9039N) appears as a high
degree hub of over 20 in G2 (Figure 3(left)). One of its
341

Figure 3. Connectivity of the metabolic protein aceE to GRN and PIN. (left) aceE in G1 (blue) corresponds to a highly connected hub in the PIN (green in G2 ). (middle) aceE (DIP:9039N) and its
neighbour aceF in the PIN. (right) aceF in the PIN has its corresponding node in the GRN.

References

[12] T. Kamada and S. Kawai. An algorithm for drawing general
undirected graphs. Information Processing Letters, 31:7–15,
1988.
[13] M. Kanehisa and et al. From genomics to chemical genomics: new developments in KEGG. Nucleic Acids Research, 34:D354–D357, 2006.
[14] J. A. Nelder and R. Mead. A simplex method for function
minimization. The Computer Journal, 7:308–313, 1965.
[15] H. Omote and K. Sugiyama. Method for drawing intersecting clustered graphs and its application to web ontology language. In APVIS 2006, pages 89–92. Australian Computer
Society, Inc., 2006.
[16] L. Salwinski and et al. The Database of Interacting Proteins: 2004 update. Nucleic Acids Research, 32:D449–
D451, 2004.
[17] F. Schreiber. High quality visualization of biochemical pathways in BioPath. In Silico Biology, 2(2):59–73, 2002.
[18] R. Sharan and et al. Conserved patterns of protein interaction in multiple species. PNAS, 102(6):1974–1979, 2005.
[19] R. Sharan and T. Ideker. Modeling cellular machinery
through biological network comparison. Nature Biotechnology, 24(4):427–433, 2006. doi:10.1038/nbt1196.
[20] T. Shlomi, Y. Eisenberg, R. Sharan, and E. Ruppin. Interplay
between transcriptional regulation and metabolism. Molecular Systems Biology, 3:101, 2007.
[21] K. Wegner. SimWiz3D - visualising biochemical simulation
results. In Proc. International Conference BioMedical Visualization (MediViz), pages 77–82, 2005.
[22] C. Yeang and M. Vingron. A joint model of regulatory and
metabolic network. BMC Bioinformatics, 7:332, 2006.
[23] D. Zheng and et al. Identification of the CRP regulon using
in vitro and in vivo transcriptional profiling. Nucleic Acids
Research, 32:5874–5893, 2004.

[1] A. Ahmed and et al. GEOMI: GEOmetry for Maximum
Insight. In Graph Drawing, pages 468–479, 2005.
[2] C. L. Barrett and et al. The global transcriptional regulatory network for metabolism in Escherichia coli exhibits few
dominant functional states. PNAS, 102:19103–19108, 2005.
[3] G. D. Battista, P. Eades, R. Tamassia, and I. G. Tollis. Graph
drawing: Algorithms for the visualization of graphs. Prentice, 1999.
[4] M. Y. Becker and I. Rojas. A graph layout algorithm for
drawing metabolic pathways. Bioinformatics, 17(5):461–
467, 2001.
[5] R. Bourqui and et al. Metabolic network visualization eliminating node redundance and preserving metabolic pathways.
BMC Systems Biology, 3:1–29, 2007.
[6] U. Brandes, T. Dwyer, and F. Schreiber. Visual understanding of metabolic pathways across organisms using layout in
two and a half dimensions. Journal of Integrative Bioinformatics, 1:e2, 2004.
[7] D. C. Y. Fung and et al. 2.5D visualisation of overlapping
biological networks. Journal of Integrative Bioinformatics,
5(1):e90, 2008.
[8] S. Gama-Castro and et al. RegulonDB version 6.0: gene regulation model of Escherichia coli K-12 beyond transcription,
active (experimental) annotated promoters and Textpresso
navigation. Nucleic Acids Research, 36:D120–D124, 2008.
[9] E. Grafahrend-Belau and et al. MetaCrop - a detailed
database of crop plant metabolism. Nucleic Acids Research,
36:D954–D958, 2008.
[10] K. Han and B. H. Ju. A fast layout algorithm for protein
interaction networks. Bioinformatics, 19(15):1882–1888,
2003.
[11] B. H. Junker, C. Klukas, and F. Schreiber. VANTED: A system for advanced data analysis and visualization in the context of biological networks. BMC Bioinformatics, 7:e109,
2006.

342

