2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Designing multimedia content for architectural research and case study projects

Victor Manuel Martinez Lopez
Benemerita Universidad Autonoma de Puebla
Facultad de Arquitectura
Puebla, Pue. Mexico
Vmartin_l@yahoo.com.mx
Abstract— The present work shows how to conceive and
present architectural documentation for research and specific
projects. The purpose of this multimedia content is to
investigate in how helpful it can be to register architectural
information in the manner of plans, sections, facades, renders,
photographs and audiovisual content related to a specific
project in a dynamic way. A project will be presented showing
a final research about the documentation and classifications of
tombs, graves and burials in a cemetery in Puebla City, in
México. The description will explain the phases and evolution
for designing the interface and the technical issues during the
making of this multimedia content.
Keywords-Architecture;
Modelling

Interface;

Audiovisual;





Digital;



GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE MULTIMEDIA CONTENT
The content of the multimedia project starts by
displaying some evocative photographs of mausoleums and
tombs of this cemetery, and then it shows a presentation
screen to access the contents. This starting page shows the
project title and where it is located, shows a paragraph that
serves as introduction to the cemetery thematic in México, It
can be seen also a 3D model of the iconic central ossuary in
the cemetery. The main menu in this page allows access to
the following content:
I.

II.

THE GEOMETRY

Visually explains the geometric situation of the
monuments by means of 3D architectural representations.
From here it is possible to have access to another specific
content:
 Mausoleums: this content shows in its central page
an expressive mosaic of the ossuary, which keeps
the archeological remains of the fallen in the 5th of
May Battle (emblematic event for the Mexican
people in which the French army is defeated in
1862 French Intervention). In the upper part of the
page are shown the 7 icons of the representative
mausoleums, by doing click it is possible to have
access to another specific content:
 Geometric presentation of the mausoleums: from
here it is visible a map at the left of the page that
helps in the localization of the object in the
historical zone; a photograph of the cemetery street
with information of the family, date, type of
mausoleum, style details and construction material;
a volumetric representation of the shape;
photographs showing zoom to details and finally an
expressive photographic mosaic of the monument.
 Tombs: this content shows in its central page an
expressive mosaic of the monument, which keeps

INTRODUCTION

This is an audiovisual video clip content that goes for
about 2minutes and 30 seconds, which makes it possible to
show a general idea of the cemetery by means of a
photographic walkthrough using panoramic displays and by
means of full shots and focusing on architectural details of
the mausoleums.
THE SITE
Organizes the geographic situation of the cemetery by
using 2D architectural representations. From here it is
possible to have access to another pair of specific content:
 Location: it shows in a dynamic text box “SITIO”
matters related to history and localization of the
cemetery in Puebla City. In the dynamic text box
“ANTECEDENTES” there is information about the
cultural understanding of the cemetery and the
specific evolution in Puebla City. It is
complemented by a virtual walkthrough showing
the limits and location of the cemetery in the urban

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.116

context to show the scale and nearby streets and
highways, this specific content can be paused and
manipulated to show frames using the interactive
buttons.
Zoning: this content shows the zoning plan of the
cemetery and its two specific zones: the actual and
the historical. From here it is possible to have
access to another pair of specific content:
Historical Zone: it dynamically displays the content
of the zone emphasizing the regulatory lines of the
cemetery or streets, the representative mausoleums
and tombs are also codified by colors. It is possible
to do a zoom to the plan to see the details and
labeling of the streets and entrances (by doing rightclick and then selecting “Aumentar”).
Location of representative monuments: it shows a
vertical plane of the historical zone with the
location of the monuments for studying indicated by
labels from 1 to 8, and by doing click it is possible
to see an image of each one. “Fig. 1”.

663



the archeological remains of the fallen in the 5th of
May Battle (emblematic event for the Mexican
people in which the French army is defeated in
1862 French Intervention). In the upper part of the
page are shown the 3 icons of the representative
mausoleums, by doing click it is possible to have
access to another specific content:
Geometric presentation of the tombs: from here it is
visible a map at the left of the page that helps in the
localization of the object in the historical zone; a
photograph of the cemetery street with information
of the family, date, type of tomb, style details and
construction material; a volumetric representation
of the shape; photographs showing zoom to details
and finally an expressive photographic mosaic of
the monument.
III.





ICONOGRAPHIC DETAILS

Visually explains the iconographic details of the
monuments using 3D architectural representations. From
here it is possible to have access to another pair of specific
content:
 Mausoleums: this content shows an allusive
photograph of the cemetery. In the upper part of the
page are shown the 7 icons of the representative
mausoleums, by doing click it is possible to have
access to another specific content:
 Presentation of the iconographic details of the
mausoleums: from here it is visible a map at the left
of the page that helps in the localization of the
object in the historical zone; a list of specific
architectural and iconographic details; it also shows
a conceptual volumetric display of the shape; an
interactive photograph that by clicking and
positioning the cursor shows labeling of the
architectonic detail and shows a larger image; in the

lower part there is an hypertext link which shows a
PDF file of the format for capturing the information
data and their specific categories.
Tombs: this content shows an allusive photograph
of the cemetery. In the upper part of the page are
shown the 3 icons of the representative
mausoleums, by doing click it is possible to have
access to another specific content:
Presentation of the iconographic details of the
tombs: from here it is visible a map at the left of the
page that helps in the localization of the object in
the historical zone; a list of specific architectural
and iconographic details; it also shows a conceptual
volumetric display of the shape; an interactive
photograph that by clicking and positioning the
cursor shows labeling of the architectonic detail and
shows a larger image; in the lower part there is an
hypertext link which shows a PDF file of the format
for capturing the information data and their specific
categories. “Fig. 2”.
IV.

CREDITS

It shows information of the project, research people,
collaborators and makers of the interactive content. It is
possible to have access to the website of the BUAP by doing
click on the logo and in the lower part there are some icons
which allow installation of video codec’s and additional
software like Flash Player or Adobe Acrobat Reader for the
purposes of eliminating compatibility and display
information on any PC in case of trouble.
V.

EXIT

To exit and close the multimedia application and
presentation. .

Figure 1. The initial interface: (a) presentation screen (b) location screen.

664

Figure 2. Exploring the content: (a) Architectonic Details, (b) Iconographic details.

665

