2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Systrip: a visual environment for the investigation of time-series data in the
context of metabolic networks
J. Dubois1,2 , L. Cottret3 , A. Ghozlane1 , D. Auber1,2 , F. Bringaud4
P. Th´ebault1,5 , F. Jourdan3 and R. Bourqui1,2
1
Universit´e de Bordeaux CNRS UMR5800
2
INRIA Bordeaux Sud-Ouest,
3
INRA UMR1089 X´enobiotiques Toulouse,
4
Universit´e Bordeaux Segalen CNRS UMR 5536,
5
Universit´e Bordeaux Segalen CBiB
{jonathan.dubois, amine.ghozlane, david.auber, patricia.thebault, romain.bourqui}@labri.fr,
{Ludovic.Cottret, Fabien.Jourdan}@toulouse.inra.fr, bringaud@rmsb.u-bordeaux2.fr
Abstract

the newly sequenced organisms. This richness and complexity is leading to the creation of many bioinformatics
methods. These approaches have to be combined into efﬁcient methodological pipelines in order to go from raw data
to meaningful biological interpretations. Setting up one of
these pipelines is a challenge as the output of each step
can be critical for the next ones. Visualisation is therefore
required to efﬁciently monitor the assembling of such complex analysis pipelines. In this article we will focus on the
analysis of biological networks and in particular metabolic
networks.
The metabolism is the set of biochemical reactions
that occur in a living system. Each reaction transforms
some metabolites (small molecules like glucose) called
substrates into other metabolites called products. For a
long time, the information about metabolism was partial
and fragmented into well known metabolic functions (e.g.
glycolysis or Krebs cycle) called metabolic pathways or
metabolic maps. The metabolism of an organism is therefore generally modelled as a collection of disconnected
graphs. However the data that are currently generated
cover many of these pathways and thus requires the simultaneous analysis of all of them (generally more than a hundred). The best way to perform such a global study is to
integrate all the metabolic pathways of a given organism
into a single network called metabolic network. According
to Gehlenborg et al. [21], the representation of the complete metabolic network and the data associated to the reactions, metabolites or enzymes is of one the greatest challenge today in bioinformatics. It would in particular help
in understanding biological shifts induced on an organism
by environmental stresses.
In this article we present Systrip, a visual environment
for the analysis of time-series data in the context of bi-

Technological advances in biology lead to a profusion of
quantitative data, raising analytical challenges. Visual analytics is particularly well suited to address these difﬁculties. It helps to interactively move through the different levels of analysis and to simultaneously investigate data with
different point of views. It is especially the case when dealing with biological networks that can contain hundreds of
elements. In these studies biologists generally follow the
same analytic process which consists in ﬁrst getting an
overview of the data before focussing on a few relevant
subnetworks. In this article we present, Systrip, a visual
environment for the analysis of time-series data in the context of biological networks. In particular we focus on the
study of metabolism. Systrip gathers bioinformatics and
graph theoretical algorithms that can be assembled in different ways to help biologists in their visual mining process. This framework had been used to analyse various
real biological data. In this article we describe how it
helped in understanding drug effects on the metabolism of
the parasite of the tsetse ﬂy causing sleeping sickness.

1

Introduction

These last years, a technological gap has been ﬁlled in
molecular biology with the development of high sequencing technologies. While it took years to sequence the
genome of a single organism (e.g. fourteen for the human genome), it can now be done within a few days (and
soon a few hours). It opens a new area in terms of biological investigation since the so called omics technologies
can generate a large amount of high throughput data for
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.43

204

ological networks. While Systrip provides a large range
of visual data mapping methods to handle metabolic networks and related high throughput data, it completes them
with a large range of computational methods. The originality of Systrip is to combine of these classical bioinformatics methods (e.g. scope detection [23], chokepoint detection [41]) with well-known theoretical -still unexploited in
biology- graph ones (e.g strahler [1], strength [3]). Systrip
also supports exploration awareness as it enables the biologists to manually create views on the data at each important
ﬁltration step of their analysis process.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section 2 reviews related work on the analysis of timeseries data in the context of metabolic networks. In
section 3, we present how Systrip supports the biologists’
visual analytics process. Section 4 refers to the detailled
description of Systrip software and its main features. We
then present in section 5 case studies on Trypanosoma
brucei metabolism. Finally, we draw a conclusion and
give directions for future work in section 6.

2

shared by several pathways are duplicated and each pathway is laid out independently, Bourqui et al. [8] introduced
a method avoiding node duplication in order to preserve a
realistic network topology. Recently, Lambert et al. [28]
proposed a trade-off between the approach of Bourqui et
al. [8] and the approach of Rohrschneider et al. [33] that
enables the user to deﬁne whether or not node duplication
should be performed.
The choice of the drawing algorithm has to be adapted
to the purpose of the visualization. To allow the user to
explore different options, Systrip provides many classical
layout algorithms (e.g. layered, force-directed, circular)
but also metabolism oriented drawing algorithms like the
one proposed in [8]. In addition to the node-link diagram
visualization of metabolic networks, Systrip also integrates
parallel coordinates, spreadsheet, scatterplot and histogram
views (see section 4.2).
Contextual visualization: Global biological studies are
generally designed to investigate the adaptation of the organism metabolism to an environmental stress (e.g. drug
treatment). Samples are collected all along the adaptation
process. The output data will be, for each biological entity (e.g. metabolite), a vector of numerical values corresponding to measures made at different time points. These
kinds of data are called time series data. However, most
general biological network visualization software only superimposes biological measurements on nodes for one time
point.
Among them, Cytoscape [35], Pathway Tools [32], BiologicalNetworks [4] and Cerebral [6] support the visualization of a single time point from a time-series experiment.
This is achieved by coloring nodes according to experimental data value for a particular measurement. In a more
dynamic way, Pathway Tools [32] and Cerebral [6] allow
to visualize the whole time-series by respectively using
smooth animation between time points and using linked
views, called small multiples, for each time point. Other
tools, such as VANTED [26] and VisANT [24], support the
visualization of the whole experimental data visualization
by embedding an expression proﬁle plot, a bar chart or
line chart inside the nodes. In GENeVis [9], the authors
combined gene expression levels and their statistical signiﬁcances into a single glyph.
In Systrip we decided to integrate visualization of
metabolite measurement data (called metabolomics data)
as both size- or color-coding for a particular time point and
heatmap or curvemap [29] for whole time-series. This allows to take advantage of both techniques: high (resp. low)
values are emphasized by large (resp. small) node sizes
while heatmap (or curvemap) shows evolution of these values inside each node.

Related work

Metabolic pathways and networks: Before the outburst
of high throughput data, metabolic investigations were performed at the metabolic pathway scale. For instance, many
studies focus on central carbon metabolism in order to decipher the different kind of energy intakes. This part of the
metabolism only gathers few pathways resulting in graphs
of relatively small size (dozens of nodes and edges). Visualisation efforts were thus put on the drawing of these
subnetworks [7, 11, 40, 20, 17, 27, 29]. These approaches
usually combine a cycle detection [7, 40, 20] step and a
layered [11, 20] or a force-directed [7, 40] drawing algorithm. Recently, Meyer et al. [29] proposed a new visualization method called linearized metabolic pathway views
that represents pathways as segments corresponding to sequences of elements computed during a linearization process.
Even if these methods can successfully represent several metabolic pathways (up to ﬁve according to [7]), they
cannot be used to draw the entire metabolic network. To
represent the entire network, tools such as SBML Viewer 1
or Cytoscape [35] use classical drawing algorithms (e.g.
force-directed ones). However, these layouts do not respect the biological drawing conventions (see [30]) and do
not therefore fulﬁll biologists’ and bioinformaticians’ expectations [34]. Very few tools try to respect these drawing
conventions [25, 32, 8, 33, 28]. While in [25, 32, 33] nodes
1 SBMLViewer,

http://sbw.kgi.edu/layout/

205

and ﬁlter, then details-on-demand”. Once the metabolic
network and related series of values have been loaded, the
main challenge is to ﬁnd the chemical and biological links
between them. However, the number of monitored nodes
is often much smaller than the total number of nodes. In
that case, the number of interesting biological scenarios
connecting them quickly becomes huge. To overcome that
issue, biologists and bioinformaticians ﬁlter out irrelevant
nodes and edges. The aim is to iteratively reduce the size
of the network to reach an interpretable subnetwork (for
example, see ﬁgure 3). At each important ﬁltration step,
the user can create a subnetwork of interest that will be
considered as a breakpoint in his exploration. That feature
is important since the analysis process does not necessarily
follow a linear ﬂow and the user may have to restart his
exploration from a previous step of the analysis. Moreover
it may help to remind the user of the main steps of an
analysis that was started during a previous session. When
designing Systrip, we deﬁned an intuitive data and view
management. Unlike tools like Cytoscape, Systrip disconnects the original data from the focussed subnetworks and
related views. As the subnetworks are fully disconnected
from the original network, the user can easily but also
safely modify them (e.g. adding/removing elements, computing graph measures or applying metabolic-dedicated
algorithms) without altering the original data. That feature
is particularly suited to the top-down analysis process used
in biology and bioinformatics. It also enables to perform
simultaneously several analytics pipelines on the same
data by applying different combinations of elementary
bricks.

Figure 1: The “sense making loop” adapted from [38].

3

Mining biological data

Information Visualization exploits human visual capabilities -according to Ware [39], 40% of our cortical activities
are dedicated to processing visual signals- to support visual
exploration and analysis. It has now been established as a
fruitful strategy to tackle the problem posed by the abundance of information [36]. It is particularly suitable in biology to visually identify original patterns in the data like
subnetworks where molecule concentrations are affected
when the system is perturbed. The Visual Analytics initiative promotes the use of Information Visualization to support analytical reasoning through a sense-making loop (see
ﬁgure 1). That sense-making loop allows, through the visualization, the human perception and knowledge and the
exploration to deﬁne new speciﬁcations (or requirements)
in order to incrementally build but also to validate hypotheses, and therefore leads to information discovery.
The visual analytic process designed in Systrip follows
that sense-making loop as it combines -semi-automated
data processing together with human analytical and perceptual capabilities. Primary aim of Systrip is to support
visual analysis of time-series data in the context of the
complete metabolic network of an organism. To achieve
that goal, Systrip provides 5 classes of functionalities (that
we call bricks): input, drawing, graph measure, ﬁltration
and views (see ﬁgure 2). These elementary bricks can
also be classiﬁed into network related (e.g. betweenness
centrality [10] or excentricity [12]), bioinformatics related
(e.g. scope selection [23] or chokepoint selection [41]) and
multi-dimensional data related (e.g. parallel coordinates or
scatterplot). By combining several simple but also complex bricks in a meaningful pipeline, the user can deﬁne
his own speciﬁcations and therefore build an image that
answers the original biological question.
Most biologists’ and bioinformaticians’ analysis
process follows the so-called Schneiderman’s Visual
Information-Seeking Mantra: “Overview ﬁrst, zoom

4
4.1

Software System
System Architecture

Systrip is developed in C++ and is based on Tulip [2].
Tulip is an information visualization framework dedicated
to the analysis and visualization of relational data. It aims
at providing to the developer a complete library supporting
the design of interactive information visualization applications. Tulip is made of three independent sub-libraries
Tulip, Tulip-OGL and Tulip-Qt that are respectively in
charge of graph management, OpenGL rendering and user
interaction. The current framework also enables the development of plug-ins to enrich the set of available algorithms,
visual encodings, interaction tools and also domain-specic
visualizations. The plug-ins management system can connect to a distant server to check for newer versions of installed plug-ins or to download new ones. Following Munzner’s nested model [31], Tulip also supports the implementation of user interface overlays, called perspectives.

206

	


Figure 2: Systrip provides an environment gathering input facilities, graph drawing, graph measure and ﬁltration algorithms, and supports several visualization techniques. These elementary (and computational) bricks can also be classiﬁed
as network, bioinformatics and multi-dimensional data related.

Figure 3: Example of analysis pipeline. A metabolic network is loaded into a node-link diagram view and drawn with FM3
algorithm [22]. During the next step, metabolomic data is loaded and a size mapping is computed. To focus his analysis,
most relevant element are selected and the graph induced by the shortest paths between these elements is extracted. The
user then builds a node-link view on that network and tries both FM3 and MetaViz layout algorithms.
shows a screenshot of Systrip. In this ﬁgure, one can see
on the left side a panel containing (top-left corner) the elements of the metabolic network (and its decomposition
into metabolic pathways) and (bottom-left corner) all subnetworks created by the user (also containing the related
list of elements and pathways). The middle part of the
tool contains the different views created by the user on the
metabolic network, the time-series data but also database
queries results. Since all the data are related to elements
of the metabolic network, these views (except the information views) can be synchronized. We support a linking
and brushing technique that allows to highlight selected elements in all views.

Such an overlay integrates dedicated features in order to
fulﬁl end-user’s expectations. Since Systrip is a perspective of the Tulip framework, it takes full advantage. Relying on a graph structure makes Systrip ﬂexible as it allows
to support both relational and multi-dimensional data. It
also eases the future integration of other biological networks such as gene regulatory or protein-protein interaction networks.
The Model-View-Controller architecture of Tulip allows
Systrip to support multiple and synchronized views. Any
interaction on a view (e.g. selection of an element) implies
the automatic update of all views displaying this data. Finally, in addition to the algorithms and views developed
speciﬁcally for Systrip (see section 4.2), its users can access to all Tulip plug-ins (included in Tulip released or via
Tulip plug-ins server).

4.2

Visualizing metabolic network: In ﬁgure 5, one can see
two node-link diagram views on the Trypanosoma brucei
metabolic network. In this representation, a node is either a metabolite or a reaction, and, a metabolite and a
reaction are linked if and only if the metabolite is consumed or produced by the reaction. Some of these reactions are reversible (they can occur in both direction), we
use double arrows to render this information. As a reac-

Main Features

In this section, we present Systrip’s user interface, its main
widgets and views to support both metabolic networks and
time-series data visualization and exploration. Figure 4

207

Figure 4: Screenshot of Systrip software. (Left) A panel containing (top-left corner) the elements of the metabolic network (and its decomposition into metabolic pathways) and (bottom-left corner) all subnetworks created by the user (also
containing a list of elements and pathways); (Right) The different representations of the entire metabolic network, of the
subnetworks, the time-series data and also database queries results.
tion may consume and/or produce several metabolites, we
also use different colors to encode incoming (green edges)
and outgoing (red edges) sides of the reaction. Systrip
also takes advantage of Tulip plug-ins system and offers
many graph related algorithms. Among them, Systrip supports various drawing algorithms (hierarchical [2], 2D/3D
force-directed [19, 22] and MetaViz [8] layout algorithms),
bioinformatics algorithms (scope selection [23], chokepoints selection [41]) but also graph theoretical measures
(betweenness centrality [10], eccentricity [12], strahler [1],
strength [3]).

Figure 5: Node-link diagram representation of the
metabolism. (Left) Zoomed view on the whole metabolic
network of Trypanosoma brucei drawn with FM3 [22] ;
(Right) View on a subnetwork of interest drawn using the
metabolic network dedicated algorithm [8]. Size mapping
and heatmap glyph are used to emphasize time-series data.

Visualizing time-series data: Systrip supports different visualization methods to mine time-series -or any
stamped- data (ﬁgure 6 illustrates these visualization methods). When focussing on individual time points, the user
may use the spreadsheet to visualize the values associated
to the monitored elements (e.g. concentration or expression levels). Histograms can also be used to emphasize, for
each time point, the distribution of the their values (double
clicking allows to focus on a single histogram). If the user
is interested in comparing values over several time points,
Sytrip offers a scatterplot matrix view (again, double clicking allows to focus on a single scatterplot) or parallel coordinates one. While scatterplot supports pairwise comparison and therefore evaluation of correlations between two
dimensions (or time points), parallel coordinates allows to
compare simultaneously elements over an arbitrary num-

ber of dimensions. The former representation can also help
the user to identify clusters of elements having similar behaviour during the entire experiment.
Contextual visualization: The user can also visualize
time-series data in the context of the metabolic network. In
that case, one can again distinguish two tasks in the analysis (i) the comparison of values of the elements at a single
time point (ii) their evolutions over the entire experiment.
To solve the ﬁrst task, Systrip supports two visual encodings that emphasize the values of the element at a given
time point. Both node colors and node sizes can be used to
encode the node values for that particular time point. In ﬁg-

208

4.3

ure 5, a size mapping has been performed to highlight elements with high values, while in ﬁgure 8, node colors were
also computed according to the time-point 3. Concerning
the second task, the ﬁrst solution supported by Systrip is to
visualize the whole time-series of each element by rendering a heatmap or curvemap [29] glyph inside it. Another
option is to navigate through the time points and to follow the evolution of the node sizes and/or colors. Systrip
can “play the movie” of the time-series by automatically
animating transition between time points. To preserve the
user mental map, a smooth animation is performed during
each transition between a time point to the next one by interpolating the node sizes and/or colors.

Simple vs Advanced user interface

Systrip integrates many features that can be complex to
correctly set for a non-expert in graph visualization and
analysis. For instance, Tulip’s plug-ins installed on the
computer are all available in Systrip, and, parameters related to drawing issues can be difﬁcult to interpret. According to the biologist feedbacks, we decided to set a simple
user interface as default, and, on demand, to display advanced options and algorithms.
The simple interface contains the most useful algorithms from a biological point of view, i.e. mostly algorithms dedicated to biological networks. To make the interface even simpler, the parameters are automatically set
to default values when applying an algorithm (these values were either set according to their biological meaning
or according to empirical tests). The advanced user interface is designed for expert users and offers more functionalities than the simple one. First of all, an “Algorithms” menu, containing Tulip plug-ins installed on the
computer, is added in the menu bar. These plug-ins covers
a large variety of algorithms classiﬁed into “Size”, “Layout”, “Color” or graph “Measure”. Using that advanced
interface, the user can set manually the needed parameters
when applying an algorithm. The left panel (see ﬁgure 4)
is also enriched: a new tab to manage the views and interaction tools settings is inserted and a conﬁguration widget is added in the “Data Sets” tab (to enable the user to
modify animation parameters). Both simple and advanced
user interfaces allow to edit preferences. These preferences
include rendering parameters (e.g. default node and edge
colors, sizes, shapes, etc), information displayed in the left
panel of the tool (e.g. properties displayed when an element is selected) and database settings.

Figure 6: Expression data visualizations supported by
Systrip software (from top-left corner to bottom-right):
histograms, scatterplot matrix, parallel coordinates and
spreadsheet views.

Visualizing database queries: The elements of the
metabolic network are related to a large range of databases.
It is important for a visual framework in biology to
give access to this shared knowledge. In Systrip, the
user can query both KEGG [27] and PublicHouse 2
databases. These databases contain detailed information
about metabolites and reactions such as their name, molecular weight, chemical formula, or 2D molecular geometry.
To visualize database results and also to allow navigation
through the databases, Systrip offers an information view
embedding a web browser. For instance, ﬁgure 4 shows the
result of a KEGG query on NADP+ oxidoreductase. Another feature is the 3D molecular geometry visualization
obtained from the 2D geomtry and the OpenBabel library 3
(ﬁgure 4 shows the 3D geometry of pyruvate).

5

2
PublicHouse,
http://biowarehouse.ai.sri.com/PublicHouseOverview.html
3 OpenBabel, http://openbabel.sourceforge.net/

209

Case studies

In this section, we demonstrate some measurable beneﬁts when using Systrip to monitor the metabolism of Trypanosoma brucei, which is the causative agent of human
African trypanosomiasis [5] (sleeping sickness). These
trypanosomes possess a complex life cycle that includes
two replicating stages: the bloodstream form in the blood
of mammals, and the insect (procyclic) form in the midgut
of the vector. Like all parasites with an obligate host
change, the parasitic protozoan T. brucei has to adapt its
metabolism to widely varying conditions during its life cycle. By exploiting experimental data and using Systrip,
we propose to further investigate three analyses of interest: (i) the metabolic impact of different carbon sources
(proline and glucose), (ii) the metabolic effects of a drug
(DFMO) and (iii) the distribution of metabolic ﬂuxes in the

different branches of the glucose metabolic network. These
different analyses were carried out by exploiting different datasets (metabolite concentrations) coming from several metabolomic experiments that were designed to capture the metabolic concentration proﬁle in a given environmental context and were not focused on speciﬁc biological functions. We therefore investigated these datasets
by exploiting the analysis framework provided by Systrip,
which enable us to visualize the experimental data through
their global context given by the metabolic network. In
the following user cases, we propose several analysis, that
exploits three different metabolomic datasets where each
sample was obtained with some variable conditions. For
the two ﬁrst analysis, the metabolic network was built
and processed by respectively using the MetExplore Trypanocyc database and platform [14, 15]; and for the third
one, the model was based on the topology of the metabolic
network given in [13]. The three metabolic models were
then exported in the widely used Systems Biology Markup
Language (SBML [18]) that can be imported into Systrip.

5.1

Figure 7: Linked view of network and data. The selection
obtained on the network (Left) was obtained by the selection on the histogram of data (Right).

Glucose proline dataset

The ﬁrst analysis explored the global topological impacts
on metabolic networks in trypanosomes associated with
responses to environmental change. We focussed on the
procyclic forms of the parasite with metabolomic data obtained with different carbon sources. For each monitored
metabolite, a ratio is provided between its measured concentration in the proline and glucose sample experiments
(close to one means no change, close to zero means an over
production in the glucose experiment while higher values
corresponds to an over production in the proline experiment). We mapped the differential data onto the metabolic
network elements with the objective to identify a potential
partition of the graph that may be related to the shift that
occurred between the two environmental conditions. To do
so, we used a combined visualization of the distribution
of the differential concentrations and the global metabolic
network (see ﬁgure 7).
Thanks to this analysis, we were able to propose two
subnetworks related to each extremity of the histogram, in
other words related to the two differential conditions given
by the two carbon sources. Selecting the lower values of
the histogram allows the identiﬁcation in the network of
the metabolites which are related to the glucose experiment
(see ﬁgure 8). In order to connect these nodes and therefore
to extract a relevant subnetwork, we then computed all the
biological shortest paths between them by taking into account the direction and reversibility of reactions. The same
operation was repeated for the proline experiment with the
highest values of the histogram. At the end, the two sub-

Figure 8: The two subnetworks extracted using the histogram. (Left) The glucose related subnetwork and (Right)
the proline related subnetwork.
networks corresponding to the two carbone sources were
analysed thanks to Systrip and we visually identiﬁed the
pathways that are mainly involved in one or the other conditions. We conﬁrmed that the compounds and reactions of
the glycolysis pathway are mainly involved in the subnetwork related to the glucose condition. On the other hand,
the proline degradation pathway is only present in the proline related subnetwork. Finally, our analysis allowed to
identify the backbone of the metabolic network that corresponds to the unchanged metabolites and may not be involved in the glucose/proline catabolism.

5.2

DFMO dataset

Some metabolites in the network may not have been monitored during the experiment. So a ﬁrst way to narrow
the search space consisted in computing, based on the detected metabolites, all the metabolites that can be synthesized. This deﬁnition corresponds to a bioinformatics
method called the scope [23]. It is possible to compute
this scope with Systrip, we then obtained a meaningful
metabolic subnetwork.Even with the selection facility, the

210

view still contained too many nodes to be navigated. To
deal with this problem, the aim was then to focus on the
backbone of the network. In biology the notion of ﬂux is
central when studying the metabolism. The Strahler metric
on graphs is thus particularly adapted to compute the potential ﬂux through the reactions. By coloring the edges according to these values the user can already detect a backbone that can be extracted by applying a threshold on the
edges. Since this subnetwork contained only one tenth of
elements it was, as a second step, possible to apply a graph
drawing algorithm dedicated to metabolic drawings [8].
The applied ﬁltrations guarantee that we focussed on a
relevant subnetwork in terms of biological and topological meanings. In fact, this pathway contains the enzyme
targeted by the drug. The question was then to understand the link between the inhibition of this enzyme and
the metabolomics data. In that case, the animation provided by Systrip is particularly adapted to go through the
different time points as it allowed to understand how the
pathway is modiﬁed. The conclusion raised by the observation of the animation were consistent with the hypothesis
of the biologists on the drug effects.

5.3

tal data or assumed from the literature on T. brucei glycolytic metabolism. The proportion of end products and
ﬂuxes were predicted for ﬁxed proportion of acetate excretion ranging from 1 to 99%, with a 5% increment.
We used the csv import of Systrip to visualize the ﬂux
and metabolite distribution in the metabolic network context. The aim is to identify the underlying process of this
ﬂexibility. We have computed the graph states for each
constraint proportion on acetate. By coloring and adjusting the size of the edges according to ﬂux and metabolite
proportions, the animation revealed the central role of the
malic enzymes in ﬂexibility process. The animation clearly
demonstrated the direct correlation between the rate of acetate production and the metabolic ﬂux through the malic
enzyme. The study presented here, is consistent with further analysis reported on malic enzymes with Metaboﬂux.
This conclusion was not raised from our initial visual analysis of the Metaboﬂux data set, which only displayed a
limited number of parameters. A subsequent deep analysis of the Metaboﬂux data set was required to observe the
correlation described above.

6

Glucose metabolomic network dataset

We presented Systrip, a visualization environment dedicated to metabolic networks. Selection and extraction of
subnetworks based on the classiﬁcation of the nodes in reference to metabolic pathways or to biological features such
as biosynthetic capability have been facilitated. One of the
main contributions of Systrip for the metabolic network visualization is the powerful interface to support contextual
visualization of time-series data. The entire time series can
be visualized as heatmap and curvemap glyphs while single time points can be mapped to node size and/or color.
Additional ways to explore time-series data are proposed:
spreadsheets, histograms, scatterplots and parallel coordinates. Each way to explore data can be used at the same
time and mapped onto the metabolic network and eventually the extracted subnetworks. Selections on any of the
representations are reﬂected in the other ones. Moreover,
by combining biological and graph measures, the Systrip
user can reduce the data to visualize by restricting the
scope of the study. Systrip is made of elementary bricks
that can be combined into sophisticated pipelines to select subnetworks that follow topological or biological criteria. At last, links to external databases enable to enrich
the analysis.
Regarding the ﬁrst analysis that were carried out with
Systrip and thanks to their relavance in biological analysis, an interesting list of additional improvements started to
come up for a further investigation of metabolism in a dynamic context for analysing the ﬂuxes. It would be also of

The third analysis was based on the procyclic form of
T. brucei. That form converts glucose, the major carbon
source used in rich-medium, into the excreted end products acetate and succinate. This parasite has the particularity to perform the ﬁrst six glycolytic steps in the glycosomes, which are peroxisome-like organelles [13]. This
unique metabolic strategy implies a tightly controlled use
of metabolic cofactors (ATP and NAD+ ) inside the organelle. Interestingly, the proportion of acetate and succinate excreted from glucose metabolism varies depending
on the geographical context of experimental analyses, with
acetate production ranging between 28% and 55% of the
major excreted end products from glucose [37, 16]. This
is suggestive of signiﬁcant ﬂexibility in the ﬂux distribution among the various branches. While the metabolic
network leading to the production of acetate and succinate in the procyclic trypanosomes is well known, the
ﬂux distributions of metabolites in the different branches
of the network were not investigated so far. To address
this question and analyze the extent of the metabolic ﬂexibility of glucose metabolism in this parasite, we used
Metaboﬂux 4 . This software, by running simulations based
on a multiple objective optimization framework, gave as
results the ﬂux distributions (percentage of ﬂux throw the
enzymes) and metabolite ratios when constraining the system by the different constraints known from experimen4 Metaboﬂux,

Conclusion and future work

http://www.cbib.u-bordeaux2.fr/metaboﬂux/

211

interest to offer the ability of loading metabolic networks
directly from public databases. Moreover, an actual challenge in system biology is to integrate various sources of
∼omics data with the objective to improve the realistic signiﬁcance of bioinformatics analyses. Regarding Systrip,
the integration of new methods dedicated to the visualisation of speciﬁc and various omics data would be on purpose
and may be carried by extending the actual well deﬁned
framework. A ﬁrst stage would concern the dimensionality reduction and may lead to interesting work to deﬁne
relevant analysis environments (e.g. principal component
analysis or multidimensional scaling).

[7] M. Becker and I. Rojas. A Graph Layout Algorithm
for Drawing Metabolic Pathways. Bioinformatics,
17:461–467, 2001.
[8] R. Bourqui, V. Lacroix, L. Cottret, D. Auber, P. Mary,
M.-F. Sagot, and F. Jourdan. Metabolic network visualization eliminating node redundance and preserving
metabolic pathways. BMC Systems Biology, 1(29),
2007.
[9] R. Bourqui and M. A. Westenberg. Visualizing temporal dynamics at the genomic and metabolic level.
In 13th Int. Conf. Information Visualization 2009,
pages 317–322. 2009.

Acknowledgements

[10] U. Brandes. A faster algorithm for betweenness centrality. Journal of Methmatical Sociology, 25:163–
177, 2001.

This work was partially done under the Systryp project,
supported by the ANR (France) and BBSRC (UK); and
under the EVIDEN project (ANR 2010 JCJC 0201 01),
supported by the ANR (France).

[11] U. Brandes, T. Dwyer, and F. Schreiber. Visualizing
Related Metabolic Pathways in Two and Half Dimensions. In Proc. Graph Drawing 2003, pages 11–122,
2003.
[12] U. Brandes and D. Wagner. Visone: Analysis and
visualization of social networks. In Graph Drawing Softwares, Mathematics and Visualization, pages
321–340. 2003.

References
[1] D. Auber. Using Strahler numbers for real time visual
exploration of huge graphs. In ICCVG, pages 56–69,
2002.

[13] F. Bringaud, C.E. Ebikeme, and M. Boshart. Acetate
and succinate production in amoebae, helminths,
diplomonads, trichomonads and trypanosomatids:
common and diverse metabolic strategies used by
parasitic lower eukaryotes. Parasitology, 137:1315–
1331, 2010.

[2] D. Auber. Tulip : A huge graph visualisation framework. In P. Mutzel and M. J¨unger, editors, Graph
Drawing Softwares, Mathematics and Visualization,
pages 105–126. Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[3] D. Auber, Y. Chiricota, F. Jourdan, and G. Melanc¸on.
Multiscale Visualization of Small-World Networks.
In Proc. of IEEE Information Visualization Symposium, pages 75–81, 2003.

[14] B. Chukualim, N. Peters, C. Fowler, and M. Berriman. Trypanocyc - a metabolic pathway database for
trypanosoma brucei. BMC Bioinformatics, 9(Suppl
10):P5, 2008.

[4] M. Baitaluk, M. Sedova, A. Ray, and A. Gupta. BiologicalNetworks: Visualization and analysis tool
for systems biology. Nucleic Acids Res., 34:W466–
W471, 2006.

[15] L. Cottret, D. Wildridge, F. Vinson, M. P. Barrett,
H. Charles, M.-F. Sagot, and F. Jourdan. Metexplore: a web server to link metabolomic experiments
and genome-scale metabolic networks. Nucleic Acids
Res, 38(Web Server issue):W132–W137, Jul 2010.

[5] M. P. Barrett, D. W. Boykin, R. Brun, and R. R. Tidwell. Human african trypanosomiasis: pharmacological re-engagement with a neglected disease. Br J
Pharmacol, 152(8):1155–1171, Dec 2007.

[16] V. Coustou, M. Biran, S. Besteiro, L. Riviere,
T. Baltz, J.-M. Franconi, and F.Bringaud. Fumarate
is an essential intermediary metabolite produced by
the procyclic trypanosoma brucei. J Biol Chem,
281:26832–26846, 2006.

[6] A. Barsky, T. Munzner, J. L. Gardy, and R. Kincaid. Cerebral: Visualizing multiple experimental
conditions on a graph with biological context. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (Proc. InfoVis 2008), pages 1253–1260, 2008.

[17] Dogrusoz, Erson, Giral, Demir, Babur, Cetintas, and
Colak. Patikaweb: a web interface for analyzing biological pathways through advanced querying and vi-

212

sualization. Bioinformatics, 22(3):374–375, November 2005.

[29] M. Meyer, B. Wong, M. Styczynski, T. Munzner, and
H. Pﬁster. Pathline: A Tool for Comparative Functional Genomics. Computer Graphics Forum, 29,
2010.

[18] A Finney and M Hucka. Systems biology markup
language: Level 2 and beyond. Biochem Soc Trans,
pages 1472–3, 2003.

[30] G. Michal. On representation of metabolic pathways.
BioSystems, 47:1–7, 1998.

[19] A. Frick, A. Ludwig, and H. Mehldau. A Fast Adaptive Layout Algorithm for Undirected Graphs. In
Proc. Graph Drawing 1994, pages 388–403, 1994.

[31] T. Munzner. A Nested Process Model for Visualization Design and Validation. IEEE TVCG, 15:921–
928, 2009.

[20] S. D. Gabouje and E. Zim´anyi. Generic visualization
of biochemical networks: A new compound graph
layout algorithm. In Poster Proc. of WEA 05, 2005.

[32] S. Pailey and P. Karp. The Pathway Tools cellular
overview diagram and Omics Viewer. Nucleic Acids
Research, 34(13):3771–3778, 2006.

[21] Nils Gehlenborg, Sen I O’Donoghue, Nitin S Baliga,
Alexander Goesmann, Matthew A Hibbs, Hiroaki Kitano, Oliver Kohlbacher, Heiko Neuweger, Reinhard
Schneider, Dan Tenenbaum, and Anne-Claude Gavin.
Visualization of omics data for systems biology. Nat
Methods, 7(3 Suppl):S56–S68, Mar 2010.

[33] M. Rohrschneider, C. Heine, A. Reichenbach,
A. Kerren, and G. Scheuermann. A Novel GridBased Visualization Approach for Metabolic Networks with Advanced Focus&Context View. In Proc.
Graph Drawing 2009, pages 268–279, 2010.

[22] S. Hachul and M. J¨unger. Drawing large graphs with
a potential-ﬁeld-based multilevel algorithm. In Proc.
Graph Drawing 2004, pages 285–295, 2004.

[34] P. Saraiya, C. North, and K. Duca. Visualizing biological pathways: requirements analysis, systems
evaluation and research agenda. Information Visualization, 4:1–15, 2005.

[23] T. Handorf, O. Ebenh¨oh, and R. Heinrich. Expanding
metabolic networks: scopes of compounds, robustness, and evolution. J Mol Evol, 61(4):498–512, Oct
2005.

[35] P. Shannon, A. Markiel, O. Ozierand, N. Baliga,
J. Wang, D. Ramage, N. Amin, B. Schwikowski, and
T. Ideker. Cytoscape: A Software Environment for
Integrated Models of Biomolecular Interaction Networks. Genome Research, 13:2498–2504, 2003.

[24] Z. Hu, D. M. Ng, T. Yamada, C. Chen, S. Kawashima,
J. Mellor, B. Linghu, M. Kanehisa, J. M. Stuart, and
C. DeLisi. VisANT 3.0: new modules for pathway visualization, editing, prediction and construction. Nucleic Acids Res., 35:W625–W632, 2007.

[36] J. J. Thomas and K. A. Cook, editors. Illuminating
the Path: The Research and Development Agenda for
Visual Analytics. IEEE Computer Society, 2006.
[37] S.W. van Weelden, B. Fast, A. Vogt, P. van Der
Meer, J. Saas, J.J. van Hellemond, A.G. Tielens, and
M. Boshart. Procyclic trypanosoma brucei do not
use krebs cycle activity for energy generation. J Biol
Chem, 278:12854–12863, 2003.

[25] G. Joshi-Tope,
M. Gillespie,
I. Vastrik,
P. D’Eustachio, E. Schmidt, B. de Bono, B. Jassal,
G. R. Gopinath, G. R. Wu, L. Matthews, S. Lewis,
E. Birney, and L. Stein. Reactome: a knowledgebase
of biological pathways. Nucleic Acids Research,
33:D428–D432, 2005.

[38] J. J. van Wijk. The value of visualization. In IEEE
Visualization, pages 79–86, 2005.

[26] B. H. Junker, C. Klukas, and F. Schreiber. VANTED:
A system for advanced data analysis and visualization
in the context of biological networks. BMC Bioinformatics, 7:109, 2006.

[39] C. Ware. Information Visualization: Perception for
Design. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2000.
[40] K. Wegner and U. Kummer. A new dynamical layout algorithm for complex biochemical reaction networks. BMC Bioinformatics, 6(212), 2005.

[27] M. Kanehisa, S. Goto, M. Furumichi, M. Tanabe, and
M. Hirakawa. KEGG for representation and analysis
of molecular networks involving diseases and drugs.
Nucleic Acids Research, 38:D355–D360, 2010.

[41] I. Yeh, T. Hanekamp, S. Tsoka, P. Karp, and R. Altman. Computational analysis of plasmodium falciparum metabolism: organizing genomic information
to facilitate drug discovery. Genome Res, 14(5):917–
924, May 2004.

[28] A. Lambert, J. Dubois, and R. Bourqui. Pathway
preserving representation of metabolic networks. In
Proc. of EuroVis 2011, 2011.

213

