2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Traditional Settlements Boundary Visualization
Yuan –Miao

Authors Shang-chia Chiou

Graduate School of Design
National Yunlin University of Science and Technology
Yunlin, Taiwan
E-mail:miaoyuan1999@qq.com

Department of Architecture and Interior Design
National Yunlin University of Science and Technology
Yunlin, Taiwan

However, it seems that there is another space boundary
which transcends vision and function in some settlements. It
is the reflection of residence’s collective consciousness and it
is expressed by coalescing the tangible medium and the
intangible spiritual cognition. This paper aims to give a
detailed presentation of the non-objective ideology which
depends on edge space and then present the traditional
cultural heritage through visualization.
Fujian province locates in the remote region and it was
refugees’ migration land in ancient China during the wars.
Apart from this, these areas not only retain many aspects of
Chinese traditional culture but also derive other cultures
from their sea culture, such as belief and the strong
awareness of family ethics. These cultural elements are all
reflected in settlements, which is familiar to human life. In
addition, the edge is more highlighted as it is provided with
identifiability, impressiveness and functionality.

Abstract—To control the space is an important task in
preserving cultural heritage. For example, the edge design of
traditional settlements in historical cities and blocks
determines the basic size, space and shape of the space.
However, unlike the space designed in paper, the formation of
edges of traditional settlements are the presentation of
residents’ public consciousness in the settlements, value
orientation and behaviour law under the long-term historical
influence, rather than the expression of the designer’s personal
moment will. This topic cites some traditional cities and
settlements of Fujian sea system in China as example and use
the boundary as research subject in order to present nonobjective historical documents hidden in this system in details
by researching documents, field study and chart analysis. The
article also comes up with a new angle of research into
Cultural Heritage Knowledge Visualization.
Keywords:settlement space; boundary; culture; visualization
expression

I.

II.

INTRODUCTION

Edge is a significant element of the space. 2500 years ago
in China, a man named Li Er[1] who lived in Pre-Qing
dynasty (BC,571), wrote in his book Tao Teh King from the
building’s availability point of view to argue that space relies
on the interface to form. He also cited the example of
tangible earthenware after burning to expound and prove that
only when there is fixed interface can the storage space of
inside be shaped (Figure 1). Kevin Lynch[2] researched edge
space basing on human visual image. He advanced the
knowledge of edge from physical form to visual image.
Between the 2500 years, these two scholars discussed and
defined edge space from the visual and the functional
perspective.

Figure 1. Clayėinterface of spaceėearthenware.(left)
Figure 2. Visibility research, space edge(right) (Lynch ,1959:47)

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.102

BELIEF CULTURE OF SPACE BOUNDARY

As the edges of space mentioned by Kevin Lynch, the
space of Chinese settlement in ancient cities is also shaped to
the neat interface with the “Lifang system”. For this reason,
the urban space is clear divided and the block which is
enclosed with the roads has become the basic living
element—Lifang, which formed a living space shared by
inhabitants of a specific area and the streets function as
boundaries.
The urban layout of Quanzhou city in Fujian province still
retains the space texture of the Lifang system’s layout in this
period. It is clear from the blue area of Figure 3 that the
space structure of settlement is shaped with the “Lifang
system”. In fact, citizens did not fully acknowledge and
accept the planning which was the hierarchical reflection of
government’s power and will at that time. Due to various
reasons like physical geography and societal factors,
settlements of Fujian sea clan had strong worship toward
belief culture and then they re-divided the space, using
“Jing” as a unit, in accordance with their mental demands.
The original idea of “Jing” is “peaceful space with the god’s
protection”, which means a comfort from psychological
cognition to the real life.
How do people make the psychological cognitive space
come true in the real life space? The answer is the
607

extraordinary power from gods. To be specific, they need to
shape the space by using the temple as the center of circle
and the god’s protection scope as the diameter. As Figure 4 “Jing” of Quanzhou allocation structure chart shows, the
chart is made after interviewing the local residents and
consulting the literature and the jurisdiction scope of each
Jing’s temple in history. Therefore, this chart can be
regarded as a mental map which combines urban space and
belief culture.
Figure 5. The chart of the housing allotment system(Left)
Figure 6. Qionglin settlement land allotment map(Right)(Wu Peihui[5],
1999:p27)

The template is used to format your paper and style the
text. All margins, column widths, line spaces, and text fonts
are prescribed; please do not alter them. You may note
peculiarities. For example, the head margin in this template
measures proportionately more than is customary. This
measurement and others are deliberate, using specifications
that anticipate your paper as one part of the entire
proceedings, and not as an independent document. Please do
not revise any of the current designations.

Figure 3. Space texture map of Quanzhou Old town(Left)
Figure 4. 36“Jing”: mental map by folk region ( Right )
(LinZhishen[4], Study of the Traditional Settlement Pattern Based on the

IV.

Community Structure)

III.

FOLK CULTURE OF SPACE BOUNDARY

Every 18th and 19th of Lunar January in Ningde (Founded
in 933, Tang dynasty) of Fujian province, there is a grand
parade for Chenghuang ye, the god who rules the jurisdiction
of the hell city. God Parade is activities in which people
bring out the figure of Buddha consecrated in the temple and
travel a circle around the god’s space of jurisdiction
(Figure7). The function of God Parade is to protect local
residents and dispel evilness. The trip route should be strictly
confidential until the moment the trip starts. When the trip is
about to begin, the management committee director hands
out the route map to the guide and then the God Parade
begins.

CLAN CULTURE OF SPACE BOUNDARY

With the emphasis on family ethics in Chinese traditional
society, the settlement’s demarcation is also based on the
conventional “housing allotment system”. Literally, the socalled “the housing allotment system” means allocating
house according to the hierarchical order of the status of a
generation in the family. More specifically, hall is regarded
as the centre, the open door direction as the ahead (as the
arrowhead depicts); the left is more respected than right and
forth is more respected than back. “Housing allotment”
grades: supreme (left front of the hall) for grandparents
ĺsecond (right front of the hall) for parents ĺthird (left of
the hall) for the eldest sonĺ forth (right of the hall). (See
Figure 5).
When we did the research about Qionglin settlement, the
largest settlement of Taiwan Jinmen, an interesting
phenomenon was found similar to the housing allotment
system. The settlement is divided into four parts and each of
them has different names. After consulting the Cai’s family
pedigree, we knew that the fifth Cai’s ancestor of Qionglin
settlement who owned this land had four sons. With
ancestral hall as the core, the eldest son obtained left land,
the second son received right area, the third son got front
area and the forth son obtained the back area. Because the
third son had no heirs and the forth son moved out, their
properties are divided in accordance with such space
structure. This division of boundaries reflects traditional clan
culture.

Figure 7. City God get around and route map

The author possesses a route map (Figure 7) from the
management committee director of City God Temple and
draws the outline of the route basing on the main land marks
of the map. As shown in Figure 8, the route consists of two
circles, which begins at the inner one and then the outside
one. After searching lots of historic ancient books and
interviewing seniors, the author found the space boundaries,
core and streets, etc. To compare with the location of the
ancient wall illustrated in the historic documents of Ningde

608

city diary (Qianlong Edition, 1762) and the route map, we
can find that the first circle of God Parade is the location of
the ancient wall, a location rebuilt in 1563, Ming dynasty.
Although the wall has been destroyed during Japanese War
in 1939, the heritage of traditional folklore enables the
conception of space boundary to be retained till now and
allows the visualization of settlement space from the angle of
the folk customs. At the same time, God Parade divides
boundaries through the god’s activity and defines
settlement’s boundaries within the sacred space.

conflicts or matters of the settlement. As society evolves, the
growing population led to the shortage of land resources and
drove people to scramble for land resources. The territorial
consciousness of settlers became intense, and the fear of
external disasters and diseases make it extremely essential to
define their own territories.
As is shown by studies, the space boundary of Fujian sea
system demonstrates many multicultural characteristics such
as distinctive beliefs, folk customs, production, religions
which are connected with sea immigrant culture which is
pregnant with the special geographic location of Fujian sea
system settlements. It seems that there exists a correlation of
cultural layers (Figure 10). Maybe, Cultural Heritage
Visualisation is not only a research method to express the
abstract cultural heritage by means of informatization and
imagination, but also an approach to explore basic cultural
context and development.

Figure 8. The relational graph of god parade and urban area

To demarcate the space through folk activities is a special
way to define boundary.

Figure 9. The location of Taiwan and Fujian

Table 1.Relationship among three limitations of space

V.

CONCLUSION

Figure 10. The location of Taiwan and Fujian

Why does the concept of boundary exist (Table 1)and
contain multicultural content? Tracing the history and
geography (Figure 9), Fujian is an immigration province and
from the warring state of Tang dynasty, lots of refugee
families to settle in groups. In addition, the mutual help
among neighbours made the family ethics stronger. From
Ming dynasty, the residents of Fujian (most of them from the
same village as a group) sailed across the sea to Taiwan in
succession to make a living. In order to get through
dangerous channel, people always carry Mazu (the sea
goddess of China) or some other god idols of their
hometown with them. After successful landing, they believed
more in and depend more on these gods. At the same time,
the temple has become a place to handle and settle the

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

609

Li Er(BC 571), Tao Teh King;
Kevin lynch(1959) ,The Image of City, the Joint Centre of urban
studies;
Pan Guxi(2004), Chinese Architecture History(the fifth edition),
China: China Architecture and Building Press;
Lin Zhishen(2009), Study of the Traditional Settlement Pattern Based
on the Community Structure, master's thesis;
Wu Peihui(1999), Settlements of Jinmen Penghu, Taiwan: Daotian
publishing Co., LTD.,
Ningde city dairy(1762), Qianlong 27 years edition.

