2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Comparison of Emerging Information Visualization Tools for Higher Education
Marta Pinto

Rui Raposo

Department of Education; Communication and Art
University of Aveiro
Aveiro, Portugal
martapinto@ua.pt

Department of Communication and Art
University of Aveiro
Aveiro, Portugal
raposo@ua.pt

Fernando Ramos
Department of Communication and Art
University of Aveiro
Aveiro, Portugal
fernando.ramos@ua.pt
the data that we want to work with. As Eick [7] states, “with
the growth of networking and decreasing cost of storage it
has become technically feasible and cost effective to store
and access vast sets of information. The academic, business,
and government challenge is how to make sense of this
information and translate the insights into value producing
activities”. In a knowledge economy, information is relevant
for all the stakeholders of any field, and HE is but one the
many fields that are gradually grasping the advantage of the
adoption of IV solutions in activities linked to decision
making.
Information Visualization (IV) is being used in many
fields including Education, with the purpose of sharing to a
wide range of public related data, conveying information of
interest to institutions, general public at a social and
political level.
Handling and exchanging information is part of the
information and knowledge society, emerging as a pressure
from within the knowledge driven economy [1-3]. In many
types of works, handling data and processing information in
the digital form is part of everyday activity [4]. In Higher
Education (HE), the focus of this paper, digital technologies
have allowed the handling, access and manipulation of
massive data-sets, to benefit research, help to visualize more
complex
systems
and
strengthen
international
communication and collaboration in research [5]. But many
international data bases only allow data to be used for the
purpose of research and knowledge transfer, preventing
wide public to have access [6]. Although there are a great
number of online open databases to be used, data available
is vast and disperse, making it a time consuming task to
access all the data that we want to work with. As Eick [7]
states, “with the growth of networking and decreasing cost
of storage it has become technically feasible and cost
effective to store and access vast sets of information. The
academic, business, and government challenge is how to
make sense of this information and translate the insights
into value producing activities” (p.?). In a knowledge
economy, information is relevant for all the stakeholders of
any field, and HE is but one the many fields that are

Abstract—Information Visualization online tools have
gradually found its way into various contexts of use and
Higher Education Institutions are not an exception. The
considerable
amount
of
data
and information continuously produced in Higher Education
Institutions provide Information Visualization professionals
an interesting set of challenges which, if looked through a
broader perspective all share a common goal: to assist and
contribute to decision making. However, tools presently
available, or in an ongoing stage, take different approaches
regarding interface, interaction and goal design in Higher
Education Institutions, Information Visualization tools. This
paper presents a review and analysis of some Higher
Education Institution Information Visualization online tools,
according to an up-to-date theoretical framework. Its
conclusions include some final thoughts on what is driving, or
not, work and outcomes in this particular context of use.
Keywords-Information Visualization; Higher Education;
emerging tools

I.

INTRODUCTION

Information Visualization (IV) is being used in many
fields including Education, with the purpose of sharing to a
wide range of public related data, conveying information of
interest to institutions, general public at a social and political
level.
Handling and exchanging information is part of the
information and knowledge society, emerging as a pressure
from within the knowledge driven economy [1-3]. In many
types of works, handling data and processing information in
the digital form is part of everyday activity [4]. In Higher
Education (HE), the focus of this paper, digital technologies
have allowed the handling, access and manipulation of
massive data-sets, to benefit research, help to visualize more
complex
systems
and
strengthen
international
communication and collaboration in research [5]. But many
international data bases only allow data to be used for the
purpose of research and knowledge transfer, preventing wide
public to have access [6]. Although there are a great number
of online open databases to be used, data available is vast
and disperse, making it a time consuming task to access all
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.27

100

In the case of data concerning HE, if the vast majority of
data and deriving information is not available from open
databases, this means that it will need to be collected directly
from institutions, a time consuming task for whomever
collects data and for institutions who may be see it as a
burden [17].
Over the last few years IV has also gone beyond its focus
on individual singled out objects with their own sets of
variables, to increasing the number of tasks of comparison of
complex data [18]. Complex networks represented in IV can
be seen through Manuel Limas’ work of aggregation of a set
of 772 IV projects 1 of different visualization methods and
disciplines, presented in the website ‘Visual Complexity’
[14]. Within this website, for the context of HE, up to this
date, it is possible to find only one link referencing a paper
produced by Ortega, et al. [19], which aimed at mapping the
web presence of the European Higher Education Area
(EHEA), regarding the hyperlinks used by universities
towards analyzing the topology of the European academic
network. IV contributed towards mapping university
linkages, showing visual relationships between themselves,
showing the complex networks [20], contributing towards a
greater sense of transparency in HE.
European Higher Education Area (EHEA) calls for
greater accountability and the need to make European HE
diversity transparent, through the development of
mechanisms for providing more details about HEI such as:
benchmarking exercises, classifying and ranking HEI study
programs, creating quality profiles, and offering comparable
information on Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)/study
programs [21]. Data regarding HE is valuable to decision
makers, and its visibility on the web may give institutions
prestige, helping them attract students, scholars and financial
investment [19, 22]. Relating this to the aim of the TRACER
project, presented in the introduction of this paper, the
usefulness of an IV tool becomes clear for it may contribute
for students decision making. Pratt and Palloff [23] state the
knowledge of how wired the HE institutions are, helps
students determine which HEI to choose to apply to and
attend. This evidences that making this information
available, through an IV tool is of interest and may influence
decision making by institutions and users.The stated interest
and need for transparency, has led the European Comission
to support the creation of a set of 4 online IV tools, to map
diversity of HE and characterize HEI according to their
autonomy, mobility, ranking and classification:
• U-Map 2 , a European classification of HE
institutions, a tool active online that calls for the
institutions participation in updating information;
• University Autonomy in Europe3, ranking countries
according to organizational, financial, staffing and
academic autonomy, active online tool;
• U-Multirank4, a global university ranking tool, that
calls for the institutions participation in updating the
data;

gradually grasping the advantage of the adoption of IV
solutions in activities linked to decision making.
II.

STATE OF THE ART

In this paper, IV is broadly defined as computer driven
visual representations of data interface [8], although more
recent authors call for the need to define IV not only by the
technology it involves, but also regarding the relation, with
aim and context it wants to reach [9].
In 1957 computer processing was first used for statistical
data representation, evolving to interactive statistical
applications [10]. Further in 1987 the term visualization was
first used by McCornick, to describe how interactive graphs
and scientific visualization which began to be understood as
valuable for data analysis and to deepen research, as well as
a tool that would serve to draw the experiences [11]. IV is an
area of interest to anyone who wants to represent data
efficiently, among which are researchers and academics [12].
More recently, interest in IV has been growing, integrating
artists of programming and design data, scientists interested
in art working with the information in the form of digital art
with the power to engage users and make their experience
more visually interesting [13].
With the widespread use of the web as a work tool,
concerns with user friendly interface and interaction design
have taken center stage in this powerful medium. It may also
be said that the whole web 2.0 phenomena has contributed to
the importance of interface and interaction design, alongside
issues related with usability and accessibility, due to its focus
on the participation and collaboration activities developed by
users when they interact, produce and share content and
information.
The Web 2.0 phenomena, and its participative nature, has
also allowed a huge amount of data to be available and
shared online, in multitude forms through an unpredictable
number of manners. Several authors however agreed that
current challenges within IV involve: finding ways of
making sense of that data, converting it into meaningful
information and knowledge [7, 14]; making sense of the
increasing dimensions and data complexity provided by user
pro-consumption; finding patterns and making connections
towards a better understanding of the data and information
produced [14-16]; and how it may be made available to
specialists and non-specialists web users.
The evolution of IV has enabled it to become massive,
with IV tools used worldwide by recognized governmental
and non-governmental organizations, institutions, services,
entities, which have realized the power of this type of
communication and understanding of data and information
on a large scale. IV is dealing with data and information such
as statistical quantitative data (i.e.: Census Bureau data,
national and international reports); bibliometric data
concerning the quantity of scientific publication, that can
help define a research profile of the HE institution or
department [6] (i.e.: Web of Science, Scopus and Google
Scholar). In both cases some datasets are open and of public
use, while others can only to be used for research and
knowledge transfer, for particular contexts and environments
[6].

1

http://www.visualcomplexity.com/vc/ accessed at 21/02/2012
http://www.u-map.eu/
3
http://www.university-autonomy.eu/dimensions/organisational/
2

101

•

•

MAUNIMO5 , a tool aiming to draw attention to
various forms and types of academic mobility - this
is part of a project which is at the initial development
stage, and does not have available the proposed
online tool.
In all the IV tools mentioned above, HE institutions were
directly contacted in order to obtain the data and information
needed for each tool and its particular goal. It was also set
that the projects update was and is dependent of their
continuous collaboration in order to feed the tool with up-todate data and information. Collecting this sort of data and
information is a time consuming task, usually done through a
survey and a coordinated search within existing databases.
Besides time consuming it also requires the researcher to:
find the data and information in case it is open access and
making a careful collection of it taking in consideration its
context [24]. So, if that is such a hassle why bother? The
Web can hence be used as a way to attract students, scholars
and funding from other places, spreading the prestige of
these educational institutions nation and worldwide. This
raw yet true fact has provoked competition between
universities to achieve an advantageous visibility on the Web
and to improve their position in search engine results. The
following sections of this paper present some additional
aspects of the theoretical framework where they are
deconstructed according to their direct use in the HE IV tools
comparison and analysis.
III.

•

table based on the proposal of visual comparison for
IV, by Gleicher, et al. [18]. Both the work of these
authors focus in a more broad analysis of IV and its
design;
table to allow the comparison at a deeper level of the
patterns in the IV tools, according to the compiling
of visualization methods by Behrens [26] - see
Table1 presented in this paper.
IV.

COMPARISON SETTING OF IV TOOLS FOR HE

The aim is to understand how information and data are
being visually presented in the 3 selected IV tools for HE.
A. Tools selected
As result of the search performed, there were 3 IV tools
regarding HE selected, of which will be made a briefe
description: i) U-Map, European Classification of HEIs; ii)
University Autonomy in Europe; iii) U-Multirank.
U-Map tool: a classification tool of European HEIs, of
an ongoing project (see Fig. 1 bellow). This tool gives the
user a list of HEIs with a description of the profiles through 6
comparable dimensions. Users select the dimensions more
relevant for their need of information, visualizing specified
profiles of HEIs. The graphical presentation of data is in
sunburst charts to illustrate institutional profiles, comparing
side-by-side up to three HEIs [17]. The data of U-Map tool
through time will be updated by HEIs who will have a
registered profile, and reviewed by the administrators of the
tool.

METHODOLOGY FOR THE SELECTION AND
COMPARISON OF IV TOOLS FOR HE

To select the IV tools regarding HE information a
systematic search was undertaken from September 2011 to
February of 2012, using the key words: higher education,
Information Visualization, tool, mapping tool. The search
was performed on the websites: Information Aesthetics 6 ,
The Chronicle of Higher Education 7 , the Google search
engine. The search resulted in a total of 4 IV tools
representing data regarding HE and aiming to classifying,
and rank HE institutions. We have selected only 3 IV tools
which have been published online or have a final report
detailing the aims, organization, interaction and design of
the tool.
To establish a comparison between the set of 3 IV tools,
a search was undertaken by searching in the Scopus
database, Springer link, and IEEE Xplore digital library
using the key words: comparison, Information Visualization,
tool, Higher Education. A total of 3 articles where accessed
and analyzed in order to structure a comparison of the
selected IV tools. The results led us to propose 3 tables to
establish the comparison of the set of tools:
• table based on the taxonomy of tools that support the
fluent and flexible use of visualizations proposed by
Heer and Shneiderman [25];

Figure 1. Printscreen of the U-Map tool

U-Multirank tool: a global multi-ranking tool, aiming
to allow users to select HEIs performance indicators
according to their own preferences and priorities, and define
the institutional profile they are interested in and hence the
sample of institutions to be comparing, gaining a detailed
view of institutional profiles (see Fig. 2 bellow).

4

http://www.u-multirank.eu/
http://www.maunimo.eu/
6
http://infosthetics.com
7
http://chronicle.com/section/Home/5
5

102

and was analyzed according to the information obtained in
the final report published [17]; analysis of the U-Map tool
focuses on the online available demonstration mode.
The first comparison task is based on the fluent and
flexible use of visualizations proposed by Heer and
Shneiderman [25], adopted to understand how the
visualization is helping the user to make sense of data. The
authors present a taxonomy of interactive dynamics that
contribute to successful analytic dialogues, consisting of the
group of three high-level categories, with a total of 12 task
types [25]:
Category 1: data and view specification (visualize,
filter, sort, and derive): in this category the strongest task
integrated into all the three tools, is allowing the user to
filter out data to focus on relevant items. This means users
have a limited data view specification options.
Category 2: view manipulation (select, navigate,
coordinate, and organize): the view manipulation is the
strongest task allowed by all 3 tools, were the user is
enabled to select items to highlight, filter, or manipulate, as
well as to organize multiple windows and works paces,
although the U-Map offers only two window work spaces,
and to coordinate views for linked multi-dimensions. This
highlights the visual manipulation as strong quality of these
tools. Within this category the only task not made available
by any tool, is the navigation to examine high-level patterns
and low-level detail, meaning that what the user sees is what
the user gets in terms of the patterns produced.
Category 3: analysis process and provenance (record,
annotate, share, and guide): the most fragile category,
almost non existing integration in the tools. Only one task in
tool is included, the University autonomy in Europe, guides
their users through the analysis tasks or stories of the data.
Sharing or recording is not implemented in any tool,
meaning that the user cannot keep its history of interaction
within the tools, collaborate or share visualization.
The second task of analysis consisted in comparing the
designs of visualizations, core in IV. The proposal of visual
comparison by Gleicher, et al. [18] brings us to a brief
comparison the tools regarding three categories: Category 1)
juxtaposition, the design of each object is separate; Category
2) superposition, multiple designs show multiple objects in
the same coordinate system (i.e. on top of one another);
Category 3) explicit encodings, represent the relationships
that directly visually encodes connections between objects.
The analysis of the tools, done in a checklist like way,
revealed that the only visual category used in the design of
all the tools was the juxtaposition, and that all have adopted
a sunburst layout, implementing a partition layout [28].
Finally the third comparison task was prepared by
compiling the visualization methods proposed by Behrens
[26], allowing a comparison of the design patterns for
interactive IV, providing an overview of methods with
elements of the display, behavior and interaction patterns, as
shown in the Table 1 shown below [26]:

Figure 2 Sunburst representation of an institutional
performance profile
The creators of both U-Map and U-Multirank believe
these tools offer a new approach to user-driven rankings
[17]. The institutional profiles rely on multidimensional
rankings, already created in U-Map, adding to the user the
possibility of selection of dimensions and of a set of
institutions they want to compare in a focused ranking [27].
Regarding the comparison allowed by U-Map, Federkeil et
al [27] in a critical perspective over these two tools, state
that it does not make sense to allow comparison between
institutions with such different profiles.
University Autonomy in Europe tool: lets the user
compare 28 HE systems regarding their academic,
organizational, financial and staffing autonomy (see Fig. 3
bellow). The visualization is allowed by a graphical
representation in the sunburst-like which represent unique
indicators made up by multiple colored squares. The more
autonomous the HE system is, the more colored squares
there are. A high score on an indicator or autonomy
dimension indicates that the relevant regulations provide a
legal framework without restricting universities in their
freedom of action.

Figure 3 Pintscreen of the University Autonomy in
Europe tool
B. Tools comparison
We propose three tasks of comparison, focusing on the
design and interaction patterns of the tools, sustained on the
work of the three authors referred in methodology section of
this paper. It is important to take into consideration the two
following notes: the U-Multirank tool is not active online,

103

TABLE I.

V.

COMPARISON TABLE OF VISUALIZATION

The analysis of the data and view specification revealed
that concerning all categories, the three set of tools U-Map,
European Autonomy in Europe and U-Multirank, are very
similar in the visualization and interactions provided, and
that all are result of projects supported by the European
Commision. The similarity between both U-Map and UMultirank is explained as a result of the first tool developed U-Map - having prepared the ground for the second tool
[17]. Nonetheless, all tools have in common the adopted the
visual presentation of data in a sunburst layout, and only
offer one type of visualization method, what in our opinion,
this makes this set of tools limited in what it concerns the
exploration of visual displays and interface interactions
design.
In such a strong social web context, it is noted that none
of the IV tools allow the user to collaborate, annotate or
share visualizations. There would be advantages if these
tools, created with the aim of contributing towards
transparency of HE, would allow the user to save the result
of his interaction patterns with the tool: careful interaction by
filtering the variables and dimensions of interest, to be able
to export that visualization or share it with others on the web.

IV tools

U- Ma p

Un ive rs ity
a u to n o my
in Eu ro p e

U- Mu ltira n k

Correlations (Scat ter plots and Bubble Charts).

no

no

no

Continuous quantities (Simple Line Charts and Multiset Line Charts).

no

no

no

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

no

no

Hierarchies (T ree Diagrams and T reemaps).

no

no

no

Networks (Diagram Maps and Relation Circles).

no

no

no

Spatial configurations (T opographic Maps and T hematic Maps).

no

no

no

no

no

no

yes

no

yes

yes

no

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

no

no

yes

no

yes

no

no

no

yes

no

n/a

Visualiz ation me thods

Display
Patterns

Discrete quantities (Simple Bar Charts, Multiset Bar Charts and Stacked
Bar Charts).
Data proportions (Nightingale's Polar Area Diagrams, Pie Charts and
Ring Charts).
Flow diagrams (Sankey's Diagrams and T hread Arcs).

Navigation (Simple Zoom, Local Zoom, Panning,T imeline, Linked
multiples and Overview plus detail).
Filtering (Layering, Active Objects, Boundary Filters, Facet Browsing
and Dynamic Query).
Behaviour Arrangement (Selective Arrangement, Sortable Columns, Custom
Patterns
Dimensions and Isolated Comparisons).
Exploration ("Details on Demand" and DataT ips).
Animation (transition in element’s colour or size and element
animation).
Boolean selection (usually done with interface elements such as radio
Inte raction buttons, checkboxes, and dropdown menus)
Patterns Linear adjust (Sliders and double Sliders).
incl ude :
Spatial navigation (Drag and Drop and SelectionMasks).

DISCUSSION OF RESULTS

Comparison table adapted from the visualization methods proposed by Behrens (2008)

The results show that the display patterns of discreet
quantities and of data proportions are a common option in all
the tools. The U-Map and U-Multirank tools, allow the users
to have behavior patterns such as filtering the information to
access and arranging it facilitate understanding and
comparison tasks, and allowing for a deeper exploration of
data and information by giving details on demand as well as
data tips. The interaction patterns most common in use are
the selection of elements by interacting with the checkboxes
or dropdown menus of the interface.
In all tools the visual presentation of data is done in a
sunburst layout, as it is possible to see figures 1, 2 and 4, and
in the U-Multirank final report [17]. Each sunburst line
represents a unique indicator, made up by its length, or a
multitude of squares. In University Autonomy in Europe the
more squares are filled, the more autonomous the higher
education system. A high score on an indicator or autonomy
dimension indicates that the relevant regulations provide a
legal framework without restricting universities in their
freedom of action. The main differences between these UMap and University Autonomy in Europe tools, is that the
first allows a comparison between 3 institutions
simultaneously, each represented by one independent
sunburst for the institutions profiles and characteristics [17];
and in University Autonomy tool, comparison is not allowed
by putting the sunburst graphs side by side, arguing that
some characteristics do lend themselves to international
comparison [29]. The issue of comparison of institutions is
also predicted in the U-Multirank tool report, stating “the
integration of the already designed and tested U-Map
classification tool into U-Multirank enables the creation of
the user-selected groups of sufficiently comparable
institutions. This two-step approach is completely new in
international and national rankings” [17]. Because these tools
are recent, there is no timeline behavior.

VI.

CONCLUSIONS

The limited number of IV tools for HE can be somewhat
justified with the fact that this sort of outcomes are relatively
recent in this particular context of use. Pioneer projects, such
as U-MAP, have started dealing with these issues in 2008. If
considered that rankings and institutional comparisons are
still very sensitive issues one may easily understand the need
for in-depth thought and much consideration before investing
time and resources in the development of such tools. There is
much discussion about which should be the appropriate
ethical and methodological practices adopted by the network
of HEIs. However, the diverse landscape of HEI makes
reaching a consensus close to impossible. HEI may agree
with comparing themselves to the “big picture”, but never to
variable based comparison with their peers. This has been a
very important issue still under-discussion within the UMAP project.
Their aim is to promote transparency of the HE area, and
not to rank comparatively the HEIs. It is also important to
take into account, the fact that all data had to be collected
and validated directly with the HEIs, a time consuming task.
This may justify the lack of temporal comparison of data in
all the tools.
Regarding the layout and interactive patterns of the tools,
we can conclude that although the selected IV tools fit under
the umbrella of interactive web tools, they offer limited
interactive patterns, and sets of variables to compare. The
visual layout of the tools are similar, lacking diverse layout
exploration. None allow the user to share or export the
visualization created as a result of their interaction, filtering
and arranging within the tool. Not taking advantage of the
knowledge transfer via social web.

104

[17] F. (ed) van Vught and F. Ziegele, "Design and Testing the Feasibility
of a Multidimensional Global University Ranking," Consortium for
Higher Education and Research Performance Assessment2011.
[18] M. Gleicher, D. Albers, R. Walker, I. Jusufi, C. D. Hansen, and J. C.
Roberts, "Visual comparison for information visualization,"
Information Visualization, vol. 10, pp. 289-309, 2011.
[19] J. L. Ortega, I. Aguillo, V. Cothey, and A. Scharnhorst, "Maps of the
academic web in the European Higher Education Area—an
exploration of visual web indicators," Scientometrics, vol. 74, pp.
295-308, 2008.
[20] J. L. Ortega and I. Aguillo, "Mapping world-class universities on the
web," Information Processing &amp; Management, vol. 45, pp. 272279, 2009.
[21] EHEA. (2012, 10-03-2012). Transparency tools. Available:
http://www.ehea.info/article-details.aspx?ArticleId=145
[22] D. Butler. (2010, 15-03-2012). University rankings smarten up.
Nature
[News].
Available:
http://www.nature.com/news/2010/100303/full/464016a.html
[23] K. Pratt and R. M. Palloff, The virtual student: a profile and guide to
working with online learners, First ed. San Francisco: Jossey Bass,
2003.
[24] N. Iliinsky, "On Beauty," in Beautiful Visualization, O. R. Media,
Ed., ed Sebastopol, 2010.
[25] J. Heer and B. Shneiderman. (2012, 05-03-2012). A taxonomy of
tools that support the fluent and flexible use of visualizations.
Interactive Dynamics for Visual Analysis 10(2). Available:
http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2146416
[26] C. Behrens, "The Form of Facts and Figures," Master of Arts in
Design in the Interface Design program Master Thesis, Potsdam
University of Applied Sciences, 2008.
[27] G. Federkeil, J. File, F. Kaiser, F. A. van Vught, and F. Ziegele, "An
Interactive Multidimensional Ranking Web Tool," in Higher
Education Dynamics. vol. 37, ed, 2012, p. 167.
[28] J. Heer, M. Bostock, and V. Ogievetsky, "A Tour Through the
Visualization Zoo," Communications of the ACM, vol. 53, pp. 59-67,
2010.
[29] T. Estermann, T. Nokkala, and M. Steinel, "University Autonomy in
Europe II - The Scorecard," Belgium 9789078997306, 2011.

One final observation worth making is that, despite the
fact that the IV tools present data and information which may
help in decision making or future research, none of the tools
suggest any improvement aids nor best practices for cases
where there is still room for improvement. This could
eventually be the next goal for future work on online IV
tools proposed for the HE area as an aid for improving
current practices through proactive and reactive analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by the Portuguese
Foundation for Science and Technology for financially
supporting the project under the reference PTDC/CPECED/113368/2009 COMPETE:FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER014394.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

R. E. Anderson, "Implications of the Information and Knowledge
Society for Education International Handbook of Information
Technology in Primary and Secondary Education." vol. 20, J. Voogt
and G. Knezek, Eds., ed: Springer US, 2008, pp. 5-22.
B. Collis, "E-learning and the transformation of learning for a
knowledge economy," in The network society: From knowledge to
policy, Castells and Cardoso, Eds., ed Washington DC: John Hopkins
Center for Transatlantic Relations, 2006, pp. 215-224.
W. Powell and K. Snellman, "The Knowledge Economy," Annual
Review of Sociology, vol. 30, pp. 199-220, 2004.
L. Manovich. (2005, The Shape of Information. Available:
http://manovich.net/DOCS/IA_Domus_3.doc
OECD. (2012, 19/03/2012). CERI - University Futures: Information
and
Communication
Technology.
Available:
http://www.oecd.org/document/55/0,3746,en_2649_35845581_36760
247_1_1_1_1,00.html
J. Callaert, E. Epping, G. Fererkeil, B. Jongbloed, F. Kaiser, and R.
Tijssen, "Data Collection," in Higher Education Dynamics. vol. 37, F.
A. van Vught and F. Ziegele, Eds., ed, 2012, p. 125.
S. G. Eick, "Information visualization value stack model," in Visual
and Spatial Analysis, B. Kovalerchuk and J. Schwing, Eds., ed:
Springer Netherlands, 2004, pp. 31-45.
C. Chen, "Top 10 unsolved information visualization problems,"
Computer Graphics and Applications, IEEE, vol. 25, pp. 12-16, 2005.
L. Masud, F. Valsecchi, P. Ciuccarelli, D. Ricci, and G. Caviglia,
"From Data to Knowledge - Visualizations as Transformation
Processes within the Data-Information-Knowledge Continuum," in
Information Visualisation (IV), 2010 14th International Conference,
2010, pp. 445-449.
M. Friendly, "A brief history of data visualization," Handbook of data
visualization, pp. 15-56, 2008.
B. H. McCormick, "Visualization in scientific computing," SIGBIO
Newsl., vol. 10, pp. 15-21, 1987.
C. Ware, Information visualization: perception for design: Morgan
Kaufmann, 2004.
"Manuel Lima - Visual Complexity," R. T. Hong and E. Dumont,
Eds., ed: Vimeo.com, 2009.
M. Lima, Visual Complexity: Mapping Patterns of Information. New
York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2011.
J. Steele and N. Iliinsky, Eds., Beautiful Visualization: Looking at
Data Through the Eyes of Experts. Sebastopol: O'Reilly Media, 2010,
p.^pp. Pages.
N. Yau, Visualize This: The Flowing Data Guide to Design,
Visualization, and Statistics. Indianapolis: Wiley Publishing, 2011.

105

