2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Criteria for cooperative urban design through digital
system of design tools
Anja Jutraz

Tadeja Zupancic

Faculty of Architecture
University of Ljubljana
Ljubljana, Slovenia
anja.jutraz@fa.uni-lj.si

Faculty of Architecture
University of Ljubljana
Ljubljana, Slovenia
tadeja.zupancic@fa.uni-lj.si

architecture, urban planning, geography, sociology, the
cognitive science, etc.

Abstract—Urban design is a public collaborative activity,
which deals with our building environment. We all want to
make urban areas pleasant and functional. Both lay public and
professionals have to be included in the design process. They
have different knowledge backgrounds and expertise, but they
need to communicate and collaborate with each other, using a
wide variety of digital tools available. However, it can be
argued, that existing interfaces cannot meet the needs of this
communication process: one of the main problems is that they
are not integrated into a recognizable system of tools for public
participation in urban design.

Figure 1. Shifting between urban planning, urban design and architecture

The main question is how to improve the quality of the
urban environment, where everyone is included in the urban
design process, and everyone (lay public and professionals)
is satisfied at the end. Due to rapid development of digital
media over the past decade face-to-face collaboration has
begun slowly losing its importance and virtual collaboration
has gained popularity. (Hudson-Smith, 2003) By moving
design focus from face-to-face to virtual collaboration, the
need for interfaces between different participants is rising in
importance. A digital system of tools needs to be established
out of different digital tools for effective communication and
collaboration in urban design. It will help all the participants
to improve the quality of the living environment, gain better
final results, and at the same time, lay public and
professionals will exchange their knowledge/ expertise and
educate each other.

At different stages of public participation in urban design
special needs for specific digital tools can be identified (e.g.
digital tools for decision making process, digital tool for
informing lay public etc.). These stages and their related
suitable digital tools will be defined in the following article as
starting points for the development of the digital system of
tools mentioned above.
3D city models represent a special digital tool for
communication and collaboration between lay public and
professionals through the whole process of participation. They
are really important for visualization and simulation in
cooperative design. The criteria for cooperative design using
the 3D city models will be defined in this article: as essential
elements of the digital system of urban design collaboration
and communication tools.

II.
Keywords-urban design; public participation; digital tool;
collaboration; communication; lifelong learning

I.

Public participation process in urban design can be
defined as cooperative design, where designers
(professionals) and users (lay public) are involved on an
equal footing. Cooperative design combines communication
between all the participants, active collaboration and
education/ exchanging knowledge between different
participants. At the beginning of the process the most
significant is communication, later on the communication is
moved towards collaboration - rather than just exchanging
the information they start working and designing together.
Through the public participation process the participants
educate each other, the level of knowledge is rising
throughout the process (it is low at the beginning, and it
increases through the process). Participants start to learn
from each other, each of them has some expertise, which is

INTRODUCTION

Urban design is a public collaborative activity, which
deals with creating and shaping cities and towns, and it is
giving the form and its character with designing elements,
buildings, public spaces. It is an integrative field, which
needs a wide range of knowledge. This includes how people
behave in the physical environment, their perception of the
places, different urban forms, and the relationship of design
proposals to the natural, physical and cultural environment.
Urban design is an interdisciplinary activity, where different
disciplines work and design together: architecture, landscape

1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.74

PUBLIC PARTICIPATION PROCESS

416

contributed to the others; public participation process is
moving towards life-long learning (Figure 2).

Figure 2. Moving public participation process towards lifelong learning

People collaborate with each other in different ways, and
depending on the degree of involvement in the participation
process we can specify several categories and levels of
public participation. According to Arnstein there are three
main categories: “Non-participation”, “Degree of Tokenism”
and “Degree of Citizen Power” on the top. (Arnstein, 1969)
Moreover, Arnstein defined eight steps of public
participation process: “manipulation” and “therapy” are part
of “non-participation”, by increasing public impact we move
towards “informing”, “consultation” and “placation”, and on
the top of the ladder there is full participation, which is
reflected in the “partnership”, which allows the exchange of
views between the public and authorities, and the “delegated
power” and “citizen control”. Public participation is a
process in which people have to think thoroughly about what
they want, consider some options, and work through what
should happen. Wilcox (1994) altered Arnstein’s eight step
ladder of participation to five levels which will be the base
for further development of digital tools: information
(informing people what is planned to be done), consultation
(feedback, number of options), deciding together
(encouraging others to provide some additional ideas and
options, join in deciding about the best way forward), acting
together (deciding together what is best and forming a
partnership to carry it out) and supporting (helping others
with what they want).
Planning involves different dimensions which have to be
considered through the whole design process: from social
interaction, various people involved in the process, contexts
(factors), etc. (Roo, 2010) Urban design is a complex
process, where different professions have to be taken into
consideration (like sociologist, economist, landscape
architects, etc.) and also different dimensions of urban design
(social,
visual,
functional,
temporal,
perceptual,
morphological). We should enable lay public and all the
disciplines to be involved in the urban design process from
the very beginning, and ensure continuous collaboration
between all of them. Our aim is full participation,
cooperative design, that’s why we want to define a digital
tool for each stage of the urban design and public
participation process. Together they will form the digital
system of design tools.

Figure 3. Digital tools in public participation process

Figure 3 examines the stages of the participation process,
the connection between different stages of public
participation process and some digital tools, showing where
digital tools are most appropriate and the main purpose of the
tools at each stage. Different digital tools have different
public impact: some are made just for informing (low public
impact), the others for real collaboration (high public
impact). The most important digital tool at each stage of the
public participation process is shown in the figure 3.
Public participation in urban design is seen as an
opportunity for life-long urban design learning, offering a
wide variety of different actions, problems and educational
elements. Through participating in the design process all the
participants should improve their knowledge. The public
participation process could be seen as a project based
learning (PBL) concept, which has already been used in the
architectural projects at Stanford University (PBL Lab, 2012)
and in many other projects: the participants from different
disciplines work together from the first step of the project,
through working together they exchange their expertise and
develop shared visions. They include different opinions,
knowledge and through “working by doing” they improve
their knowledge level and educate each other. This concept
could be translated into the urban design process. Lay public
can understand the reasons why something was made a
certain way; they can and should better understand the
reasons and consequences.
III.

CRITERIA FOR COOPERATIVE DESIGN THROUGH
DIGITAL SYSTEM OF TOOLS

We are facing the lack of a digital system for public
participation in urban design, where different digital tools for
communication and collaboration would be combined into a
new wholeness. Different participants have different
knowledge/ expertise, and they need the interface
understandable to all of them for more effective cooperative
design. A digital system of tools needs to be developed to
simplify the public participation process; it is made to
include lay public and professionals in the process and it is

417

save participants’ time, participants should have
more time to express their opinion: they should not
spend time for transportation;
real-time multiuser application, interdisciplinary:
different disciplines should be part of this process.

focused on better final solutions and increased satisfaction
among all of them.
The digital system of tools (DST) should be composed of
different tools that are answering the needs for public
participation process in urban design. For example, a tool for
the decision making process is a support tool, corresponding
to the Arnstein’s level of “partnership”, the first level of
“degree of citizen power”. Tools would represent the support
for public participation in urban design. DST should offer
different participants various tools; participants would
choose the tools that would be the most appropriate for the
selected urban design problem. Only combination of various
tools would allow gaining better final results.
The DST would include the following elements:
data services;
multi-user planning scheme, list of participants:
there would be a transparent list of all participants in
the urban design and public participation process
(name, purpose of being involved, discipline,…); it
is important to know who the participants (lay
public/professionals) are as they use different
channels for exchanging knowledge, comments;
text, communication tools, verbal presentation of the
design process, forums for exchanging opinions,
interdisciplinary blogs: different channels for
exchanging information, comments, opinions;
important combination of visual and non-visual
information;
analysis, presentations: it is really important that
analysis and presentations are transparently seen to
all participants of the design process;
aerial photographs with street level imagery, 2D
maps, 3D city models: pedestrian view should be
presented as well as the bird view, there should be
combination of 2D and 3D, 4D is recommended;
visualizations, a realistic visual simulations;
various scenarios: simulations of various scenarios
should be presented, in the way that is comparable to
the real site;
planning and experiential design aspect: how you
experience the site;
educational module: participants should be educated
about basic urban design, about the process, about
work of other disciplines, etc.
The characteristics of the DST should be the following:
online, virtually based, with no geographic/ location
or time constraints;
easy to use, easy to navigate 3D models,
understandable for different users with different
knowledge background;
real-time information sharing: you could get all the
information whenever you want;
cost-effective: participants should not need a lot of
money to start using it, DST should be free or low
budget;
reliable;
transparent: everyone could see and access all the
information;

A. Types of urban design digital tools
Digital tools could be classified into different
groups/categories on the basis of their characteristics/
elements and their main purpose of use. These groups could
be defined through the comparison of known examples,
grouped from the research databases such as CUMINCAD,
DDSS, etc. (Jutraz, Zupancic, 2010)

Figure 4. Types of urban design digital tools

As we can see in the Figure 4, our aim is to move
towards the “Virtual Urban Lab”, which presents a DST for
public participation in urban design, with the following basic
elements: non-visual information, 2D elements, 3D elements,
4D elements and virtual collaborative elements. “Virtual
urban lab” presents a virtual environment for
communication, collaboration, designing and education of
the lay and professional public, so for effective cooperative
design in urban design. The 3D city model will present the
base of “Virtual urban lab”, as an interface between
imagination and real-world, which will help to simulate and
present the current situation and proposed new design.
B. 3D city models as an essential part of the DST for
urban design
The DST for cooperative urban design is combined of
different urban design digital tools, where each digital tool is
added at the specific stage of the participation process, some
of them can represent continuous support. The 3D city
models should be included from the first stage of the
participation process and they should be used for
communication, collaboration and life-long learning process.

418

Other digital tools are added through the participation
process and in relation to the 3D city models. (Figure 5)
The criteria for the 3D city models are defined on the
basis of the research of various 3D city models. The most
important criteria for the 3D city models from our opinion
are: scale, view, level of detail, role of avatar and possibility
of scenario/alternatives simulation. Below is presented the
short overview of all mentioned criteria for 3D city models.

Figure 6. Linkage between orientation and view in the 3D city models

The experts should define relative views in advance. For
example, in 3DICC (2012) we can define views in advance:
we define the views where the changes were made and
which are relevant for the public. These views have many
positive effects: easier navigation, easier to emphasize the
most important parts of the 3D city model, focusing the
participant’s attention, etc. Easier shifting can be achieved
using additional orientation tables. (Figure 7)

Figure 5. Tools for public participation process in urban design (right)
and The criteria for 3D city models (left)

1) Scale
Urban design usually operates at and across a variety of
spatial scales. We should be aware of different scales we are
working with, and also of the relationship of the parts to the
whole. Tibbalds (1992) argued that “places matter the most”:
“We seem to be losing the ability to stand back and look at
what we are producing as a whole…” By changing the scale
we are changing the focus. There is also a strong connection
between changing the scale and extent of urban intervention
at the same time. By moving small-scale urban intervention
to a large-scale intervention we are shifting design focus
from urban design to urban planning, from 3D to 2D
approach.
2) View
The most suitable way to use 3D city model is to present
the site from different views: from the pedestrian view, the
mid-view and the bird view (Jutraz, Voigt, Zupancic, 2011).
Some urban elements or characteristics that are observed
from one view cannot be seen from another. From the
pedestrian view you hardly get the impression of the whole
space, it all depends on the choice of the view. By moving
the view from the pedestrian to the bird view it is easier to
orient yourself. The mid-view can be seen as an interface
between the pedestrian and the bird view. Shifting between
different views can even improve the final results of the final
results of the cooperative process.

Figure 7. Predefined views in 3DICC

3) Level of detail
Level of detail has influence on the experience of the
space of lay public and/or professionals. The level of detail
has already been explored in numerous studies. For example,
in UCLA Urban Simulation Lab (UCLA, 2010), they found
out, that when the level of detail is increased, the level of
recognition and perception increase as well, and the
comments on proposed solution are more relevant. Others
report limitations of that effect.

419

4) Role of avatar
Virtual environments help you to experience the realworld. Usually you are using your avatar to move around the
virtual environment, to explore and experience the 3D
models. As Murphy (2011) states avatars can “help you learn
to cope with similar situations in the actual world”. You are
actually watching the digital representation of you, and this
can “change your mind, improving your behaviour in a
social situation, calming your anxieties, swaying your views
of a person or product, and helping you make better lifestyle
or financial decisions”. According to the research at
Dartmouth College people project themselves onto the
avatars, and it was discovered that “you’re recruiting similar
parts of the brain when you are thinking about the digital
representation of yourself as you are when you’re thinking of
the real-life version of yourself”. Moreover, people could
learn a lot from their avatars, and the more they identify with
their avatars the more effective the learning process is. When
you move around a 3D city model with your avatar, you will
be able to adopt this experience and reflect it into everyday
life, and you will more easily imagine what urban design
proposals would mean for real-life. We can use avatars in 3D
city models in the public participation process to teach lay
public how to use urban space, how to improve the quality of
their life - we can use it as part of lifelong learning process.
The mask effect of the avatar makes the communication
easier for many people.

these criteria: scale, view, level of detail, role of avatar and
possibility of scenario/alternatives simulation.
Each stage of public participation process is really
important for the final result (design) and involves different
participants, who work together and exchange their
knowledge/ expertise through the whole process. The DST
(“Virtual urban lab”) could be therefore defined as an urban
design learning environment, where knowledge transfer is
happening in both directions, from the professionals to the
lay public and vice versa. The cooperative urban design
through using digital communication and collaboration tools
can be seen as a lifelong learning process, what will also be
explored further.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by the Slovenian Research
Agency (ARRS), the research is part of PhD studies at
University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Architecture. We would
like to thank also PBL Lab and AEC Global Teamwork
2012, for opportunity of using and exploring the 3D ICC, an
online collaboration environment.
REFERENCES
[1]

Arnstein S. R. (1969) A ladder of citizen participation. Journal of The
American Institute of Planners, 35, p.216-224
[2] Carmona M, Tiesdell S, Heath T, Oc T (2010) Public Places – Urban
Spaces: The Dimensions of Urban Design. Architectural Press Elsevier, 2nd edition
[3] Hudson-Smith, A (2003) Digitally Distributed Urban Environments:
The Prospects for Online Planning. unpublished PhD Thesis,
University College London, available at www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/andy/
[4] Jutraz, Voigt, Zupancic (2011) 3D city models as understandable
design interfaces for lay public. TTEM Magazine
[5] Jutra , A and Zupan i , T (2010) Evaluation of visual digital tools for
public participation in urban design. DDSS conference, Eindhoven.
[6] Murphy, S (2011) Your Avatar, Your Guide: Seeing a digital
doppelgänger can change your mind – for better or worse. Scientific
American Mind, pp. 58-63.
[7] Roo G, Silva AE (2010) A planner’s encounter with Complexity.
Ashgate Publishing, England.
[8] Stanford (2011) http://pbl.stanford.edu/
[9] UCLA – Urban simulation team (2010) http://www.ust.ucla.edu
[10] Wilcox, D (1994) The Guide to Effective Participation,
http://www.partnerships.org.uk/guide/index.htm
[11] 3DICC (2012) http://www.3dicc.com/
References of digital tools (Figure 4):
[12] Cityplanner (2011) http://cityplanner.agency9.com/cityplanner/
[13] CUMINCAD (2010) http://cumincad.scix.net/cgibin/works/Home
[14] DDSS (2010) http://www.ddss.nl/DDSS/publications
[15] Hafencity (2009) http://www.hafencity.com/
[16] Halatsch J, Kunze A, Schmitt G (2009) Value Lab: a Collaborative
Environment for the Planning of Future Cities. in: Cagdas, G.,
Colakoglu, B. (eds.), 27th eCAADe Conference Proceedings,
Istanbul, eCAADe and ITU/YTU, p.507-514
[17] New
Spatial
acts
for
Ljubljana
Municipality
(2009)
https://urbanizem.ljubljana.si/index2/
[18] Second Life (2011) http://secondlife.com/
[19] Teleplace (2011) http://www.teleplace.com

5) Scenario/alternatives simulation
It can be noted that majority of the tools available cannot
offer the option of simple alternative shifting. On the basis of
the input from the lay public and professionals on urban
design (suggestions, comments, improvements, designs) the
professionals should prepare possible scenario/alternatives
simulation for the lay public to experience it. Professionals
cannot be equated to the lay public, and possible
scenario/alternatives have to be presented to both of them.
IV.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

To conclude, different stages of the participation process
and at the same time different stages of the urban design
require a specific digital tools; for example, the first stage of
urban design is equivalent to the first stage of public
participation process and should involve the digital tools for
informing, research, communication between different
participants, exchanging their experiences about the space
and site analysis. Digital tools are mutually complementary
and help lay public and professionals to communicate,
collaborate and design shared urban vision. Effective DST
for public participation should include different types of
urban design digital tools: non-visual, 2D, 3D, 4D and virtual
environments. The whole DST could be defined as a “Virtual
urban lab”, virtual interface for cooperative design between
different participants.
Among the key components of the participation process
environment are 3d city models, with their specific criteria.
Our future work will be focused to more detail research of

420

[23] Voigt, A, Kieferle, J and Wössner, U (2009) Urban-spatial
Experiments with Digital City Models in a Multi-dimensional VRSimulation Environment (Urban Experimental Lab). in SIGraDi
2009: Proceedings of the 13th Congress of the Iberoamerican Society
of Digital Graphics, Sao Paulo (Brazil), pp. 144-146.
[24] 3d prostor (2011) http://www.3dprostor.si/

[20] The
Virtual
Slaithwaite
Interface
(2009)
www.ccg.leeds.ac.uk/slaithwaite
[21] UCLA – Urban simulation team (2010) http://www.ust.ucla.edu
[22] VirtualcitySYSTEMS (2009) http://www.virtualcitysystems.de/

421

