2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Visualizing Migration of Demographic Simulation in Prehistoric and Protohistoric
Periods
Mariko Sasakura, Akame Akagi, Akane Yamaoka
Department of Computer Science
Okayama University
Okayama, Japan
sasakura@momo.cs.okayama-u.ac.jp

Naoko Matsumoto
Graduate School of Humanities and Social Science
Okayama University
Okayama, Japan
naoko m@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp

Abstract—In this paper, we report two methods to visualize
migration of people in an artiﬁcial society. The artiﬁcial
society system we target have been developed for simulating
demographic changes in prehistoric and protohistoric periods
in Japan. The system is capable of long term simulation of
demographic changes in and migration between areas. We
visualize migration from two perspectives: global view and
family view. Global view focuses on the ﬂow of people in
migration. Family view focuses family relations in migration
and visualizes it with a graph.

In Section II, we explain the overview of the simulation
system we have developed. In Section III, we describe
data representation of the simulation system which may
help readers to understand our visualization method. We
show proposed visualization in Section IV. In Section V,
we mention related works in visualization ﬁeld, and give
conclusion in Section VI.

Keywords-Visualization for migration, Artiﬁcial society,
Graph drawing

In this section, we describe the demographic simulation
system of which results we visualize.
The demographic simulation is widely used in the studies
of social simulation [6]. The demographic simulation system
introduced in this paper aims to study the relation between
the transition of population and migration in prehistoric
and protohistoric periods in Japan. The system has been
implemented as an agent system in which each person is an
agent. It can deal with about 10,000 people, since the total
population of the subject areas of research in prehistoric and
protohistoric Japan is estimated not to exceed several tens
of thousands. The number of areas in which people live in
the simulation system is at most several dozen.
In the simulation system, we can make various situations
by changing input parameters. The parameters which a user
can specify are the number of areas, the initial population
of each area, adjacency relations among areas, the rate of
population growth of each area, the rate of migration and
simulation time. The rate of population growth is speciﬁed
by several parameters such as pregnancy rate, fertility rate
and mortality rate.
The outputs of the system are the population during the
simulation time of each area and trace information for each
person. The trace information includes all events for a person
such as birth, marriage, childbirth, migration and death. Also
it includes in which area a person lives monthly. Since the
output data are enormous, effective visualization of the data
is vital for understanding the results.
The feature of the system we have developed is migration
in reference to family relationship. The purpose of the
simulation using the system is to study effects of migration

II. D EMOGRAPHIC SIMULATION

I. I NTRODUCTION
Generally speaking, visualization is very important for
computer simulation because simulation system generates a
large amount of data. We can say the same thing for systems
of artiﬁcial society.
Artiﬁcial society is one of the models for computer
simulation which aims to simulate social activity. Usually it
is based on multi-agent system which can simulate complex
society by simple rules for agents [3], [5].
Artiﬁcial society is commonly used for demography,
which is a statistical study of population such as the change
of population, birth rate, mortality, and so on. The common
visualization method in artiﬁcial society is line charts [2].
Line charts are suitable to represent temporal change in
numerical values. However, we may need different kind of
visualization for speciﬁc needs.
In this paper, we propose two visualization methods to
help understanding the role of migration in the demographic
simulation developd for the study of prehistoric and protohistoric societies in Japan. The features of the simulation
are 1) small population, 2) long term, and 3) migration
considering family relationship. Especially, to comprehend
the ﬂow of migrating people in the simulation is important
but difﬁcult. Therefore, we have developed two visualization
methods to show the movement of migrating people. One
of them shows migration globally, which we call “Global
view”, and the other shows migration with family relationship, which we call “Family view”.
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.18

42

area. M arriage means the person marries the person pID,
Delivery means that the person gives birth to the person
pID, and Death means that the person is dead. Therefore,
Events denoted as the regular expression is:

to the population increase od decrease in each area. In the
system we try various ways of migration such as:
• move to other area alone or with family
• select the destination of area of moving with/without
family relationship
• male only or female only moving
And also we can specify the number of degree of which
persons are as a family. Therefore, we focus to visualize
migration.

Events = ((Create | Birth)
(M ove | M arriage | Deliver)∗
(Death)?)
Events must be started by Create or Birth and has
arbitrary number of M ove, M arriage and Delivery. If
the person die during the simulation, Events is ended by
Death. If the person is alive when the simulation is ended,
Events has no Death.

III. DATA REPRESENTATION
In this section, we mention the output of the simulation
system. The result of the simulation R as a pair of information on areas and persons.

IV. V ISUALIZATION METHODS

R = (A, P )

A. Overview
The visualization part of the system consists of three kinds
of views: population view, global view and family view. The
population view is an ordinary line chart which shows the
transition of the population of each area and in sum total.
The proposed visualization method for the demographic
simulation consists of two kinds of diagrams.
1) Global view: an animation diagram to show migration
among areas.
2) Family view: an animation diagram to show migration
with family relationship.
Global view shows ﬂows of migration globally. Family
view focuses one or several families and shows moving
of individuals. With both views, a user may grasp the
movement of people migrating in a simulation intuitively.

where A is a set of information on an area a and P is a set
of information on a person p, that is a ∈ A and p ∈ P .
a denotes information of an area. Its format is described
by the regular expression as follows.
a = (aID aN ame P op+ )
where aID is a unique id for the area which is automatically
given, aN ame is a name of the area which is given by
a user, and P op is the number of the population of the
area at a simulation step. P op includes the total population,
the number of birth, the number of death and the number
of migration from/to other areas. P op+ is more than one
repeats of P op. P op+ must be ordered by time. In the
simulation, one step of the simulation corresponds to a year.
p denotes information of a person. Its format is deﬁned
as follows.

B. Global view
Global view shows migration of mass population. The
basic idea of the global view is that we colour a part of the
population according to the common feature of them, such
as their birth area, or the resident area of the last year. And
we make an animation to show migration with time.
The basic policy of the global view are:
• Each area is represented by a rectangle.
• Areas are distinguished by colours. The colour is automatically given by the system.
• People who corresponds to speciﬁed condition are
represented by a small circle.
• A circle for people is placed in the rectangle of an area
in which they live at the year.
• A small circle for people is also coloured according to
the related area by the speciﬁed condition such as their
birth area.
• The visualization system makes an animation as displaying the ﬁgures in time order, and moving small
circles from an area to other area if migration occurs.
We can specify a condition such as people who live in an
area at an arbitrary year or who were born in an area and

p = (pID aID Rel Events)
where pID is a unique id for the person which is automatically given, aID is the area in which the person is appeared
at ﬁrst, Rel is a set of links to the relatives and Events is
a list of events.
Event is an element of Events. There are six kinds of
events: Create, Birth, M ove, M arriage, and Delivery
and Death. Each event consists of the step number of the
event occurred, the area number in which the person lives
at the time, and other parameters speciﬁc to the event.
Create = (step number, aID)
Birth = (step number, aID)
M ove = (step number, aID)
M arriage = (step number, aID, pID)
Delivery = (step number, aID, pID)
Death = (step number, aID)
Create is given to the person who already exists in the
system when the simulation is started. Birth means that the
person is born. M ove means that the person moves to other

43

The person whose ID is 2174 is represented as a red circle
in the ﬁgure. Red triangles denote her blood relatives. Green
triangles denote her children. The blue circle is her husband
and blue triangles are relatives by afﬁnity. Orange rectangles
are the relatives of more than third degree of kinship either
by blood or afﬁnity. Upper triangles are elder relative and
lower triangles are younger relatives. Only living relatives
are displayed.
Figure 2 (a) shows the situation when the person was
born. She was born in the area A, and at the time she had
only three living relatives. Figure 2 (b) shows the situation
after 25 years. She lived in area D married with three living
children. She lived with most of her relatives by afﬁnity, but
her husband was living in area E alone. Her blood relatives
lived in area A and B. Figure 2 (c) shows the situation after
39 years when she died. At the time, she lives in area C with
her husband, one of their children and some relatives both
of blood and afﬁnity. There are more relatives than 14 years
before, and we can see that they spread out in all areas. Of
course, this result is made by random numbers.

live in an arbitrary year. To make animation, several circles
may be made for the speciﬁed condition. The procedure is
as follows:
1) A user speciﬁed condition C at the year t. C is living
in an area or being born in an area.
2) The system selects people who correspond to the C
at the year t. We denote the set of the people as
S(t). Since the people who correspond to the speciﬁed
condition may live in all area, S(t) = S1 ∪S2 ∪. . .∪Sn ,
where n is the number of areas.
3) The set of people in the area i at the year u can be
denoted as Si (u) = si 1 (u + 1) ∪ si 2 (u + 1) . . . ∪
si n (u + 1) ∪ si d (u + 1), where si j (u + 1) are the
set of people who move to the area j from the area i
at u + 1 year. si d (u + 1) is the set of people who are
dead at u + 1 year.
4) The system makes a circle for each si j and si d . It
makes animation by moving the circle for si j from
the area i to j and delete the circle for si d .
Figure 1 shows example diagrams. In the ﬁgure, we focus
people who live in area A at the year 0. Our demographic
simulation takes the ﬁrst 30 years as the preparation period,
and the real simulation part starts after the preparation
period. Figure 1 (a) shows the situation of the ﬁrst year
of the real simulation part. At the ﬁrst year a few people
live in area B but most of the people live in area A. Each
of the three circles in area A denote people who will stay in
area A in the next year, people who will move to area B at
the next year and people who will be dead in the next year
respectively. Figure 1 (b) shows the situation of 16 years
later and Figure 1 (c) shows the situation of 35 years later.
In this simulation, people who had lived in area A at the
start of the real simulation are spread all over the areas in
35 years later.

V. R ELATED W ORKS
Global view and family view can be considered as one
of visualization methods for time dependent and spatial
data. The result of the simulation is a time dependent data
where the time is interval, linear continuous and ordered
time according to the taxonomy of the time dependent data
[1], [4].
For time dependent and spatial data, Tominski et al. have
proposed a 3D visualization [8]. They use pencil icons on
a map to visualize time dependent data. However, in our
simulation, real geographical information among areas is not
used. Only adjacency relations are considered.
Family relationship makes a tree, area connection makes
a simple graph, and there are inclusion relations between
area and persons. Therefore family view can be considered
as one of graph drawing methods. We refer to compound
graphs of Sugiyama and Misue [7]. However, our method is
specialized to small number of nodes. We don’t draw edges
for family relation but represent the relation by colour and
size of triangle. This is valid because the number of nodes is
small. Our method is not suitable to visualize large graphs.

C. Family view
Family view shows migration of one or several families. It
gives users an image of a transition of the speciﬁed families
and it is also helpful to conﬁrm that the simulation runs
collectly. The ability to investigate family relationships in
migration process is one of the features of our simulation,
and the visualization of Family view shows the results in
comprehensible format.
The family relationship is recorded in each person as Rel.
Family view traces links of Rel and make animation. The
procedure is:
1) A user selects a person by ID.
2) The system gathers the family information of the
person.
3) The system makes animation.
Figure 2 shows the family view which focuses the person
whose ID is 2157. The view shows migration of the family
from the birth to the death year of the person.

VI. C ONCLUSION
In this papers we propose the two visualization methods,
global view and family view. They visualize and animate
the result of migration in demographic simulation. Using
global view, we can grasp the ﬂow of population easily and
intuitively. By family view, we can trace the movement of a
family. Family view is also useful for debugging. We found
at least one bug of the simulation by family view.
We are planning to use the simulation and visualization
system for sdemographic tudies in prehistoric and protohistoric periods in Japan.

44

(a) The ﬁrst year of a simulation.

(b) The situation of 16 years later.

(c) The situation of 35 years later.
Figure 1.

Global view : a visualization for migration.

45

(a) The birth of a focused person (ID:2157).

(b) After 25 years (300 months).

(c) The dying year (after 39 years – 469 months).
Figure 2.

Family view : a visualization for migration of a family.

46

This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc
Research(B) project number 20320123 from JSPS.
R EFERENCES
[1] Aigner, W., Mikscha, S., M¨uller. W., Schumann, H. and Tominski, C., Visualizing time-oriented data―A systematic view,
Computer & Graphics, vol.31, no.3, pp.401–209. 2007.
[2] Chamberlain, A., Demography in archeology, Cambridge University Press, 2006.
[3] Davidsson, P., Agent based social simulation: a computer science view, Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation
vol. 5, no. 1, 2002.
(http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/5/1/7.html)
[4] Frank, A. U., Different Types of ”Times” in GIS, Spatial and
Temporal Reasoning in GIS, pp.40–61, 1998.
[5] Mannion, O., Lay-Yee, R., Wrapson, W., Davis, P. and Pearson,
J., JAMSIM: a microsimulation modeling policy tool, Journal
of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, vol.15, no.1, 8,
2012.
(http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/15/1/8.html)
[6] Read, D. W., Kinship based demographic simulation of societal
processes, Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation,
vol.1, no.1, pp.55–71, 1998.
[7] Sugiyama, K. and Misue, K., Visualization of structural information: automatic drawing of compound digraphs, IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, vol.21, no.4,
pp.876–892, 1991.
[8] Tominski, S., Schelze-Wollgast, P. and Schumann, H., 3D
Information Visualization for Time Dependent Data on Maps,
Ninth International Conference on Information Visualization
(IV’05), pp.175–181, 2005.

47

