2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Data Visualization in Online Journalism and
Its Implications for the Production Process
Wibke Weber
Stuttgart Media University
(HdM)
weber@hdm-stuttgart.de

Hannes Rall
Nanyang Technological
University (NTU)
Rall@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Classical visual representations were statistical graphics
(e.g. for financial data) and thematic cartography (e.g.
weather map); both cartography and statistical graphics
are visual means to discover and display data,
information or even stories. Story leads us to another
research field that – looking back on its history –
normally is not known for exploring large amounts of
data: journalism. Since a few years, as a consequence of
media convergence, these two research fields (data
visualization and journalism) have merged to a new form
of news coverage: data-driven journalism, which can be
seen as a part of computational journalism [1]. Datadriven journalism is based on large sets of data for the
purpose of writing news stories. Data journalists describe
the journalistic process as a workflow that consists of:
digging deep into data, analyzing and filtering the found
data, visualizing it, and forming a story [2, 14]. In the
last years, collections of data have become available
online (e.g. Open Government Data) and open source
tools allow analyzing and visualizing the data even with
little knowledge of information technology.
A visual format in the data-driven journalism is the
interactive information graphic, also called interactive
feature or interactive graphic. We define an interactive
information graphic as a visual representation of
information or knowledge with the following elements:
Verbal elements (text, audio, typography) and visual
elements (photo, illustration, diagram, map, symbol,
icon, pictogram, video, moving image) are combined in
such a way that they create a new hybrid form.
Interactivity and multimedia are main characteristics of
an interactive information graphic [4, p. 361]. The value
of an information graphic is to display complex
information, which is difficult to be told verbally, in a
visual way. With their interactive graphics and features
The New York Times (Fig. 1), The Guardian, and Zeit

Data stories – this buzzword links together two
different disciplines: computer science and journalism.
The new relationship is called data-driven journalism.
The emerging product of this relationship: data-based
visualization that reveals the story behind the data.
However, who produces those “data stories”? A
journalist, an information designer, a computer scientist,
or a team? New formats often implicate new workflows
and a new way of thinking. This paper sets data
visualization in the context of online journalism by
focusing on the production process. We interviewed 19
experts of German, Swiss, and American media
companies: designers, programmers, and journalists.
For the analysis of the interviews we used the grounded
theory approach. The findings show: The crucial success
factor in the production process of data-based
visualization in journalism is the attitude that everyone
in the team acts as a journalist – no matter whether
programmer, designer or statistician. A case study of the
New York Times newsroom illustrates our findings.
Keywords:
data visualization, interactive
information graphic, data driven journalism, online
journalism, attitude, collaboration, sketching,
storyboard

1. Introduction
Data visualization has a long history stretching back
hundreds of years [5, 9, 21, 22, 26]. According to
Friendly, data visualization is “the science of visual
representation of ‘data’, defined as information which
has been abstracted in some schematic form, including
attributes or variables for the units of information”[9]1.
1

For the definition of data visualization in comparison to
information and knowledge visualization, see [3, 9]. According
to Post et al. [17] “the phrase ‘Data Visualization’ is gaining
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.65

acceptance to include both the scientific and information
visualization fields“.
349

process of data visualizations in the context of online
journalism with the aim to identify changes in
workflows, challenges, best practices or factors of
success. In a second step, we demonstrate with a case
study the implications the use of data visualization has
for the journalistic practice. The research framework for
our study is a transdisciplinary one by bringing together
the academic fields of data visualization, information
design and practitioners in the field of journalism to
identify and solve problems.

online (Fig. 2) play a pioneering role in data
visualization in online journalism [cf. 1, p. 2].

2. Applied Methods
We started our study with a literature research. A lot
of blogs discuss the strengths and the weaknesses of
data-driven journalism and try to describe and define the
new journalistic practice [2, 7, 8, 14, 15]. The video
report “Journalism in the Age of Data” provides a good
overview of trends, tools, and formats [16]. However,
since data-driven journalism has arisen only a few years
ago, we found no scientific studies about the production
process in data-driven journalism. In order to explore this
new research field, we decided for the method of
qualitative interviewing. We conducted 19 expert
interviews in 8 media companies (5 in Germany, 2 in
Switzerland, and 1 USA) in the period May 2010 to
August 2011. The experts are information graphic
designers, graphic editors, art and design directors,
programmers, and journalists, who work in editorial
departments for print and online journalism or TV and
regularly plan, design and/ or program interactive
graphics. The interviews were based on an interview
guide specially developed for the research questions of
our study. We focused on several main aspects:
education, competences, tools, tasks, roles, workflow,
and responsibility. Each interview took about one hour
and was recorded as audio file. Afterwards, the
interviews were transcribed and made anonymous. For
the evaluation of the interviews, we used the qualitative
method of grounded theory [19], which has proven as a
good method to explore behaviors of groups. In contrast
to traditional scientific research, the grounded theory
method does not start with a hypothesis, but ends with a
hypothesis or a theory developed from the collected data.
The collected data comprises theoretical samplings,
which means: not representative samplings, but
samplings that have proven relevance to the evolving
theory [19, p. 176]. Sampling stops, when theoretical
saturation is achieved and no further sampling leads to a
change of the theoretical concept, which was the case
with 19 expert interviews.
We analyzed the data by constantly comparing one
interview to another, identifying concepts on different
levels of abstraction, integrating the concepts into
categories and relating them to each other; this process
contains open, axial and selecting coding according to
Strauss and Corbin [19]. The theoretical categories that
have emerged from the coding process are: methods,

Figure 1: The interactive graphic “The
Guantánamo Docket” is based on documents
and research related to the 779 people who
have been sent to the Guantánamo Bay prison
since 20022

Figure 2: The interactive graphic “Tell-all
Telephone” visualizes the phone data of six
months collected by the Deutsche Telekom3
In this context, we often find the buzzword “data
stories” or the phrase “telling stories with data”.
However, who tells the story4, and who designs the
graphic? Is it a journalist or a designer? Do they
collaborate with a programmer? Who decides in which
way the data is to be displayed? How is the development
process of a data-based visualization structured? What
about journalistic ethics and standards? In order to
answer these questions, we focus on the production
2

http://projects.nytimes.com/guantanamo/ (retrieved Feb 20,
2012)
3 http://www.zeit.de/datenschutz/malte-spitz-vorratsdaten
(retrieved Feb 20, 2012)
4
In contrast to narratology, which defines story as a sequence
of non-fictional or fictional events that are temporally
structured and coherently related to each other, we use
the term “story” in the journalistic sense of conveying facts
or events.

350

time, competences, collaboration, and role, with attitude
as the core category; the core category connects the other
categories and forms the core of the theory or hypothesis.
For the coding process, we used the coding paradigm
that consists of four items: conditions, interaction,
strategies, and consequences [12, 19]. Our case study of
the New York Times illustrates in detail the interplay of
the categories in the production process.

3.2 Collaboration as a Condition
Collaboration as a crucial condition to produce databased visualizations is closely related to the key factor
attitude. Important steps in the production process of a
data-based visual are: data retrieval, analyzing and
filtering data sets, extracting the message from the data,
transforming the message into a story, visualizing the
story, and programming the story. These steps require
new competences and capabilities of those creating data
stories: mathematical, visual and verbal competences, in
addition technical and multimedia skills. Depending on
the intended final outcome this might also include
knowledge of modeling virtual characters, animating
them, film editing and the addition of interactive
elements, not to forget the obvious necessity to write
text(s), incorporate sounds, and provide journalistic
integrity and authenticity.
Not all of these skills will be equally in demand for
each project and purpose and it is rather unlikely, that all
of these areas of expertise can be covered equally well
by just one person. This results in an intertwined
collaboration of experts, who can combine and exchange
their areas of expertise customized for the requirements
of specific projects: e.g. a graphic editor with strong
design skills in visualizing data would collaborate with a
colleague, who is able to transform this into a highly
cinematic approach through storyboarding and the
subsequent use of 3D animation software. As our
interview analysis has shown, a team of at least three
experts has proven itself in practice: a programmer (e.g.
flasher), a designer, and an author.
As a consequence, new curricula in education or
even new job descriptions might emerge from the
collaboration: e.g. the visual journalist or the graphic
reporter with journalistic competence and in depth
knowledge of digital animation tools, or the data
journalist, who becomes an expert in data retrieval, data
analysis, data visualization (e.g. geovisualization), with a
background in statistics or systems programming and
storytelling [cf. 13, p. 2].

3. Results
The grounded theory coding process yielded the
following results: We identified attitude as a core
category, which is related to all other categories as
follows: In the era of convergent journalism,
collaboration between the different professional groups
(authors, designers, programmers) is a crucial condition
to produce data-based visualizations like interactive
graphics. This collaborative production process requires
a change of attitude: each team member should
understand him or herself as a journalist, because they
are all involved in producing a journalistic product
(hypothesis). The compliance with journalistic principles
can be seen as a consequence. The collaboration also
implicates a change in the communication modus:
sketching and storyboard become a visual
communication device (interaction/ strategies).
3.1 Attitude as a Success Factor
How do designers, programmers, journalists
understand their role in the production process? One
result of the expert interviews is: In German and Swiss
editorial departments it is still the journalist or the editor
who is responsible for the content or the story of the
interactive graphic; the designer only delivers his visual
part, the same goes for the programmer. An interviewed
designer said: “Mostly the journalist does the research,
and we care for the visual things like maps or charts.” In
contrast, the interviewees of the New York Times stated:
“We are journalists” (see case study, section 4). In this
statement, we recognize a paradigm shift that has
occurred in the New York Times newsroom. What is
new is that even programmers and designers see
themselves as journalists; they belong to the journalistic
team of the newsroom and define their task as a
journalistic task. We could not make out such a strong
comparable self-understanding in the other interviews. It
seems that in German and Swiss media companies the
traditional concept of roles still exits: here, the journalist
– there, the designer or programmer, who is more or less
regarded as a supplier. Admittedly, we detected a slight
tendency to overcome the gap by building a team of
three people (journalist, designer, programmer) for
special projects, e.g. an interactive feature of the
Olympic Games.

3.3 Journalistic Principles as a Consequence
Beside the purely skill related challenges pertaining
to the fields of journalistic writing and data visualization,
another very specific challenge needs to be addressed:
How to create visually appealing images without
compromising journalistic integrity? Is there any such
thing as “creative freedom”, if it comes to transforming
data into interesting visuals? What if facts are missing or
data is wrongly displayed? And what about speed, which
is a relevant criterion in news production? All
interviewees agreed that in news coverage time is the
limiting factor for data visualization, because visuals,
e.g. interactive graphics, cannot be produced in a few
hours like an article; data visualization requires time.
Therefore, reporting new information first or getting the
scoop cannot be the aim of data journalism; accuracy

351

always comes before speed. The attitude “we are
journalists” – as mentioned above – implicates to work
according to the journalistic standards and ethics like
integrity, accuracy, credibility, clarity, which is the
foremost priority over speed and aesthetic aspects5.

After a short introductory session with Steven Duenes,
graphic director of the New York Times, the interview
focused on the graphic editors Xaquín González Veira
and Graham Roberts, who have created a multitude of
interactive information graphics based on data. The goal
of the interview was to gain deeper insights into the
details of the production process, the working methods
and the application of multi-disciplinary skill-sets to
achieve the final results. The interview was one of the
guideline-based interviews as described above in section
2. The visual representation, we refer to as an example, is
the data-based visualization “How Mariano Rivera
Dominates Hitters”9. It can be classified as a hybrid
format between video and animated graphic and explains
the pitching mechanics and technique of the famous
baseball pitcher Mariano Rivera.

3.4 Visual Methods as a Strategy
The collaboration also implicates a change in the
communication modus: Sketching and storyboard act as
a visual communication device between interacting
parties as well as a tool to structure the main creator’s
visual thought process. According to the analyzed expert
interviews, some interviewees use a storyboard to further
translate and transfer the plot of the story into a visual
narrative. The importance of the storyboard is to provide
the bigger frame of storytelling, the context, which
prevents the team from getting lost in the details and “not
seeing the wood from the trees”. Comparable with the
breakdown of a film-script into single shots, the
storyboard fulfills the function: to create a visual
architecture for the piece defining its structure, narrative
flow, including potentially non-linear deviations from the
main storyline. In general, drawing remains an ideally
simple and fast tool to share ideas and discuss ideas with
others. These visualization methods, which normally do
not belong to the toolbox of a journalist, become more
and more important in the production of news.6

4.1 Sketching as a Tool of Visual Thinking
We were particularly interested in exploring to what
extent the age-old technique of drawing is still employed
in the creation of cutting edge digital information
graphics. It emerged rapidly from our conversation on
the creation process that drawing as a tool of visual
thinking remains still relevant. New York Times Graphic
Editor Xaquín Gonzalez Veira answered the question
whether he and his colleagues are also using the
sketches, concepts and scribbles: “Yeah, I do – and Steve
Duenes, who is actually the Graphic Director, is very
obsessed with sketching.” He further elaborates on this
process and confirms the importance and relevance of
this tool: “Because the moment you see, you can explain
graphics with words but the moment you see them, or
you see a sketch, you understand if it works or not. (….)
My wife always tells me: Just don’t explain to me the
graphic – just show it to me.”
To take the process of visual construction of an
interactive visualization further, the initial sketches
would be further developed into the most commonly
used tool for planning audio-visual narratives: a
storyboard (Fig. 3). Similar in appearance to a comic, it
illustrated the graphic through a series of sequentially
arranged images. Different from a comic though, the
storyboard will of course use the correct screen aspect
ratio(s) and further incorporate elements like split-and
multiple screens through corresponding illustrations.
Such a storyboard can certainly be very loose and rough
in its drawing; the goal is not to achieve a polished look
(that is left to later production stages) but a clear visual

4. The New York Times – a Case Study
We illustrate the preceding theoretic considerations
and the implications with a case study of the New York
Times newsroom in New York. We interviewed two
people who are actively involved in creating data
visualizations and interactive features, which are
considered to define the state of the art in the field.7 This
is demonstrated by winning the National Design Award
20098 and by dominating the Malofiej Award for years.
5

Giner and Cairo offer a checklist to ensure basic, ethical
journalism standards in presentation of infographics [10].
The reason was a series of non-factual and inaccurate
graphics in the media’s coverage of the death of Osama bin
Laden. In his books, Wainer illustrates how graphs can be
used and misused and how to avoid pitfalls [24, 25].
6
For sketching as a visual tool, see [23].
7
Hannes Rall: Interview with Xaquín González Veira, Graham
Roberts and Steven Duenes conducted at the New York
Times Newsroom, New York, August 17, 2011.
8
“The Communication Design Award, which honors work in
graphic or multimedia design, is presented to The New York
Times Graphics Department. The New York Times has a
long history of groundbreaking information graphics. From
Sept. 11, 2001, when the department produced scores of
maps and diagrams explaining the attacks and their
aftermath, to the 2008 presidential election when the desk
built the interactive maps on nytimes.com, the Times
Graphics Department provides readers with a visual way to
understand the news. A staff of cartographers, illustrators,

9

352

researchers and developers work as a team to shape and
deliver information by reporting, writing, designing, drawing
and programming information graphics for both the printed
newspaper and nytimes.com. Over time, the graphics have
evolved from simple maps and charts to more complex
visualizations, but the goal of authoritative, accurate
journalism has remained the same.” [18]
“How Mariano Rivera Dominates Hitters” (2010).
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2010/06/29/magazine
/rivera-pitches.html (retrieved Feb 29, 2012).

plan before moving into production. Its very own
aesthetic quality lies within the clarity of the information
it provides.

think we came to the conclusion that it’s better to show
what the field’s in directly to the user rather than giving
them a bunch of data and force them to figure it out on
their own. You know that way they see everything, but
maybe not really discover anything about it. So that’s
how the cinematic style came in, I storyboarded
something that would kind of take everyone through bit
by bit.” (Fig. 3, 4, 5)

Figure 3: G. Roberts storyboard for the graphic
10
“How Mariano Rivera Dominates Hitters”

Figure 5: The information graphic as a mix of
video and graphic.12
According to Roberts the initial storyboard versions
of the graphic were already very similar to the finished
graphic at least in the structure. He said: “That was really
my storyboard of, you know, and it’s very crude,
obviously. But it did pretty much follow this idea. (…) It
did actually end up pretty close to that. (…) I did make
two more detailed storyboards.”
Figure 4: Data visualization for the nearly 1,300
pitches Rivera threw in 200911

4.2 Roles and Attitude

Graham Roberts, one of the graphics editors of the
“How Mariano Rivera Dominates Hitters”-graphic,
explained more on the topic: “So Shan wrote this little
application using Processing that will take all the pitch
data to be collected and it was almost like a pre-graphic
graphic, where you could see all the pitches.” His
colleague Xaquín González Veira added: “It was a
graphic to make a graphic.”
Graham Roberts further elaborated – and this is not
only interesting concerning the working method, but also
in terms of the dramaturgic structure (let the user explore
the data vs. narrating the story): “And we thought maybe
originally it would be something where you’d just see all
the pitches and you could punch in different numbers and
just look at what the pitch’s path of view’s like, but I

Besides the documented relevance of understanding
the sophisticated use of visual storytelling and its
application through sketching and storyboarding, there is
further evidence for the increasing convergence of the
field. In an environment like the newsroom of the New
York Times experts with competences in several areas
are working closely together, supporting each other when
and where needed with their specific strength(s) in an
area. In several cases a very high competence in research
and journalism is combined with a mastery of
sophisticated animation skills and software. The graphics
people have degrees in cartography, statistics, graphic
design and journalism, but others have different
backgrounds, for example the graphics editor for Science
has a degree in East Asian Studies, and the senior editor
got his degree in Urban Studies, and the interactive
designer majored in Economics.

10

http://www.xocas.com/blog/en/?p=184, (retrieved Feb 20,
2012)
11
http://www.xocas.com/blog/en/?p=184 (retrieved Feb 20,
2012)

12

353

http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2010/06/29/magazine/
rivera-pitches.html (retrieved Feb 20, 2012)

In Duenes’ opinion, information graphics are not
just art. They are a combination of art and journalism and
a little bit of science [cf. 6]. New York Times Graphic
Editor Xaquín González Veira stated: “We are
journalists”. This is the reason, why the title is graphics
editor and not graphic artist. They do not only decide if
something is published as an information graphic: “We,
I’d say, 90 percent of the time gather all the information
that is in the graphic.” These graphic editors are not only
working out the story, visual concept and its visual
storytelling flow in the storyboard – they even model the
characters and environments and animate them for the
final graphic. In the award-winning New York Times
visualization about the famous hitter Mariano Rivera13,
the only portion not done in house (by NYT newsroom
graphic editors) was the actual recording of motion
capture data-provided by a closely situated lab of New
York University (NYU). Anything else, including
modeling, rigging, rendering and textures plus animation,
was done by the authors of the graphic themselves.
Anybody aware of the high quality of the final outcome
and the complexity of high-end 3D animation software
will immediately recognize this as an extraordinary
accomplishment. Graphic editors Xaquín González
Veira, Graham Roberts, Frank O’ Donnell and Mika
Gröndahl are journalists and skilled computer graphic
artists.14

complex; we don’t know it. But we know where it was,
we know the shape of the complex, we can point to
general areas where we know that something happened
there, but we don’t show that thing happening. We just
say that whatever source told us that here, this
happened.”
In this case a clear primacy of journalistic integrity
over any speculative artistic interpretation for dramatic
effect was formulated and it demonstrates the general
work ethic at the New York Times newsroom. It is all
the more remarkable that the graphic editors there still
manage to come up with highly entertaining and visually
appealing information graphics which preserve absolute
factual accuracy. A statement of Graham Roberts from
the interview sums up this philosophy and will provide a
fitting closing quote here: “I mean, the choice for me is
made on what’s the cleanest, clearest way of showing
this, what’s the least noise between the information and
the news and the person receiving it. You know I try and
make that as aesthetically pleasing as I can along the
way, but not hopefully without adding noise to it.”

5. Conclusions and Discussion
In our study about data visualization in online
journalism, we have identified one key element, which
can be described as the success factor for the production
process: attitude – the attitude that each team member
acts as a journalist. Information designers, programmers,
statisticians, animators, authors – anyone who is
involved in news production is part of a journalistic
project and fulfills journalistic tasks and therefore should
understand him or herself as a journalist. Its holistic
approach for producing information graphics makes the
New York Times a leader and a role model in the field of
interactive information graphics. This paradigm shift that
the New York Times newsroom made is still to be
accomplished in German and Swiss media companies
where we can still find two different ways of thinking:
verbal vs. visual.
When looking toward the needs and requirements of
the professional field compared to the “traditional”
journalist, we found new and diverse professional
profiles: Artistically skilled journalists who can serve the
multi-disciplinary
requirements
of
interactive
information graphics almost autonomously, even though
those persons are hard to find. Conversely, it might be
argued that this constitutes the need for new academic
programs, which balance the education in the fields of
design/ visualization, computer science, and journalism
and bridge the gap between these disciplines. Such an
interdisciplinary approach might lay the foundations for
a holistic understanding of information and knowledge
visualizations and therefore might foster better
visualizations and information graphics. Some
universities have already been starting to set up courses
in data-driven journalism combining computer science,

4.3 Journalistic Principles vs. Visual Appeal
For the final section of the interview, the question
was addressed whether there can be a conflict between
journalistic principle (e.g. integrity, accuracy), and
artistic freedom. And, if so, how this can and must be
addressed by information designers and data journalists
in responsible ways. In other words, is there any conflict
between integrity and visual appeal or how do the
designers at it? Xaquín González Veira emphasized:
“There’s no conflict. We don’t make up things – (…)
some other people may have that conflict. We don’t.”
Graham Roberts added: “Something we discussed,
there’s no conflict in knowing that we are not going to
show stuff that we don’t have. That’s the bottom line.”
Veira confirmed by quoting the former graphics director
Charles Blow: “Show only what you know”, and he
continued: “Which is like we’re not going to – if there’s
a breaking news of the Osama bin Laden’s capture.
We’re not going to reproduce what happened inside that
13

14

At the 19th Malofiej World Infographics Summit 2011 in
Pamplona, the New York Times won the Peter Sullivan
Award in the category “Best of Show” with the information
graphic “How Mariano Rivera Dominates Hitters”.
Mika Gröndahl, a graphics editor and illustrator, talks about
his diagram of a centrifuge for the print version of Science
Times: “The centrifuge graphic is a classic example of how
reporters and graphics editors work together. To gather the
reference material, I spoke with sources the reporter had
cultivated over the years. Then I made a sketch and refined
it. I created a 3-D model and made revisions until we were
satisfied with the level of detail and clarity.” [11]

354

mathematics and journalism, e.g. the Columbia
University’s Graduate School of Journalism [1].
A limitation of our study might be the grounded
theory approach. Some authors criticize the grounded
theory approach for its claim to be a theory and call into
question the emergence of empirical data [12, 20].
However, since the whole research field is at its very
beginning, the grounded theory is a helpful method to
generate first ideas and hypotheses. Another limitation of
the grounded theory approach is the sampling process:
When is the theoretical sampling finished? According to
Strauss and Corbin “sampling continues until theoretical
saturation of categories is achieved” [19, p. 193]; that is
the point where new data from further interviews has no
more implications for the theory. We had the impression
that the theoretical saturation was achieved by 19
interviews. Furthermore, the grounded theory approach
always generates only qualitative data, not quantitative,
since statistical methods are not used. That might be seen
as another weakness of our study.
We are aware that our findings reflect a current
stage in convergent journalism, which is in a constant
state of flux. Therefore, we do not want to use the strong
term “theory” for our findings; instead, we prefer the
term hypothesis. A quantitative analysis (e.g. a survey in
media companies) to verify or falsify our hypothesis
could be a next step.

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

6. Acknowledgements
[14]

We would like to thank all interviewees for giving
us insights in their design processes.
[15]

7. References

[16]

[1]

Anderson, C.W. (2011). Notes Towards an Analysis of
Computational Journalism. HIIG Discussion Paper Series
No. 2012-1. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2009292 (retrieved
April 29, 2012)
[2] Bradshaw, P. (2010). How to be a data journalist. The
Guardian. http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/datablog/
2010/oct/01/data-journalism-how-to-guide (retrieved Feb
29, 2012).
[3] Burkhard, R.A. (2005). Towards a Framework and
Model for Knowledge Visualization: Synergies between
Information and Knowledge Visualization. In: Tergan,
S.-O., Keller, T. (Eds.): Knowledge and Information
Visualization. Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer. 238-255.
[4] Burmester, M., Mast, M., Tille, R., Weber, W. (2010).
How Users Perceive and Use Interactive Information
Graphics: an Exploratory Study. In: IEEE Proceedings of
the 14th International Conference Information
Visualization (IV 10). London. 361-368.
[5] Chen, C. (2004). Information Visualization: Beyond the
Horizon. London, Springer (2nd ed.).
[6] Duenes, S. (2008). Steve Duenes, graphics director for
The Times, is answering reader questions.
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/25/business/media/25a

[17]
[18]

[19]
[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]

355

sktheeditors.html?pagewanted=all (retrieved Oct 1,
2011).
European Journalism Centre (EJC) (2010). Data-driven
journalism: What is there to learn. http://mediapusher.eu
/datadrivenjournalism/pdf/ddj_paper_final.pdf (retrieved
Feb 29, 2012).
European Journalism Centre (EJC). Data-driven
journalism. Where journalism meets data. Blog.
http://datadrivenjournalism.net/ (retrieved Feb 29, 2012).
Friendly, M., Denis, D. J. (2001). Milestones in the
history of thematic cartography, statistical graphics, and
data visualization. Web document,
http://www.math.yorku.ca/SCS/Gallery/milestone/milest
one.pdf (Feb 20, 2012).
Giner, J. A., Denis, Cairo, A. (2011): Editors, artists
chafe at the errors and hype in bin Laden death story
graphics. (May 9, 2011).
http://www.niemanwatchdog.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=
Showcase.view&showcaseid=152 (retrieved Feb 29,
2012)
Gröndahl, M. (2008) talks about his diagram of a
centrifuge. In: Talk to the Newsroom: Graphics Director
Steve Duenes. http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/25/
business/media/25asktheeditors.html?pagewanted=all
(retrieved Feb 29, 2012).
Kelle, U. (2005). "Emergence" vs. "Forcing" of
Empirical Data? A Crucial Problem of "Grounded
Theory" Reconsidered. Forum Qualitative Social
Research. Volume 6, No 2, Art. 27. May 2005.
http://www.qualitative-research.net/index.php/
fqs/article/view/467/1001 (retrieved Feb 29, 2012).
Klanten, R., Ehmann, S., Schulze, F. (2011): Visual
Storytelling. Inspiring a new visual language. Berlin,
Gestalten.
Lorenz, M. (2010). Data driven journalism: What is
there to learn? Innovation Journalism Conference, 7–9
June 2010, Stanford. http://www.slideshare.net/
mirkolorenz/datadriven-journalism-what-is-there-to-learn
(retrieved Feb 29, 2012).
Matzat, L. Datenjournalist. Blog.
http://www.datenjournalist.de (retrieved Feb 29, 2012).
McGhee, G. (2009/2010): Journalism in the Age of Data.
A video report on data visualization as a storytelling
medium. http://datajournalism.stanford.edu/ (retrieved
Feb 29, 2012).
Post, F.H., Nielson, G. M., Bonneau, G.-P. (2002). Data
Visualization: the State of the Art., Boston, Dordrecht,
London, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Smithsonian’s Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum
(2009). http://www.nationaldesignawards.org/2009/
honoree/the-new-york-times-graphics-department/
?p=172; (retrieved Oct 16, 2011, author not disclosed).
Strauss, A., Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of Qualitative
Research. Grounded Theory, Procedures and Techniques.
Newbury Park, CA, Sage.
Thomas, G., James, D. (2006). Reinventing grounded
theory: some questions about theory, ground and
discovery, British Educational Research Journal, 32, 6,
767–795.
Tufte, E.R. (1997). Visual Explanations. Cheshire, CT,
Graphics Press.
Tufte, E.R. (1990). Envisioning Information. Cheshire,
CT, Graphics Press. 1990.
Tversky, B., Suwa, M. (2009). Thinking with sketches.
In: Markman, A. (Ed.). Tools for innovation. Oxford,
Oxford University Press

[24] Wainer, H. (2009). Picturing the World. Princeton, New
Jersey, Princeton University Press.
[25] Wainer, H. (2005). Graphic Discovery. Princeton,
Oxford, Princeton University Press.
[26] Ware, C. (2000). Information Visualization.
Burlington, MA, Morgan Kaufmann.

356

