2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Cultural Heritage Cube
A conceptual framework for visual exhibition exploration
Florian Windhager

Eva Mayr

Department of Knowledge and Communication
Management, Danube University Krems
Austria
florian.windhager@donau-uni.ac.at

Department of Knowledge and Communication
Management, Danube University Krems
Austria
eva.mayr@donau-uni.ac.at

this informal - and often incidental - learning process, it is
not enough that museums display exhibits with small labels.
To effectively learn something, relevant information has to
be selected on an individual basis, has to be evaluated and
integrated with the other information present at the site or
existing in form of prior knowledge. These cognitive
processes of informal learning often have to happen under
aggravating circumstances: the prominent wish to see
“everything” has to encounter complex conceptual and
physical exhibition architectures, as well as limited visiting
time and finite attention spans [21]. As a ubiquitous result,
museum fatigue shadows the scene: Perceptive and cognitive
overload confluence into a strong reduction of visitors’
attention towards exhibits, learning motivation and
receptivity [6].
As this is the basic threat for every exhibition designer
and curator, several approaches have been fielded to tackle
this issue. Exhibit clusters, for instance, can provide zones of
perceptual similarity (e.g. by thematic affinity, geographic or
temporal proximity, etc.) and thus facilitate the elaboration
of general concepts [7], exhibit arrangements along timeand storylines deliver path-like structures to leverage
narrative information integration [1], interaction engages
visitors to overcome a passive mode of perception and
encourage active behavior [13, 14], whereas advance
organizers can support conceptual orientation and
information integration on different levels of a learning
process.
Being one of the first who took on this last method within
the domain of educational psychology, Ausubel [2]
suggested the use of advance organizers as effective means
to improve the construction of mental models: Learners are
provided a conceptual structure before a learning unit in
which they can integrate the learning material later on.
Advance organizers were shown to be especially effective in
non-linear, unstructured learning environments [19] and,
therefore, have high potential for museums as well. Visitor
research shows that advance organizers in the form of texts
for conceptual orientation presented before a museum visit
can support informal learning, too [8].
Exhibits for conceptual orientation are usually included
in each exhibition nowadays. However, this information is
often presented only textually and cannot compete against
the exhibits’ attraction power; consequently it receives only
little attention from the visitors [10]. In contrast, information

Abstract: Cultural heritage exhibitions commonly have to
arrange a high amount of diverse artefacts and associated
information in architecturally complex facilities. This
constellation issues challenges to both: exhibition designers
who have to find ways to deal with spatial restrictions and
visitors who often experience cognitive overload and museum
fatigue due to the high amount of information available.
Against this background, the article is focusing on the
question, how information visualization can serve as advance
organizer, to make the organizing principles of cultural
heritage exhibitions (like common topics, themes, geographical
or temporal origin) transparent to the visitors. For this
purpose, we extend the visualization method of time geography
to an interactive visualization framework of time topography,
which can support the interactive exploration of conceptual
and physical cultural heritage exhibition spaces in parallel.
Keywords: cultural heritage visualization, digital humanities,
advance organizer, time geography, visual analytics;

I.

INTRODUCTION

“The past is a foreign country, they do things different
there”, Leslie Poles Hartley put down on paper in 1953 [12,
18]. Having inherited this artefact together with a
breathtaking multitude of other things done different, we
want to dedicate the current piece of paper to the question,
which challenges inter-country communication between past
and presence is facing today - and how it could benefit from
a different perspective on its own constellations, leveraging
new methods of interactive information visualization.
Museums and exhibition spaces cover a vast array of
topics and types of things, mostly foreign to visiting
audiences: from objects of natural heritage to the tangible
and intangible aspects of cultural heritage, displaying
developmental traces from archaeological artefacts and
ancient artworks to objects of zeitgeist and matters of current
concerns. By doing so, heritage institutions always have to
cope with a basic form of asymmetry, generated by growing
amounts of highly diverse artefacts and curators rich
knowledge on the one side, and the bottlenecks of the
visitors cognitive potentials on the other side.
Visitors most often visit a museum for leisure purposes:
as a family or school outing, for entertainment and recreation
[3, 4]. Though learning is part of the visiting experience for
most visitors, it is not their main purpose [20]. To support
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.92

540

Figure 1: Cultural heritage artefacts are often associated with rich information, including data on place and time of origin,
which could be visualized within the freely scalable visualization framework of time geography.
along timelines. The resulting figures are so called spacetime-cubes: Geographic maps, which serve as horizontal
layers, get orthogonally intersected with timelines, so that
three-dimensional cubes are unfolding, where the vertical
dimension is open to envision space-time. As such, these
“space-time-aquariums” provide a notation, by which
geographically and chronologically structured information
can visually merge. Depending on the specific scaling of the
space or time dimension, space-time-cubes can cover only
small sections of space time – such as short regional chains
of events – or at the maximum scale they can cover space as
world history (see Figure 1, right hand side).
Within this scalable framework, the position of any
physical entity can be located and visualized over various
time phases [16]. The resulting patterns with regard to a
single object are space-time-trajectories, which visualize
movements as characteristic traces or tracks. While a nonmoving object produces a vertical trajectory, moving objects
plot curved paths into the cube, which envision the
characteristic space-time behaviour of historical entities –
and which could be analytically resolved into more basic
visual elements. Whereas time-geography originally aims at
the visualization of human life paths, this method can also be
applied to artefacts which are exhibited in museums, such as
weapons, bones, artworks, etc. Relevant basic elements of
their space-time-paths for example encompass the spacetime-points of their origin (in case of complex artefacts also
the phase of its assembly), their time-geographical
movements, and relevant events, including: possibly known
effects and in case of losses their point of disappearance and
retrieval or reconstruction.

visualizations and new media applications which allow for
interactivity often receive high attention. Therefore, we want
to turn to the potential of information visualization methods
“to amplify cognition” [5] also within the museum domain and present an application for a visually oriented advance
organizer, which roots are located in the human geography
domain.
II. TIME-TOPOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION
VISUALIZATION AS ADVANCE ORGANIZER
It is challenging for museums to display the different
connections between exhibits. Take, for example, an art
exhibition: by which kind of information should they be
grouped (see Figure 1, left hand side): Should artworks be
grouped by the place or the time from which they origin, by
the artist, or by the topic addressed? As an exhibitions’
educational message usually can only be reconstructed by
movement through space [24], an exhibition’s curator has to
decide which relation between the exhibits is most important
and determines the exhibition layout. Advance organizers,
which can visualize additional conceptual connections, are
usually placed in entrance halls or at the beginning of a show
floor. Two methods which are featuring most prominently in
museums to serve as visual advance organizer are maps and
timelines. In the following, we want to introduce an
integrative method which has been absent in the range of
visualization strategies for cultural heritage visualization
until now [9] - and which shall be extended to a freely
adaptable cultural heritage visualization framework further
down.
A. Time geography
The notation of time geography was introduced by
Hägerstrand [11] to visually analyze the spatial dynamics of
various entities over time. To achieve this purpose, two
methods became conceptually intertwined: cartography as
method to map arrangements on geographic surfaces and
chronography as method to map arrangements of events

Apart from these options of fine-grained timegeographic imaging – which naturally depend on rich
historical artefact data – the most basic coordinates often are
time and location of exhibit origin. Given any historically
structured exhibition, these artefact data points now can be
re-positioned in time and space. The result will be a

541

figure as ground layer. The evolution of life, fine arts, or any
given topic can now be visualized as historically staggered
cluster map (Figure 2, middle) or as branching tree, which
unfolds over specifically structured topic maps (see Figure 2,
right hand side).
As information visualization methods like social,
semantic or multi-topographical network analysis have seen
significant methodical and technological advancements in
recent times [7, 17, 23], they can be leveraged and
coherently integrated into an extended framework of time
topography. With this extended framework, which allows
exhibition designers (and visitors) to select various mapping
methods to re-position their exhibits in conceptually
illuminating space-times, we consider to present an
innovative solution to visually structure and organize
theoretically unrestricted types of exhibition data.

characteristically
distributed
point
cloud
in
a
characteristically scaled space-time-cube (see Figure 2, left
hand side), which can be further explored and visually
analyzed (see chapter 2.3). The effect of such re-positioning
procedures for the visitor’s intellectual experience
corresponds to the described effects of advance organizers.
Before entering the real exhibition spaces, with all its
informational diversity, a coherent exhibition model of
reduced complexity could be offered. As such, it delivers a
well defined overview first and can serve as cognitive
schema or skeleton, which is capable to grow and take up the
flesh of more detailed information, when zooming into the
exhibition by individual walkthroughs.
B. Time topography
Before turning towards possible methods of interaction
with a space-time-cube, a generalizing extension of the
framework as outlined so far has to be ensured. Geographical
mapping is not the only method which could help to reposition exhibits in relevant conceptual contexts; various
extensions of the time-geographical framework are possible.
Aligning with the given scaffold of the space-time-cube,
these extensions use the vertical time axis as well, but
replace the method of horizontal geographic mapping by
other information visualization techniques.
For instance by turning to fairly common exhibition
topics like natural history, history of arts, or history of
nations, the geographic space-time-cube, as conceptualized
above, can display valuable exhibit information. Still it
cannot be considered to deliver the most appropriate
mapping method, when the evolution of whole populations,
art forms or dynasties has to be visualized. While the
chronological distribution still plays a decisive role, the
topographical distribution could be better visualized within a
conceptual space of diversity. Now, instead of geographic
maps, maps of association, affiliation or social closeness

C. Visual analytics for interactive exhibition exploration
Visual analytics is the science of analytical reasoning
facilitated by interactive visual interfaces and appropriate
visualisation techniques [22]. Here, visual and analytical
methods are intertwined to support the exploration of data
and discovery processes. Within this framework, the user is
not merely a passive element who interprets given
visualisations and installations, but is instead the core entity
which drives the process of analyzing data and interacting
with them.
Visual analytics methods are especially suited for
application with large data sets to support users in gaining an
overview on and exploring these data. An exhibition-based
space-time-cube would necessarily include different
structuring properties (i.e. horizontal layers, temporal frames,
exhibition parts, etc.) and, therefore, requires intuitive and
easy interfaces for museum visitors. By applying visual
analytics methods to an exhibition space-time-cube visitors

Figure 2: Selection of space-time-cubes, showing different artefact distributions in topographical space-times. From left
to right: geographic space-time, categorial space-time of different styles, and historical-genetic space-time.

542

Figure 3: Interlinking time-topographical (left) and physical (right) exhibition layouts.
As shown in Figure 3, this visual interlinkage of exhibit
layouts can allow for the formation of a “bilingual”
(“bispatial”) mental model, which can guide and enrich
visitors’ experience in the time-topographical and the realtopographical framework. Thus it can help to navigate in the
face of cognitive and factual exhibition walkthroughs.
As the outlined approach of a visual “exhibit positioning
system” could be implemented on various media devices and
on various levels of pervasiveness or richness, the following
chapter will map out the various options and stages of
technical realization.

are enabled to interactively orient themselves in the
exhibitions’ geographical and topographical space-time.
They can navigate through these spaces, zoom in and out,
filter, select exhibits, retrieve further information, discover
connections between different exhibits and build up a
cognitive framework which later helps them to integrate the
exhibits and the information at the museum in their enacted
knowledge structure.
D. Interlinking time topography and exhibition topography
Maybe the most demanding challenge, is the task to
offer and establish an interlinkage between (the arrangement
of) the time-topographical exhibition space and (the
arrangement of) the real exhibition space.
Time-topographical visualizations allow a translation
and re-positioning of given exhibits in meaningful spacetime arrangements, but have to be re-translatable into the real
(spatial exhibition) arrangements again, to achieve best
enduring effects. Thus a public terminal in the entrance area,
which allows for time-topographical exploration of the
exhibition, has to ensure the link back to the real spatial
topography of the exhibits arranged on the exhibition site,
where all the details will be discovered on the move.
Technically spoken, to interlink the exhibition with the
space-time-cube in a one-sided manner, a Linked View
should be deployed between the time-topographical
exhibition model and an architectural model of the exhibition
layout. Linked views offer (at least two) different views on
an identical set of elements by varying visual layouts or rules
of arrangement. If these views are furthermore set up for
interactive exploration (user-driven methods of linking and
brushing), the selection of an element in the first view causes
the highlighting of the element in the other view. This allows
the cognitive translation of arrangements from one layout to
the other – and possible re-translation (or multiple cyclic
elaborations) in terms of an enriched return to the former
way of viewing.

III.

TECHNICAL IMPLEMENTATION

Technical implementations of time-topographical
concepts could be enacted on at least two different levels,
which would correspond to different media realms: (1)
Computer-based visualizations in the museum’s entrance
hall allow the introduction of the space-time-cube as advance
organizer, whereas (2) additional printed maps or spacebased exhibition design can ensure the coherent utilisation of
the time-topographical model for the visitors’ experiences of
the real exhibit arrangements in the given architectural
museum spaces.
Whereas the first dimension also could be realized as a
supplementing post-hoc measure in every given museum by
itself, only a synchronous and narrow intertwining of
conceptual information design and physical exhibition
design is considered to allow for the best possible
development of a coherent mental exhibition model, which
again is considered as a precondition for effective cognitive
processing in terms of information evaluation, elaboration,
and integration.
A. Time topography as advance organizer
Time-topographical visualization applications can be
implemented as interactive advance organizer on large public

543

technologically implemented using a great variety of
exhibition design approaches. As long as the basic
combination of spaces and time visualizations are
implemented by the use of various information design
technologies, we are sure that new kinds of coherent visitor
experiences will emerge:
The main effect of the space-time-cube is its function
as advance organizer. It allows visitors to build up a
conceptual framework, in which to integrate the exhibits and
the information presented in the exhibition. Thereby, they
can more easily orient themselves in the exhibition’s
conceptual space, can more effectively evaluate the exhibit
information based on the conceptual framework, and finally
will acquire more enduring knowledge. Also, the exhibition
design principles are made more explicit. Visitors are
encouraged to decode the conceptual orientation of exhibits
in the museum space, while they integrate the exhibit
information into the framework built up by using the
advance organizer.
In addition, this technology can raise expectations and
interests before the visit. Interested visitors are more
motivated to attend to the exhibition more closely and more
processing capacities will be freed.
By situating the advance organizer in the entrance hall,
it has different effects: First, it will not directly compete with
the exhibits, but rather directs the visitors to them by
providing conceptual orientation, as well as raising
expectations and curiosity. Secondly, such a technological
3D-installation has high attraction power and motivates
visitors to explore it. Thereby, it overcomes the shortcomings
of textual advance organizers. As a public terminal it
additionally can be explored in groups, allowing for
discussion of concepts and conversational elaboration.
Last but not least, the space-time-cube opens up a
flexible view on exhibitions: Curators are normally restricted
to organize the exhibits using one or few organizing
principles (e.g. time). In the space-time-cube in contrast,
exhibits can be organized in their whole complexity, the
organizing principles can be interactively changed, and allow
visitors to get an idea on the multiple connections between
exhibits of the past - as well as their interlinkage with
visitors of the presence.

screens (e.g., in the entrance area), on individual PC
terminals (for the purpose of individual exploration), or on
websites (for the public communication of science). As
various tools already allow for the creation of interactive,
time-topographical exhibition visualizations (e.g., [15]), the
major challenge for curators and exhibition designers will be
data migration and integration into advance organizers.

B. Coherent exhibition design
A coherent exhibition design aims on the alignment of
the structural and sequential exhibition configuration with
the conceptual orientation provided on the advance
organizer. If the concepts and structures of the advance
organizer are available during the visit continuously and
stringently, visitors can more easily integrate the exhibits and
the information into the mental model, which they built up in
advance.
Time-topographical conceptualizations are already
included in most coherent exhibition designs. They can be
made more explicit and easy to decode by additionally
including guiding systems (e.g., signboards and overview
maps analogous to the ones used on the advance organizer),
showroom design (e.g. colour coding, red threads), or
detailed single exhibit information referencing back to the
advance organizer.
Alternatively (or additionally) the advance organizer
can be made accessible on mobile devices too. This would
allow visitors to continue to navigate and orient themselves
in the exhibition’s conceptual, temporal, and geographical
space, and to make connections to exhibits in other parts of
the exhibitions. In addition, visitors could bookmark exhibits
and information of personal relevance and interest, annotate
thoughts, and take home this information for extended
exploration.
Not only for these mobile applications, usability issues
have to be taken into close consideration, as threedimensional visualization methods always put up high
challenges with regard to navigation, visual clutter and the
readability of labels especially on small screens.
IV.

CONCLUSIONS
REFERENCES

Due to its conceptual nature, we consider this article to
lay ground to the development of a conceptual and
technological framework which can support visitors’
experience in museums with regard to general information
integration, informal learning, as well as the relocation of
exhibits in space and time. Though only concrete
implementations and evaluations will show the extent, to
which these effects are achieved, we want to emphasize the
relevance of conceptual elaboration as precondition to the
successful implementation of various technological
measures.
As outlined above, the time topographical framework
has to be envisioned as freely scalable and adaptable
scaffold, which is open to support cognition on any
historically structured subject-matter and which can be

[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

544

R. Allen, and S. Nalluru, “Exploring History with Narrative
Timelines”, in Human Interface and the Management of Information.
Designing Information Environments, LNCS, vol. 5617, 2009, pp.
333–338.
D. P. Ausubel, “The use of advance organizers in the learning and
retention of meaningful verbal material”, Journal of Educational
Psychology, vol. 51, 1960, pp. 267-272.
G. Black, The engaging museum. London, UK: Routledge, 2005.
A. Briseño-Garzón, D. Anderson, and A. Anderson, “Entry and
emergent agendas of adults visiting an aquarium in family groups”,
Visitor Studies, vol. 10, 2007, pp. 71-87.
S. Card, J. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, Readings in Information
Visualization: Using Vision to Think, San Francisco, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, 1999.

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16] M.-J. Kraak, “The Space-Time Cube revisited from a
Geovisualization Perspective,” Proc. 21st International Cartographic
Conference: Cartographic Renaissance (ICC 03), 2003, pp. 19881996.
[17] L. Krempel, Visualisierung komplexer Strukturen. Grundlagen der
Darstellung mehrdimensionaler Netzwerke, Frankfurt/Main: Campus,
2005.
[18] D. Lowenthal, The Past Is a Foreign Country. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 1985.
[19] T. F. McManus, “Individualizing instruction in a web-based
hypermedia learning environment: Nonlinearity, Advance Organizers,
and self-regulated learners”, Journal of Interactive Learning Research,
vol. 11, 2000, pp. 219-251.
[20] J. Packer, “Learning for fun: The unique contribution of educational
leisure experiences”, Curator, vol. 48, 2006, pp. 329-344.
[21] B. Serrell, Paying attention: Visitors and museum exhibitions,
Washington, DC: American Association of Museums, 1998.
[22] J. J. Thomas and K. A. Cook, Illuminating the Path: The Research
and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. Los Alamitos, CA:
IEEE CS Press, 2005.
[23] F. Windhager, L. Zenk, and H. Risku, “Situated organizational
mapping”, in Netzwerkanalyse und Netzwerktheorie, 2nd ed., C.
Stegbauer, Ed., Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag für
Sozialwissenschaften, 2010, pp. 239-249.
[24] J. D. Wineman, and J. Peponis, „Constructing Spatial Meaning.
Spatial Affordances in Museum Design,” Environment and Behavior,
vol. 42, 2010, pp. 86–109.

G. Davey, “What is museum fatigue?”, Visitor Studies Today, vol. 8,
2005, pp. 17-21.
J. Diesner, and K. Carley, „Relation Extraction from Texts“, in
Handbook Network Research, C. Stegbauer, and R. Häussling, Eds.
Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften, 2010, pp.
507-521.
J. Falk, “Testing a museum exhibition design assumption: The effect
of explicit labeling of exhibit clusters on visitor concept
development”, Science Education, vol. 81, 1997, pp. 679-687.
A.E. Foni, G. Papagiannakis, and N. Magnenat-Thalmann, “A
taxonomy of visualization strategies for cultural heritage
applications”, ACM J. Comput. Cult. Herit. vol. 3, 2010, pp. 1-21.
S. A. Griggs, “Orientating visitors within a thematic display”,
International Journal of Museum Management and Curatorship, vol.
2, 1983, pp. 119-134.
T. Hägerstrand, “What about people in regional science?”, Papers
Regional Science Association, vol. 24, 1970, pp. 7-21.
L. P. Hartley, The Go-Between. London, UK: Hamish Hamilton,
1957.
C. Heath, D. vom Lehn, and J. Osborne, “Interaction and interactives:
Collaboration and participation with computer-based exhibits.” Public
Understanding of Science, vol. 14, 2005, pp. 91-101.
E. Hornecker, and M. Stifter, “Learning from interactive museum
installations about interaction design for public settings,” Proc.
OZCHI 2006 Conference, Design: Activities, artefacts and
environments, New York: ACM, 2006, pp. 135-142.
T. Kapler, and W. Wright, “GeoTime Information Visualization”,
Information Visualization, vol. 4, 2005, pp. 136-146.

545

