2012 16th International Conference on Information Visualisation

Zone Modelling and Visualisation: Keys to the Design of Low Carbon Buildings

Robina Hetherington, Robin Laney, Stephen Peake
The Open University
r.e.hetherington@open.ac.uk, r.c.laney@open.ac.uk, s.r.peake@open.ac.uk
Abstract

The need for creating buildings with very low
energy demands may mean that architectural creativity
may be compromised [4]. The ability to make easy use
of BPS [Building Performance Simulation] could enable
the architect to explore a range of design options whilst
monitoring their implications on the predicted energy
performance. The use of BPS at the present time is,
however, limited [5]. It is often restricted to iconic
projects where the budget is sufficiently large to enable
the employment of specialist energy consultants. There
is also concern about the knowledge required by building
designers to implement low energy strategies [6]. Whilst
low energy buildings have and are being built, they
constitute a small proportion of all development and they
will probably have benefited from significant input from
energy consultants. In the future architects developers
and owners will be required to reduce dramatically the
energy used to build and run buildings. For instance in
the UK all new buildings will be required to be zero
carbon by 2019. Many architectural practices, especially
small firms without access to energy expertise, will
struggle to combine high design standards, especially for
non-domestic buildings, with rigorous energy
performance. This paper proposes new software that
could integrate BES [Building Energy Simulation] into
building design and make it more understandable and
accessible to small practices with limited budgets.
The paper is organized as follows; the limitations of
existing approaches are first discussed, the software
proposal is introduced; the role of the zone to: 1) support
iterative building design; 2) support BPS processes and
3) provide an information system is described and finally
possible future work is outlined.

A new approach to building modelling software, to
support the iterative design of energy efficient buildings,
is proposed. The proposal is for the combination of two,
previously separate, software types - building design
modelling and building performance simulation, along
with the development of a third component - a design
advisor, into one software tool. This software is intended
for use by architectural practices, who may not have
access to energy expertise, and who may then struggle to
maintain design standards for non-domestic buildings
required to satisfy rigorous energy performance
regulations.
In this paper we describe, through an example, how
the three components would work together, by the
employment of zone meshes, to visualise, simulate and
support with information and advice, the design of a
building. The novelty of the method resides in the
application of underlying zone meshes for the support of
iterative building design. The approach is described,
illustrated and future work outlined.
Keywords---Building
Information
Modelling
[BIM],
Energy,
Climate
Change,
Building
Performance Simulation [BPS] Building Energy
Simulation [BES].

1

Introduction

The reduction of carbon dioxide emissions through
the decrease of energy consumption by buildings is now
a critical task [1]. Governments around the world are
legislating for new buildings that use significantly less
energy than those already built in the days of cheap fossil
fuels. Iterative, holistic building design is key to how
architects will meet the challenges of designing
beautiful, yet low energy buildings. Energy modelling,
integrated within the design process, is seen as crucial to
the optimization of the building [2]. Software has an
important role to play in the support of this holistic
approach to building design to achieve rigorous, high,
energy usage standards in the buildings of the future [3].
1550-6037/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2012.86

2

Existing approaches

The traditional separation of architectural design and
energy simulation processes and the separate standalone
software results in a dichotomous view of the building
model [7]. The separate approaches are illustrated in
Figure 1; the architectural view is of a building
composed of objects such as walls, floors and roofs. The
energy simulation view is that of zones; volumes of
495

For a comparison of tools for the design of Net Zero
Energy Buildings see Attia and De Herde [6]. They
conclude that there is a need for more investment in early
design tools with the addition and improvement of many
features, including informative support (pre-decision and
post processing of simulation), optimization of
renewable energy and access for architects to simulation
software that model the physical processes rigorously.
However, the priorities of the dominant vendors
appear to be on the development of energy analysis tools
embedded within their flagship products with poor, or
no, interoperability of data to external BPS or BIM
software [7].

thermally consistent air. Interoperability of data between
the different types of software is limited and imperfect.
The need to integrate design and building performance
simulation software has been discussed in the literature
for some time [8][9][10][11][12]. It is seen as a
necessity to enable the replacement of traditional
sequential processes with interactive concurrent design
[13].

a)

ĂƌĐŚŝƚĞĐƚƵƌĞ

3

b)

The proposed software is planned to cover the
lifespan of the building over five stages as shown in
Figure 2. This paper concentrates on the first three
stages, block design, space design and detailed design.
The block design phase could also be called the concept,
massing or sketch phase. It is when the overall shape
(mass) and footprint of the building is determined. The
space design phase covers the development of the
building into individual spaces or thermal zones. This
could also be called sketch or design development. The
third stage of this proposal, when the design is
developed, is called the detailed design.

ƐŝŵƵůĂƚŝŽŶ
ƚĞǆƚ ĚĂƚĂ ʹ ĞŶƚĞƌĞĚ ŵĂŶƵĂůůǇ

Text input

CAD
2D

3D interface

BIM
3D complex mesh
rich contextual data
some limited
analysis possible

ƐŝŵƉůĞ ǌŽŶĞ ŵĞƐŚ ŽŶůǇ ƚƌĂŶƐĨĞƌ

Ăůů ĚĂƚĂ ŵĂŶƵĂůůǇ ĞŶƚĞƌĞĚ

Combined software

simple zones
complex physics
engine

ĐͿ
Figure 1a) the architectural view of the building
composed of objects b) the thermal view of the
building composed of spaces and c) the current
separate architectural and simulation approaches to
software
There have been significant developments towards
integrated tools with the large software houses
developing new or adapting existing software. For
instance Autodesk’s Project Vasari, Ecotect1 and
ArchiCAD’s Eco Designer2 have been developed for use
in the early conceptual design phases by building
designers. In general these tools use fairly simplified
algorithms for thermal simulation calculations. In
parallel, new and more user-friendly GUIs [Graphical
User Interface], have also been developed for the more
complex simulation engines such as EnergyPlus3.
DesignBuilder4, Bentley System’s AECOsim5and
Hevacomp6and OpenStudio7 are all examples of this
approach.

1

Figure 2 The five stages for the software, this
paper concentrates on the first three stages

http://usa.autodesk.com/
http://www.graphisoft.com/products/ecodesigner/
3
http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/energyplus/
4
http://www.designbuilder.co.uk/
5
http://www.bentley.com/en-US/Promo/AECOsim/
6
http://www.bentley.com/enUS/Products/Building+Analysis+and+Design/Hevacomp.htm
7
http://openstudio.nrel.gov/
2

The last two stages are important; the as-built model
is a record of the building as constructed, recording any
modifications to the design as a result of changes on site.
The operational model would facilitate the recording of
data from POE [Post Occupancy Evaluation].

496

Project Vasari. However, where this proposal varies
from these types of software, is that it extends past the
early conceptual building design stage and is intended to
act as the basis for iterative design throughout the life of
building project.

There are three separate components that the
software proposal is required to provide:
• Building design functions with at least the
existing (and sophisticated) features of BIM
[Building Information Modelling] software
• Support for BESs, with either:
o The algorithms written into the building
design software
o Acting as a GUI to BPS software installed
on the same computer or network
o Provide good interoperability of data for
free standing BPS software
• A design advisor that would have two distinct
features
o A knowledge base
o Targets and goal tracking.

ĂͿ

ďͿ

Figure 3 The Zone mesh at the center of the
iterative building design process. It facilitates
the transfer of data between the 3 software
components

ĐͿ

The three components of the software are shown in
Figure 3. At the centre to this proposal is the concept of
the ‘zone’ to support iterative design. The term zone is
derived from the concept of the thermal polygon zone as
employed in BPS. We use the term to describe a 3D
planar mesh, composed of zero thick surfaces that
enclose a volume of air. It is envisaged that the use of
such a mesh will enable the iteration between the various
design stages and support optimization of the building
form, fabric and energy usage. The zone mesh would
form the basis for BES and act as a frame for setting of
energy goals and targets within the design advisor
component of the software. The role that the zone mesh
takes in the software is described in the following
sections.

4

Figure 4 The different modelling stages in the
building design process showing: a) Block
design, the building as a number of blocks; b)
Space design, the blocks broken down into a
series of space zones an c) Detail design, the
8
model with external finishes added
Iterative design, the ability move from the building
conceptualisation to sketch and to detail phases and back
again as required, is important in the design of low
energy buildings. With this software it is proposed that
the
modelling
process
starts
with
blocks
(zones/volumes). In the next phase these zones are
subdivided into spaces (thermal or non-thermal zones).
The zone (mesh) used to form the spaces is then used as
a frame or skeleton used to attach the detailed objects of
the building. The three stages are shown in Figure 4.
This example is an existing building, the Jennie Lee, The
Open University, Walton Hall, Milton Keynes.

The use of the zone throughout the
building modelling stages

Architects are confident in working with spaces or
zones [14][4]. The use of zones as a design medium is
not new; it is used in Ecotect [15] and more recently in

8

Figure 4 a) and b) modelled in Sketchup and c) used with
permission of Swanke Hayden Connell Architects

497

Figure 5 Matrix of building design, performance and design advisor activities set against the modelling
stages of block, space and detailed design
Fundamental to this approach is a building model
mesh (the zone) composed of volumes enclosed by zerothick planar surfaces. These volumes or zones act as a
‘skeleton’ or ‘frame’ for the building model to which
building objects are applied, such as windows, doors and
roofs, as shown in Figure 4 (c). This is a different
approach to the current practice of either retro-fitting or
completely re-modelling zones as part of a post-design
energy analysis.
As discussed earlier, there are
dichotomous views of the building model. Architects
start with simple sketch-type models that are developed
into detailed views of the building, complete with
moldings, profiles and structural elements. Although
often the building concept has been simple, the building
model becomes increasingly complex as the project is
developed. Energy experts however require a simple
building model. Dynamic energy modelling, because it
typically simulates the response of a building to climate
at hourly intervals over a year, is computationally
demanding. The more complex the model mesh, the
more time-consuming the simulation, with little
improvement in the uncertainty of the simulation results
[5]. BES and similar simulation and analysis tools
require a ‘simplified’ or ‘reduced’ building geometry
[16]. This method effectively retains the simplicity (and
intelligence) of the architects original concept within the

building model and makes it visible and available for
later simulation as if required.
The use of zones meshes would enable multi-criteria
analysis through either:
• The integration of existing algorithms
programmed within the building design
software,
• The provision of a GUI to BES software such as
EnergyPlus, installed on the same computer,
network or linked via the Internet to a server,
• The provision of export and import of data to
and from free standing BPS software, for
instance CFD [Computational Fluid Dynamics].
CFD, employed for use in internal ventilation
studies, is computationally very demanding and
it can be difficult to interpret the results, as such
it is considered too specialist to be included in
this software.
Building design is multi-facetted and involves
different activities at different stages in the process, as
shown in the matrix in Figure 5. The following sections
discuss how the zone mesh is used to enable the
combination of building design modelling, BES and
design advisor functions.

498

4.1

4.2

The block design stage

The next stage in the design process, see Figure 5, is
the subdivision of the blocks into spaces as shown by
comparison of Figure 4 a) and b). The space zones
should be volumes of air that are intended to have
consistent thermal values.
A typical visualisation of the zone mesh as a series
of thermal spaces is shown in Figure 4 (b). This stage
would be developed from the block zone, by splitting the
blocks into a number of smaller units. This could be
achieved automatically or by ‘drawing’ split lines. As
with the block zone the appearance - colour,
transparency, solid/wireframe options could be applied.
In a very simple building the block and space zone could
be the same. However, in most cases this will involve
groups of rooms, for instance a row of offices on one
floor. It could, however, be one room, if that was
deemed to have a significantly different condition at
different points, for instance on a corner of a building.
Equally it could be part of a space, for instance, in a
large, deep plan exhibition area that could be subject to
varying thermal conditions due to the presence of
windows along one wall. It has been argued that this
definition of the thermal view of the building is better
carried out by the building designer, rather than the
current practice of an energy consultant, as they have a
better understanding of the building [17]. This use of the
concept of zones would also encourage the architect to
visualize the building as a thermal unit in addition to
other concerns such as structural, organizational and
aesthetics. The software would include for more than
one space zone type. A thermal zone is a mesh that
denotes an enclosed space within the building,
completely enclosed with floors, walls, ceilings, roofs
and/or adjacent zones. Outside zones or spaces such as
balconies and covered areas would be considered as nonthermal zones.
The space zone can then be used to ‘attach’ targets
for energy, in-use and embodied, and set comfort
standards. These targets could be part of the graphical
display, possibly through a ‘dashboard’ panel, and be
continually updated as the design is developed.
Individual surfaces of the space zones could be selected
within the model (highlighted) and targets set for
construction, glazing, shading and PV/solar hot water.
For instance the thermal resistance and thermal mass
values of external walls and roofs could be set. The
design advisor could be active in making suggestions at
this stage. For instance, based on the orientation of the
surface and the climatic data, it could advise on
percentages of glazing, both in terms of heat loss/gain
and any subsequent need for shading.
The range of planned simulations available at this
stage are set out in Figure 5. Simulation and analysis
would be rapid at this stage, comparable to the process of
architectural sketching. This could be through the use of
quick-to-run algorithms and enable ‘what-if’ scenarios to
support the development and refinement of architectural
concepts. Although the design advisor system might

At the block design stage the visualization of the
building is of simple block zones as shown in Figure 4
a). The blocks would be generated from a palette of
primitive volumes, which could be assembled and
manipulated as required, with ‘push-pull’ of surfaces and
vertices along with Boolean operations to combine
volumes.
The blocks could be coloured,
translucent/transparent or wire-framed/solid as required.
The principal rule is that surfaces between blocks would
be co-planar and that the blocks are labelled.
The activities undertaken by the design team in the
block design stage are given in Figure 5. The first action
on any project is to set the building location which then
fixes the climate. The effect of this is that the design
advisor can give information on strategic options and
types of construction appropriate for that region. The
design activities undertaken in this phase include an
analysis of the site; adjacent buildings, topographical
features and potential views. The building function(s)
can be set; this will trigger the design advisor to supply
information regarding legislation and comfort standards.
The design can then commence with visualisation of the
concept as a group of blocks. With a simple building it
might be one block; more complex projects may have
multiple blocks and functions. These block zones can
then have goals established, based on their footprint or
volume. The goals could be for energy in use, embodied
energy and comfort standards.

Figure 6The space zone model used in a
9
shadow analysis
Simulations can then be run for sunlight/shadows,
such as shown in Figure 6, and windflow around the
building. The aim of these early stage simulations are to
identify, by means of a visualisation, any problems such
as wind canyoning or permanent shadowing created by
the block forms and/or adjacent buildings. The potential
for the use of renewable energy can be established based
on the available portion of the site area for GSHP
[Ground Source Heat Pumps], incident solar energy for
domestic hot water or electricity generation using PV
[Photo Voltaic] and topographical features for wind
turbine generation.
9

The space zone stage

Figure 6 modelled in Project Vasari

499

building objects represent ‘real’ building elements or
products, such as external and internal walls, roofs,
floors, ceilings, windows and doors as shown in Figure 4
(c). The space and block zone meshes created in the
earlier stages are building objects and would be recorded
as such in a software backend database. However, they
should be regarded as a conceptual ‘thing’, similar in
many respects to a setting out line on a building site.
Key to the software operation is a set of rules for the
relationships of building objects within the building
model. This affects the ownership, naming, positioning
and connection of the building objects. A parent-child
hierarchy would be employed whereby all ‘real’ building
objects, such as external and internal walls, roofs, floors,
ceilings, windows and doors are ‘owned’ by one named,
space zone mesh.
As with many types of design and visualisation
software there would need for the facility to place
objects, such as the zone mesh, onto ‘layers’. The
feature would enable the isolation, visibility and
manipulation of elements on a particular layer.

recommend a percentage of glazing for thermal reasons,
the location and proportion of windows would affect the
quality of light in the building. Figure 7 shows a
preliminary daylighting study carried out on one space.
It shows the falloff of light from the windows and that
different fenestration would be required to ensure a more
even distribution of light. Thermal modelling could
employ relatively simple algorithms such as those
developed by ASHRAE10 [American Society of Heating,
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers] or the
CIBSE [Chartered Institution of Building Services
Engineers] admittance method11. More detailed thermal
modelling could be available at this stage, but it would
be envisaged that it would be employed towards the end
of the design iteration stage, and perhaps left to run
overnight. Solar incidence data would be used to test out
the need for shading and quantify the PV generation
potential.
Windflow studies would enable the
development of a natural ventilation strategy.

Figure 8 The relationship between a curved
surface and a planar zone mesh. The curve is
‘attached’ to the flat surface at a tangent.
Curves can be an important design feature for
architects. Figure 8 illustrates that how a curved element
is attached to a zone mesh. It is proposed that curved
primitives, such as spheres, cylinders and freeform
curves would be available as part of palette of volumes
available to the designer in the block and spatial zone
modelling phases. However, they would be effectively
planar. As buildings objects are attached to the zone
surface they could take a curved form as required.
Rules for connections of building objects would be
monitored and enforced by the software. The primary
rule would be that the zone surfaces would be
concurrent, that is neither overlapping or with narrow
gaps between them; this is to support reliable thermal
analysis and inter-zone heat exchange calculations. All
building objects would be positioned in three dimensions
within the building model relative to the parent spatial
zone. Thus, as part of the iterative design process, if
either the block zone, spatial zone or the building object
is resized the software will detect the changes. As shown
in Figure 9 the objects affected by these changes would
then be both highlighted visually in the model and a list
of affected objects given. The designer could then deal
with the objects as they deemed necessary.

Figure 7 Daylight analysis of a space
showing distribution through the space12
Visualization of the simulation results at this early
sketching of ideas stage is crucial.
It requires
comparison of the results with the goals and targets set
within the design advisor component. At this stage the
visualization could be very simple, aimed to illustrate
how close the current design solution is to achieving a
particular performance goal. Key, to the iterative
building design process, is that the software should
enable the designer to retrieve and compare previous
design options/solutions and simulation results.

4.3

The detailed design stage

The detailed design stage involves using the space
zone mesh as a frame or skeleton to which building
objects are attached or located within. At this stage the
10

http://www.ashrae.org/standards-research-technology/standards--guidelines
11
http://www.edsl.net/main/Software/Designer/CIBSE.aspx
12

Simulation run in Ecotect

500

ĂͿ

ďͿ

ĐͿ

Figure 9 Block, spaces and detailed models: a) shows the effect to the model if the space or zone is
enlarged, the computer would re-size the block model and the detailed model and give a visual warning
as to the building objects affected by the change; b) shows the model expanded and c) shows the zone
mesh split with object relocated
The rule for the ‘attachment’ of the building objects
to the zone mesh would be established by the software
user. For instance, with external walls, there could be a
choice between whether the inner face, centre line or
outer face of the wall would be coplanar with the zone
surface. Objects, such as internal walls, do not need to
touch the zone, but their position would be recorded
relative the zone in which they are located. Rules or
choices for junctions of building objects, such as internal
walls joining external walls or the corners of external
walls would be provided in a similar way to that already
used in BIM software.

Simulation at this stage can include detailed thermal,
daylighting, ventilation performance and energy
generation characteristics. The model detail required for
these types of analysis vary. Thermal simulation is
likely to be a full dynamic analysis, taking into account
direct and indirect solar gains, internal gains, inter-zonal
heat flow, occupancy schedules and internal comfort
requirements. Figure 10 shows a typical simulation
result illustrating the months where heating or cooling
would be required to maintain comfort. At this stage, the
space zone mesh will be suitable for inter-zonal studies,
but additional data would be required to model solar
overhangs and shading devices as shown in Figure 11.
Daylight studies predict the internal natural lighting
levels on the working plane or surface to determine if
they will be sufficient for occupants of the space to carry
out their normal duties. Effective use of natural daylight
means that the use of electrical lighting, and hence
energy used, can be reduced.
Accurate daylight
modelling also requires a relatively simple model,
however unlike a thermal model, external wall
thicknesses, overhangs, light-reflectors and shading
devices become important as shown in Figure 11. To
enable this type of simulation the automatic generation
of an additional mesh would be provided within the
software, called the external envelope. It would be

Figure 10 Showing monthly heating/cooling
load for a complete building13
13

Simulation run in Ecotect

501

generated from Cartesian coordinates obtained from the
zone data and the known thicknesses of the walls and the
dimensions of overhangs and shading devices. This
mesh would reside on a bespoke layer.

analysis, should support the architect in the optimisation
of both the aesthetics and the performance of the
building. It places the determination of the thermal view
back into the hands of the architect, who will know the
building well, as opposed to an external consultant.
Because of this the architect, with the support of the
design advisor system, would potentially be better able to
conceptualise the building in terms of thermal comfort
zones and energy targets. This should partly address
concern about ‘black box’ results where the computer
delivers a set of uncomprehendable numbers. Possible
adaption to changed climate could also be modelled with
the inclusion of future weather data now being developed
[19].
It would however restrict the architect to a particular
mode of working, in that, as discussed in the paper, the
building model has to be assembled in a particular
manner. Earlier work suggests that should not be a
problem [4] and should reduce anomalies in the building
model as reported by Steel et al [20].

Figure 11 Showing a diagrammatic section
through a building. Penetration of sunlight is
restricted by the overhang and the light shelf.
Daylight is shown reflected from the light shelf
and ceiling
Ventilation simulation, through the use of CFD, also
requires a simplified model. Obstructions, such as
internal partitions, and openings, such as windows and
louvers, that affect the flow of air are important features
to model. This data would also be generated from the
geometry of the model and reside on a separate layer.
Detailed predictions would be provided for energy
generation by the input of specific materials and product
details to the model and the results feed through to the
energy goals calculations.
The design advisor would provide typical
construction details and the embodied energy of
materials along with an option to supply data on local
materials (to reduce transport costs). It could provide
data and options on how shading could best be provided.
The monitoring of goals would be ongoing, but due to
the time taken to carry out the more detailed analysis at
this stage might be restricted to an overnight run.
At this detailed design stage the software would
provide a range of building model visualisation,
rendering and printing options, as typically found in BIM
software.

5

Figure 12 Data flow between the three
components of the software, plus the export of
data
Future work falls into three distinct categories; the
exchange of data between the three components as
shown in Figure 12, the design of the interface and the
design of the advisory system.
The combination of the three components of the
software, building design, BES and the design advisor
relies on the successful exchange of data. The input data
for the various BES algorithms and external software
would need to be established and cross referenced to
check that, in particular, the geometries meet the various
requirements. Export and input of data by way of
interoperable languages would also require further
investigation.
The design of the interface would be challenging as
it would need to facilitate the display of the three
components: the building model design, input and output
information from the BES and information from the
design advisor. A particular challenge would be to make
the GUI appear simple and intuitive to use and yet
provide access to information from detailed simulation
results and deliver sophisticated BIM operations.

Discussion and future work

This software concept offers a number of advantages
over that currently available. The same model can be
used from early sketch design to completion, operation
and maintenance. We believe that the early sketch
modelling in 3D, through the use of primitive block
shapes, should make the software attractive to architects
as it could overcome some of the concerns regarding
inhibition of early design processes through the use of a
high precision tools such as BIM [18]. This sketching of
the building form, coupled with rapid ‘sketch’ type

502

The design advisor would involve two components;
the knowledge base and the goal tracking systems.
Compilation of a database that covers an extensive range
of subjects such as rules of thumb advice, construction
details relative to the geographical location, comfort and
user standards and patterns, embodied energy, local and
transport details, etc. is a significant and challenging
task. In addition it would require constant updating with
POE data and new building product details. The goal or
target tracking system, linked to the space zones, would
require collecting the output from a number of analytical
engines to calculate and compare predicted energy
required with energy generated, along with warnings on
comfort conditions or potential thermal difficulties with
the construction.

[5]

6

[11]

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

Concluding remarks

The challenges facing the construction industry in
reducing the energy used by buildings are profound
[21][22]. In this paper we have outlined a proposal for
software that, whilst alone will not solve these problems,
would constitute a valuable tool to support architects to
maintain design standards. The proposal is simple, yet
novel, to maintain a simple mesh within the building
model, denoting zone spaces, through all stages of the
design process. The difficulties in creating such software
are not in the computational methods involved, but in the
scale and size of the undertaking. The development of
this type of software will require a large and skilled
team.

7

[12]

[13]

[14]

Acknowledgements
[15]

The authors would like to thank Michael Jackson for
his feedback during the development of the ideas
presented in this paper and Swanke Hayden Connell
Architects for use of the image in Figure 4(c) of the
model of the Jennie Lee building.

8

[16]

References
[17]

[1]

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate
change 2007 : mitigation of climate change : contribution
of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press,
2007.
[2] Rocky Mountain Institute, Including Building Energy
Modeling in the Integrative Design Process. 2011.
[3] R. Hetherington, R. Laney, and S. Peake, ‘Zero and Low
Carbon Buildings: A Driver for Change in Working
Practices and the Use of Computer Modelling and
Visualization’, in 2010 14th International Conference
Information Visualisation, London, United Kingdom,
2010, pp. 590–596.
[4] R. Hetherington, R. Laney, and S. Peake, ‘Integrated
Building Design, Information and Simulation Modelling:
The Need for a New Hierarchy’, in Building Simulation
2011, Sydney, Australia, 2011.

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

503

J. L. M. Hensen and R. Lamberts, Eds., Building
performance simulation for design and operation.
Abingdon Oxon; New York NY: Spon Press, 2011.
S. Attia and A. De Herde, ‘Early Design Simulation
Tools for Net Zero Energy Buildings: a Comparison of
Ten Tools’, in Proceedings of Building Simulation 2011,
Sydney, Australia, 2011.
R. J. Hitchcock and J. Wong, ‘Transforming Ifc
Architectural View Bims for Energy Simulation: 2011’, in
Proceedings of Building Simulation 2011, Sydney,
Australia, 2011.
J. Clarke, Energy simulation in building design, 2nd ed.
Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2001.
K. Papamichael and V. Pal, ‘Barriers in developing and
using simulation-based decision-support software’.
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2002.
G. Augenbroe, ‘Trends in building simulation’, Building
and Environment, vol. 37, no. 8–9, pp. 891–902, 2002.
J. L. M. Hensen, ‘Towards more effective use of building
performance simulation in design’, in Proc. 7th
International Conference on Design & Decision Support
Systems in Architecture and Urban Planning, 2004, pp. 2–
5.
C. Eastman, P. Teicholz, R. Sacks, and K. Liston, BIM
handbook: a guide to building information modeling for
owners, managers, designers, engineers and contractors,
2nd ed. Hoboken NJ: Wiley, 2011.
B. Dong, K. Lam, Y. Huang, and G. Dobbs, ‘A
comparative study of the IFC and gbXML informational
infrastructures for data exchange in computational design
support environments’, in Tenth International IBPSA
Conference, Beijing: IBPSA China, 2007.
S. van Nederveen, R. Beheshti, and W. Gielingh,
‘Modelling Concepts for BIM’, in Handbook of Research
on Building Information Modeling and Construction
Informatics, J. Underwood and U. Isikdag, Eds. IGI
Global, 2009.
A. Marsh, ‘CAD Geometry vs Performance Analysis,
Natural Frequency’, Natural Frequency, 2006. [Online].
Available:
http://naturalfrequency.com/articles/cadanalysis.
[Accessed: 24-Aug-2010].
V. Bazjanac, ‘Space Boundary Requirements for
Modeling of Building Geometry for Energy and Other
Performance Simulation’, CIB W78 2010 - Applications
of IT in the AEC Industry, 2010.
V. Bazjanac, ‘IFC BIM-Based Methodology for SemiAutomated Building Energy Performance Simulation’.
24-Sep-2008.
Y. E. Kalay, ‘The impact of information technology on
design methods, products and practices’, Design Studies,
vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 357–380, May 2006.
M. Eames, T. Kershaw, and D. Coley, ‘On the creation of
future probabilistic design weather years from UKCP09’,
Building Services Engineering Research and Technology,
vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 127–142, Oct. 2010.
J. Steel, R. Drogemuller, and B. Toth, ‘Model
interoperability in building information modelling’, Softw
Syst Model, Oct. 2010.
T. Oreszczyn and R. Lowe, ‘Challenges for energy and
buildings research: objectives, methods and funding
mechanisms’, Bldg. Res. & Info., vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 107–
122, Jan. 2010.
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, ‘Low
Carbon Construction’. HM Government, 2010.

