DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.02036.x

COMPUTER GRAPHICS

forum

Volume 30 (2011), number 8 pp. 2301–2313

Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields
H. Obermaier1 , M. I. Billen2 , H. Hagen3 , M. Hering-Bertram4 and B. Hamann1

1 Department

of Computer-Science, University of California, Davis, CA, USA
of Geology, University of California, Davis, CA, USA
3 Department of Computer-Science, University of Kaiserslautern, Germany
4 Department of Computer-Science, Rhine-Waal University of Applied Sciences, Germany
{hobermaier, mibillen}@ucdavis.edu, hagen@cs.uni-kl.de, hamann@cs.ucdavis.edu, martin.hering-bertram@hochschule-rhein-waal.de
2 Department

Abstract
The evolution of strain and development of material anisotropy in models of the Earth’s mantle flow convey
important information about how to interpret the geometric relationship between observation of seismic anisotropy
and the actual mantle flow field. By combining feature extraction techniques such as path line integration and
tensor accumulation, we compute time-varying strain vector fields that build the foundation for a number of
feature extraction and visualization techniques. The proposed field segmentation, clustering, histograms and multivolume visualization techniques facilitate an intuitive understanding of three-dimensional strain in such flow fields,
overcoming limitations of previous methods such as 2-D line plots and slicing. We present applications of our
approach to an artificial time varying flow data set and a real world example of stationary flow in a subduction
zone and discuss the challenges of processing these geophysical data sets as well as the insights gained.
Keywords: flow visualization, strain, spherical histograms, deformation
ACM CCS: I.6.6 [Computer Graphics]: Simulation Output Analysis

1. Introduction
Vector field visualization has received strong attention in the
recent history of scientific visualization, as flow simulation
techniques have become available to a diverse set of application areas. While the best known application fields for flow
simulation such as aerodynamics and industrial mixing have
been studied extensively from a visualization point of view,
other fields such as geophysics suffer from a lack of specific
visualization techniques and require the definition and development of alternative and tailor-made visualization methods.
Solid Earth geodynamics is concerned with the forces that
move tectonic plates at the planet’s surface through energy
provided by solid-state thermo-chemical convection in the
mantle (outer 2890 km). Over long periods of time (>10 000
to 1 million years) and at the high temperatures and pressures
of the mantle, material deforms by a process of solid-state
creep flow at high effective viscosity (1019 –1025 Pa s). Due
to the long time-scales and slow (<10–100 cm yr−1 ) noninertial flow resulting from the high viscosity, the point of
c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics
Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Published by
Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4
2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

interest shifts away from classic flow field illustration, such
as integral structure and vortex core extraction, towards visualization of more general continuum mechanics including
object deformation, and the applicability of generic flow visualization techniques is rather limited.
In this paper, we are concerned with upper-mantle flow
(<670 km depth) in subduction zones, where one tectonic
plate sinks beneath another tectonic plate (e.g. Alaska and
Japan). These subduction zones are of high importance to
geoscientists because they provide the largest forces driving
plate tectonics and are the most seismically active regions on
the planet. One of the major outstanding questions regarding
subduction zones is the geometry of mantle flow induced
by sinking of a dense tectonic plate into the mantle [Bil08],
which cannot be observed directly. Observations of seismic
anisotropy provide indirect evidence of this pattern, because
the crystal axis of the seismically anisotropic mineral olivine
will align [i.e. they form a lattice preferred orientation (LPO)]
with the strain direction during deformation. However, these
observations must be interpreted with the aid of simulations

2301

2302

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields

of mantle flow, which track the evolution of strain and material alignment.
Our work aims at solving the problem of 3-D flow-induced
strain analysis by integrating a combination of feature extraction and field processing techniques with novel methods of strain segmentation and visualization. The resulting
visualization of flow and strain helps geoscientists in two
ways. First, it allows the scientist to distinguish regions with
uniform strain orientations, which can be analysed with a
simple algorithm for comparison to observations, from more
complex regions requiring more detailed analysis. Secondly,
it facilitates rapid identification of the relative orientation of
the strain orientations and the flow field, which provides for
more accurate interpretation of seismic anisotropy observations to determine the flow field. As a consequence, our work
contributes both to the application field of geophysics by
providing an intuitive and interactive visualization for flowinduced strain analysis as well as to the visualization community by introducing novel methods for non-directed strain
axis field segmentation and strain and cluster visualization.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Section 2 gives an overview of existing visualization methods in the area of geophysics and strain visualization. In
Section 3, background information on geological subduction
and data formats are provided. Section 4 details the steps of
strain field computation. Segmentation and visualization of
the resulting strain fields are explained in detail in Sections
5 and 6. This is followed by an application and results section presenting the created results and their benefits for the
geophysics community. Section 8 concludes this paper.

2. Related Work
Work related to the scope of this paper can be found in the
field of visualization, where it is centred on visualization of
vector and tensor fields and is partially related to strain analysis and in the field of geophysics, where basic techniques
are used for visual analysis of flow and strain data.

2.1. Visualization
Different flow visualization techniques are related to properties of flow-induced strain. One such method is the Finite
Time Lyapunov Exponent (FTLE) [Hal01] which derives a
scalar-valued convergence and divergence map from flow
fields. The maximal structures of this field highlight regions
where strain along a particle trajectory is locally maximal,
thus giving an insight into flow separation. Contrary to FTLE,
which is based on gridded integral line generation, others
[OHBKH09] have proposed visualizing strain that was accumulated along individual integral flow lines to visualize
deformation of distinct volume particles over time. This technique has recently been applied to generate a localized FTLE
map [KPH*09]. The work presented in this paper makes use

of a similarly dense and localized line integration to obtain strain directions in time-varying flow fields. In tensor
field visualization and Diffusion Tensor Imaging in particular, anisotropy clustering based on tensor invariants with
varying distance measures is state-of-the-art and has been
proposed by several authors [ZMB*03, STS07, RJF*09].
Their clustering methods are fine tuned for DT-MRI tensor fields. In the context of geophysics, stress-related tensors have been visualized by glyphs in [NJP05]. In the last
years, strain segmentation has received increased attention
in vector field visualization by the definition of various Eulerian and Lagrangian strain measures, which have been used
to segment flow fields into strain and vortex regions based
on the magnitude of these components [SWTH07]. For a
state-of-the-art report on volume visualization we refer to
[EHK*04].

2.2. Geophysics
Analysis of Lattice Preferred Orientation or grain orientation
[ZiK95] obtained from mantle flow simulations of subduction zones [JB10, WSMG06] is commonly performed by
manual inspection of generic visualizations resulting from
techniques such as slicing and arrow plot visualization [JB10]
of instantaneous Infinite Strain Axis directions [JB10, KR02].
While these visualization methods are generally available
and easy to implement, they suffer from loss of dimension
and lack a homogeneous field impression. The need of manual parameter adjustment such as slicing orientation and position favours overlooking of features during visual inspection. A first attempt at computing and interpreting LPO from
time-varying flow simulations was done in [MvKK02] by the
integration of strain along particle tracers. The resulting twodimensional strain orientation field is visualized using line
plots and temperature-based colouring and serves as basis for
further manual analysis and segmentation. Work with focus
on visualization of geophysical flow with analysis of heat
and critical point development is given by Erlebacher et al.
[EYD02]. A natural two-dimensional watershed-like visualization of LPO is given by optical micrographs with polarized
light [ZiK95] and is the result of photographing physically
sliced material samples in lab experiments. FTLE-like visualizations are presented in [Sub09].

3. Strain in Geophysical Flow Data
In simple flow fields, such as horizontally oriented simple
shear found beneath the centre of large tectonic plates, it is appropriate to assume that the orientation of LPO, or observed
seismic anisotropy, and the flow field is parallel [CBS07].
However, in subduction zones, the flow field can be highly
three dimensional depending on the geometry of the subducting plate [JB10] and can change rapidly in time [BB10]. An
observation of seismic anisotropy provides a single measurement at the Earth’s surface that reflects the changing pattern

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields

2303

Figure 1: A seismic wave travels through the Earth’s mantle
before reaching a sensor at the surface. LPO along the ray
(in blue) are used as approximation of mantle flow geometry.

Figure 2: Typical slicing techniques showing flow direction
and magnitude (left-hand side) and predicted LPO orientation (right-hand side).

of seismic anisotropy along the ray path of the seismic wave
in the upper mantle, as illustrated in Figure 1 . Therefore,
accurate interpretation of this observation requires knowing
how the pattern of material alignment varies spatially and
how it relates to the geometry of the flow field.

previous studies linking seismic lattice-preferred orientation
with mantle flow have been limited in their ability to compare
the complex 3-D patterns of stretching found in numerical
models with the surface observations of seismic fast axis
directions. Most studies have made simplifications such as
focusing on 2-D map slices or cross sections of the stretching
directions (see Figure 2 ), ignoring the effects of dipping fast
axis, or interpreting only the large-scale patterns [CBS07,
JB10, MvKK02].

3.1. Background
Simulation of subducting slab movement and evolution of
LPOs enables geophysicists to make predictions about the
propagation of seismic waves caused by earthquakes or artificial sources. Observation of differences in the speed of
propagation of polarized seismic waves is one method of
inferring the pattern of mantle flow [RS94]. Such seismic
anisotropy occurs in the upper mantle in regions where deformation causes the crystal lattice within olivine minerals to
acquire a preferred orientation. Bulk alignment of this mineral’s crystal structure will cause seismic waves that travel
through these regions to arrive at seismic stations at different times depending on wave polarization. From this information seismologists can geographically map bulk alignment in the mantle, which is usually indicated by plotting
the direction of the fastest seismic axis of the olivine mineral, providing a first rough approximation of mantle flow
directions.
The relationship between the mantle flow pattern, the
shearing causing the alignment and the resulting fast axis
depends on several other factors [KJKS08]. When neglecting
microscopic influence on material orientation such as recrystallization, these directions of preferred alignment may be approximated by deformations caused by macroscopic external
forces such as strain induced by the flow field [WSMG06].
In addition, the magnitude of stretching is also important
because significant shearing is needed to cause the lattice
orientation to become both strongly aligned and pervasive
throughout the bulk rock: only pervasive and strong alignments can be seismically detectable. Limitations on joint
analysis of the numerical models and the seismological data
stem mainly from the difficulty in clearly identifying the 3-D
geometries of regions where strong lattice-preferred orientation is predicted by the numerical models and providing
this information to seismologists so they can more accurately interpret the observations. This is due to the fact that

During data set analysis, geophysicists have to identify regions with different strain orientation as well as regions with
high anisotropy manually to make estimations about predicted seismic wave propagation. The inevitable requirement
of manual plane alignment as well as visual ambiguities and
clutter resulting from common visualization methods based
on slicing complicates data set analysis. We aim to develop
methods to assist and support geophysicists in their analysis
of seismic anisotropy. In summary, the methods introduced
in this paper have the following two goals:
1. Visualize time-varying and stationary strain orientation (i.e. material alignment) discontinuities to separate
heterogeneous regions and allow identification of persistent strain forces.
2. Visualize correlation between flow direction and material
alignment in the simulated flow field to allow verification
and analysis of mantle flow directions as obtained by
real-world seismic measurements.
Consequently, the proposed visualization methods presented in the next sections not only rely on the data provided
by the velocity vector field but make use of the accompanying
stress tensors as well.

3.2. Data format
Mantle flow simulation data in this work are given on an
irregularly spaced curvilinear grid in a geographic coordinate
system and represent mantle flow in a small section of the
Earth as seen in Figure 3(a) . For computational reasons, we
map this geometric data in a pre-processing step from locally
rotated geographic coordinate systems to a global Cartesian

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2304

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields

4.1. Strain tensors

Figure 3: (a) Two-dimensional illustration of possible data
set locations in geographic coordinates. One section of the
data set contains a subduction zone in the upper mantle. (b)
Points of evaluation are mapped back into the original curvilinear field before cell-wise interpolation is performed. This
avoids incorrect cell identification and allows interpolation
in geographic coordinate space.

coordinate system by applying X: (ψ, φ, r) → (x, y, z). The
neighbourhood relation between data points is not affected by
this mapping. Cells of the data set are identified by indices
(i, j, k) with irregular spacings in longitude, latitude and
radius direction. To guarantee correct cell identification and
avoid errors that would occur when evaluating the field in
the now distorted neighbourhood grid, positions during field
evaluation in R3 are mapped back into the curvilinear grid by
X −1 . The correct surrounding cell of the evaluation point is
subsequently identified by binary search in the grid intervals
of longitude, latitude and radius (see Figure 3b). Cell-based
interpolation is performed in local geographic space.

4. Strain Field Computation
The main goal of this paper is the analysis of material alignment, as induced by the flow field. For this matter, this section
introduces a method that facilitates the computation of such
strain orientations at arbitrary positions in space and time
by integration of the velocity gradient. The resulting field of
material alignment directions is termed a strain field and is
used to extract alignment discontinuities and evaluate mantle flow directions. Thus, the general notion of a strain field
as used in this work is that of a vector field whose orientation corresponds to the direction of main deformation of
Lagrangian particles. In the following we assume that all
regions where significant deformation takes place are contained in the simulation domain. To compute this deformation, we release isotropic particles into the flow field at regions of inflow and deform them along their paths according
to strain in the flow field. The strain direction of a particle is then computed from the resulting anisotropic shape.
Given a sufficiently dense particle set, strain directions at
arbitrary positions in time and space can be reconstructed by
interpolation. These strain axes approximate preferred material alignment in geophysics caused by macroscopic external
forces. In the following we detail the steps of strain field
computation.

Simulations of the geodynamic model commonly return
flow, temperature, viscosity and symmetric stress data. The
stress–strain relationship of non-Newtonian fluids is nonlinear, and strain at different stress levels exhibits varying
behaviour such as viscous or plastic deformation [JB10]. If
the model of stress–strain relationship is known, the strain
rate tensor field can be accurately obtained from the input
stress field and given viscosity. In a more general case, the
infinitesimal strain rate tensor may be computed by decomposing the velocity gradient of the flow field into a rotational
antisymmetric and a symmetric part. For a 3-D vector field
v : R3 → R3 , the velocity gradient may be approximated by
finite differences (1) and decomposed into the rate of strain S
and rate of rotation R tensors (2). This rate of strain tensor S
is a linear approximation of deformation caused by Eulerian
or Lagrangian strain.
(∇v)ij =

S=

vj (x + h · ei ) − vj (x − h · ei )
.
2h

1
(∇v + (∇v)T ),
2

R=

1
(∇v − (∇v)T ).
2

(1)

(2)

Once the data set is mapped to Cartesian coordinates, we
perform strain analysis with a desired level of detail according to the steps described in the next paragraph.
A uniform 3-D Cartesian grid with a user specified voxel
resolution is imposed on every time step of the data set. In
time-varying data sets path lines are integrated such that every voxel in four dimensions is traversed at least once. This
guarantees a minimum density of particles at every location
in the data set. Particles travelling along these integral lines
are subject to strain forces and thus change from a spherical
to a deformed shape. The main axes of these strain ellipsoids
define the direction of material alignment and are computed
at every 4-D voxel of the field discretization. We segment the
resulting strain axes field using different techniques to highlight distinct strain regions. Details on these segmentation
steps are given in later sections.

4.2. Discretization of the flow field
As our time-varying strain mapping method requires that every cell of the final strain field grid is traversed by at least
one path line, we let the user choose a resolution for this discretization to reduce computational complexity and support
interactivity. Thus, we assume in the succeeding sections that
the data set is superimposed by a Cartesian grid of l × m × n
voxels vi per time step t. Resolution of the final strain orientation field is bound to the resolution of this discretization
step, that is, strain orientations are given per voxel.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2305

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields

(a)

with t = ti and an initially isotropic shape Dxt00 (t0 ) = I .
The strain rate matrix given by the simulation at pxt00 (tj ) is
S(pxt00 (tj )). The change in shape over an interval [tj , tj+1 ]
along the path line pxt00 is captured by the matrix exponential
exp(S(pxt00 (tj ) · (tj +1 − tj ))), as defined for a general matrix

(b)

A by
∞

Figure 4: (a) Illustration of line rasterization. The highlighted cell knows line (0) and position index (3). (b) Deformation of particle neighbourhoods caused during particle
advection. Major and minor eigenvectors of the deformed
particles are shown in grey.

4.3. Dense path line integration
Strain orientation at a given point p in space and time is computed by accumulating strain information along a particle
path that ends in p. As our method produces strain orientations per voxel similar to other image-based visualization
techniques like FTLE, it has to be guaranteed that every 4-D
voxel vti is traversed by at least one such particle path. To
satisfy this requirement, one particle path, that is, one path
line, is started at the centroid of every voxel v 0i and integrated with an adaptive fourth-order Runge–Kutta integrator
[TGE97] until it leaves the data set or reaches the last time
step. During traversal voxels vti are marked with the line and
position index of the path line if a 4-D floating point rasterization [Bre65] of the path line crosses the voxel.
New path lines px are started at the centre x of all unmarked vti and integrated in forward and backward direction
according to their standard definition (3).
t

px (t) = x +

±v(px (τ ), τ )dτ,

(3)

0

After this stage of the algorithm, every voxel is traversed
by at least one path line. Furthermore, every voxel knows
the indices of traversing path lines and the closest preceding
discrete position on the line as illustrated in Figure 4(a) .

4.4. Orientation field computation
Let pxt : R → R3 denote the path line with starting position
ptx (t) = x. Under the assumptions that a path line pxt00 crosses
a given position xt at time t and that initial particle shapes are
isotropic, strain orientation at xt is defined as the direction
of the major axis of the deformed particle at pxt00 (t) = x t .
The deformation tensor D defining the mapping from an initially spherical particle neighbourhood to a deformed shape
at pxt00 (t) is computed by accumulation of strain information
along discrete positions tj of the integral particle trace pxt00 :
⎛
⎞
Dxt00 (t)= ⎝

i

j =0

exp S pxt00 (tj ) · (tj +1 − tj ) ⎠·Dxt00 (t0 ),(4)

exp(A ·

t) =
i=0

1 i
A ·
i!

ti.

(5)

The mathematical relationship described by Equation (4)
is depicted in Figure 4(b) and has been used in stationary or
first-order form in [KR02, OHBKH09].
Length and direction of the major axis of the deformed
ellipsoids at xt are given by the square root of the maximum eigenvalue and the corresponding eigenvector of
Dxt00 (t)T · Dxt00 (t).
Based on these definitions and the information collected
during particle tracing, it is feasible to compute the desired
strain axis orientation field for arbitrary time steps. Values
of the strain field are computed at the centre of every voxel
vti by evaluating (4) at the closest point on a path line that
crosses this voxel and interpolating it in a nearest neighbour
fashion. We note that a 4-D position x has a unique path-line
passing through it if the field is Lipschitz continuous. If no
path-line passes through the centre and the closest path-line
is not unique, we average strain directions of all closest pathlines. The direction of the major axis represents our strain
axis orientation at vti , magnitude of the field corresponds to
the largest eigenvalue of DT · D.
4.5. Stationary strain fields
Unlike the Lagrangian strain analysis presented in the preceding sections, geophysicists often simplify LPO computation by analysing instantaneous strain distributions. Further
reasons to work with stationary flow fields are the large timescales as well as missing availability of time-varying data
sets. The concept of infinite strain axis analysis [KR02] facilitates local strain axis computation that successfully approximates a complicated Lagrangian strain advection in many
real-world situations. Thus, the instantaneous strain orientation field is calculated as a local approximation of the asymptotic major axis of the strain ellipsoid after an infinite amount
of constant strain. The methods described later in this paper
are suitable for analysis of strain orientation fields resulting
from time-varying and stationary fields.
5. Strain Field Segmentation
The visualization goals specified in Section 3.1 require the
highlighting of strain discontinuities and velocity–strain relationships. We satisfy these requirements by segmenting the
field into regions with homogeneous strain orientation or
homogeneous strain–velocity relationship. The following

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2306

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields

sections present two criteria for strain segmentation to
achieve this goal and aid analysis of important LPO
properties.
As the main direction of strain corresponds to expected
lattice-preferred orientation, strain segmentation in the context of this work focuses on this direction only [ZTW06],
rather than on other tensor properties [LGALW09]. The set of
strain orientations in a given time step defines a non-directed
vector field g : R3 → R3 . Positions, where the deformed particles are isotropic and no unique strain orientation exists, are
treated as a separate group, that is, they exhibit maximal dissimilarity to other strain orientations.
5.1. Orientation segmentation
To allow analysis of regions of LPO discontinuities, we capture rapid changes in LPO by computing the Frobenius norm
of the Jacobian of the normalized gradient field g ∗ = gg :
3

3

fo (p) =
i=0 j =0

∂gi∗ (p)
∂xj

2

.

(6)

Due to the normalization of g, fo (x, y, z) represents a measure of angular deviation of the strain axis field g in a neighbourhood of p. Thus, maxima of fo describe regions with
a sudden change in strain orientation. We approximate the
Jacobian by difference quotients with locally oriented strain
axis directions.
The voxel grid together with values of fo creates a 3-D
scalar-valued image that can be used as basis for domain
segmentation. We use interactive watershed segmentation to
extract locally maximal structures [RM00]. All results shown
in this paper use a watershed-segmentation level that merges
small-scale basins with depth <10% of the data range.
5.2. Alignment segmentation
A second important property of strain fields is the degree
of alignment between strain and velocity direction. This is
especially important in areas, where one of the two fields is
used to derive information about the other, as is the case in
seismic analysis of LPOs. Such seismic analysis is concerned
with identifying lattice-preferred orientations and deducing
appropriate mantle movement. For this matter, we map g
to a scalar field representing the angular difference between
strain and velocity.
fa (x, y, z) = acos

|g(x, y, z)T v(x, y, z)|
.
||g(x, y, z)||||v(x, y, z)||

(7)

Segmentation of the range of fa induces a segmentation on
the strain field itself. A segmentation of the strain field with
respect to fa is performed by applying thresholding to the
range of fa , thus subdividing the alignment interval [0, π /2]

into smaller segments. In contrast to FTLE visualization,
where segmentation or highlighting of strain magnitude is
desired, fa can be used to separate flow parallel deformation
from flow orthogonal regions of deformation. High values
of fa indicate a strong divergence between strain and flow
direction and can provide guidance as to the level of analysis
required to accurately interpret observed seismic anisotropy
in corresponding regions of the data set.

6. Visualization
The goal of the visualization techniques presented in the
following is to provide domain experts with the means to
perform 3-D analysis of strain directions and overall field
behaviour without relying on 2-D projective methods such
as slicing. For this matter, boundaries and shape of strain volumes resulting from the segmentation criteria defined in the
previous sections as well as strain and flow behaviour in the
interior of these volumes have to be visualized while avoiding
common problems of 3-D visualization such as information
overload, visual occlusion and clutter. Our visualization has
to cope with these challenges while clearly depicting key features of the strain field. A visualization technique for strain
analysis in mantle flow fields should be able to convey the
following key properties:
1. Display boundary and shape of strain volumes;
2. Illustrate strain orientation and magnitude in the interior
of strain volumes;
3. Show relative flow behaviour;
4. Show local and global strain behaviour.
With this visual information, we enable domain experts
to distinguish regions in which seismic anisotropy measurements are indicators of mantle flow directions from regions
in which more detailed analysis is required to relate observations to flow geometry. In contrast to common strain visualization techniques that focus on glyph or hyperstreamline
techniques [HJYW03] to visualize full tensor information,
the techniques presented in this work combine visualization of major strain axis direction and field segmentation
and make frequent use of transparency to reduce occlusion.
To provide a spatial and global view of the strain and flow
field, we combine statistical orientation visualization in the
form of histograms with 3-D display of strain directions
and segmentation volumes. As transparency plays a major
role in the display of strain volume shape and boundary, we
use multi-volume rendering techniques to easily use correct
order-dependent transparency on a volume and content level.

6.1. Multi-volume visualization
The distinct regions in image space as obtained by the
methods described in Section 5, are sets of voxels and as

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields

Figure 5: Steps of MC-based multi-volume slicing and visualization. First, a RGBA mask with normal information
is created for each subvolume. In the final volume composition, view dependent scalar- and isovalue propagation is
performed for MC slicing and allows fast and correct multivolume visualization for arbitrary volume positions in R3 .
such represent geometric volumes that segment the present
data set into separate sections. To visualize both strain orientations and boundary shapes of segmentation geometry,
transparent rendering of these volumes is required. Correct
rendering of segmentation geometry in the form of transparent boundary surfaces may be performed by methods
such as depth-peeling [Eve01] or order-dependent rendering. However, when combining this visualization with a volume rendering of internal strain orientation, one quickly runs
into problems with respect to correct transparency rendering
[RTF*06]. As a consequence, we use a multi-volume visualization technique comparable to [HBH03] for consistent and
interactive rendering of both internal strain and segmentation
geometry based on volume slicing and clipping [WEE02].
A segment or subvolume Vi defines a binary mapping on
the data set, classifying individual voxel centres as interior or
exterior. We store values of this binary map mi : R3 → {0, 1}
as 3-D mask in the form of alpha values of a RGBA texture,
where entries of the RGB vector in the vicinity of volume
boundaries represent geometric normals of the volume geometry, as seen in Figure 5 . Trilinear interpolation on mi
yields a representative volume definition for the isovalue 0.5.
Utilizing these data and the well-known Marching Cubes
(MC) algorithm, we perform the following steps for slicingbased [EHK*04] selective multi-volume visualization (see
Figure 5):

2307

Slice geometry for a volume Vi obtained in step 4 is processed in a fragment shader with corresponding mask and position data, where all geometry and volume information outside of the volume (mi (x, y, z) < 0.5) is discarded [EHK*04]
and locations close to the boundary (mi (x, y, z) ∈ [0.5, 0.6]) is
rendered as volume boundary representation. Embedding the
volume representations (e.g. bounding boxes) into a global
depth context allows consistent propagation of scalar values
in step 2. Isovalue stepping together with ‘z-less or equal’
depth buffer testing guarantees view-dependent and consistent back to front rendering of volumes with correct transparency processing.
This technique allows arbitrary selection and positioning of individual parts of the volumetric data set, has the
advantage of preventing classic z-fighting issues when using pre-sorted triangulated geometry and avoids expensive
plane-clipping, sorting or intersection computations, allowing highly interactive frame rates.

6.1.1. Volume boundaries
Volume boundaries are defined as regions close to the boundary of the volume mask (mi (x, y, z) ∈ [0.5, 0.6]) and are shaded
with pre-computed normals stored in mi . Each volume is assigned a colour from HSV-colour space.

6.1.2. Volume interior: strain lines
Information on the inside of a strain volume consists of strain
and velocity vectors. The complete strain field g for one instance in time corresponds to a typical eigenvector field as
obtained from tensor data such as DT-MRI and represents a
general non-oriented vector field. This field type allows extraction of integral lines along strain directions. To visualize
strain directions for a given time step of the simulation, we
integrate a uniformly spaced set of lines Li that are locally
tangential to the direction of strain and rasterize them into
a 3-D texture. Use of a texture allows slicing-based volume
visualization as described in the previous section. Opacity
and colour at a position p = (x, y, z) defined by
Rgba(p) = (2) · fa (p)/π 01 − 2 · fa (p)/π ||g(p)||

1. Create individual volume mask textures from mi .
2. Determine extremal depths zmax and zmin for bounding
box of volume set for current view and volume positions.
3. Subdivide [zmin , zmax ] into n + 1 intervals with length
d.
4. Compute MC slice geometry tiso for every volume and
current isovalue iso = zmax − d.
5. For every tiso : render transparent slice by passing mask,
position and representation of flow and strain directions
of sliced volume to fragment shader.
6. Repeat from 4. with zmax = zmax − d.

·maxi (ω(d(p, Li ))),

(8)

where d returns the distance between a point and a given line
−d

2

and ω(d) = e r 2 is a spherical kernel function with constant
radius r. A volume rendering of the resulting 3-D strain
texture produces pictures comparable to volume LIC [CL93],
where strain magnitude/FTLE values are mapped to opacity
and colour to the degree of alignment between flow and
strain direction (red: strong alignment, blue: orthogonality).
Spacing of integral lines reduces typical occlusion problems
present in volume LIC visualization. A texture containing

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2308

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields

these strain lines is passed to the fragment shader in step 4,
thus clipping strain lines outside of active volumes.

6.1.3. Interaction
As the proposed multi-volume visualization method allows
selective display and transformation of parts of the data set,
we implement hiding or deactivation of single volumes. To
realize such colour-based picking in OpenGL, we extract
geometric triangulations of volume masks (see Figure 5).
This geometry is used for fast picking operations only and is
not used for final visualization of the data set, due to limited
suitability for transparency rendering.
To provide a clearer look at volume boundaries, we give
the user control over volume positioning by making use of
the explosion metaphor, allowing volume positions to change
according to a force-driven concept. Let c0i = ci be
the bounding-box centre of strain volume i ∈ {1, . . ., n}.
Iterative evolution of volume centres is governed by
cik+1 − cik = h

1
n
ω(j
, i)
j

n

ω(j , i)
j

(cik − cjk )
||cik − cjk ||

to a high variation in bin sizes. Bin areas around the pole
are degenerate and minimal, whereas areas along the equator are comparatively large and quadrilateral. This variation
opposes the desire to use histograms as a consistent density
measurement and visually cannot be fully compensated by
scaling of bin heights. As a result of these observations, we
prefer an almost equidistant parametrization of the sphere
as given by icosahedron subdivision (see e.g. [HS05]). The
resulting sphere subdivision resembles a geodesic dome consisting of almost equilateral triangles, thus allowing uniform
data binning with almost identical base area. Further advantages of this parametrization are consistent triangular bin
shapes in contrast to mixed rectangular and triangular shapes.
A disadvantage of this subdivision is however the increased
complexity of identifying corresponding bins for given normalized vector directions, since bin triangles do no longer
correspond to regular subdivisions of longitude and latitude.
To reduce this computational complexity, triangles of the
icosahedron are assigned to cells in a uniform discretization of 3-D space to allow fast-access bin hashing during
histogram creation.

,

where h > 0 controls explosion step size and ω is a smooth
distance-based weighting function. Visual distinction between different strain volumes is aided by colour coding. For
non-strongly interleaved volume sets this positioning concept provides better views at volume and boundary shapes
and simplifies selection of individual volumes. Additionally,
transparency of volume boundaries is a free, user controlled
parameter and does not only give a clearer look at otherwise
hidden volume boundaries due to the reduction of occlusion,
but enables the user to have a look at interior properties of
the volume by revealing strain lines.

6.2.2. Data binning
The orientation information of the strain axis field is reflected
in the spherical histogram by mapping the height of right
prisms to the number of orientation vectors pointing to its
base triangle. This construction leads to a point-symmetric
histogram in the case of non-directed vector fields; that is,
two mirrored hemispheres. Volume membership information
gathered during strain field segmentation is mapped to the
histogram by the use of volume colours. For this matter, each
volume is assigned a distinct colour from HSV space with
S = 1 and V ≥ 0.5. During data binning, RGB bin colour
for a bin b is computed as scaled average of the contributing
strain volumes.
(R, G, B)b =

6.2. Strain histograms
While the presented multi-volume visualization technique
gives a localized view of strain orientations, a more global
view of these orientations and their segmentation is desired
in strain analysis to identify prevalent and separated strain
orientations. An established display method for global segmentation analysis in the field of image processing are histograms. Fortunately, histogram binning is not limited to
scalar fields, but may be generalized and adapted to higher dimensional data types such as vector fields by the use of spherical histograms [GJL*09]. We use a similar technique for
spherical histogram construction in our non-directed strain
axis field.

6.2.1. Sphere subdivision
Previous histogram methods use a uniform parametrization
in spherical coordinate space to obtain bin intervals, leading

i

χb (i)(Rs(i) , Gs(i) , Bs(i) )

i

χb (i)(Rs(i) , Gs(i) , Bs(i) )

,

(9)

where χ b is a binary membership function indicating whether
a direction contributes to bin b and s(.) returns the index of the
volume a vector is associated with. Additionally, saturation
of the resulting colour is set to a value inversely proportional
to the number of contributing volumes to avoid ambiguities.
A histogram with a number of small distinctly coloured and
highly saturated regions with homogeneous colour indicates
that strain variation within single volumes is small.
6.2.3. Interaction
The spherical histogram associated with the data set responds
to user selections in volume visualization mode. Contribution of orientation vectors located in inactive volumes are
removed from the histogram bins. Fast histogram updates
are guaranteed by storing volume contributions for every

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields

2309

Figure 6: Left-hand side: Volume visualization of strain
lines with fully transparent volume boundaries. Right-hand
side: Sinking slab in test data set. Velocity magnitude is
highest along the path of the slab, while slow rotating flow
is observed along its sides.
individual bin and volume during initial histogram construction. Removal of certain volume contribution in bin height
and colour can thus be performed quickly without triggering
a full recomputation of the histogram. Reduced histograms
enable the user to quickly observe strain orientations in a
more local and focused context. Again, colour-based picking
is implemented to allow selection of individual bins. Selection of a set of bins bi initiates the construction of a volume
in 3-D space with g∗:
→ bi . This interaction allows
interactive creation and highlighting of strain volumes. In
contrast to the segmentation methods described in this paper,
interactive selection can produce overlapping strain volumes.
For interactive creation of fa volumes, we implement a radial
alignment display that allows selection of alignment intervals
in [0, π ].
7. Results and Evaluation
This section discusses visualization capabilities of the presented methods as well as visualization benefits as identified
by domain experts. Due to the difference in strain computation, we present results of stationary flow fields separately
from time-varying strain analysis.
7.1. Visualization of time-varying flow
For the analysis of time-varying strain behaviour, we applied
our method to a small region of a test model used to study the
dynamic process of the detachment or break-off of part of a
sinking tectonic plate from the plate at the surface, as seen in
Figure 6 [BB10]. In this test case, the sinking tectonic plate
is comparatively young with an age of around 20–30 million
years, which means that it is fairly thin and weak compared
to older tectonic plates. Therefore the sinking plate rapidly
sinks vertically. Subducting slab geometry is approximated
by a temperature isosurface. The flow of the mantle around
the slab is dominated by two components: poloidal flow
and toroidal flow, as seen in Figure 6. Each time-step of
the simulation covers approximately 310 000 years. Figure 6
shows a volume visualization of rasterized strain lines by

Figure 7: Left to right, top to bottom: Four time steps of evolution of prominent fo features and histograms. Histogram
information shows that strain in the two lateral regions is
orthogonal and converges over time as the slab leaves the
data set. Region splitting indicates forming of new regions
with high strain discontinuity. Volume rendering conveys
the impression of phong-shaded solid geometry as well as
transparent volumes with interior strain lines. Bottom row:
Explosion and volume selection allow an unobstructed view
at volume boundaries. Further global and selective strain
analysis is aided by spherical histogram visualization.

reducing opacity of volume boundaries to 0. Our visualization conveys convergence and divergence flow properties,
as regions with dominant opacity correspond to Lagrangian
Coherent Structures in FTLE fields. In contrast to standard
FTLE methods, our technique includes directional information. In regions with strong alignment between flow and strain
(red) strain and stream lines coincide, whereas flow is orthogonal to strain in blue regions. Figure 7 is a visualization of the
evolution of selected fo subvolumes of this data set. Homogeneous and consistent strain orientations can be seen on lateral
parts of the slab path both in the volume display as well as in
the histograms. Discontinuities in strain orientation develop
mainly along paths of vortex cores. Localized histogram information gives an insight into expected seismic anisotropy
for different regions. Results obtained by alignment segmentation are given in Figure 8 . Strong disagreement in flow and
strain alignment, as extracted in Figure 8, is observable along
outer regions of vortices and underneath the slab. Radial displays show distribution of alignments in the data set (y-axis
corresponding to full alignment) by colour and opacity and
current volume selection (blue segment).

7.2. Instantaneous flow
The given instantaneous flow field covers a portion of a
model of the southern Alaska subduction zone where the
Pacific plate subducts beneath Alaska [JB10]. This model
has predominantly vertically oriented flow that is drawn in

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2310

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields
Table 1: Average seconds (Intel Core2 Duo 2.16Ghz, 4GB
RAM, 64bit) spent per time step on integration/tensor accumulation/segmentation for different resolutions of the grid.

Data set
Alaska
Simulation

Figure 8: Left to right, top to bottom: Evolution of fa region
with maximal deviation between strain and flow. Strong orthogonal strain is observed along frontal lateral parts of the
slab and weak orthogonal strain in lateral parts. Dominant
dis-alignment direction is indicated by histograms and strain
lines. Radial graphs show alignment of the selected region.

perpendicular to the top of the slab (poloidal flow) and horizontally oriented flow around the edges of the slab (toroidal
flow). The data set consists of around 5.7 million points carrying velocity, temperature, viscosity and stress information.
Furthermore, a pre-computed set of infinite strain axis direction, as described in Section 4.5, is provided. Data dimensions
are [23◦ , 29◦ ] for co-latitude [205◦ , 220◦ ] for longitude and
[5971 km, 6321 km] for radius. Results of our segmentation
method on a 1003 voxel grid is shown in Figure 9 ,
where the benefits of interactive picking and volume

Figure 9: Different fo volumes in a 1203 grid. Selection of
different volumes and explosion style rendering of fo strain
volumes allows a clear look at inner segmentation, where
strain segmentation coincides with slab geometry. Additional
transparent rendering reduces occlusion. Histogram display
shows a dominant strain direction parallel to the slab.

503

603

1003

-/-/1.6
2.0/3.2/1.3

-/-/2.6
3.3/5.3/2.0

-/-/15.6
10.0/16.4/4.6

explosion are demonstrated. Further visual improvement is
gained by transparent rendering of volume boundaries, providing a look at inner strain directions. Volume visualization
of the segmented data set with fully opaque boundaries
visually corresponds to a triangulation-based visualization.
More details and clean segmentation of strain volumes can
be obtained in high voxel grid resolutions. As listed in
Table 1, a low resolution grid greatly reduces computation
times, caused by a decreased number of integrated path lines
and decreased number of velocity gradients. Segmentation
time increases less rapidly with a higher resolution. We
note that fo segmentation of the field for identical watershed
segmentation parameters converges, as the grid resolution is
increased.

7.3. Expert evaluation
Numerical models of the flow and strain field in subduction
zones have two main purposes in geophysics research. First,
using time-varying flow models we can examine how the 3-D
strain field evolves as the geometry of a subducting plate and
the induced flow change in time: this analysis gives us insight
into how geophysical events change the strain field. Second,
comparison of the flow and strain field from instantaneous
flow models to observed seismic anisotropy for specific, real
regions of the Earth provides the only means of determining
the actual geometry of flow in the mantle for the present day.
The geometries and locations (relative to the sinking slab)
of regions with uniform stretching directions together with
the information about the stretching direction and magnitude
can be used to predict the fast axis orientations that would be
observed at the surface, compare these with observations and
link them to the mantle flow. This information bridges a gap
between the seismologist and the geodynamicist allowing
them to work iteratively to compare the results of numerical
models and observations of fast axis in order to determine
the pattern of flow in the mantle.

7.3.1. Time-varying flow
For the analysis of the time-varying flow models, visualizations of the segmentation of the strain field and how this
changes in time, provide an efficient means for characterizing
how the structure of the strain field changes with the evolving

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields

2311

Figure 10: Segmentation fa reveals large regions, where LPO and flow directions disagree. Selection and use of transparency
support further analysis of volume properties. In contrast to fo segmentation, histograms in alignment-based segmentation often
show no clear segmentation in orientation space. No region with full strain-velocity agreement is found, as indicated by radial
graphs (full alignment represented by y-axis). Volume colouring according to average alignment (bottom right) allows easy
identification of reliable and unreliable strain directions in the histogram.

structure of the sinking plate. Here the visualizations provide
clear indications of regions with similar strain field characteristics, which are likely to form a strong LPO fabric along flow
lines, as well as the boundaries between these regions where
LPO will go through realignment, which can lead to weak
LPO and observed seismic anisotropy. The 3-D histograms
visualized with the segmentation isosurfaces indicate the degree of misalignment of the strain field in adjacent regions,
which is important for determining how weak the LPO will
be in the transitional region.
In the example data set, the fo segmentation clearly shows
multiple regions with only moderately aligned strain fields
(separation in histogram in Figure 7) and their evolution over
time. Orientation changes can be seen to be prevalent along
paths of more complex (i.e. vortex lines) flow. This evolution
occurs as the slab sinks deeper and steepens, changing its
shape from concave down to concave up. This clear connection between the strain field and changing geometry would
have been difficult to recognize using standard techniques
of plotting the maximum stretching orientations within the
3-D volume for multiple time-steps and trying to recognize
spatial patterns and changes in time.

7.3.2. Instantaneous flow and comparison to observations
For the analysis of instantaneous flow models, our focus
is on determining the flow pattern in the mantle through
comparison of the strain field with indirect observation of the
LPO (seismic anisotropy). In this case, it has been common to

assume that the flow field is aligned with the strain field, and
therefore the fast-axis of seismic anisotropy indicates the flow
directions. However, we know that this assumption breaks
down in regions with complex 3-D flow, like subduction
zones. Therefore, visualization of the fa segmentation, based
on the relative alignment of the flow and strain field, provides
a direct visual indication of where in the model flow and
strain field are aligned, and a simple mapping from seismic
anisotropy to flow is sufficient, and where the flow field may
be strongly out of alignment, requiring more sophisticated
analysis (volumes with red strain-lines in Figure 10). The
tool also makes it easy to select display of volumes with
different degrees of alignment, revealing the 3-D structure of
these volumes (see large misalignment volume in Figure 10).
This is particularly important because a single observation of
seismic anisotropy integrates the orientation of LPO along
a seismic ray path that travels up through different depths
of the mantle beneath the seismic station. Therefore, if there
are strong changes in orientation of the strain field beneath
a seismic station, the changes in orientation with depth have
to be accounted for in analysis of the observations, which is
lost in 2-D projections of the strain field.
In the example data set for the Alaska subduction zone,
the strain field is the calculated infinite strain-axis (ISA) orientation [KR02, CBS07]. This same data set was previously
analysed and compared to surface observations of seismic
anisotropy using 3-D visualization of the ISA vector, with
the flow vectors, as well as using maps of the directions at
many depths [JB10]. Using the previous technique it was
very difficult to identify regions with parallel alignment of

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2312

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields

the ISA and flow in two and three dimensions. It was particularly difficult to identify isolated regions of misalignment
that changed rapidly with depth. The segmentation visualization developed here, makes such identification very efficient
and through the histograms provides quantitative information
on the degree of misalignment (strong change in alignment
along outer parts of the data set as indicated by thin volumes
in Figure 10). An interesting feature that can be identified
by 3-D strain analysis is a region of slab-parallel stretching surrounded by stretching that is caused by the poloidal
flow (purple lateral volume in Figure 9). This region of slabparallel stretching corresponds to the observations of seismic
fast axis with similar alignment. This is an important example
of stretching and lattice preferred orientation that is perpendicular to the dominate flow direction of the mantle [JB10].
Our results show that the presented extraction and visualization techniques are suitable for strain-based analysis of
time-varying and stationary flow. The examples analysed in
this work demonstrate that geophysical flow analysis benefits
from these techniques by providing means of LPO discontinuity and flow alignment visualization, thus allowing detailed conclusions about the quality and confidence into flow
reconstruction from LPO and formation of separate material
sections.
8. Conclusion and Future Work
We have presented a method for automatic strain analysis in
3-D flow data and its application to the field of geophysics.
Our work contributes to the geophysics community by providing a more intuitive, 3-D view of the data and supporting automatic analysis and segmentation of 3-D strain. The
methods developed in this work to extract and visualize regions with uniform stretching directions and the magnitude
of stretching, provide an efficient and effective means of
identifying regions with potentially strong LPO and improve
the understanding of seismic measurements of LPO. The visualizations convey several key pieces of information: the
geometry and locations of edges in the field of stretching
directions, the magnitude and orientation of the stretching,
and the relative behaviour of mantle flow within each region. Thus, contributions of our work to visualization are the
development of multi-volume visualization of interior and
boundary representation for flow-induced strain in instantaneous and time-varying flow fields, created by novel strain
extraction and segmentation. While we have demonstrated
the applicability and expressiveness of strain analysis in
geophysics, we expect that many other application areas,
such as industrial mixing, can benefit from a sophisticated
strain field analysis in connection with existing vector field
visualization techniques.
Acknowledgement
Supported by DFG’s IRTG 1131.

References
[BB10] BURKETT E. R., BILLEN M. I.: Three-dimensionality
of slab detachment due to ridge-trench collision: Laterally simultaneous boudinage versus tear propagation.
Geochemistry, Geophysics and Geosystems 11, (2010),
Q11012–21.
[Bil08] BILLEN M. I.: Modeling the dynamics of subducting
slabs. Annual Reviews Earth and Planetary Science 36,
(2008), 325–356.
[Bre65] BRESENHAM J. E.: Algorithm for computer control of
a digital plotter. IBM Systems Journal 4, 1 (1965), 25–30.
[CBS07] CONRAD C. P., BEHN M. D., SILVER P. G.: Global
mantle flow and the development of seismic anisotropy:
Differences between the oceanic and continental upper
mantle. Journal of Geophysical Research 112, B7 (2007),
1–17.
[CL93] CABRAL B., LEEDOM L. C.: Imaging vector fields using line integral convolution. In SIGGRAPH ’93: Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques (Anaheim, CA, 1993),
pp. 263–270.
[EHK*04] ENGEL K., HADWIGER M., KNISS J. M., LEFOHN A.
E., SALAMA C. R., WEISKOPF D.: Real-time volume graphics. In SIGGRAPH ’04: ACM SIGGRAPH 2004 Course
Notes (New York, NY, USA, 2004), ACM, p. 29.
[Eve01] EVERITT C.: Interactive Order Independent
Transparency. NVidia, White Paper Technical Report,
2001.
[EYD02] ERLEBACHER G., YUEN D. A., DUBUFFET F.: Case
study: Visualization and analysis of high Rayleigh
number, 3d convection in the Earth’s mantle. In VIS
’02: Proceedings of Vision ’02 (Boston, MA, 2002), pp.
493–496.
[GJL*09] GRUNDY E., JONES M. W., LARAMEE R. S., WILSON
R. P., SHEPARD E. L. C.: Visualisation of sensor data
from animal movement. Computer Graphics Forum 28,
3 (2009), 815–822.
[Hal01] HALLER G.: Lagrangian structures and the rate
of strain in a partition of two-dimensional turbulence.
Physics of Fluids 13, 11 (2001), 3365–3385.
[HBH03] HADWIGER M., BERGER C., HAUSER H.: Highquality two-level volume rendering of segmented data sets
on consumer graphics hardware. In VIS ’03: Proceedings
of Vision ’03 (Seattle, WA, 2003), pp. 301–308.
[HJYW03] HASHASH Y., JOHN I., YAO C., WOTRING D.:
Glyph and hyperstreamline representation of stress and

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

H. Obermaier et al. / Visualizing Strain Anisotropy in Mantle Flow Fields

2313

strain tensors and material constitutive response. International Journal for Numerical and Analytical Methods in
Geomechanics 27, 7 (2003), 603–626.

[RM00] ROERDINK J., MEIJSTER A.: The watershed transform:
Definitions, algorithms and parallelization strategies. Fundamenta Informaticae 41, (2000), 187–228.

[HS05] HLAWITSCHKA M., SCHEUERMANN G.: Hot-lines: tracking lines in higher order tensor fields. In VIS ’05: Proceedings of Vision ’05 (Minneapolis, MN, 2005), pp. 27–34.

[RS94] RUSSO R. M., SILVER P. G.: Trench-parallel flow beneath the Nazca Plate from seismic anisotropy. Science
263, 5150 (1994), 1105–1111.

[JB10] JADAMEC M., BILLEN M. I.: Reconciling surface plate
motions with rapid 3D mantle flow around a slab edge.
Nature 465, (2010), 338–341 .

[RTF*06] RO¨ SSLER F., TEJADA E., FANGMEIER T., ERTL T.,
KNAUFF M.: GPU-based multi-volume rendering for the
visualization of functional brain images. In Proceedings
of Sim Vision 2006 (Magdeburg, Germany, 2006), pp.
305–318.

[KJKS08] KARATO S., JUNG H., KATAYAMA I., SKEMER P.:
Geodynamic significance of seismic anisotropy of the
upper mantle: New insights from laboratory studies. Annual Reviews Earth and Planetary Science 36, (2008), 59–
95.
[KPH*09] KASTEN J., PETZ C., HOTZ I., NOACK B., HEGE H.C.: Localized finite-time Lyapunov exponent for unsteady
flow analysis. In Vision Modeling and Visualization, vol.
1, Universit¨at Magdeburg, Inst. f. Simulation u. Graph.
(Magdeburg, Germany, 2009), pp. 265–274.
´ RIBE N. M.: Timescales for the evolu[KR02] KAMINSKI E.,
tion of seismic anisotropy in mantle flow. Geochemistry,
Geophysics, Geosystems 3, 1 (2002), 1–17.

[STS07] SCHULTZ T., THEISEL H., SEIDEL H.-P.: Segmentation of DT-MRI anisotropy isosurface. In Proceedings of
EuroVis 2007 (Norrk¨oping, Sweden, 2007), pp. 187–194.
[Sub09] SUBRAMANIAN N. C.: Convective Stretching And Applications To Mantle Mixing. PhD Thesis. UC Davis, 2009.
[SWTH07] SAHNER J., WEINKAUF T., TEUBER N., HEGE H.-C.:
Vortex and strain skeletons in Eulerian and Lagrangian
frames. IEEE TVCG 13, 5 (2007), 980–990.
[TGE97] TEITZEL C., GROSSO R., ERTL T.: Efficient and reliable integration methods for particle tracing in unsteady
flows on discrete meshes. In Visualization in Scientific
Computing ’97 (Springer, Wien, 1997), pp. 31–41.

[LGALW09] LUIS-GARC´IA R., ALBEROLA LO´ PEZ C., WESTIN C.:
Segmentation of tensor fields: Recent advances and perspectives. In Tensors in Image Processing and Computer
Vision. A.-F. Santiago, L. Garc´ıa, R. de, T. Dacheng, and
L. Xuelong (Eds.). Springer-Verlag, London (2009), pp.
35–58.

[WEE02] WEISKOPF D., ENGEL K., ERTL T.: Volume clipping
via per-fragment operations in texture-based volume visualization. In VIS ’02: Proceeding of Vision ’02 (Boston,
Massachusetts, 2002), pp. 93–100.

[MvKK02] MCNAMARA A. K., VAN KEKEN P. E., KARATO S. I.:
Development of anisotropic structure in the Earth’s lower
mantle by solid-state convection. Nature 416, (2002),
310–314.

[WSMG06] WENK H.-R., SPEZIALE S., MCNAMARA A.,
GARNERO E. J.: Modeling lower mantle anisotropy development in a subducting slab. Earth and Planetary Science
Letters 245 (2006), 302–314.

[NJP05] NEEMAN A., JEREMIC B., PANG A.: Visualizing tensor
fields in geomechanics. In Proceedings of IEEE Vis 05
(Minneapolis, MN, Oct. 2005), pp. 35–42.

[ZiK95] ZHANG S., I. KARATO S.: Lattice preferred orientation
of olivine aggregates deformed in simple shear. Nature
375, (1995), 774–777.

[OHBKH09] OBERMAIER H., HERING-BERTRAM M., KUHNERT
J., HAGEN H.: Volume deformations in grid-less flow simulations. Computer Graphics Forum 28, 3 (2009), 879–
886.

[ZMB*03] ZHUKOV L., MUSETH K., BREEN D., WHITAKER R.,
BARR A. H.: Level set modeling and segmentation of DTMRI brain data. Journal of Electronic Imaging 12 (2003),
125–133.

[RJF*09] RODRIGUES P., JALBA A., FILLARD P., VILANOVA
A., TER Haar Romeny B.: A multi-resolution watershedbased approach for the segmentation of diffusion tensor images. In Proceedings of the MICCAI Workshop
on Diffusion Modelling (London, UK, 2009), 161–
172.

[ZTW06] ZIYAN U., TUCH D., WESTIN C.-F.: Segmentation
of Thalamic Nuclei from DTI using Spectral Clustering.
In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on
Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI’06) (Copenhagen, Denmark, October
2006), LNCS 4191, pp. 807–814.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

