DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2010.01839.x

COMPUTER GRAPHICS

forum

Volume 30 (2011), number 1 pp. 153–168

Allometric Scaling for Character Design
T. McGraw, T. Kawai and J. Richards
West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, USA
tim.mcgraw@mail.wvu.edu,
{tkawai, jricha34}@mix.wvu.edu

Abstract
Geometric scaling transformations do not respect the biological processes which govern the size and shape of
living creatures. In this paper, we describe an approach to scaling which can be related to biological function.
We use known biological laws of allometry which are expressed as power laws to control the mesh deformation
in the frequency domain. This approach is motivated by the relation between fractal biological systems and their
underlying power-law spectra. We demonstrate our approach to biology-aware character scaling on triangle
meshes representing quadrupedal mammals.
Keywords: allometry, biological mesh processing, character design, signal processing, spectral mesh decomposition
ACM CCS I.3.5 [Computer Graphics]: Computational Geometry and Object Modeling

cessing, allows us to represent the mesh as a combination
of manifold harmonic basis functions. This permits meshes
with hundreds of thousands of vertices to be manipulated
in terms of about a thousand variables, and simplifies many
processes such as mesh filtering, segmentation, and computation of the mesh skeleton. We further reduce the number
of variables to fewer than 10 by finding the combinations of
coefficients with anatomical and biological meaning.

1. Introduction
The design of virtual living characters for movies, games and
other computer graphics applications is largely an artistic
endeavor. As a result, biological issues are often overlooked
during character design. By incorporating known relations
between scale and biological function into the character design process, we can force the resulting data to be biologically
plausible. This simplifies the process of character design, permitting the designer to manipulate the geometric form of a
character by setting a few scale parameters, and to generate a spectrum of characters at different scales from a single
mesh. This process can also provide insight into the relations
between form and function of living creatures by allowing
the user to explore the space of plausible creatures. In this
paper, we present a method of incorporating known correspondences between biological function and geometric form
in the character editing process using spectral mesh processing techniques.

In this work, we simplify the character design process by
incorporating known empirical relations between biological
function and geometrical measurements. These relations are
used to constrain the editing in terms of manifold harmonic
coefficients. In this work, we consider constraints which involve the cardiopulmonary system, the metabolic system,
and biomechanical stresses due to locomotion.
Character modelling using such biological relations will
simplify editing of meshes representing living creatures. This
can lead to more efficient generation of biologically plausible
character designs.

Characters are typically modelled as triangle meshes consisting of thousands or more vertices. Editing these triangle
meshes can be time consuming due to the large number of vertices. The number of variables needed to specify a mesh can
be reduced by using modelling techniques such as splines or
subdivision surfaces. Another approach, spectral mesh proc 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics
Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Published by
Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4
2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

2. Background
The study of the connection between form and function is an
old one. One of the earliest to discuss the topic was Galileo

153

154

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

Figure 2: Galileo’s sketch of two bones. One is three times
as long as the other, but the larger bone must have a different
shape if it is to perform the same function as the smaller
bone.
Figure 1: 1950s Sci-Fi and Horror movies featured many
characters scaled to fantastic degrees. The isometric scaling performed to create these characters is implausible for
physical and biological reasons.

[GCFdS54] who was especially interested in how changes in
scale affected the shape of certain mechanisms and animals.
This line of questioning was also pursued in the early 1900s
by Haldane [Hal28], later by Thompson [Tho52] and more
recently by Bonner [Bon69, Bon06]. The relations between
biological function and anatomical form can be expressed as
mathematical models which are theoretical in nature, or they
can be based on observations and measurements of many
species (such as the allometric laws discussed later).
The ‘square-cube law’ refers to the relation between volume and cross-sectional area as objects undergo dramatic
scaling, and it can have biomechanical consequences. These
consequences are often described in the context of the
extreme scaling transformations depicted in 1950s horror
movies such as ‘Attack of the 50 Foot Woman’ or ‘Them’,
which features giant mutated ants. These fantastic characters, shown in Figure 1, are unrealistic due to changes in
proportionality between volume and area that are required
when objects undergo scaling transformations. The squarecube law states that applying a uniform scaling factor, s, to
each dimension of an object causes the volume to increase by
a factor of s 3 , but the cross-sectional area only increases by a
factor of s 2 . Assuming that material properties are unchanged
by the scaling, the weight of the object will scale by s 3 , but
the structural ability of the object to resist tensile and shear
stresses will only scale by s 2 . What this means for the 50 ft
woman is that she would collapse under her own weight. Our
method of character design permits artists to easily generate
plausible character designs with respect to such scaling.

2.1. Historical Perspective
Galileo published many observations regarding the scale of
mechanisms and structures [GCFdS54], including a discus-

sion of the scale of living creatures. This was accompanied
by the sketch in Figure 2, which shows the changing proportions of a bone which scales to three times its original length.
He observed that the bone does not simply scale uniformly—
it must change shape. Specifically, the larger bone must be
thicker to support the increased weight it must bear. This
can be seen as a biological example of the design principle
‘form follows function’ Galileo admits that changes in material may mitigate the effects of scale, as will buoyancy as
demonstrated by large fish and whales whose skeleton cannot
support their weight outside of the water. In this work, we
concentrate on terrestrial animals to avoid such concerns.
Haldane [Hal28] also described the relation between structure and scale in his essay ‘On Being the Right Size’, although
he did not explicitly reference Galileo’s work. Haldane’s
principle states that the structure and complexity of living
organisms is dictated by their size as well as function. He
gives examples of possible changes in structure which may
compensate for changes in scale
‘. . . suppose that a gazelle, a graceful little creature with long
thin legs, is to become large, it will break its bones unless it
does one of two things. It may make its legs short and thick,
like the rhinoceros, so that every pound of weight has still
about the same area of bone to support it. Or it can compress
its body and stretch out its legs obliquely to gain stability,
like the giraffe’.

These are exactly the types of transformations of shape we
propose to model in response to changes in scale.

2.2. Allometric laws in biology and other sciences
‘Allometric change’ or ‘differential scaling’ occurs when the
proportions of an organism adjust in response to changes in
size or other parameters. The term ‘allometry’ was coined
by Julian Huxley [Hux32] who presented the first allometric laws relating body weight to quantitative biological
properties.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

155

in the study of non-biological systems with self-similar or
self-affine structure at many scales. Kolmogorov’s 5/3 law
governs turbulence at multiple scales in fluids and can be exploited in fluid simulation and animation [SF93, Bri08]. The
law was derived by Kolmogorov from theoretical principles,
not empirical observations, and relates the energy contained
in each wavenumber (or spatial frequency) to the wavenumber itself through the power law E(k) = Ck 5/3 . The connection between natural systems exhibiting fractal geometry and
power laws in the spectral domain shows up in many other
areas.

Figure 3: Allometric relation between metabolism and mass
for 391 species of mammal. The relation is linear when plotted on a log–log scale. Figure from Dodds et al. [DRW01].

Allometric laws relate two biological characteristics, and
commonly take the form of a power law, X = aY b . Laws
of this form may be linearized by taking the logarithm of
both sides, log X = log a + b log Y . For example, Kleiber’s
law, B = aM 3/4 , relates metabolic rate, B, and body mass,
M. Although many of these laws are based on empirical
observations they often hold true over a large number of
species. A log–log plot of Kleiber’s law over 391 species is
shown in Figure 3. Allometric laws can be roughly classified
in terms of the value of the exponent, b. If b = 1 the relation
is linear, and the mass scaling is a linear function of the
biological variable (isometric scaling). If b < 1 the relation
is a ‘negative allometry’, and X increases relatively slowly as
Y increases. The case of b > 1, ‘positive allometry’ implies
that X increases quickly relative to Y. If b = 0 then X is
invariant with respect to Y. A familiar example of negative
allometry is the relation between head size and body mass.
Juvenile animals typically have large heads relative to their
body weight. As they age the body weight increases more
quickly than the head size, so that in the adult the head is
proportionally smaller relative to the body.
The influential biologist Stephen J. Gould [Gou66] suggested that allometry was more than the mere study of such
power laws, but that it was ‘the study of size and its consequences’. Because many of these laws are expressed in
terms of mass, length or area, they are useful in developing
plausible scaling transformations. Allometric laws involving
many physiological systems have been proposed, including
circulatory [Li96] and cardiovascular models [Tor98]. As a
statistical tool, allometry has proven to be useful for comparative physiology.
West [WBE97] established a connection between allometric laws and the fractal structure of biological systems, such
as the branching networks of tubes forming vascular and
respiratory systems. In fact, allometric relations often arise

Mandelbrot and Van Ness [MVN68] first established that
self-affine processes have a power spectrum in the form of a
power law. Furthermore, the power-law exponent is directly
related to fractal dimension. One particular process, fractional Brownian motion has been used in computer graphics
to generate fractional Brownian surfaces which are useful as
terrain models [Man79]. Power-law filtering of Fourier coefficients is used in studies of geology [LDC93], to describe
rain and clouds [SL87], and in analysing images of sea ice
[FFL∗ 96].
‘Pink noise’ or ‘1/f noise’ with a spectral density S(f ) =
C/f α occurs in many natural phenomena. Some approaches
to procedural texture generation are based on controlling
image spectra to impose the ‘1/f’ structure [Ebe03]. A wellknown example is the turbulence function described by Perlin
[Per85]. In fact, the power spectrum of natural images is
known to obey a power-law relation [RSAT04].
In this paper, we explore the extension of these concepts to
mesh processing. The manifold harmonic transform provides
us with a frequency domain representation of the mesh, and
a means of directly manipulating the power spectrum. We
observe that the power spectrum of character meshes obeys
a power law, just as natural images do. We will show that
power-law filtering of the mesh spectrum results in allometric
scaling of the mesh. Then, using known biological allometric
relations we can control local scaling to generate biologically
plausible changes in shape.

2.3. Biological approaches to graphics
Models of biological processes have been exploited to improve the realism of graphics applications. Previous examples of biologically inspired graphics include the ‘artificial
life’ proposed by Terzopoulos [Ter99, Ter08]. Much work in
this area has concentrated on modelling of behaviours, such
as flocking and herding of groups [Rey88].
Lee [LST09] used biomechanical modelling for simulation and animation. Tu [Tu99] developed models based on the
biomechanics and locomotion of fish. Terzopoulos [TW90]
utilized biomechanical models of the head for facial animation. Ijiri et al. [IYKI08] developed a system for realistic animation of opening flowers. The reaction–diffusion process

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

156

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

proposed by Turing [Tur52] as an explanation for patterns on
animal skins has been used to generate texture maps with an
organic appearance [WK91, Tur91].
Unlike this previous work, we do not propose to generate any animation or to numerically simulate any process.
Instead, our goal is to model how biological processes influence changes in shape. Along those lines, there have been
several other approaches taken for structural generation of
plants [Pru86, PL90, PHL∗ 09]. Unlike this work, we do not
generate a mesh, we modify an existing mesh.
Several previous works have utilized numerous rangescans to learn the parameterization of shape-space. The space
of human body shapes was parameterized by Allen et al.
[ACP03] and they demonstrated a method to generate realistic meshes with anatomical features of varying size and
shape. Anguelov et al. [ASK∗ 05] presented a human body
animation model that incorporated changes in shape and
pose. They used principal components analysis to find a lowdimensional space of parameters that described variation in
shape, but also required numerous range scan data as input.
Unlike these methods, our method requires only a single input mesh and exploits known measurements and relations
that abound in the biology and morphometry literature.

2.4. Spectral mesh processing
The manifold harmonic transform that we use for processing character meshes is a product of the active research area
of spectral mesh processing. Spectral methods, in general,
involve analysis of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of appropriately defined matrices. These methods have been applied to many topics in the visualization, graphics and pattern
recognition fields.
Liu and Zhang [LZ04] applied spectral clustering to threedimensional mesh segmentation. The selected eigenvectors
of the affinity matrix or the closely related graph Laplacian
were used. Katz et al. [KLT05] presented an algorithm for
segmenting a mesh into visually meaningful sub-meshes.
Zhang and Liu [ZL05] described a mesh segmentation algorithm based on recursive spectral two-way cut and Nystr¨om
approximation. De Goes et al. [dGGV08] presented a segmentation method to assist the rigging of articulated bodies.
We will make use of spectral mesh segmentation to restrict
scaling and other shape changes to the relevant anatomical
areas.
Vallet and L´evy [VL08] presented a method to convert the geometry of a mesh into frequency space for the
purposes of mesh smoothing. The eigenfunctions of the
Laplace–Beltrami operator are used to define Fourier-like
basis functions called manifold harmonics. High-frequency
noise and other details can be removed by low-pass filtering.
The manifold harmonics are described in further detail in
Section 2.5.

Spectral methods have also led to new methods of mesh
parameterization. Gotsman et al. [GGS03] discussed parameterizing a triangle mesh onto the sphere, and also a
generalization of the method of barycentric coordinates for
planar parameterization. Zhou et al. [ZSGS04] presented a
fully automatic method, called iso-charts, for creating texture atlases on arbitrary meshes. Mullan et al. [MTAD08]
presented a spectral approach to automatically obtain discrete free-boundary conformal parameterization of triangle
mesh patches. Zigelman et al. [ZKK02] presented a technique for texture mapping on arbitrary surfaces with minimal
distortions by preserving the local and global structure of the
texture.
Other applications of spectral methods include symmetry detection [OSG08], surface reconstruction [KSO04],
remeshing [DBG∗ 06], mesh compression [BCG05, ZB04,
Zha04] and shape correspondence [MCBH07, JZ07, LH05].
See Zhang et al. [ZvKD10] for a more complete survey.

2.4.1. Manifold harmonics
The manifold harmonic basis (MHB) is analogous to the sinusoidal basis implied by the Fourier transform—both are
eigenfunctions of Laplacian operators defined on their respective spaces. The Fourier transform operates on functions of real variables, but the manifold harmonic transform
(MHT) operates on functions whose domain is a discrete
graph representing the connectivity of the mesh.
Given a triangulated mesh with n vertices we may
compute m basis functions H k , k = 1, . . . , m called the
manifold harmonic basis. Each basis function is assumed
to be a piecewise linear function represented by its value
Hik at each vertex, i. These basis functions, in matrix
form, can be used to transform the vertices back and forth
between their native geometric space and the frequency
domain. Let x = [x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ], y = [y1 , y2 , . . . , yn ], and
z = [z1 , z2 , . . . , zn ] be the geometric coordinates and x˜ =
[x˜1 , x˜2 , . . . , x˜m ], y˜ = [y˜1 , y˜2 , . . . y˜m ], z˜ = [˜z1 , z˜ 2 , . . . , z˜ m ]
be the frequency coordinates.
The frequency domain vertices can be computed using the
manifold harmonic transform
x˜ = xDH ,

(1)

where D is a lumped mass matrix which depends on triangle
˜ z˜ .
areas within the mesh. Similar expressions hold for y,
The mesh may be reconstructed from the frequency domain vertices by
˜ ,
x = xH

(2)

where H is the transpose of H. Similar expressions can be
written for y, z.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

157

Spatial frequencies, ωi , of the basis functions are related
to the√eigenvalues, λi , associated with each eigenvector by
ωi = λi . A frequency-space filter can be implemented by
multiplying the frequency coordinates with filter weights, f
during reconstruction
˜ H,
x = xF

(3)

where F is a diagonal matrix whose entries are given by f .
The filtering achieved by this process is similar to filtering
time domain signals using the Fourier transform: low-pass
filtering can be implemented by attenuating the coefficients
of high-frequency basis functions. Details may be enhanced
by boosting the same coefficients. When filter coefficients are
all equal, f = [a, a, . . . , a] the filter performs an isometric
scaling by factor a.
We perform allometric mesh scaling in terms of these filter
coefficients by giving anatomical and functional meaning to
certain combinations of coefficients. Usually, directly manipulating filter coefficients is not an intuitive way to edit
a mesh. In general terms fi controls low-frequency shape
when λi is low, and high-frequency detail when λi is high,
but it is difficult to achieve desirable results when manually changing these coefficients. Mesh editing in terms of
these filter coefficients has potential to be a powerful tool if
they can be controlled in a meaningful way. For example,
Rong et al. [RCG08] performed mesh deformation in terms
of manifold harmonics, but the deformations described were
changes in pose, not shape. Our work will connect biological
and physiological function to mesh shape through these filter
coefficients.

3. Implementation
We implemented the manifold harmonic decomposition as
described by Vallet and L´evy [VL08] and applied it to mesh
data from public mesh repositories. Results for a horse mesh
are shown in this section.
A plot of the absolute value of manifold harmonic coefficients for the horse mesh is shown in Figure 4. The coefficients roughly obey a power law with respect to eigenvalue,
and therefore also frequency. We observe this behaviour over
all of our input meshes and note the similarity to natural images which are also characterized by power-law spectra. For
two-dimensional natural images, the spatial frequency domain is also two-dimensional. The spectrum for images is
commonly determined by circular averaging to obtain a onedimensional radial spectrum [RSAT04]. We similarly represent the spectrum of meshes in terms of the radial spectrum
r˜ = x˜ 2 + y˜ 2 + z˜ 2 .
A power-law spectrum implies a linear relationship between the manifold harmonic coefficients and eigenvalue
when plotted on a log scale. We assess the linearity of this
relationship by computing the correlation coefficient, R be-

Figure 4: Manifold harmonic coefficients plotted on a semilog scale (top) and log–log scale (bottom). Red crosses are
r˜ radial spectrum coefficients. The solid lines shown for reference are the approximate power law curve computed by
linear regression in log–log coordinates.

tween log r˜ and log λ. The results are given in Table 1. Negative values of R correspond to exponential decay, and all values computed are negative as expected. As a rule of thumb,
R values in the range [−1.0, −0.5] imply a strong linear relation in log-space, and therefore a strong power-law relation
between manifold harmonic coefficients and frequency. The
mean correlation coefficient over all meshes was −0.888 with
a variance of 0.0009. The average slope α for the meshes was
−1.25, which corresponds closely with the findings of Graham and Field [GF07] who found that the best-fit slope over
137 photographs of natural scenes was −1.37 (R = −0.96)
and the best-fit slope over 124 paintings of natural scenes
produced by artists was −1.23 (R = −0.94).
Qualitatively, the power-law behaviour is also apparent
in Figure 5, which shows a mesh reconstructed from various numbers of basis functions. Using only the 20 lowest

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

158

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

Table 1. Correlation coefficients between log r˜ and log λ.

Mesh
Horse
Camel
Hippo
Cow
Elephant
Pig
Giraffe
Cat

3.1. Global allometric scaling

Vertices

α

R

19851
21887
22264
2903
3752
3522
9239
7207

−1.39
−1.17
−1.24
−1.14
−1.21
−1.23
−1.27
−1.35

−0.927
−0.900
−0.832
−0.864
−0.903
−0.894
−0.879
−0.906

Values of R closer to −1 imply a linear relationship between these
variables, and therefore that the mesh spectrum obeys a power law.

(a) 20

(b) 50

(c) 100

(d) 200

(e) 500

(f) 1000

Figure 5: Horse reconstructed from varying numbers of
manifold harmonic basis functions. Low-frequency components describe the shape of the horse, and high-frequency
components represent detail.

frequency basis functions, the quadrupedal structure of the
character becomes visually apparent, and much of the volume of the torso is filled. As the number of basis functions
increases, progressively finer (smaller amplitude) details can
be seen to emerge.
Some known allometric relations involve global geometric properties of the body, such as volume, surface area or
length. Other relations are specific to anatomical regions. To
accommodate both types of relations, we present separate
global and local allometric scaling techniques in the following sections. In both algorithms, we presume that the input
mesh is plausible, and generate new meshes which are also
plausible.

The global allometric scaling described in this section is determined by one parameter, and only biomechanical considerations are taken into account. Biewener [Bie90] reports that
‘mammalian skeletons experience peak locomotor stresses
(force per area) that are 25–50% of their failure strength,
indicating a safety factor of between two and four’. This
provides valuable information about how the biomechanics
of terrestrial locomotion influence the size of the limbs. In
particular it places bounds on the cross-sectional area of the
limbs.
Furthermore, forces generated during motion are generally proportional to body weight, and the highest forces
experienced are usually impact forces due to falling or
jumping. These can be 5–10 times body weight. By comparison, running may result in forces approximately two to
three times body weight [Ale85]. Rather than requiring the
user to estimate safety factors, we assume that the safety
factor in the scaled mesh will be equally to the safety factor
in the original mesh. However, it would be trivial to incorporate variable safety factors, or activity levels into our
system.
Because shear stresses, τ , and compressive stresses, σ , are
both given by F /A, where F is the applied force and A is
the cross-sectional area, we can see that increased forces due
to higher body weight can be mitigated by increased crosssectional area. Bending stresses are more complicated because they depend on the cross-sectional shape (through the
area moment of inertia). However, the stress can be reduced
by decreasing the bending moment. This can be achieved by
shortening the limb or decreasing the applied force. It can
also be achieved by increasing the area moment of inertia,
which we do not explicitly address.
By constraining the mesh deformation in terms of biomechanical stresses experienced during terrestrial locomotion,
we also constrain the range of valid input meshes. To apply our method to fish and other water-dwelling creatures
bouyancy and stresses due to swimming should be considered. This reflects the connections between form and function which allometric laws embody. In particular, the differing relations between size and shape for aquatic animals
as compared to terrestrial animals has been noted by many
researchers. Thompson [Tho52] observed that the skeletons
of large whales and smaller porpoises were remarkably similar due to the reduced effect of gravity on these creatures.
Similarly, flying creatures will be constrained by additional
internal stresses generated by lift forces. We do not foresee any problems incorporating these other biomechanical
analyses into our system because they can be expressed in
terms of geometrical quantities (length, volume, surface area,
cross-sectional area) which we can estimate from the mesh.
However, in this work, we restrict our analysis to quadrupedal
animals.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

To estimate the body mass of a character, we assume a constant material density, ρ, and then compute mass from the
volume, M = ρV . We use the method described by Mirtich
[Mir05] for computing the volume of triangle meshes. Because our calculations are done in terms of ratios, we do not
require the user to input a value for ρ, and we can consider
weight, mass and volume to be equivalent.
To estimate cross-sectional area, we again make use of the
manifold harmonic decomposition. In particular, we use the
so-called Fiedler vector, the eigenvector/eigenfunction corresponding to the second smallest eigenvalue of the mesh
Laplacian. The Fiedler vector and corresponding eigenvalue
figure prominently in spectral graph partitioning and the
study of graph topology. What makes it so useful for segmentation problems is that nearby vertices have similar values in the Fiedler vector. This implies that isocontours of the
Fiedler vector should form short closed paths on the mesh.
Critical points, where the isocontour length becomes zero,
occur at mesh extremities. These properties make the area of
the isocontours useful for characterizing peak stresses in the
mesh. We rely on the user to manually select the isocontour
which experiences peak stress. From the area of this contour
and the volume of the mesh we can estimate the value of
peak stress. From these contours we also compute the mesh
skeleton which we make use of in the next section. The centroid of each contour is a point on the skeleton of the mesh.
The isocontours of the Fiedler vector are shown in Figure 6
along with the computed skeleton. Additional skeleton results are shown in Figure 7. The skeleton we compute is a

159

geometric medial axis rather than a true approximation of
the anatomical skeleton. So, for example, our skeleton lacks
features such as a skull and ribs. However, it is useful for
approximating lengths.
The relationships between allometry, fractal systems and
frequency domain power laws motivate the implementation of allometric scaling in terms of manifold harmonic
coefficients. Consider the function
x˜i (α, s) = s x˜i λαi .

(4)

After applying this transformation to the coefficients they
still obey a power law, but with a different exponent, so
the underlying mesh still falls within the class of ‘natural
meshes’. The expected results of this function can be explained in terms of Figure 5. Note that the reconstruction
using a few basis function reveals the skeletal shape and the
torso. As higher frequencies are added the neck and then legs
appear. High spatial frequencies correlate with small crosssectional area. When α > 0 the coefficients corresponding
to small area shrink faster than those corresponding to high
area. The expectation is that the limbs in these meshes will
become thinner compared to the torso, for example. This corresponds to scale reduction in that the smaller creature can
be supported by relatively thin legs. For α < 0, the situation
is reversed, and for α = 0 the scaling is isometric.
Global allometric scaling was tested on synthetic onedimensional signals with 1/f spectra. An example output of
the experiment is shown in Figure 8. The power-law exponent
of the spectrum was computed by least-squares in log-space.
After allometric scaling the exponent was recomputed. The
example shown in Figure 8 was computed with α = 1.8, and

Figure 6: Isocontours of the second manifold harmonic basis function (left) and mesh skeleton computed from centroids
of isocontours (right). The isocontours provide us with a measure of local cross-sectional area, and the skeleton allows us
to estimate bone lengths.

Figure 7: Skeleton results for pig and giraffe.

Figure 8: Test of global allometric scaling in the DCT domain. A synthetic noise signal, f , and its spectrum, |f˜| , are
shown on the left (a,c). Applying global allometric scaling
as described in Equation (4) results in the signal g which has
spectrum g˜ as shown on the right (b,d).

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

160

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

lected regions to obtain the six desired regions: head, neck,
upper torso, lower torso, forelimbs and hindlimbs as shown
in Figure 11. From the segmentation we can obtain an indicator function for each region, Iseg such that Iseg (xi ) = 1
when vertex xi is part of the specified region, and Iseg (xi ) = 0
otherwise. Then we define the vertex set xseg = Iseg x.
Figure 9: Original bone (left), allometrically scaled bone
(middle), isometrically scale bone (right). The proportions
have changed in a way similar to the prediction of Galileo.

Figure 10: Original chair (middle), and allometrically
scaled chair (left, right). Note that the scaling is effective
when the topological genus is greater than 0.

results in the power-law exponent changing by a factor of 1.8
as expected.
Not all of the cross-sectional areas computed from isocontours are load-bearing, for example we do not expect the ears
or tail of an animal to support the full body weight. With
this in mind we manually select an isocontour with small
cross-section in one of the limbs to characterize the peak
stresses expected in the character. Then the peak stresses in
the original mesh σ0 = M0 /A0 . After scaling with isometric
factor, s and allometric factor, α, we want the peak stresses
to be equal, σ1 (s, α) = σ0 . Because isometric scaling affects
3
stress in a linear manner σ1 (s, 0) = ss2 AV0 = sσ0 , we can com0
pute the isometric scale factor s = σ1 (1, α)/σ0 given α.
The global allometric scaling results in Figures 9 and 10
demonstrate the non-uniform scaling we expect when trying
to compensate for the square-cube law. The bone becomes
proportionally thicker as it becomes larger, as predicted by
Galileo in the sketch in Figure 2. The smaller chair can be
supported by longer, thinner legs, and the larger chair has
thicker, and proportionally shorter legs to support a higher
weight. These results also demonstrate the generality of the
scaling method with respect to topological genus.

3.2. Local allometric scaling
Local scaling requires a segmentation of the mesh that defines the anatomical regions. We developed a user-assisted
technique based on the method presented by Zhang and Liu
[LZ04]. An automatic oversegmentation of the mesh into 24
regions is first performed, then the user manually merges se-

The MHT of the segmented vertex set is performed in
terms of basis functions, H, and lumped-mass matrix, D, of
the original mesh
x˜seg = xseg DH .

(5)

Our approach to local allometric scaling is to perform
power-law scaling on only the coefficients of basis functions
which contribute most to the segmented vertex set. Because
the basis functions are global it is not possible to guarantee
that this transformation will only change vertices in the segmented set, but we aim to minimize the distortions in other
areas.
In formulating local allometric scaling, we make use of
˜ has power-law form then |x|
˜ 1+α also has a
the fact that if |x|
power-law form with similar exponent when α is small. The
transformation of frequency coordinates is given by
x˜i = sgn(x˜i )|x˜i |1+αG(x˜i ,x˜seg,i ) ,
where G is the geometric mean defined as
√
ab if ab > 0,
G(a, b) =
0
otherwise.

(6)

(7)

The transformation in Equation (6) preserves the sign of the
frequency coordinates, which prevents spurious reflections
from occurring, and also avoids the generation of complex
coordinates. The geometric mean of two numbers tends to be
closer to the lower number, which makes it useful for isolating the coefficients which contribute most to the segmented
region. When x˜i and x˜seg,i are both large, then the geometric
mean will be large, but when either of the coefficients (or
both coefficients) are small the geometric mean is small, as
shown in Figure 13. The geometric mean of two numbers
is always less than or equal to the arithmetic mean of two
numbers. So when a coefficient contributes relatively little
to the segmented region the exponent computed by Equation
(6) will be close to one. When the coefficients are of opposite
sign the geometric mean is 0 and no scaling is performed.
Because coefficients of opposite sign contribute to geometric
reflections in the reconstructed mesh, we leave these coefficients unchanged to avoid large-scale mesh deformations.
Local allometric scaling was also tested on synthetic onedimensional signals with 1/f spectra. An example output of
the experiment is shown in Figure 12. An indicator function,
I, was selected to simulate the effect of segmentation in one
dimension. The spectrum of the segmented region DCT(If )
was computed.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

161

Figure 13: The geometric mean, G(a, b) , of two variables,
a and b.

Figure 11: Mesh segmentation used for local allometric
scaling. The various regions will be allometrically scaled
independently.

Figure 14: Local allometric scaling of the torso of the horse
mesh. Arithmetic manipulation of the spectrum results in discontinuities (left). Power-law manipulation of the spectrum
gives a smoother result (right).

Figure 12: Test of local allometric scaling in the DCT domain. Note that the region segmented by the indicator function (shown in green) can be locally scaled with only minor
changes to the surrounding regions.

The naive approach, arithmetically scaling the coefficients
of the vertex set, has predictably bad results as shown in Figure 14. That is because this method is equivalent to simply
scaling the segmented vertex set, which leads to discontinuities at the segmentation boundary. Our approach to local allometric scaling does not suffer from this consequence. Simply following arithmetic scaling with low-pass filter would
also be unsatisfactory since some of the desired high frequency detail would be blurred as well.
Local allometric scaling is a useful mesh editing tool by
itself because it gives anatomical meaning to combinations of
frequency coordinates for a mesh. We extend this idea even
further by using allometric laws to connect relative rates of

Figure 15: Local allometric scaling permits specific
anatomical regions to be targeted for scaling. From left
to right the torso shrinks, and from top to bottom the legs
shorten. The original mesh is in the centre.
change of different regions to obtain biologically plausible
results.
Results of local allometric scaling are shown in Figure 15.
In this case, local anatomical changes were made by explicitly specifying values of αj in Equation (6). As expected, the
scaling results in minor changes in pose and other non-local
deformations, but no discontinuities are observed.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

162

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

3.3. Biology-aware allometric scaling
Prothero [Pro92] tabulated allometric relations between different local variables for many species. The variables included length and diameter of forelimbs, hindlimbs and torso
as a means of describing a simplified model composed of
cylinders. We draw on this work, but segment the mesh further. We decompose the torso into chest and abdominal segments, and also add head and neck segments. Because the
relations we present here are based on empirical measurements of quadupedal mammals, they may not give plausible
results for other characters (such as humans, insects or fish).
The optimization method we present can, however, be extended by incorporating relations which are appropriate for
the species being modelled.
Allometric relations between specific anatomical regions
and mass can sometimes be explained theoretically in terms
of physiology.
Biomechanical relations allow us to impose constraints
which guarantee that the character has a musculoskeletal system which can resist internal stresses. Limb length is an important factor in theoretical analysis of locomotion [Ale03].
It is related to stride length and peak stress. Because stresses
generated during locomotion are due to body forces, the connection to body mass is strong.
Cardiopulmonary relations are used to guarantee that the
character has a cardiovascular system which can supply blood
throughout the body, and a respiratory system capable of oxygenating the blood stream. Many cardiovascular parameters
have allometric relations with body mass; including heart
rate, blood pressure, stroke volume, length of aorta and heart
mass [DL98]. In addition, chest volume is proportional to
both lung volume and heart volume. Furthermore, heart volume is proportional to stroke volume which is an important
variable in assessing the function of the circulatory system
[Li96]. However, because girth measurements are easier to
obtain and less prone to error, we use chest girth as a variable
in the scaling algorithm. Because heart girth is proportional
to chest girth, and chest girth is allometrically related to body
mass, we can obtain a relation between chest girth and stroke
volume.
Metabolic relations enforce the constraint that the character have a digestive system capable of generating enough
energy for activity. The energy requirements dictate the mass
of the digestive system which influences the size of the lower
abdomen. The abdominal region contains organs vital to the
digestive system, such as the stomach, liver and intestines.
Because of this function its size is influenced by metabolic
0.74
[UJP98] is thought to
parameters. The relation Mab ∝ Mbody
be a direct consequence of Kleiber’s law relating metabolic
rate to body mass with an exponent of 0.75. This would imply that the volume of food in the gut is proportional to the
energy metabolized.

Head and neck size. There is no general relation between
head size and body mass which holds over a large number of
species. For the families in which allometric relations have
been observed the relation is negative, such as the relation in
0.78
. Also, within a single species there
primates Mbrain ∝ Mbody
is a negative allometry associated with maturation Mbrain ∝
0.70
. We use the latter number in our experiments. The
Mbody
segment we have not addressed yet is the neck. Like the head,
we find no general observations, except among creatures
characterized by exceedingly long necks. Animals such as
the giraffe and flamingo with very long necks must have high
blood pressures to push blood up to the brain. We provide
the user with a control for separately controlling this attribute
using 1/3 as the baseline value predicted by isometric scaling.
The anatomical measurements and the allometric relations
we use in the biology-aware scaling algorithm are
0.360
(foreleg length) Lfl ∝ Mbody
0.336
(hindleg length) Lhl ∝ Mbody
0.365
(chest girth) Gchest ∝ Mbody

(head mass) Mhead ∝

(8)

0.700
Mbody

0.740
(abdominal mass) Mab ∝ Mbody

however, the selection of mass, length or girth measurements,
and the values of the exponents can be freely selected by
the user to achieve desired results. We estimate lengths of
regions from the skeleton and the segmentation. The diameter
(the length of the longest geodesic path between vertices)
of the skeleton is taken to be the length. Region volumes
are estimated by segmenting the mesh, capping the open
boundaries, and computing the volume of each submesh.
Girth measurements are computed by calculating the length
of isocontours of the Fiedler vector.
We perform scaling which takes all of the above relations
into account using the following extension of Equation (6)
x˜i (α, s) = s sgn(x˜i )|x˜i |1+α0 +

6
j =1 αj G(x˜i ,x˜j ,i )

,

(9)

where α 0 is the global allometric scale, and j indexes the
six segmented regions. As in the global scaling case, we
compute the isometric scale factor, s, which will make the
mesh biomechanically plausible.
We use an energy minimization approach to perform local
allometric scaling subject to the constraints in Equation (8).
To limit the amount of mesh deformation performed, we
set a target mass Mbody,1 = 1.1Mbody,0 when scaling up, and
Mbody,1 = 0.9Mbody,0 when scaling down, where Mbody,0 is
the initial volume of the mesh. Given this target mass, we
can set target values for the variables on the left-hand side of

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

163

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

Equation (8),
Lfl,1 = r 0.360 Lfl,0 ,
Lhl,1 = r 0.336 Lhl,0 ,
Gchest,1 = r 0.365 Gchest,0 ,

(10)

Mhead,1 = r 0.700 Mhead,0 ,
Mab,1 = r 0.740 Mab,0 ,

(a) Breton

where r is the ratio of target mass to initial mass
Mbody,1 /Mbody,0 , which is 1.1 or 0.9 in our experiments.
Larger or smaller mass ratios can be achieved by repeated
applications of the optimization procedure with recomputation of the MHB and MHT between iterations. The energy
we seek to minimize is given by
E(x˜ ) = (Mbody (x˜ ) − Mbody,1 )2 + (Lfl (x˜ ) − Lfl,1 )2 + · · ·
(Lhl (x˜ ) − Lhl,1 )2 + (Gchest (x˜ ) − Gchest,1 )2 + · · ·

(b) Quarterhorse (original mesh)

(Mhead (x˜ ) − Mhead,1 )2 + (Mab (x˜ ) − Mab,1 )2 + · · ·
(σ (x˜ ) − σ1 )2 ,

(11)

where σ is the biomechanical stress described in Section 3.1.
We find the values of s, {α} which minimize Equation (11)
using a non-linear least-squares solver [NW00] based on the
trust-region Newton-CG method.

4. RESULTS
We processed 12 triangle meshes representing quadrupedal
terrestrial animals. The meshes were pre-processed to remove
unreferenced vertices and non-manifold faces, then simplified to contain fewer than 100 000 vertices. The simplification process reduces the memory requirements for storing the
MHB, which may not fit into main memory for large meshes.
The MHB and MHT of each mesh were computed, then a
skeleton was automatically extracted and a user-assisted segmentation was produced. The data were processed on desktop
computer with Intel Quad Core QX6700 2.66 GHz CPU and
4 GB RAM.
Global allometric scaling applied to the horse mesh is
shown in Figure 16 along with images of actual horse breeds
for reference. Horse breeds vary over a wide range of scales,
which leads to much variation in shape. Because there are
many feasible horse shapes we do not expect an exact match,
but there are many similarities between the meshes and the
photographs. The Breton is a large draft horse characterized
by stocky, powerful legs, a short neck, and a wide chest. The
corresponding mesh has matching characteristics, however
the length of the torso of the actual horse is longer. The
miniature stallion in the reference photo has spindly legs, a
narrow torso and a long thin neck, much like the corresponding mesh.

(c) Miniature stallion

Figure 16: Visual comparison of global allometric scaling
results (left) and photographs of horse breeds (right).
Additional results for global allometric scaling are shown
in Figure 17 for camel, pig, elephant, cow and giraffe meshes.
The anatomical features scale in the same way as the horse
mesh—the enlarged creatures tend to have shorter and thicker
body parts and the shrunken meshes are longer and thinner.
When performing large deformations, as in Figure 19, the
transformed spectrum of the input mesh may not correspond
to the spectrum of resulting mesh. This is because the new
mesh does not necessarily have the same manifold harmonic
basis as the input mesh. For this reason, we perform large
scale changes iteratively—applying a small scale change, recomputing the MHB and repeating, as in the biology-aware
allometric scaling shown in Figure 18.
The allometric scaling process we have described does
not perform any collision detection, and so some selfintersections may be generated. This can be seen in the tail
of the cow in Figure 17. Another visible artefact is highfrequency rippling, as seen in Figures 9 and 10, and smoothing of some fine details. The smoothing effect is most noticeable in allometric minification because this process causes
high frequency details to be attenuated faster than low frequency details. Some sharp corners and points degenerate

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

164

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

Figure 17: Global allometric scaling results. Allometric minification with α = −0.1 (top), the input mesh (middle) and
allometric magnification with α = +0.1 (bottom) for several meshes. The overall scale of each mesh has been normalized in
this figure.

Figure 18: Biology-aware allometric scaling results. Relative scales of anatomical regions have been linked to make the scaling
match observed allometric relations which are governed by biological function. The original meshes are in the middle column.
The overall scale of each mesh has been normalized in this figure.

into line-like features, such as the tail of the elephant, and
the horns of the cow. These issues have been mitigated in the
character mesh results by a combination of low-pass filtering
of the input to the scaling algorithm, and detail enhancement
of the output [VL08].
5. Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented a novel character editing technique that respects biological and physiological principles. The resulting

meshes are plausible in terms of biomechanical constraints
and important biological processes which impact scale. In
this work, we consider the impact of the cardiovascular and
metabolic systems. Our technique does not perform any timeconsuming numerical simulation of biological processes. Instead, it relies on previously observed allometric relations
between scale and function. We do not require the user to input values for any physical or biological parameters, but the
input mesh is assumed to be plausible. Users interface with
the allometric relations in a strictly qualitative way—simply

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

165

Figure 19: Allometric scaling of horse, cow, elephant and pig meshes. The original mesh is in the middle, and it has been
scaled larger (to right) and smaller (to left) such that biomechanical constraints are satisfied.
choosing to increase or decrease mass. We have demonstrated that the methods we present give reasonable results
by providing visual comparison with known horse breeds.
In future work, we plan to implement additional rules and
make a clearer distinction between inter- and intra-species
allometry. Intra-species allometric laws govern the development of animals of the same species as they mature, while
inter-species laws govern differences among adults of different species. The user will then be able to pick a set of rules
based on the biological class (e.g. mammal, reptile, insect)
best matching the mesh, and optionally include effects due to

age. Additional biomechanical relations will be incorporated
to account for other forms of locomotion, such as swimming
and flying. This will permit the system to be extended from
quadrupeds to fish, birds and other species. We also plan
to further explore the application of the Fiedler vector to
skeleton generation for character animation.
There are other geometrical constraints to consider when
scaling biological structures, including surface area–volume
relations which govern how heat due to metabolism is dissipated. This typically becomes an issue at very small scales,
such as with rodents and insects.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

166

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

Acknowledgements
Meshes were obtained from Princeton database described in
A Benchmark for 3D Mesh Segmentation, the Princeton Suggestive Contour Gallery the Stanford 3D scanning repository and the Georgia Tech Large Geometric Models Archive.
Photo credits : Jean Figure 16(a), Rumo Figure 16(b) and
Eponimm Figure 16(c). Photos used under Creative Commons license.

References
[ACP03] ALLEN B., CURLESS B., POPOVIC´ Z.: The space of
human body shapes: Reconstruction and parameterization
from range scans. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
22, 3 (2003), 587–594.
[Ale85] ALEXANDER R.: The maximum forces exerted by animals. The Journal of experimental biology 115 (1985),
231–238.
[Ale03] ALEXANDER R.: Principles of Animal Locomotion.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2003.
[ASK∗ 05] ANGUELOV D., SRINIVASAN P., KOLLER D., THRUN
S., RODGERS J., DAVIS J.: Scape: Shape completion and animation of people. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
24, 3 (2005), 408–416.
[BCG05] BEN-CHEN M., GOTSMAN C.: On the optimality of
spectral compression of mesh data. ACM Transactions on
Graphics 24, 1 (2005), 60–80.
[Bie90] BIEWENER A.: Biomechanics of mammalian terrestrial locomotion. Science 250, 4984 (1990), 1097–1103.
[Bon69] BONNER J.: The Scale of Nature. Harper and Row,
New York, NY, 1969.
[Bon06] BONNER J.: Why Size Matters: From Bacteria to
Blue Whales. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
2006.
[Bri08] BRIDSON R.: Fluid Simulation for Computer Graphics. AK Peters Ltd., Natick, MA, 2008.
∗

[DBG 06] DONG S., BREMER P.-T., GARLAND M., PASCUCCI V.,
HART J. C.: Spectral surface quadrangulation. In Proceedings of the SIGGRAPH (Boston, MA, 2006), Association
for Computing Machinery, pp. 1057–1066.
[dGGV08] dE GOES F., GOLDENSTEIN S., VELHO L.: A hierarchical segmentation of articulated bodies. Computer
Graphics Forum (Symposium on Geometry Processing)
27, 5 (2008), 1349–1356.
[DL98] DRZEWIECKI G., LI J.: Analysis and Assessment of
Cardiovascular Function. Springer, New York, NY, 1998.

[DRW01] DODDS P., ROTHMAN D., WEITZ J.: Re-examination
of the “3/4-law” of metabolism. Journal of Theoretical
Biology 209, 1 (2001), 9–27.
[Ebe03] EBERT D.: Texturing & Modeling: A Procedural Approach. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, 2003.
[FFL∗ 96] FALCO T., FRANCIS F., LOVEJOY S., SCHERTZER D.,
KERMAN B., DRINKWATER M.: Universal multifractal scaling of synthetic aperture radar images of sea-ice. IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 34, 4
(1996), 906–914.
[GCFdS54] GALILEI G., CREW H., FAVARO A., DE SALVIO A.:
Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences. Dover Publications, New York, NY, 1954.
[GF07] GRAHAM D., FIELD D.: Statistical regularities of art
images and natural scenes: Spectra, sparseness and nonlinearities. Spatial Vision 21, 1–2 (2007), 149–164.
[GGS03] GOTSMAN C., GU X., SHEFFER A.: Fundamentals of
spherical parameterization for 3d meshes. ACM Transactions on Graphics 22, 3 (2003), 358–363.
[Gou66] GOULD S.: Allometry and size in ontogeny and phylogeny. Biological Reviews 41, 4 (1966), 587–640.
[Hal28] HALDANE J.: On being the right size. In A treasury
of Science. H. Shapely, S. Rapport and H. Wright (Eds.).
Harper and Brothers, New York, NY (1954), pp. 321–325.
[Hux32] HUXLEY J.: Problems of Relative Growth. L.
MacVeagh, The Dial Press, New York, NY, 1932.
[IYKI08] IJIRI T., YOKOO M., KAWABATA S., IGARASHI T.:
Surface-based growth simulation for opening flowers. In
GI ’08: Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2008 (Windsor,
Ontario, Canada, 2008), Canadian Information Processing
Society, pp. 227–234.
[JZ07] JAIN V., ZHANG H.: A spectral approach to shapebased retrieval of articulated 3d models. Computer Aided
Design 39 (2007), 398–407.
[KLT05] KATZ S., LEIFMAN G., TAL A.: Mesh segmentation
using feature point and core extraction. The Visual Computer (Special Issue of Pacific Graphics) 21, 8-10 (2005),
649–658.
[KSO04] KOLLURI R., SHEWCHUK J. R., O’BRIEN J. F.: Spectral surface reconstruction from noisy point clouds. In
Proceedings of the Eurographics Symposium on Geometry Processing (Nice, France, 2004), Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 11–21.
[LDC93] LAM N., DE Cola L.: Fractals in Geography. PTR
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1993.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

[LH05] LEORDEANU M., HEBERT M.: A spectral technique
for correspondence problems using pairwise constraints.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Vision (Beijing China, October 2005), vol. 2, IEEE
Computer Society, pp. 1482–1489.
[Li96] LI J.: Comparative Cardiovascular Dynamics of
Mammals. CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 1996.
[LST09] LEE S., SIFAKIS E., TERZOPOULOS D.: Comprehensive biomechanical modeling and simulation of the upper
body. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 28, 4 (2009),
99, pp. 1–17.
[LZ04] LIU R., ZHANG H.: Segmentation of 3d meshes
through spectral clustering. In Proceedings of the Pacific
Graphics (Seoul, Korea, 2004), IEEE Computer Society,
pp. 298–305.
[Man79] MANDELBROT B.: Fractals: Form, Chance and Dimension. W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, CA, 1979.
[MCBH07] MATEUS D., CUZZOLIN F., BOYER E., HORAUD R.:
Articulated shape matching by robust alignment of embedded representations. In Proceedings of the ICCV ’07
Workshop on 3D Representation for Recognition (Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, 2007), IEEE Computer Society, pp. 1–
8.
[Mir05] MIRTICH B.: Fast and accurate computation of polyhedral mass properties. Graphics Tools: The JGT Editors’
Choice (Natick, MA, 2005), AK Peters, pp. 109–129.
[MTAD08] MULLAN P., TONG Y., ALLIEZ P., DESBRUN M.:
Spectral conformal parameterization. Computer Graphics Forum (Symposium on Geometry Processing) 27, 5
(2008), 1487–1494.
[MVN68] MANDELBROT B., VAN Ness J.: Fractional Brownian motions, fractional noises and applications. SIAM
review 10, 4 (1968), 422–437.
[NW00] NOCEDAL J., WRIGHT S.: Numerical Optimization.
Springer, New York, NY, 2000.
[OSG08] OVSJANIKOV M., SUN J., GUIBAS L.: Global intrinsic symmetries of shapes. Computer Graphics Forum (Symposium on Geometry Processing) 27, 5 (2008),
1341–1348.
[Per85] PERLIN K.: An image synthesizer. SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics 19, 3 (1985), 287–296.
[PHL∗ 09] PALUBICKI W., HOREL K., LONGAY S., RUNIONS A.,
LANE B., MECH R., PRUSINKIEWICZ P.: Self-organizing tree
models for image synthesis. ACM Transactions on Graphics 28, 3 (2009), 58:1–10.

167

[PL90] PRUSINKIEWICZ P., LINDENMAYER A.: The Algorithmic
Beauty of Plants. Springer-Verlag, New York, Inc., 1990.
[Pro92] PROTHERO J.: Scaling of bodily proportions in adult
terrestrial mammals. American Journal of Physiology—
Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology 262,
3 (1992), 492–503.
[Pru86] PRUSINKIEWICZ P.: Graphical applications of Lsystems. In Proceedings of Graphics Interface ’86 / Vision Interface ’86 (Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada,
1986), Canadian Information Processing Society, pp.
247–253.
[RCG08] RONG G., CAO Y., GUO X.: Spectral mesh deformation. The Visual Computer 24, 7 (2008), 787–796.
[Rey88] REYNOLDS, C. W.: Flocks, herds, and schools: A distributed behavior model. Computer Graphics 21, 4 (1988),
25–34.
[RSAT04] REINHARD E., SHIRLEY P., ASHIKHMIN M.,
TROSCIANKO T.: Second order image statistics in computer
graphics. In Proceedings of the 1st Symposium on Applied
perception in graphics and visualization, (New York, NY,
USA, 2004) ACM, pp. 99–106.
[SF93] STAM J., FIUME E.: Turbulent wind fields for gaseous
phenomena. In Proceedings of the 20th annual conference
on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, ACM
(New York, NY, USA, 1993), pp. 369–376.
[SL87] SCHERTZER D., LOVEJOY S.: Physical modeling and
analysis of rain and clouds by anisotropic scaling multiplicative processes. Journal of Geophysical Research 92,
D8 (1987), 9693–9714.
[Ter99] TERZOPOULOS D.: Artificial life for computer graphics. Communications of the ACM 42, 8 (1999), 33–42.
[Ter08] TERZOPOULOS D.: Autonomous virtual humans and
lower animals: From biomechanics to intelligence. In
{AAMAS ’08: Proceedings of the 7th International Joint
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (Estoril Portugal, 2008), International Foundation
for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, pp. 17–
20.
[Tho52] THOMPSON d.: On Growth and Form. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, England, 1952.
[Tor98] TORRANCE R.: Allometric algorithms and the work
of the heart. Respiration Physiology 113, 1 (1998), 95–99.
[Tu99] TU X.: Artificial Animals for Computer Animation:
Biomechanics, Locomotion, Perception, and Behavior.
Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 1999.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

168

T. McGraw et al. / Allometric Scaling for Character Design

[Tur52] TURING A. M.: The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society (B)
237 (1952), 37–72.
[Tur91] TURK G.: Generating textures on arbitrary surfaces
using reaction-diffusion. In Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques (Las Vegas, NV, 1991), Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 289–298.
[TW90] TERZOPOULOS D., WATERS K.: Physically-based facial modeling, analysis, and animation. Journal of visualization and Computer Animation 1, 2 (1990), 73–80.
[UJP98] ULIJASZEK S., JOHNSTON F., PREECE M.: The Cambridge encyclopedia of human growth and development.
Cambridge University Press, 1998.
[VL08] VALLET B., L´EVY B.: Spectral geometry processing
with manifold harmonics. Computer Graphics Forum (Eurographics) 27, 2 (2008), 251–260.
[WBE97] WEST G., BROWN J., ENQUIST B.: A general model
for the origin of allometric scaling laws in biology. Science
276, 5309 (1997), 122–126.
[WK91] WITKIN A., KASS M.: Reaction-diffusion textures.
in Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques (Las Vegas,
NV, 1991), Association for Computing Machinery, pp.
299–308.

[ZB04] ZHANG H., BLOK H. C.: Optimal mesh signal transforms. In Proceedings of Geometric Modeling and Processing (Beijing, China, 2004), IEEE Computer Society,
pp. 373–379.
[Zha04] ZHANG H.: Discrete combinatorial laplacian operators for digital geometry processing. In Proceedings
of SIAM Conference on Geometric Design and Computing (Seattle, WA, 2004), Nashboro Press, pp. 575–
592.
[ZKK02] ZIGELMAN G., KIMMEL R., KIRYATI N.: Texture mapping using surface flattening via multidimensional scaling.
IEEE Transactions on Vision & Computer Graphics 8, 2
(2002), 198–207.
[ZL05] ZHANG H., LIU R.: Mesh segmentation via recursive
and visually salient spectral cuts. In Proceedings of Vision,
Modeling, and Visualization (Erlangen, Germany, 2005),
AKA Verlag, pp. 429–436.
[ZSGS04] ZHOU K., SNYDER J., GUO B., SHUM H.-Y.: Isocharts: Stretch-driven mesh parameterization using spectral analysis. In Proceedings of Eurographics Symposium
on Geometry Processing (Nice, France, 2004), Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 45–54.
[ZvKD10] ZHANG H., VAN KAICK O., DYER R.: Spectral
mesh processing (revised and extended version of Eurographics 2007 STAR report), Computer Graphics Forum
29, 6 (2010), 1865–1894.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

