DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01901.x

COMPUTER GRAPHICS

forum

Volume 30 (2011), number 6 pp. 1789–1811

The State of the Art in Topology-Based Visualization
of Unsteady Flow
Armin Pobitzer1 , Ronald Peikert2 , Raphael Fuchs2 , Benjamin Schindler2 , Alexander Kuhn3 , Holger Theisel3 ,
Kreˇsimir Matkovi´c4 and Helwig Hauser1

1 University

of Bergen, Norway
www.ii.uib.no/vis
2 ETH Zurich, Switzerland
graphics.ethz.ch
3 University of Magdeburg, Germany
isgwww.cs.uni-magdeburg.de/visual
4 VRVis Research Center in Vienna, Austria
www.VRVis.at

Abstract
Vector fields are a common concept for the representation of many different kinds of flow phenomena in science and
engineering. Methods based on vector field topology are known for their convenience for visualizing and analysing
steady flows, but a counterpart for unsteady flows is still missing. However, a lot of good and relevant work aiming
at such a solution is available. We give an overview of previous research leading towards topology-based and
topology-inspired visualization of unsteady flow, pointing out the different approaches and methodologies involved
as well as their relation to each other, taking classical (i.e. steady) vector field topology as our starting point.
Particularly, we focus on Lagrangian methods, space–time domain approaches, local methods and stochastic and
multifield approaches. Furthermore, we illustrate our review with practical examples for the different approaches.
Keywords: flow visualization, topology, unsteady flow, State of the art report
ACM CCS: I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and Techniques; I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image
Generation.

1. Introduction
The concept of flow plays a central role in many fields of
science. Classical application fields are, for example, the automotive and aviation industry, where the investigation of
air flow around vehicles is an important task. However, the
same concepts are used in the simulation and analysis of water flow in turbines of power plants, of blood flow in vessels,
the propagation of smoke in buildings, and weather simulations, to mention just a few. The visualization of data gained
from the simulation/measurement of such processes is relevant for the domain users as visualization has the potential
to ease the understanding of such complex flow phenomena.
In this context, topological flow visualization methods have
c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics
Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Published by
Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4
2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

been developed, with the aim to give insight into the overall
behaviour of the flow. A characteristic of this class of methods is the segmentation of the flow domain into regions of
substantially different flow behaviour, providing a topology
of the flow domain.
Topological methods for flow visualization have been researched over recent decades and a specific conference,
called Topological Methods in Visualization (TopoInVis), has
recently been established [HHT07, HPS08].
The overall setting for topological methods is more general than described above. Namely, any vector field , interpreting it as the rate of change of a certain quantity, might

1789

1790

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

be visualized using such methods. Then, the vector field
represents the states of a dynamical system, governed by
differential equations. In such a setting the evolution of certain points/configurations can be described mathematically
as solutions of the differential equation
x˙ (t) = v(x(t), t).
Because of the tight relation of this model to fluid dynamics
the vector field v is often referred to as flow. Notice, however,
that in that case the vector field needs to fulfill additional
equations (e.g. the Navier–Stokes equation) to represent a
flow in a fluid-dynamical sense.
If the vector field v does not depend on the variable t the
system is said to be autonomous, otherwise non-autonomous.
Equivalently, the expressions steady and unsteady (or simply
time-dependent) flow are used.
In the study of steady flow/autonomous dynamical systems
certain features such as critical points, separatrices and closed
orbits play an important role. In 1989, Helman and Hesselink
introduced these concepts to the visualization community under the name of vector field topology (VFT) [HH89]. Methods for visualizing steady flow fields, especially planar flow
fields, have achieved a high level of proficiency, whereas the
unsteady case is still challenging and by no means complete
[LHZP07, LHD∗ 04, PVH∗ 03, PVH∗ 02, GLW99, SJWS08].
VFT and feature extraction build a solid base for understanding and visualizing a given steady flow field, and there
is a considerable amount of work available on possible direct
extensions of VFT for unsteady flows. Although this may
seem a canonical research direction, both theoretical considerations [PC94] and practical demonstrations [SLM05,
WCW∗ 09] show clear limitations of this approach to unsteady flow.
Taking one step back, the overall goal is to find methods
that can give comparable answers for unsteady flow as VFT
for steady flow, namely to segment the flow domain into parts
with coherent properties in terms of their temporal evolution.
Consequently, we consider the term topology-based visualization as slightly more openly defined and may read it out
to yielding analogous results as topological methods for the
purpose of this survey. Such a segmentation reduces drastically the information to be displayed to convey a holistic
understanding of the flow on a more semantic level.
In the remainder of this introduction we give a short
overview of the field and attempt to structure it. A detailed
discussion with many additional references is then left to the
respective sections.
Classical VFT (i.e. for steady flows) segments the flow domain in regions where trajectories show the same behaviour
when looking at the temporal (t) limits at ±∞. This fact
needs special attention when taking the step from steady
to unsteady flow: in a steady field a finite amount of data

can be used to determine the flow behaviour at an arbitrary
instance of time. For unsteady fields, this is not true: the
information available is usually restricted to a certain timewindow. This means that, in general, no statement about the
asymptotic behaviour of the trajectories is possible. Visualizing time-dependent flow essentially poses different research
challenges as compared to visualizing steady flow.
Despite this, the first attempts at approaching a topologybased visualization of unsteady flow interpreted the unsteady
field as a stack of steady flow fields. This induced the idea that
a VFT-like segmentation of unsteady flow can be achieved
using the methods already known for discrete time slices
and identifying corresponding structures in subsequent time
steps. Methods for the topology-based visualization of unsteady flow based on trajectories in individual time steps can
be classified as tracking methods (tracking in time). In Section 3 we give an overview of the research done in this direction. The trajectories in a fixed time step t = t0 are solutions
of the following first-order ordinary differential equation
x˙ (s) = v(x(s), t0 ),

x(t0 ) = x0 .

(1)

These solutions are called streamlines. Notice that the integration time s is not related to the time t on which the vector
field v depends. The t-time becomes in that case a parameter
of the system. Even though this is no issue from a purely
mathematical point of view, the s-time still lacks physical
interpretation. Following a streamline means ‘freezing’ the
flow at some instance of time t and integrating (along a ‘virtual’ time s) to ±∞. Only in special cases do particles follow
streamlines in realistic scenarios (and usually for a while
only, if at all).
A promising approach is to investigate the behaviour of
pathlines, that is the solutions of
x˙ (t) = v(x(t), t),

x(t0 ) = x0 .

(2)

The solutions of this equation describe the theoretical path
of massless particles through the flow.
Another approach that uses the path of massless particles
is the investigation of so-called streaklines, defined as
xt (τ ) = xτ (t)

(3)

where xτ is the solution for the initial value problem
x˙ (s) = v(x(s), s),

x(τ ) = x0

(4)

evaluated at s = t. This describes mathematically the common
experimental setup of injecting a marker (say dye) in a flow
at a fixed spatial location x0 for the time interval [t0 , t]. The
function xt is then a parameterization of the curve consisting
of the injected particles at time t, more precisely, xt (τ ) is the
position of the particle seeded at τ ∈ [t0 , t] at time t.
The concepts of path- and streakline are essentially different from the concept of streamlines in unsteady flow. Their

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

focus is the behaviour of one or more moving particles.
Therefore, they can be classified as Lagrangian methods.
We discuss these methods in Section 4. However, applied to
steady flow, which is of course a special case of unsteady
flow, all three definitions yield the same trajectories.
In the context of this view on flow scenarios, structures that
maintain their attracting (or repelling) nature over a relatively
long time play an important role, because they influence all
passing particles in a coherent manner. Along these lines, a
scalar measure for the local separation behaviour of the flow,
the so-called finite-time Lyapunov exponents (FTLE), have
gained attention in the visualization community [Hal01]. The
notion of Lagrangian Coherent Structures (LCS) recognizes
that there are repeating patterns of motion in turbulent flows
[DD04]. This phenomenon of repeated, similar structures
has led to the assumption that understanding these coherent
structures will give insight into the mechanisms of turbulence. Although, even today, there is no generally accepted
definition of LCS, one important notion is to identify them
as the ridges of the FTLE field [Hal02]. Less formally, LCS
can be thought of as the boundaries between fluid regions for
which injected tracer particles would behave qualitatively
different [PD10]. Compared to VFT, there is a subtle, yet
important, difference: in VFT the segmentation into different regions is point wise (Eulerian perspective) whereas LCS
segments particles (Lagrangian perspective).
Recently, a mathematical framework called Feature Flow
Field (FFF) has been introduced which can treat the concepts
of path- and streamlines in a unified way [TS03]. The idea
behind this approach is that the unsteady flow is transformed
into a higher dimensional steady flow. Then the computation of path- and streamlines reduces to the computation of
streamlines of some related vector fields. Classical VFT is
not applicable to these fields, however, because they do not
contain isolated critical points. Nevertheless, it is possible
to capture parts of the topological information of the original vector field, for example critical points, periodic orbits
and vortex axes, by constructing respective auxiliary vector
fields. For different tasks different vector fields are needed.
These and similar methods can be classified as space–time
domain approaches and we discuss them in more detail in
Section 5.
Feature extraction is an important complement to VFT in
the steady case (to be precise, the extraction of some features, e.g. critical points, is an integral step in computing the
topology of a steady flow). Of course, it is also desirable
to extract the unsteady counterparts of the features in steady
flow. Most of the methods used for this purpose are local, that
is they use point-wise information only. The actual extraction
is carried out by methods also known from image processing. In contrast to methods that involve integration, most of
these techniques can be used for unsteady vector fields (at
least to a certain degree—differences can show up, e.g. when
derivatives play into the feature specification). Currently,

1791

they focus mainly on vortex structures and separation and
attachment lines. Local methods of that kind are discussed in
Section 6.
One problem that feature extraction suffers from is that
the definition of features involves parameters like thresholds
or time windows (which is also true for FTLE) or that the
definition is not unanimous (e.g. as for vortices). Often features are not detected in the actual vector field but in a field
derived from the original one and the detection of multiple
features (or various definitions of the same feature-type) has,
consequently, to deal with multiple fields.
Because dealing with multiple feature specifications at
once can be interpreted as dealing with multivariate data,
the use of interactive visual analysis (IVA) has been suggested [BMDH07]. The idea is to combine several feature
detectors to investigate combinations of them. This is valuable both for extracting those features and for understanding the parameters that determine behaviour that might be
intuitively clear but not precisely defined. Another opportunity offered by IVA is to detect correlations between different feature definitions. Furthermore, this method offers
the possibility to meet the needs of the user domain more
flexibly.
An engineer, for instance, might be interested in additional
properties (e.g. pressure, temperature, . . .) of the medium,
apart from the actual flow. On the other hand, engineers
may use different models for the same situation, according
to different tasks. IVA gives the opportunity to interactively
investigate the relations between different variables/models
using multiple views and linking+brushing [DGH03].
One prerequisite regarding feature extraction is that the
user has to be aware of which feature should be searched
for. Recently, information theory based approaches were
presented that are capable of automatically detecting regions in which something extraordinary is likely to happen
[JWSK07].
Finally, one may be interested in displaying both flow
topology and features. Unfortunately, it is known that separatrices may cross features (e.g. vortices) and therefore split
them. Stream- and also pathline predicates offer a possibility to combine several feature detectors and flow topology to refine the latter, while keeping features intact [SS07,
SGSM08].
IVA and the above-mentioned methods addressing similar
problems will be discussed in Section 7.
In accordance with this brief overview of the building
blocks available on the way towards topology-based visualization of unsteady flow, the rest of the paper is structured
as follows: (2) Classical VFT, (3) Tracking of topology, (4)
Lagrangian methods, (5) Space-time domain approaches, (6)
Local methods, (7) Stochastic and multifield approaches and
(8) Discussion and conclusions.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1792

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

Figure 1: Approaches and methods used to achieve topology-based unsteady flow visualization and their relations. Thematic
overlap is represented by intersecting building blocks. Solid arrows represent conceptual relations and dashed arrows methodological. The orange square collects the current available brick stones that come closest to the topology-based visualization of
unsteady flow. The numbers indicate the sections in which the respective building blocks are discussed.

Figure 1 gives a graphical overview of the classes of approaches and methods and how they are related to each other
as well as a graphical table of content of this article.
As mentioned before, this state of the art report uses the
term topology-based in a broadened way, because it targets time-dependent vector fields. For such fields, a definition of ‘topology’ is not yet available, unless adopting a
streamline-based view. As explained, this topology is hard to
interpret in a physically meaningful manner. For a detailed
overview over strictly topology-based methods for flow visualization and vortex extraction in unsteady flows we refer to Scheuermann and Tricoche [ST05] and Laramee et
al. [HLD07]. Salzbrunn et al. [SJWS08] present a survey
of partition-based methods in flow visualization, covering
also flow topology. Again, the main focus is on methods related to the tracking of steady topology, but it touches also
upon some of the Lagrangian methods and stochastic and

multifield approaches that we discuss in Sections 4 and 7,
respectively.
Besides flow visualization by means of topology-based
methods, there exist other approaches not covered in this
article, such as dense and texture based and feature based
flow visualization. For surveys on these areas of flow visualization, we refer to Laramee et al. [LHD∗ 04] and Erlebacher et al. [EJW05], respectively Post et al. [PVH∗ 03,
LHD∗ 04]. Yet another class of approaches are so-called
integration-based methods. Because topology-based methods are usually based on integrational objects, a fair share
of approaches presented there are contained in this class. If
no topology is extracted, but the integrational objects are directly used for visualization, we refer to integration-based
geometric methods for better distinction. For further discussion of this subclass of methods we refer to McLoughlin et al.
[MLP∗ 10].

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

1793

2. Classical Vector Field Topology
This section gives a brief overview on both historical and
theoretical aspects of classical, that is steady, VFT as well as
its application in visualization and further applications.

2.1. History
The theory of dynamical systems goes back to the 19th century work of Henri Poincar´e [Poi92]. A modern introduction
can be found, for example in Guckenheimer and Holmes
[GH83]. In our context, the case of deterministic, continuous and autonomous dynamical systems is most interesting,
because such systems can be used to formulate velocity
fields of a steady fluid flow. Many patterns in a flow can
be described and analysed by concepts from dynamical systems theory, such as critical points, separatrices and periodic orbits. Perry and Chong [PC87] give a comprehensive
overview of such 2D and 3D flow patterns. Helman and Hesselink introduced these methods to the scientific visualization
community, and used them under the notion of VFT for the
visualization of computed and measured velocity fields, first
in 2D [HH89] and later in 3D [HH91]. VFT was further popularized both by Asimov’s excellent tutorial [Asi93] and by
Globus et al.’s TOPO module [GLL91] for NASA’s FAST visualization software. Over two decades, topologically based
flow visualization has been an active research topic. A related
state-of-the-art report [LHZP07] was published in 2007.
2.2. Background
Let v(x) denote a steady velocity field. Then a streamline,
that is the solution of the initial value problem given in
Equation (1), exists uniquely if v(x) is Lipschitz-continuous
[GH83], which is the case for discrete data when interpolated
with any of the popular schemes. VFT now deals with the two
kinds of singular streamlines, namely stationary points and
periodic orbits. These singularities are of particular interest
if they are isolated. A sufficient condition for an isolated
stationary point, called a critical point, is that the velocity
gradient tensor is regular at this point (while its velocity is
vanishing). Similarly, a periodic orbit is isolated if the gradient tensor of the Poincar´e map is regular [GH83]. For these
first-order singularities, a type classification can be made
by analyzing the eigenvalues of the gradient tensor. For 2D
vector fields, there are the five possible types saddle, node
source, node sink, focus source and focus sink, plus transitional types which are structurally unstable, (Figure 2 ). In
the special case of a divergence-free 2D vector field, there
are no sources or sinks, but instead the centre is a structurally
stable type.
Type classifications exist also for first-order critical points
in 3D fields and for first-order periodic orbits in 3D fields
[Asi93]. Finally, higher-order singularities can be further
analysed. Depending on higher-order derivatives, the singu-

Figure 2: Types of first-order critical points in 2D.

larity (critical point or periodic orbit) can still be an isolated
one. A classification of higher-order critical points in 2D is
given by Firby and Gardiner [FG82]. Scheuermann et al.
[SHK∗ 97] introduce a visualization of higher-order critical
in 2D points using locally higher-order polynomial interpolations, based on the index of the singularities.
2.3. The topological skeleton of a vector field
The topological skeleton is obtained by computing all singularities plus their lower-dimensional invariant manifolds. In
2D fields only the saddle type critical points have 1D invariant manifolds. These are the so-called separatrices, that is
the streamlines converging in either positive or negative time
to a saddle point. As the topological skeleton contains most
of the topological information of a (steady) vector field, it is
a concise characterization of the vector field. The separatrices divide regions of different flow behaviour and they often
have physical relevance. In 3D velocity fields, such topological structures—then being surfaces—can indicate phenomena like flow separation or vortex axes.
Roughly speaking, the computation of the topological
skeleton consists of the following steps:
1. Computation of critical points: Find all x such that v(x) =
0. Notice that this means that the right hand side of the
differential equation becomes zero and the solution is
consequently constant.
2. Classify the critical points: Due to v(x) = 0 the local behaviour of the vector field is dominated by the gradient of
the field (cf. Taylor series expansion). Hence, an eigenvalue analysis of the gradient can classify the flow locally.
The signs of the eigenvalues are used to detect attracting,
repelling, or saddle-like behaviour.
3. Compute the separatrices: The invariant manifolds are
computed by integrating from the critical point in the
direction of the elements of a basis of the respective
eigenspace (i.e., along the direction of the corresponding
eigenvectors).
4. Compute higher order critical structures: Such structures
are, for example closed orbits.
5. Classify the higher order critical structures: Analogous
to critical points, higher order critical structures can be
attracting, repelling, or induce saddle-like behaviour.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1794

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

Figure 3: A topology-based visualization of a 2D vector field. In turn, the critical structures are highlighted: (a) critical points,
(b) separatrices emerging from the critical points and (c) a periodic orbit. Arrowheads have been added to indicate attracting
or repelling behaviour and hence the categorization of the respective structures. A few additional trajectories enhance the
perception further.

Then, the topological skeleton is the union of critical
points, respective separatrices, and higher order critical structures. Figure 3 shows the above described structures in a
topology-based visualization of a 2D vector field. This description is intended to provide the reader with an intuitive
understanding of how to extract the topological skeleton. For
more details the reader may refer to Asimov [Asi93].
2.4. Visualization methods based on VFT
A considerable amount of research has been done to extract, analyse, modify and visualize the topology of steady
vector fields. Several approaches can be used to extract
critical points. In piecewise linear fields, the zeros can be
computed explicitly. In more general settings, one might
use a Newton-Raphson approach [Kel03]. An octree-like
method is presented by Mann et al. [MR02]: they compute the index of the vector field (a generalization of the
winding number) for each cell and a non-zero index triggers a recursive subdivision. Trotts et al. [TKH00] introduce the notion of critical points at infinity to find new
separatrices. The curvature of streamlines in the proximity of critical points is studied by Theisel and Weinkauf
[The95, WT02] for 2D and 3D vector fields. Mahrous
et al. [MBS∗ 04] present an algorithm to extract separation
surfaces to segment topologically steady 3D flow. They sample the vector field by streamlines, deriving a segmented data
set from the original field and using this data set for the construction of the separation surfaces. In a later paper Mahrous
et al. present an improved algorithm [MBHJ03] that uses inflow/outflow matching, cell-locking, and adaptive streamline
sampling to reduce computational work. Regions of different flow behaviour on the boundary of 2D vector fields as
well as the corresponding separatrices are considered by de
Leeuw and van Liere [dLvL99a] and Scheuermann et al.
[SHJK00].
A first approach to detecting periodic orbits is given by
Wischgoll and Scheuermann [WS01] which uses the underlying grid structure of a piecewise linear vector field: each
grid cell is analysed concerning the re-entering behaviour
of streamlines that start at its boundaries. Figure 4(a) shows

results obtained by this method. The method is extended to
3D [WS02] by the same authors.
L¨offelmann et al. [LKG98] propose visualization techniques for the Poincar´e map to give a better understanding of
the flow near periodic orbits. Peikert and Sadlo discuss periodic orbits in 3D vector fields [PS07]. Li et al. [LVRL06]
discuss how to represent higher-order critical points on triangular surfaces using a carefully chosen triangulation and
interpolation. Scheuermann et al. [SHK∗ 97, SKMR98] explained visualization approaches for planar flows. An algorithm for computing 2D invariant manifolds of singularities
in 3D vector fields is presented by Krauskopf and Osinga
[KO99] where the surface mesh is organized in geodesic circles. Theisel et al. [TWHS03] propose to display only pairwise intersections of such streamsurfaces, known as saddle
connectors or heteroclinic orbits. Figure 4(b) shows saddle
connectors in a flow behind a circular cylinder. Peikert and
Sadlo [PS09b] present a streamsurface algorithm that robustly handles starting from and converging to singularities.
Separation and attachment lines play an important role
considering the flow around and on bodies in 3D flow fields.
Kenwright [Ken98] and Kenwright et al. [KHL99] present
methods to extract attachment and separation lines. Wiebel
et al. [WTS09] present a robust method to extract separation
surfaces from these lines using topology extraction in cross
sections of the flow.
Sadlo and Weiskopf [SW10] present an approach to timedependent 2D VFT based on generalized streak lines, i.e.,
streak lines with a moving instead of a fixed seed point. This
allows them to give a generalized definition of saddle-type
critical points for unsteady flow. This approach is inspired by
LCS, that are treated in Section 4, but avoids ridge extraction.
While the topological skeleton usually provides complete information about the qualitative behaviour of a flow,
no quantitative information can be reconstructed from it.
L¨offelmann et al. [LDG98] and L¨offelmann and Gr¨oller
[LG98] propose the use of selected direct visualization cues
to provide an intuitive description of the local flow near characteristic structures.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1795

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: (a) Periodic orbits detected in a turbulent 2D flow field (image courtesy of Wischgoll et al. [WS01] c 2001 IEEE).
(b) Visualization of saddle connectors in a flow behind a circular cylinder (image courtesy of Theisel et al. [TWHS03] c 2004
IEEE).
To account for uncertainty in vector fields, Otto et al.
[OGHT10] present the concept of uncertain VFT for two dimensional fields. This approach considers the transport of local uncertainties under integration, generalizing the concept
of streamlines for probability density distribution functions.
Together with the generalization of the concept of critical
points, this allows for a topological analysis of the uncertain
vector field. Otto et al. [OGT11] extend the method in the
previous paper to 3D. Furthermore, they improve the integration accuracy and simplify the task of saddle point detection.
The topological structure found is displayed using volume
rendering.

2.5. Further applications of topological features
As described by Theisel et al., topological features of vector
fields have not only proved to be a valuable visualization
tool, they can also be used for other tasks in processing
vector fields [TRW07].
2.5.1. Compressing vector fields
To simplify and compress large and complex flow data sets,
methods based on topological concepts allow for more efficient computational handling and transmission. Compression in this context means to reduce the amount of data
while maintaining important structures. Lodha et al. [LRR00,
LFR03] introduce a compression technique for 2D vector
fields which prohibits strong changes of location and Jacobian matrix of the critical points. Theisel et al. [TRS03b]
present an approach which guarantees that the topology of
original and compressed vector field coincides both for critical points and for the connectivity of the separatrices. It is
shown that even under these strong conditions high compression ratios for vector fields with complex topologies are
achieved.
2.5.2. Topological simplification of vector fields
The topological skeleton of a vector field may become very
complex due to the presence of noise. The reduction of unim-

portant topological features can be accomplished by simplifying the resulting topological structure. Besides smoothing
of the vector field using a box filter before extracting the
topology as described by de Leeuw et al. [dLvL99b], more
involved techniques start with the original topological skeleton and repeatedly apply local modifications of the skeleton
and/or the underlying vector field to remove unimportant
critical points. De Leeuw and van Liere [dLvL99a] extract
the topological skeleton and measure the importance of a
critical point by computing the area from which the trajectory ends in forward or backward integration. Based on this
area metric, the unimportant critical points are repeatedly
collapsed to more important critical points in the neighbourhood. The system described by de Leeuw et al. [dLvL99b]
finds couples of first-order critical points in the skeleton by
considering distance and connectivity of them. Then, pairs
of saddle points and attracting/repelling critical points with
distance less then a given threshold are collapsed. Tricoche
et al. [TSH01a] use a similar approach but provide a way
of consistently updating the underlying vector field instead
of collapsing the extracted skeleton. Further, the simplification of the topology of a 2D vector field is accomplished by
replacing clusters of first order critical points with a higher
order critical point. Weinkauf et al. [WTS∗ 05] extend this to
3D vector fields. Theisel et al. [TRS03a] solve the coupling
problem of critical points by an FFF approach which will be
explained in Section 5.2 in further detail.

2.5.3. Topological comparison of vector fields
The definition of useful metrics on vector fields plays a crucial role in the majority of applications mentioned earlier.
The first approaches on metrics (distance measures) of vector fields as proposed by Heckel et al. [HWHJ99] and Telea
et al. [TvW99] consider local deviations of direction and
magnitude of the flow vectors in a certain number of sample
points. These distance functions give a fast comparison of
the vector field but do not take any structural information
of the vector fields into consideration. A first approach to
define a topology-based distance function is given by Lavin
et al. [LBH98]. Given two vector fields v1 and v2 , all critical

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1796

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

points are extracted and coupled. Then the distance of the
vector fields is obtained as the sum of the distances of
the corresponding critical points in v1 and v2 . To compute the
distance between two critical points, a number of approaches
exist [LBH98,TW02]. To couple the points, Theisel et al.
[TRS03c] propose the use of FFFs. A general demonstration
of this comparison on real data sets is given by the same
authors [TRW07].
2.5.4. Constructing vector fields
Besides using a simulation or measurement process for data
acquisition the vector field data can also be obtained by construction. Theisel et al. [The02] present an approach oriented
at methods from the CAGD (Computer Aided Geometric Design) context. First, a topological skeleton of a vector field
is constructed by a number of control polygons. Secondly, a
piecewise linear vector field of exactly the specified topology is automatically created. An approach for constructing
3D vector fields is presented by Weinkauf et al. [WTHS04].
There, a number of specified control polygons is used to
determine location and characterization of first- or higherorder critical points and the saddle connectors. The resulting
skeleton is used to construct a piecewise linear vector field. In
application to 3D surfaces, topology-based construction and
editing of vector fields can be used to enrich surfaces with additional information. Thus, vector fields have been used for
generating non-photorealistic visualizations, like painterly
renderings or pen-and-ink visualizations, and remeshing of
the underlying surface [PZ07]. Zhang et al. [ZHT07] present
a system to interactively create and edit 2D static vector field
which can be applied to the limited domain of a 3D surfaces Recently, topological methods have been successfully
applied to extract salient features on discrete 3D surfaces as
shown by Weinkauf et al. [WG09].
3. First Approaches Towards Unsteady Flow Fields:
Tracking of Topology
First attempts to cope with time-dependent velocity fields
were done by looking at the instantaneous velocity fields.
Taking this as a starting point, some extensions to classical
VFT are available. Newer research shows the limitations
of this approach, for example with respect to a meaningful
interpretation of the results.
3.1. Tracking of singularities
Instantaneous topology extraction can be combined with
tracking of the singularities over time. Tricoche et al.
[TSH01b, TWSH02] present a method for tracking the location of critical points and detecting local bifurcations, that
is qualitative changes in the topology of the field due to a
smooth parameter change, such as fold bifurcations and Hopf
bifurcations. This approach works on a piecewise linear 2D
vector field and computes and connects the critical points on

the faces of a prism cell structure, which is constructed from
the underlying triangular grid. An extension to 3D has been
given by Garth et al. [GTS04] together with a visualization of
the paths in space–time of the critical points. The framework
of feature field flows allows for tracking of singularities as
well. A detailed discussion of this tool is given in Section 5.2.
The consideration of bifurcations has to be handled carefully in this context. Bifurcations in the topological structure
of a flow field can only happen due to changes of external flow parameters. To a certain degree, time can be seen
as such a parameter when a streamlines-based view on the
flow is adopted. However, due to the lack of an immediate physical interpretation of streamlines-based topology in
time-dependent flow, it remains questionable how expressive
the resulting structures are. In flow with a structure that only
changes slowly over time it is possible that the identified
‘bifurcations’ indeed hint on interesting changes in the flow
over time.
Wischgoll et al. [WSH01] track closed streamlines over
time by applying a contouring and connecting approach. At
each time step closed streamlines are detected independently
of each other, then the corresponding lines in adjacent time
steps are connected.
3.2. Deficiency of VFT for unsteady flow
As previously explained, streamlines do not capture the temporal change of the flow. In the context of experimental
flow visualization, researchers noted very early that a correct frame of reference is important for extracting meaningful structures. Perry and Tan [PT84] suggest to extract
patterns as ‘seen’ by an observer who is moving with the
eddies, i.e., the swirling and backflow induced by flow past
an obstacle. They use a correlation technique to compute the
velocity of an eddy and found the resulting measurements to
be quasi-steady. Later, Perry and Chong [PC94] state clearly
that topological information is only meaningful in a Galilean
reference frame in which the velocity field is nearly steady.
This implies that VFT is not applicable if such a frame does
not exist.
Although known in theory, practice largely ignored this
problem until when Shadden et al. [SLM05] give with the
‘double gyre’ an example of an unsteady flow for which a saddle type critical point substantially deviates from the actual
point of flow separation. Recently, Wiebel et al. [WCW∗ 09]
demonstrate the failure of VFT to find moving attractors in
simulation data of a rotating liquid suspension. They suggest
a procedural solution based on the evolution of density of
virtual particles seeded in the flow.
4. Lagrangian Methods
In the Lagrangian point of view, the fluid is described by
the motion of its particles. Because the analysis is based on

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

trajectories of one or multiple particles such methods are
inherently suited for unsteady flows.
4.1. The finite-time Lyapunov exponent
The finite-time Lyapunov exponent (FTLE), by some authors also referred to as the direct Lyapunov exponent (DLE)
[Hal01], is a measure for the stretching of an infinitesimal
neighbourhood along a finite segment of a flow trajectory.
More formally, let v(x, t) denote the velocity field. Then,
a trajectory x(t) starting from x0 at time t0 is the solution of
an initial value problem [see also Equation (2)]. The set of
all trajectories provides the flow map x(x0 , t0 , t) that maps
the position at time t on the trajectory started at time t0 from
x0 . By computing the flow map gradient and left-multiplying
it with its transpose, the (right) Cauchy-Green deformation
tensor field [Mas99] is obtained as
Ctt0 (x0 ) =

∂x(x0 , t0 , t)
∂x0

T

∂x(x0 , t0 , t)
.
∂x0

(5)

From this, the (maximum) FTLE is defined as
FTLEtt0 (x0 ) =

1
ln λmax Ctt0 (x0 ) ,
2(t − t0 )

(6)

where λmax (M) denotes the maximum eigenvalue of M
[Hal01].
In the limit t → t0 , the FTLE is the maximum principal
rate-of-strain, that is the maximum eigenvalue of the rate-ofstrain tensor
S = [∇v(x0 , t0 )]T [∇v(x0 , t0 )].

(7)

In the limit t → ∞, the FTLE is the (standard) Lyapunov
exponent which is independent of t0 . Discovered by A. M.
Lyapunov in the 1890s, the Lyapunov exponents became popular in the 1970s for the analysis of chaos and predictability in
dynamical systems. The finite-time variant are used [GSO87,
YN93] originally also for predictability of systems, especially for atmospheric models. In a seminal paper [Hal01],
Haller applies FTLE to velocity fields of fluid flow and reveals their relationship to the Lagrangian coherent structures
(LCS), which can provide the information on flow separation similar to the separatrices of VFT, however often also
correctly for strongly time-dependent flow. In his subsequent
paper [Hal02], he identifies the ridges of the FTLE as LCS.
In Figure 5 we show some applications of FTLE.
Shadden et al. [SLM05] apply FTLE to the ‘double gyre’
example (where VFT fails) and various other example flow
fields in 2D. They show visually that particles seeded near
the FTLE ridges do not cross them. Another counter-example
for VFT is suggested by Wiebel et al. [WCW∗ 09] where
the FTLE peak was shown to deviate much less from the
observed (moving) attractor than the topological sink.

1797

Garth et al. [GGTH07] present an algorithm for FTLE
computation in transient flow using adaptive refinement of
the flow map and propose to approximate 3D FTLE by 2D
FTLE computed in the orthogonal space of the velocity vector. Garth et al. propose a volume rendering approach that
avoids the extraction of ridges using a 2D transfer function
[GLT∗ 09]. With a variation of this technique Garth et al.
[GWT∗ 08] compute 2D FTLE on offset surfaces of solid
boundaries resulting in a visualization of flow separation and
flow reattachment. Sadlo et al. address the problems of efficient computation of height ridges of FTLE [SP07] and of
tracking FTLE ridges over time by using a grid advection
technique [SP09a]. Lipinski and Mohseni [LM10] present
a ridge tracking algorithm for FTLE fields that uses both
temporal and spatial coherency of LCS and give an error
estimator for difference between advected ridge and actual
LCS. Both approaches give great speed-up compared to the
standard algorithm.
Apart from a more effective ridge extraction, several authors recently suggested alternative methods to speed up
FTLE computation. Brunton and Rowley [BR10] present
a fast computation scheme for the FTLE field based on a
multistage approximation on the flow map, eliminating redundant integrations. This comes with an accuracy trade-off,
for which the authors provide an error bound. This approach
is especially useful for the computations of time-sequences
of FTLE fields. A similar approach is presented by Hlawatsch
et al. [HSW10]. Kasten et al. [KPH∗ 09] introduce the notation of localized FTLE (L-FTLE). The main idea of this approach is to exchange the deformation gradient tensor with
a matrix that accumulates the separation behaviour along a
path line. The computation of the matrix is based on the flow
gradient. The computation of the L-FTLE field allows for
the reuse of values computed for previous time steps, using
an idea similar to FastLIC, which results in a speed-up compared with traditional FTLE. A comparison of FTLE and
L-FTLE shows few differences [KPH∗ 09].
Comparisons of FTLE with other criteria in terms of suitability for visualization have been made by several authors.
Shadden et al. [SDM06] show that FTLE is able to reveal
the fine lobes of a chaotic vortex ring while producing temporally more consistent results than an approach based on
VFT. In Figure 6 we compare VFT and FTLE. In (a) we can
see that the possibility to integrate streamlines into a chaotic
region of the flow for very long integration times allows to
extract sharply defined regions of stability. In Figure 6(b) we
can see that the restriction to a finite time domain is alleviated using FTLE to visualize the structure of the vortex
ring.
In recent studies by Green et al. [GRH07] and Shi
et al. [STW∗ 08], FTLE is validated against other indicators of LCS in a number of analytical and numerical flow
fields, and FTLE is found to generate more detail. In a study
done by Sadlo et al. [SP09b], FTLE is shown to extract flow

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1798

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

Figure 5: Applications of FTLE to visualization. (a) In the double gyre example the critical point disjunct to the FTLE ridge
separating different regimes of the flow (image created following Shadden et al. [SDM06]). (b) Volume rendering of the FTLE
field shows the regions of locally maximally attracting and repelling behaviour (image courtesy of Garth et al. [GGTH07]
c 2007 IEEE). (c) Extraction of ridges from the FTLE field allows additional processing and filtering to concentrate on the
salient features of the flow (image courtesy of Sadlo et al. [SP07] c 2007 IEEE).

Figure 6: Analysis of a vortex ring. (a) Topological methods can benefit from the infinite integration time available and give
detailed insight into regions of stability and folding structures of the flow (image courtesy of Peikert et al. [PS09a]). (b) Even
though much less integration time is available, the FTLE field can give insight into the structure of the vortex ring (image
courtesy of Shadden et al. [SDM06]).
separation structures, but not the axes or centres of rotating
flow. In comparison with VFT, this means that FTLE provides only partial information. In the example of a spiral
saddle critical point, where VFT would give a 1D and a 2D
invariant manifold that can be interpreted as a vortex axis
and a separation surface, only the latter is reliably detected
by FTLE.
Another current limitation of FTLE is that it requires the
choice of a time window, the effect of which has not been
studied sufficiently. Generally, a longer integration time will
produce sharper ridges. On the other hand, this may cause a
larger number of trajectories to leave the flow domain. Tang
et al. [TCH10] show that just stopping the integration at the
boundaries may introduce spurious ridges and suppress true
ridges. The authors develop an algorithm that extends the
given flow field linearly, allowing the paths to continue at a
locked separation rate and addresses the problem of particles
leaving the flow domain.
In recent work by Olcay et al. [OPK10], the influence
of noise and spatiotemporal resolution of the velocity field

on the extracted LCS is investigated. The authors show that
a coarse resolution can significantly influence the location
of an LCS. Smoothing the field is shown to have the same
effect. Spatial noise can have a significant effect on single
realizations of the LCS, but the mean location remains near
LCS extracted from the unperturbed field.
Ferstl et al. [FBTW10] present an approach for interactive
investigation of 3D flows using streak lines, that uses FTLE
ridges in a 2D seeding probe as seeding structures. In this
manner, the separation behaviour detected by the FTLE can
be investigated in more detail, avoiding costly computations
in regions that exhibit coherent particle motion. Depending
on the size of the data set, the FTLE can be computed on the
fly, exploiting the GPU, or has to be pre-computed.
It is worth noticing that the result of LCS extraction based
on FTLE is influenced by the definition of a ridge, given
the choice of height ridges, watersheds, maximal curvature
ridges [Ebe96] and others. Even when agreeing on the same
concept of ridge, the definition may not be unanimous, as in
the case of height ridges [SP07].

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1799

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

4.2. Other Lagrangian feature detectors
Although FTLE, in addition to its advantages, also has the
aforementioned limitation to inform only about flow separation, other calculations can be performed in the Lagrangian
frame that reveal other types of flow features. Basically, by
computing the Cauchy-Green deformation tensor from the
flow map gradient, the rotational part is discarded. However,
to detect a vortex, this information is needed. Therefore, either the flow map gradient must be used in a different way or
a different type of temporal integration must be performed.
Cucitore et al.’s non-local vortex detector [CQB99] uses
a reference frame that moves with a particle to be tested.
In this frame, the path of a neighbour particle is calculated
for a certain time window. Then, the distance of the end
point from the origin is divided by the arc length of the
path. Low values of this ratio indicate a vortex centre. Haller
proposes another vortex detector denoted Mz [Hal05] that is
objective, that is invariant not only under Galilean transforms,
but also for rotating frames of reference. Finally, any local
vortex detector designed for steady flow can be adapted to
unsteady flow by applying a Lagrangian smoothing, i.e., by
computing a weighted average of the quantity obtained for
the same particle at several time steps. Lagrangian smoothing
has been shown to be better than a purely steady analysis by
Shi et al. [STH∗ 09] and by Fuchs et al. [FPS∗ 08].
Recently, several authors brought up the idea to adapt
the definitions underlying VFT for unsteady velocity fields.
Kasten et al. [KHNH09] propose minima of the acceleration
magnitude, after a temporal smoothing in the Lagrangian
frame, as a replacement for critical points in unsteady velocity fields. Fuchs et al. [FKS∗ 10] present the concept of
motion compensated critical points and a novel measurement for ‘unsteadiness’. This allows for the identification of
particles that are observing an almost steady velocity field
and represent a nearly Galilean transform. In this frame of
reference, classical VFT is applicable to classify the particles. This can be considered to be a first step towards a
‘Lagrangian’ VFT.

5. Space–Time Domain Approaches
To be able to handle the problem of detecting features in
time-dependent data sets, one way is to lift this problem into
a higher dimension by interpreting the time as an additional
axis and thereby assume the steady case again. This definition
allows a clear definition of pathlines by means of streamlines
in the lifted higher-dimensional case.

5.1. Streamlines and pathlines
When dealing with a time-dependent vector field v(x, t), we
are usually interested in its spatiotemporal characteristics. As
discussed in the introduction, several concepts can be used to

explore those characteristics. In a specified space–time point
(x0 , t0 ) ∈ D, we can start a streamline [cf. Equation (1)] or
a pathline. The defining ODE system (2) can be rewritten
as an autonomous system at the expense of an increase in
dimension by one, if time is included as an explicit state
variable:
d
dt

x
t

=

v(x(t), t)
1

,

x
t

(0) =

x0
t0

.

In this formulation, space and time are dealt with on equal
footing, facilitating the analysis of spatio-temporal features.
Pathlines of the original vector field v in ordinary space now
appear as streamlines of the vector field
p(x, t) =

v(x, t)
1

(8)

in space–time. To treat streamlines of v, one may simply use
s(x, t) =

v(x, t)
0

(9)

.

This is valid for arbitrary space dimensions.
Figure 7 illustrates s and p for a simple example vector
field v. It is obtained by a linear interpolation over time of
two bilinear vector fields.
Now the problem of finding a streamline or pathline oriented topology is reduced to finding the topological skeletons of s and p. Unfortunately, the classical VFT extraction
techniques for 3D vector fields are not applicable for the
fields s or p: s consists of critical lines (i.e., for every critical
point x∗ of the original vector field v any point (x∗ , t) in the
time–space domain will become a non-isolated critical point
of s), whereas p does not have any critical points at all.

5.2. Feature flow fields
In the FFF approach [TS03], a specially designed vector field
in the 4D space–time domain captures parts of the topological
information (critical points, periodic orbits, vortex axes) in its
temporal evolution. Consider an arbitrary point x known to be
part of a feature in a (scalar, vector or tensor) field. A FFF f is
a well-defined vector field at x pointing in the direction where
the feature moves to. Thus, starting a streamline integration
of f at x yields a curve where all points on this curve are part
of the same feature as x.
FFFs are commonly used with local features, which can
be described by a local analysis of the underlying field and
possibly its derivatives. Here, f can usually be described by
an explicit formula. In the 2D case, the underlying vector
field is given as follows:
v(x, y, t) =

u(x, y, t)
v(x, y, t)

.

(10)

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1800

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

(a) Stream lines of s correspond to (b) Stream lines of p correspond to (c) Streamline oriented topology (d) Detail view with a saddle conthe stream lines in v.
the path lines in v.
nection and a fold bifurcation

Figure 7: Streamlines (a) and pathlines (b) of a simple 2D time-dependent vector field obtained by linear interpolation of two
steady 2D vector fields and shown as illuminated field lines. The extracted and visualized topological skeleton (c) and detailed
structures (d) of the cavity data set (image courtesy of Theisel et al. [TWHS05] c 2005 IEEE).
Using this description, the direction of maximal change of the
u- and v-component of v is given by the gradients grad(u)
and grad(v). In the plane perpendicular to grad(u), the u
component remains constant in a first-order approximation
of v. A similar statement can be made for v. Thus, the only
direction in which u and v remain constant is the intersection
of the perpendicular planes denoted by the cross product of
grad(u) and grad(v):
⎞
⎛
det(vy , vt )
f(x, y, t) = grad(u) × grad(v) = ⎝ det(vt , vx ) ⎠ .
det(vx , vy )
(11)
In contrast to this, an FFF for a global feature can only be
given in an implicit manner, because it can neither be decided
locally whether a point belongs to a feature nor into which
direction the feature evolves. Instead, the FFF approach has
to be tightly coupled with a global feature detection strategy
to assess global features.
Tracking features in time-dependent fields is one of the
main applications of FFFs [TS03, TWHS04, TWHS05].
The temporal evolution of the features of v is described by
the streamlines of f. In fact, tracking features over time is
now carried out by tracing streamlines. The location of a
feature at a certain time ti can be obtained by intersecting the
streamlines with the time plane ti . Integrating the streamlines
of FFF in the forward direction does not necessarily mean
to move forward in time. In general, those directions are unrelated and the direction in time may even change along the
same streamline. Those changes are always related to special
events, where multiple critical points merge, split up or vanish within the underlying vector field. Hence, FFF provides
a tool to localize, characterize and classify bifurcations. Notice that the notation of bifurcation implies that the flow is
interpreted from the streamline-based point of view.
Besides tracking, FFF have been used for a variety of related problems. Those include topological simplification and
comparison of vector fields based on critical point track-

ing [TRS03b], extraction of vortex core lines defined as
ridges/valleys of Galilean invariant quantities [SWH05], extraction and tracking of vortex core lines defined as centres
of swirling motion [TSW∗ 05], extraction of topological lines
in tensor fields [ZP04, ZPP05], and identification of periodic phenomena from insufficiently time-resolved data sets
measured using particle image velocimetry [DLBB07].
Weinkauf et al. [WTGP10] introduce the notion of stable FFF, that is FFF where streamlines associated with the
desired feature exhibit attracting behaviour. This formulation guarantees that small numerical errors are automatically
corrected during integration. The authors show the construction of such fields for two common applications of FFF:
the tracking of critical points in a time-dependent 2D vector
field and the extraction of parallel vector lines for 3D vector
fields. This stable variant has been applied recently to identify discontinuities in multivariate data by tracking feature
lines [LT10].
Weinkauf and Theisel [WT10] introduce the so-called
steak line vector field, that allows for the formulation of
streak lines as tangent curves of a derived vector field of
the original field. In this manner, the costly computation of
a streak line can be reduced to a simple vector field integration. Hence, this reformulation of streak lines opens up
for a more extensive use of streak lines and surfaces in flow
visualization.
6. Local Methods
Features such as edges or ridges [Har83, EGM∗ 94, Lin98]
of images can be extracted by methods that are local in the
sense that they work on point-wise information, including
derivatives. These methods carry over naturally from image
data to scalar field data as they occur in scientific visualization problems. Height ridge extraction is applied to pressure
data by Miura and Kida [MK97] and to vorticity magnitude by Strawn et al. [SKA98], both times for finding vortex

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

core lines. Ridge extraction from FTLE data is proposed
by Shadden et al. [SLM05] for finding Lagrangian coherent
structures.
For the visualization of vector fields such as velocity
data, adaptations or generalizations of these methods can be
used. Such techniques exist for the extraction of separation
and reattachment lines [KHL99], vortex core lines [LDS90,
SH95, BS95, MK97, RP98]. Some of these vortex core line
methods involve additional physical quantities, in particular
the pressure gradient [BS95, MK97], but the remaining ones,
such as the classical methods by Levy et al. [LDS90] and by
Sujudi and Haimes [SH95] are based solely on the velocity
field and its derivatives. For a detailed discussion of the topic
of vortex extraction, we refer to the survey of Jiang et al.
[JMT05].
Many of these structures can be expressed with a unifying formalism, called the parallel vectors operator (PVO)
[PR99]. The PVO concept is not restricted to line-like features, but can be extended to surface-like features [TSW∗ 05].
For the case of height ridges, simplified extraction methods
were recently proposed for arbitrary dimensions, together
with a new class of filters for the filtering of raw features
[PS08].
In contrast to integration-based methods, local methods
are relatively unaffected by the unsteadiness of the velocity
field. Therefore, most of the mentioned methods are directly
applicable to unsteady flow. An exception is the recent extension of the vortex core line detector of Sujudi and Haimes
to unsteady flow [WST07, FPH∗ 08]. The reason for this was
that the Sujudi and Haimes method can be re-interpreted as
an operation on the acceleration field. If this is computed
from a given unsteady velocity field, it requires a temporal
derivative term, which is not needed in the steady case.
The general approach of defining and extracting features
based on local criteria for the velocity field and its derivatives
is a powerful concept, due to its mathematically rigorous formulations and the simple algorithms derived from them. At
first glance, it may look wrong to describe global structures
of a vector field by local operators. In fact, the different behaviour of height ridges and watersheds in image data led to
a lively dispute [KvD93, Ebe96] about the correctness of local versus global methods. However, although in steady flow
one of the most interesting topological structure, the separatrix, can be computed only using global methods, there
is no reason to assume that unsteady flow does not contain
topologically important structures that can be found by local
methods. In a related context, Ginoux and Rossetto [GR06]
show that in 2D and 3D slow-fast autonomous dynamical systems, the slow manifold can be computed by finding zeros
of curvature or torsion, resp., of the local trajectory. Finally,
local methods can be combined with integration-based methods. An example is FTLE computation which leads to a scalar
field and which has to be post-processed if sharp structures,
such as height ridges, are needed.

1801

Although the problem of detecting vortices is usually addressed using local methods as described earlier, there are
methods that use a geometric approach. Sadarjoen and Post
[SP99] suggest two methods detecting vortices in steady 2D
flow fields detecting clusters of centres of the osculating circles and streamlines with winding number 2π and relatively
close start and end point. The latter method is extended to
3D by Reinders et al. [RSVP02]. Petz et al. [PKPH09] propose a new criterion to characterize 2D vortex regions. To do
so, they detect and cluster loops that intersect the underlying
flow at a constant angle. Their algorithm is parameter-free
and is not restricted to a certain type of geometry (e.g. star
domains or convex domains).
Figure 8 shows visualizations of vortical flow using local
(Figure 8b) and non-local (Figure 8a) detectors.

7. Stochastic and Multifield Approaches
Rarely is the user just interested in one aspect (e.g. one single feature type) of a flow field. It is more common to look
at multiple features, features in combination with additional
measures and/or multiple definitions of the same feature at
once to get an understanding of the underlying field. Recently, a number of new approaches and methods have been
introduced to take these requirements into account.

7.1. Interactive visual analysis
As the amount and complexity of data sets grows, automatic analysis methods are often not sufficient any more. To
effectively cope with such data sets, IVA tries to balance human cognition and automatic analysis. The power of human
perception and cognition is used to guide the analysis. The
IVA approach provides an interactive discovery framework.
It helps the user in getting insight, in understanding the data as
well as complex, often hidden, correlations between certain
data dimensions. The visual information-seeking mantra—
overview first, zoom in, details on demand—as defined by
Shneiderman [Shn96], summarizes the main idea. Coordinated multiple views [Rob07] are often used in this domain
[MGJH08] as a proven concept. The main idea is to depict
multiple dimensions using multiple views and to allow the
user to interactively select (brush) a subset of the data in one
view and all corresponding data items in all linked views will
be highlighted as well [MW95, DGH03]. One of the first examples of linking and brushing with different visualization
approaches in different views is a system called WEAVE
[GRW∗ 00], which was used to interactively analyse and visualize simulated data of a human heart application using
focus+context visualization [Hau03]. IVA is used in many
domains [KMSZ06]. In the following, however, we will focus on engineering and scientific applications.
Doleisch et al. developed a system called SimVis for interactive feature specification and localization in 3D flow data.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1802

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

(a)

(b)

Figure 8: (a) Flow past a tapered cylinder visualized using a non-local vortex detector (image courtesy of Reinders et al.
[RSVP02]). (b) Visualization of the core of swirling particle motion in the Hurricane Isabel data set (image courtesy of
Weinkauf et al. [WST07] c 2007 IEEE).

They use simple 2D linked views, such as scatter plots or
histograms, for the specification of flow features. Linked 3D
views provide spatial information and advanced flow visualization techniques. Complex features can be described by
composite brushing. The feature definitions are expressed in
an XML-based feature definition language and are persistent across analysis sessions. The SimVis system has been
used to analyse flows from numerous applications, such as
flow through a catalytic converter, flow around a car, cooling
jacket flows, etc. [Dol07, DMG∗ 05, DMH04, LGD∗ 05].

be skipped for other areas. Offering multiple views, intuitive
interfaces and quick selection possibilities, IVA provides a
useful tool for such a complex task. It can also help to improve
robustness of detectors. A filtering step is almost always
necessary after a detector is evaluated. Exploiting smooth
brushing [DH01], a method which allows non-strict brush
boundaries, local characteristics of detectors can be examined
much more easily. Hauser and Mlejnek [HM03] show how a
similar approach can be efficiently applied to isosurfaces in
the analysis of flows in a catalytic converter.

Another approach deals with the parameterization of pathlines to understand flow. The main idea is to compute various
attributes from pathlines to understand the flow itself. Shi
et al. [STH∗ 09] compute scalar and time series attributes of
pathlines, such as winding angle, Lyapunov exponent, direction vector, etc., and then use coordinated multiple views
to understand the flow behaviour. Figure 9(a) shows their
interface while analysing a data set.

IVA is not really another flow segmentation method—
at least not in the classical sense—but more an integrative
approach which helps domain experts to understand detectors
and flow behaviour.

B¨urger et al. [BMDH07] compute several local feature detectors of the same flow and use IVA to compare them. In
addition, other flow attributes (such as pressure, . . .) are taken
into account as well. In this way it can be intuitively decided
which automatic method gives more accurate results in certain areas or time intervals. Such an approach enhances the
credibility and combines the advantages of several detectors
in an IVA system.
IVA is not intended as a competitor or an alternative to the
detectors described earlier. Instead, it is sought to be used
in parallel to those methods. It offers great potential in the
exploratory phase, during hypothesis generation [KLM∗ 08].
The flow segmentation is not an isolated process, it is part
of a larger work flow. Domain experts analysing the flow
have to choose detectors, and IVA can help in deciding if
detectors are applicable, if a detector functions in particular
case. Domain experts have to evaluate multiple detectors.
Engineers, for example, compute a vortex detector first, and
then check if this is an area of low pressure as well. The
analysis can be refined for areas where this holds, and can

7.2. Fuzzy feature detectors
Although IVA handles multifield structures (induced by multiple features, multiple definition of features and/or additional
quantities), utilizing multiple views and linking+brushing,
other attempts have been made to address problems related to feature extraction and visualization in a fashion that
corresponds more to the classical methods in flow visualization with respect to their outputs.
One of the drawbacks of feature extracting methods is that
the user has to be aware of the type of feature which should
be extracted. In addition, the feature one is looking for may
not be defined unanimously (e.g. vortices). To address this
problem, J¨anicke et al. [JBTS08] recently presented an improvement of the algorithm of J¨anicke et al. [JWSK07] for an
automatic extraction and visualization of regions of interest in
3D unsteady multiflow. The authors detect space–time points
that have high probability to develop into unlikely events in
future using a statistics-based algorithm. As a measure for the
unexpectedness of the value at a point they propose local statistical complexity, which is, roughly speaking, the amount
of information needed to predict the future of a space-time
point. Figure 9(b) shows a visualization of a flow around a
cuboid obtained by this method.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1803

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

(a)

(b)

Figure 9: (a) Pathlines with small Lyapunov exponents in a flow behind a circular cylinder. The region to display is selected
in the histogram (upper left window) the corresponding pathlines (upper right display) and their seeding points (lower right
display) are displayed (image courtesy of Shi et al. [STH*09]); (b) Comparison of the visualization of a flow around a cuboid
using the standard λ2 -criterion (left) and local statistical complexity (right) (image courtesy of J¨anicke et al. [JBTS08]).

Salzbrunn and Scheuermann suggest the use of streamline predicates to combine flow topology with feature extraction [SS07]. The main idea is to decompose the domain
into disjoint regions with coherent streamline behaviour, as
flow topology does, adding other distinctions than asymptotic behaviour. This addresses, for example the problem
that some features can be split up by usual flow topology.
Mathematically speaking, streamline predicates are Boolean
maps with disjoint support on the set of all streamlines.
Flow topology is then a special case of segmentation gained
through streamline predicates, called flow structure. Classical feature detectors can be used to refine flow topology
using streamline predicates. The same ideas are applied to
unsteady flow by Salzbrunn et al. [SGSM08]. In analogy to
the steady case, the authors introduce the notation of pathline
predicates. In addition, the authors present a pathline placement strategy to combine the structural overview provided
by the partition gained by means of pathline predicates with
the dynamical insight into the flow provided by tracing single
particles.

we expect of new methods. The terminology topology-based,
as used in this survey, has to be interpreted accordingly, that
is more loosely, for example also including topology-inspired
methods and methods that share one major goal of topologybased methods, that is to achieve an expressive segmentation
of a flow field. Accordingly, by surveying these approaches
together, this report might contribute to approaches that aim
at catalyzing convergence.

In an engineering context, feature models with parameters are often used. The quantification of these parameters is
obviously an important task. Ebling et al. [EWGS07] point
out that topology-based methods are not capable of doing
this. They show, for example that for an arbitrary vector field
the topological skeleton of the normalized field is the same
as the skeleton of the original field. This means that VFT
is inherently unable to provide quantitative information on
the investigated flow field. Another drawback of topological
methods in this context is that superposing features may not
be detected correctly. The authors suggest therefore the use
of vector masks and pattern matching. This approach emphasizes the interpretation of a vector field as the superposition
of many (simpler) fields.

The impulses that brought topological methods into the
focus of the visualization community came from the application domain itself. One of the most prominent examples is
Globus et al.’s TOPO module [GLL91] for NASA’s FAST
visualization software. In the light of this, it may seem surprising that topology-based methods found their way into
commercial solutions only in a very limited form (e.g. by
Avizio, www.vsg3d.com) up to now. One possible reason
for this could be that topology-based methods are still rather
new in the field compared with many other techniques (especially those inspired by well-known experimental setups).
This means, in turn, that such methods are usually not covered by standard education curricula for simulation experts.
Another reason might be that topological methods are quite
advanced methods and a fair number of questions relevant to
the domain expert can be answered by simpler methods as
well. For more intricate questions, however, topology-based
methods are able to provide insights that are not possible
with other approaches, as recent publications from the fluid
dynamics community show, cf. Peacock and Dabiri [PD10]

8. Discussion and Conclusions
This paper describes the current state of the art in topologybased flow visualization of unsteady vector fields. Topological methods for steady flows are used as a role model for what

To date, the solutions for topology-based unsteady flow
visualization remain incomplete, compared with the level
of proficiency achieved for steady flows. Incremental extensions of methods that work well for steady flows are proven
to be not able to truthfully capture the behaviour of timevarying flows. Therefore, new approaches and methods are
examined, including both new theoretical frameworks and
methodical novelties. Many of the new approaches seem
to overlap to a certain extent. This suggests that a unified
framework for treating unsteady flows with topology-based
methods actually could be found.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1804

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

for example. To be applicable by a broader community, these
methods will have to be time efficient and expressive, as well
as easy to use. Finally, as many other examples show, technological advancements may also lead to the usage of advanced
methods, such as topology-based methods, in contexts that
would not strictly require this. For example, topology-based
methods might be used for illustration purpose, in analogy to
the illustrations in recent text books on dynamical systems,
or in a particle seeding strategy. One first step in this direction
is the use of FTLE ridges as seeding structures for interactive exploration of 3D flow using streak surfaces proposed
by Ferstl et al. [FBTW10].
We perceive a strong current interest in proceeding with
research on topology-based and topology-inspired visualization of unsteady flow and major attempts are being undertaken, such as the cooperative international project that the
authors of this survey are involved in www.semseg.eu.

Acknowledgements
This report has been worked out within the scope of the
SemSeg project and we acknowledge the financial support
of the Future and Emerging Technologies (FET) programme
within the Seventh Framework Programme for Research of
the European Commission, under FET-Open grant number
226042. The authors thank the anonymous reviewers of our
survey for their constructive input and Matthew Geoffrey
Parker (University of Bergen) for proofreading.
References
[Asi93] ASIMOV D.: Notes on the Topology of Vector Fields
and Flows. Tech. Rep., NASA Ames Research Center,
1993. RNR-93-003.
[BMDH07] B¨URGER R., MUIGG P., DOLEISCH H., HAUSER H.:
Interactive cross-detector analysis of vortical flow data. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Coordinated & Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization
(CMV 2007) (Zurich, Switzerland, 2007), pp. 98–110.
[BR10] BRUNTON S. L., ROWLEY C. W.: Fast computation of
finite-time lyapunov exponent fields for unsteady flows.
Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science
20, 1 (2010), 017503.
[BS95] BANKS D., SINGER B.: A predictor-corrector technique for visualizing unsteady flow. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 1, 2 (1995),
151–163.
[CQB99] CUCITORE R., QUADRIO M., BARON A.: On the effectiveness and limitations of local criteria for the identification of a vortex. European Journal of Mechanics B/Fluids 18, 2 (1999), 261–282.

[DD04] DAVIDSON P. A.: Turbulence: An Introduction for
Scientists and Engineers. Oxford University Press, USA,
July 2004.
[DGH03] DOLEISCH H., GASSER M., HAUSER H.: Interactive
feature specification for focus+context visualization of
complex simulation data. In Data Visualization 2003: Proceedings of the 5th Joint Eurographics – IEEE TCVG
Symposium on Visualization (VisSym 2003), G.-P. Bonneau, S. Hahmann and C. Hansen (Eds.). Eurographics,
Aire-la-Villa, Switzerland (2003), pp. 239–248.
[DH01] DOLEISCH H., HAUSER H.: Smooth brushing for focus+context visualization of simulation data in 3D. Journal of WSCG 11, 1–2 (2001), 147–154.
[DLBB07] DEPARDON S., LASSERRE J., BRIZZI L., BORE´ E J.:
Automated topology classification method for instantaneous velocity fields. Experiments in Fluids 42, 5 (2007),
697–710.
[dLvL99a] DE LEEUW W., VAN LIERE R.: Collapsing Flow
Topology Using Area Metrics. In Proceedings of IEEE
Visualization ’99 (San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999), pp.
349–354.
[dLvL99b] DE LEEUW W., VAN LIERE R.: Visualization of
global flow structures using multiple levels of topology. In
Data Visualization ’99: Proceedings of the 1st Joint Eurographics – IEEE TCVG Symp. on Visualization (VisSym
’99). Springer, Vienna, Austria, 1999, pp. 45–52.
[DMG*05] DOLEISCH H., MAYER M., GASSER M., PRIESCHING
P., HAUSER H.: Interactive feature specification for simulation data on time-varying grids. In Proceedings of
Conference on Simulation & Visualization (SimVis 2005)
(Magdeburg, Germany, 2005), pp. 291–304.
[DMH04] DOLEISCH H., MUIGG P., HAUSER H.: Interactive
Visual Analysis of Hurricane Isabel with SimVis. Tech.
Rep. TR-VRVis-2004-058, VRVis Research Center, Vienna, Austria, 2004.
[Dol07] DOLEISCH H.: SimVis: Interactive visual analysis of
large and time-dependent 3D simulation data. In Proceedings of the 2007 Winter Conference on Simulation (WSC
2007) (Washington, DC, USA, 2007), pp. 712–720.
[Ebe96] EBERLY D.: Ridges in Image and Data Analysis.
Computational Imaging and Vision. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Boston, 1996.
[EGM*94] EBERLY D., GARDNER R., MORSE B., PIZER S.,
SCHARLACH C.: Ridges for image analysis. Journal of
Mathematical Imaging and Vision 4, 4 (1994), 353–373.
[EJW05] ERLEBACHER G., JOBARD B., WEISKOPF D.: Flow
textures: high-resolution flow visualization. In The

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

Visualization Handbook, C. D. Hansen and C. R. Johnson, (Eds.). Elsevier, Amsterdam (2005), pp. 279–293.
[EWGS07] EBLING J., WIEBEL A., GARTH C., SCHEUERMANN
G.: Topology based flow analysis and superposition effects. In Topology-Based Methods in Visualization: Proceedings of the 1st TopoInVis Workshop (TopoInVis 2005),
H. Hauser, H. Hagen and H. Theisel (Eds.). Berlin, Heidelberg (2007), pp. 91–103.
[FBTW10] FERSTL F., B¨URGER K., THEISEL H., WESTERMANN
R.: Interactive separating streak surfaces. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (Proceedings IEEE Visualization) 16, 6 (November–December
2010), 1569–1577.

1805

[GLW99] GRO¨ LLER E., L¨OFFELMANN H., WEGENKITTL R.: Visualization of dynamical systems. Future Generation of
Computer System 15, 1 (1999), 75–86.
[GR06] GINOUX J.-M., ROSSETTO B.: Differential geometry
and mechanics: applications to chaotic dynamical systems. International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos 16,
4 (2006), 887–910.
[GRH07] GREEN M. A., ROWLEY C. W., HALLER G.: Detection of lagrangian coherent structures in three-dimensional
turbulence. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 572 (2007),
111–120.

[FG82] FIRBY P., GARDINER C.: Surface Topology. Ellis Horwood Ltd., New York, 1982, ch. 7, pp. 115–135. Vector
Fields on Surfaces.

[GRW*00] GRESH D., ROGOWITZ B., WINSLOW R., SCOLLAN
D., YUNG C.: WEAVE: a system for visually linking 3-d
and statistical visualizations, applied to cardiac simulation
and measurement data. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 2000 (Salt Lake City, Utah, USA, 2000), pp. 489–492.

[FKS*10] FUCHS R., KEMMLER J., SCHINDLER B., WASER J.,
SADLO F., HAUSER H., PEIKERT R.: Toward a lagrangian
vector field topology. Computer Graphics Forum 29, 3
(June 2010), 1163–1172.

[GSO87] GOLDHIRSCH I., SULEM P. L., ORSZAG S. A.: Stability
and Lyapunov stability of dynamical systems: a differential approach and a numerical method. Physica D 27, 3
(Aug 1987), 311–337.

[FPH*08] FUCHS R., PEIKERT R., HAUSER H., SADLO F., MUIGG
P.: Parallel vectors criteria for unsteady flow vortices.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14, 3 (2008), 615–626.

[GTS04] GARTH C., TRICOCHE X., SCHEUERMANN G.: Tracking of vector field singularities in unstructured 3D timedependent datasets. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization
2004 (Austin, TX, USA, 2004), pp. 329–336.

[FPS*08] FUCHS R., PEIKERT R., SADLO F., ALSALLAKH B.,
GRO¨ LLER M. E.: Delocalized unsteady vortex region detectors. In Proceedings of VMV 2008 (Konstanz, Germany,
2008), pp. 81–90.

[GWT*08] GARTH C., WIEBEL A., TRICOCHE X., JOY K.
I., SCHEUERMANN G.: Lagrangian visualization of flowembedded surface structures. Computer Graphics Forum
27, 3 (2008), 1007–1014.

[GGTH07] GARTH C., GERHARDT F., TRICOCHE X., HAGEN H.:
Efficient computation and visualization of coherent structures in fluid flow applications. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 6 (Sep 2007),
1464–1471.

[Hal01] HALLER G.: Distinguished material surfaces and coherent structures in three-dimensional fluid flows. Physica
D 149 (2001), 248–277.

[GH83] GUCKENHEIMER J., HOLMES P.: Nonlinear Oscillations, Dynamical Systems and Bifurcations of Vector Fields, vol. 42 of Applied Mathematical Sciences. Springer, New York, Berlin, Heidelberg, Tokyo,
1983.
[GLL91] GLOBUS A., LEVIT C., LASINSKI T.: A tool for visualizing the topology of three-dimensional vector fields. In
Proceedings of IEEE Visualization ’91 (San Diego, CA,
USA, 1991), pp. 33–40.
[GLT*09] GARTH C., LI G.-S., TRICOCHE X., HANSEN C. D.,
HAGEN H.: Visualization of coherent structures in transient
2d flows. In Topology-Based Methods in Visualization II,
H.-C. Hege, K. Polthier, G. Scheuermann (Eds.). Berlin,
Heidelberg (2009), pp. 1–13.

[Hal02] HALLER G.: Lagrangian coherent structures from
approximate velocity data. Physics of Fluids 14 (2002),
1851–1861.
[Hal05] HALLER G.: An objective definition of a vortex. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 525 (2005), 1–26.
[Har83] HARALICK R.: Ridges and valleys on digital images.
Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing 22, 1
(1983), 28–38.
[Hau03] HAUSER H.: Generalizing focus+context visualization. In Scientific Visualization: Proceedings of the Respective Dagstuhl Seminar in 2003 (Dagstuhl, Germany,
2003), pp. 305–327.
[HH89] HELMAN J., HESSELINK L.: Representation and display of vector field topology in fluid flow data sets. Computer 22, 8 (1989), 27–36.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1806

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

[HH91] HELMAN J., HESSELINK L.: Visualizing vector field
topology in fluid flows. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications 11 (1991), 36–46.
[HHT07] HAUSER, HAGEN, THEISEL: Topology-Based Methods in Visualization: Proceedings of the 1st TopoInVis
Workshop (TopoInVis 2005). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2007.
[HLD07] HAUSER H., LARAMEE R., DOLEISCH H.: Topologybased versus feature-based flow analysis – challenges
and an application. In Topology-Based Methods in Visualization: Proceedings of the 1st TopoInVis Workshop
(TopoInVis 2005), H. Hauser, H. Hagen and H. Theisel
(Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2007), pp. 79–90.
[HM03] HAUSER H., MLEJNEK M.: Interactive volume visualization of complex flow semantics. In Proceedings of the
8th Fall Workshop on Vision, Modeling and Visualization
(VMV 2003) ( M¨unchen, Germany, 2003), pp. 191–198.
[HPS08] HEGE H.-C., POLTHIER K., SCHEUERMANN G.:
Topology-Based Methods in Visualization II. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008.
[HSW10] HLAWATSCH M., SADLO F., WEISKOPF D.: Hierarchical line integration. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics (2010).
[HWHJ99] HECKEL B., WEBER G., HAMANN B., JOY K.: Construction of vector field hierarchies. In Proceedings of
IEEE Visualization ’99 (San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999),
pp. 19–26.
[JBTS08] J¨ANICKE H., B¨OTTINGER M., TRICOCHE X.,
SCHEUERMANN G.: Automatic detection and visualization
of distinctive structures in 3d unsteady multi-fields. Computer Graphics Forum 27, 3 (2008), 767–774.
[JMT05] JIANG M., MACHIRAJU R., THOMPSON D.: Detection
and visualization of vortices. In The Visualization Handbook. Ch. D. Hensen and C. R. Johnson (Eds.). Academic
Press, New York, 2005, pp. 295–309.
[JWSK07] J¨ANICKE H., WIEBEL A., SCHEUERMANN G.,
KOLLMANN W.: Multifield visualization using local statistical complexity. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 13, 6 (2007), 1384–1391.
[Kel03] KELLEY C. T.: Solving nonlinear equations with
Newton’s method. In Fundamentals of Algorithms. N. J.
Higham (Ed.). Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), Philadelphia, PA, 2003.
[Ken98] KENWRIGHT D.: Automatic detection of open and
closed separation and attachment lines. In Proceedings
of IEEE Visualization ’98 (Research Triangle Park, NC,
USA, 1998), pp. 151–158.

[KHL99] KENWRIGHT D., HENZE C., LEVIT C.: Feature extraction of separation and attachment lines. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 5, 2 (1999),
135–144.
[KHNH09] KASTEN J., HOTZ I., NOACK B. R., HEGE H.-C.:
On the extraction of long-living features in unsteady fluid
flows. In Topological Data Analysis and Visualization:
Theory, Algorithms and Applications, V. Pascucci, X. Tricoche, H. Hagen and J. Tierny (Eds.). Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2011.
[KLM*08] KEHRER J., LADSTA¨ DTER F., MUIGG P., DOLEISCH
H., STEINER A., HAUSER H.: Hypothesis generation in climate research with interactive visual data exploration.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (IEEE TVCG) 14, 6 (Oct 2008), 1579–1586.
[KMSZ06] KEIM D., MANSMANN F., SCHNEIDEWIND J., ZIEGLER
H.: Challenges in visual data analysis. In Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Information Visualization (IV 2006) (London, UK, 2006), 9–16.
[KO99] KRAUSKOPF B., OSINGA H. M.: Two-dimensional
global manifolds of vector fields. Chaos 9, 3 (1999),
768–774.
[KPH*09] KASTEN J., PETZ C., HOTZ I., NOACK B. R., HEGE
H.-C.: Localized finite-time lyapunov exponent for unsteady flow analysis. In VMV, M. A. Magnor, B. Rosenhahn, H. Theisel (Eds.), DNB, Braunschwerg, Germany,
(2009), pp. 265–276.
[KvD93] KOENDERINK J. J., VAN DOORN A.: Local features of
smooth shape: ridges and courses. SPIE Proceedings of
Geometric Methods in Computer Vision II, 2031 (1993),
2–13.
[LBH98] LAVIN Y., BATRA R., HESSELINK L.: Feature comparisons of vector fields using earth mover’s distance. In
Proceedings of IEEE Visualization ’98 (Research Triangle
Park, NC, USA, 1998), pp. 103–110.
[LDG98] L¨OFFELMANN H., DOLEISCH H., GRO¨ LLER E.: Visualizing dynamical systems near critical points. In Proceedings of Spring Conference on Computer Graphics and its
Applications (Budmerice, Slovakia, 1998), pp. 175–184.
[LDS90] LEVY Y., DEGANI D., SEGINER A.: Graphical visualization of vortical flows by means of helicity. AIAA Journal 28, 8 (1990), 1347–1352.
[LFR03] LODHA S., FAALAND N., RENTERIA J.: Topology preserving top-down compression of 2d vector fields using
bintree and triangular quadtrees. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 9, 4 (2003), 433–442.
[LG98] L¨OFFELMANN H., GRO¨ LLER E.: Enhancing the visualization of characteristic structures in dynamical systems.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

In Proceedings of the 9th EUROGRAPHICS Workshop on Visualization in Scientific Computing ’98, D. Bartz (Ed.).
Springer, Blaubeuren, Germany (1998), pp. 59–68.
[LGD*05] LARAMEE R., GARTH C., DOLEISCH H., SCHNEIDER
J., HAUSER H., HAGEN H.: Visual analysis and exploration of fluid flow in a cooling jacket. In Proceedings of
IEEE Visualization 2005 (Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2005),
pp. 623–630.
[LHD*04] LARAMEE R., HAUSER H., DOLEISCH H., VROLIJK
B., POST F., WEISKOPF D.: The state of the art in flow visualization: dense and texture-based techniques. Computer
Graphics Forum 23, 2 (2004), 143–161.
[LHZP07] LARAMEE R., HAUSER H., ZHAO L., POST F.:
Topology-based flow visualization, the state of the art.
In Topology-Based Methods in Visualization: Proceedings of the 1st TopoInVis Workshop (TopoInVis 2005), H.
Hauser, H. Hagen and H. Theisel (Eds.). Berlin, Heidelberg (2007), pp. 1–20.
[Lin98] LINDEBERG T.: Edge detection and ridge detection
with automatic scale selection. International Journal of
Computer Vision 30, 2 (1998), 117–154.
[LKG98] L¨OFFELMANN H., KUCˇ ERA T., GRO¨ LLER E.: Visualizing Poincar´e maps together with the underlying flow. In
Mathematical Visualization, H.-C. Hege and K. Polthier
(Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (1998), pp. 315–328.
[LM10] LIPINSKI D., MOHSENI K.: A ridge tracking algorithm
and error estimate for efficient computation of lagrangian
coherent structures. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal
of Nonlinear Science 20, 1 (2010), 017504.

1807

Visualization (VisSym 2003), G.-P. Bonneau, S. Hahmann
and C. Hansen (Eds.). Eurographics (2003), pp. 203–212.
[MBS*04] MAHROUS K., BENNETT J., SCHEUERMANN G.,
HAMANN B., JOY K. I.: Topological segmentation in threedimensional vector fields. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 10, 2 (2004), 198–205.
[MGJH08] MATKOVIC´ K., GRACˇ ANIN D., JELOVIC´ M., HAUSER
H.: Interactive visual steering – rapid visual prototyping
of a common rail injection system. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14, 6 (2008),
1699–1706.
[MK97] MIURA H., KIDA S.: Identification of tubular vortices
in turbulence. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 66
(1997), 1331–1334.
[MLP*10] MCLOUGHLIN T., LARAMEE R. S., PEIKERT R., POST
F. H., CHEN M.: Over two decades of integration-based,
geometric flow visualization. Computer Graphics Forum
29, 6 (2010), 1807–1829.
[MR02] MANN S., ROCKWOOD A.: Computing singularities of
3D vector fields with geometric algebra. In Proceedings
of IEEE Visualization 2002 (Boston, MA, USA, 2002),
pp. 283–289.
[MW95] MARTIN A., WARD M.: High dimensional brushing
for interactive exploration of multivariate data. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization ’95 (Atlanta, GA, USA,
1995), pp. 271–278.
[OGHT10] OTTO M., GERMER T., HEGE H.-C., THEISEL H.:
Uncertain 2d vector field topology. In Computer Graphics
Forum 29, 2 (2010), 347–356.

[LRR00] LODHA S., RENTERIA J., ROSKIN K.: Topology preserving compression of 2D vector fields. In Proceedings of
IEEE Visualization 2005 (Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2000),
pp. 343–350.

[OGT11] OTTO M., GERMER T., THEISEL H.: Uncertain topology of 3d vector fields. In Proceedings of 4th IEEE Pacific
Visualization Symposium (Hong Kong, China, 2011).

[LT10] LEHMANN D. J., THEISEL H.: Discontinuities in continuous scatterplots. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics (Proceedings IEEE Visualization) 16,
6 (November–December 2010), 1291–1300.

[OPK10] OLCAY A. B., POTTEBAUM T. S., KRUEGER P. S.: Sensitivity of lagrangian coherent structure identification to
flow field resolution and random errors. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 20, 1 (2010),
017506.

[LVRL06] LI W., VALLET B., RAY N., LEVY B.: Representing
higher-order singularities in vector fields on piecewise
linear surfaces. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 12, 5 (2006), 1315–1322.

[PC87] PERRY A., CHONG M.: A description of eddying motions and flow patterns using critical point concepts. Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 19 (1987), 125–155.

[Mas99] MASE G. T.: Continuum Mechanics for Engineers.
CRC Press, Cleveland, OH, USA, 1999.

[PC94] PERRY A., CHONG M.: Topology of flow patterns
in vortex motions and turbulence. Applied Scientific Research 53 (1994), 357–374.

[MBHJ03] MAHROUS K., BENNETT J., HAMANN B., JOY K.:
Improving topological segmentation of three-dimensional
vector fields. In Data Visualization 2003: Proceedings of
the 5th Joint Eurographics – IEEE TCVG Symposium on

[PD10] PEACOCK T., DABIRI J.: Introduction to focus issue:
Lagrangian coherent structures. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 20, 1 (2010).

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1808

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

[PKPH09] PETZ C., KASTEN J., PROHASKA S., HEGE H.-C.:
Hierarchical vortex regions in swirling flow. Computer
Graphics Forum 28 (June 2009), 863–870.
[Poi92] POINCARE´ H.: Les m´ethodes nouvelles de la
m´ecanique c´eleste. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, France, 1892.
[PR99] PEIKERT R., ROTH M.: The “parallel vectors” operator
– a vector field visualization primitive. In Proceedings of
IEEE Visualization ’99 (San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999),
pp. 263–270.
[PS07] PEIKERT R., SADLO F.: Topology-guided visualization
of constrained vector fields. In Topology-Based Methods in Visualization: Proceedings of the 1st TopoInVis
Workshop (TopoInVis 2005), H. Hauser, H. Hagen and
H. Theisel (Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2007),
pp. 21–34.
[PS08] PEIKERT R., SADLO F.: Height ridge computation and
filtering for visualization. In Proceedings of Pacific Vis
2008, I. Fujishiro, H. Li and K.-L. Ma (Eds.). Kyoto,
Japan (2008), pp. 119–126.
[PS09a] PEIKERT R., SADLO F.: Flow topology beyond skeletons: Visualization of features in recirculating flow. In
Topology-Based Methods in Visualization II: Proceedings
of the 2nd TopoInVis Workshop (TopoInVis 2007), H.-C.
Hege, K. Polthier and G. Scheuermann (Eds.). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg (2009), pp. 145–160.
[PS09b] PEIKERT R., SADLO F.: Topologically relevant stream
surfaces for flow visualization. In Proceedings of Spring
Conference on Computer Graphics 2009, H. Hauser (Ed.).
Budmerice, Slovakia (2009), pp. 43–50.

Views in Exploratory Visualization (CMV 2007) (Zurich,
Switzerland, 2007), pp. 61–71.
[RP98] ROTH M., PEIKERT R.: A higher-order method for
finding vortex core lines. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization ’98 (Research Triangle Park, NC, USA, 1998),
pp. 143–150.
[RSVP02] REINDERS F., SADARJOEN I. A., VROLIJK B., POST
F. H.: Vortex tracking and visualisation in a flow past a
tapered cylinder. Computer Graphics Forum 21, 4 (2002),
675–682.
[SDM06] SHADDEN S. C., DABIRI J. O., MARSDEN J. E.:
Lagrangian analysis of fluid transport in empirical
vortex ring flows. Physics of Fluids 18, 4 (2006),
047105.
[SGSM08] SALZBRUNN T., GARTH C., SCHEUERMANN G.,
MEYER J.: Pathline predicates and unsteady flow structures. Visual Computer 24, 12 (2008), 1039–1051.
[SH95] SUJUDI D., HAIMES R.: Identification of Swirling
Flow in 3D Vector Fields. Tech. Rep. 95-1715, AIAA,
1995.
[SHJK00] SCHEUERMANN G., HAMANN B., JOY K., KOLLMAN
W.: Visualizing local vector field topology. SPIE Journal
of Electronic Imaging 9, 4 (2000), 356–367.
[SHK*97] SCHEUERMANN G., HAGEN H., KRU¨ GER H., MENZEL
M., ROCKWOOD A.: Visualization of higher order singularities in vector fields. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization
’97 (Phoenix, AZ, USA, 1997), pp. 67–74.

[PT84] PERRY A. E., TAN D. K. M.: Simple threedimensional vortex motions in coflowing jets and wakes.
Journal of Fluid Mechanics 141 (1984), 197–231.

[Shn96] SHNEIDERMAN B.: The eyes have it: a task by data
type taxonomy for information visualizations. In Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages
(Boulder, CO, USA, 1996), pp. 336–343.

[PVH*02] POST F., VROLIJK B., HAUSER H., LARAMEE R.,
DOLEISCH H.: Feature extraction and visualization of flow
fields. In Proceedings of Eurographics 2002 State-ofthe-Art Reports (Saarbr¨ucken Germany, 2002), pp. 69–
100.

[SJWS08] SALZBRUNN T., J¨ANICKE H., WISCHGOLL T.,
SCHEUERMANN G.: The state of the art in flow visualization: partition-based techniques. In SimVis, H. Hauser, S.
Straßburger, H. Theisel (Eds.). SCS Publishing House e.V.
Magdeburg, Germany (2008), pp. 75–92.

[PVH*03] POST F., VROLIJK B., HAUSER H., LARAMEE R.,
DOLEISCH H.: The state of the art in flow visualization:
Feature extraction and tracking. Computer Graphics Forum 22, 4 (2003), 775–792.

[SKA98] STRAWN R., KENWRIHT D., AHMAD J.: Computer visualization of vortex wake systems. In Proceeding of the
American Helicopter Society 54th Annual Forum (Washington, DC, USA, 1998).

[PZ07] PALACIOS J., ZHANG E.: Rotational symmetry field
design on surfaces. ACM Transactions on Graphics 26, 3
(2007), 55.

[SKMR98] SCHEUERMANN G., KRU¨ GER H., MENZEL M.,
ROCKWOOD A.: Visualizing non-linear vector field topology. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 4, 2 (1998), 109–116.

[Rob07] ROBERTS J.: State of the art: coordinated & multiple
views in exploratory visualization. In Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on Coordinated & Multiple

[SLM05] SHADDEN S., LEKIEN F., MARSDEN J.: Definition
and properties of Lagrangian coherent structures from

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

finite-time Lyapunov exponents in two-dimensional aperiodic flows. Physica D Nonlinear Phenomena 212 (Dec.
2005), 271–304.
[SP99] SADARJOEN I., POST F.: Geometric methods for vortex detection. In Data Visualization ’99: Proceedings of
the 1st Joint EUROGRAPHICS–IEEE TCVG Symposium on Visualization (VisSym ’99), E. Gr¨oller, H. L¨offelmann and
W. Ribarsky (Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (1999),
pp. 53–62.
[SP07] SADLO F., PEIKERT R.: Efficient visualization of lagrangian coherent structures by filtered AMR ridge extraction. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 13, 6 (2007), 1456–1463.

1809

ent structures. Computer Graphics Forum 29, 1 (2010),
88–100.
[SWH05] SAHNER J., WEINKAUF T., HEGE H.-C.: Galilean
invariant extraction and iconic representation of vortex
core lines. In Data Visualization 2005: Proceedings of the
7th Joint EUROGRAPHICS – IEEE VGTC Symposium on Visualization (EuroVis 2005), K. Brodlie, D. Duke and K. Joy
(Eds.). A K Peters (Leeds, UK, 2005), pp. 151–160.
[TCH10] TANG W., CHAN P. W., HALLER G.: Accurate extraction of lagrangian coherent structures over finite domains
with application to flight data analysis over Hong Kong
international airport. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal
of Nonlinear Science 20, 1 (2010), 017502.

[SP09a] SADLO F., PEIKERT R.: Time-dependent visualization of Lagrangian coherent structures by grid advection.
In Topological Data Analysis and Visualization: Theory,
Algorithms and Applications, V. Pascucci, X. Tricoche, H.
Hagen and J. Tierny (Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2009, in press.

[The95] THEISEL H.: Vector Field Curvature and Applications. PhD thesis, University of Rostock, November 1995.

[SP09b] SADLO F., PEIKERT R.: Visualizing lagrangian coherent structures: a comparison to vector field topology. In
Topology-Based Methods in Visualization II: Proceedings
of the 2nd TopoInVis Workshop (TopoInVis 2007), H.-C.
Hege, K. Polthier and G. Scheuermann (Eds.). Berlin,
Heidelberg (2009), pp. 15–29.

[TKH00] TROTTS I., KENWRIGHT D., HAIMES R.: Critical
points at infinity: a missing link in vector field topology.
In Proceedings of NSF/DoE Lake Tahoe Workshop on Hierarchical Approximation and Geometrical Methods for
Scientific Visualization (Tahoe City, CA, USA, 2000).

[SS07] SALZBRUNN T., SCHEUERMANN G.: Streamline predicates as flow topology generalization. In TopologyBased Methods in Visualization: Proceedings of the 1st
TopoInVis Workshop (TopoInVis 2005), H. Hauser, H. Hagen and H. Theisel (Eds.). Berlin, Heidelberg (2007), pp.
65–77.
[ST05] SCHEUERMANN G., TRICOCHE X.: Topological methods
for flow visualization. In The Visualization Handbook, C.
D. Hansen and C. R. Johnson (Eds.). Berlin, Heidelberg
Elsevier, Amsterdam (2005), pp. 341–356.
[STH*09] SHI K., THEISEL H., HAUSER H., WEINKAUF T.,
MATKOVIC´ K., HEGE H.-C., SEIDEL H.-P.: Path line
attributes – an information visualization approach to analyzing the dynamic behavior of 3d time-dependent flow
fields. In Topology-Based Methods in Visualization II:
Proceedings of the 2nd TopoInVis Workshop (TopoInVis
2007), H.-C. Hege, K. Polthier and G. Scheuermann
(Eds.). Berlin, Heidelberg (2009), pp. 75–88.
[STW*08] SHI K., THEISEL H., WEINKAUF T., HEGE H.-C.,
SEIDEL H.-P.: Visualizing transport structures of timedependent flow fields. Computer Graphics and Applications 28, 5 (2008), 24–36.
[SW10] SADLO F., WEISKOPF D.: Time-dependent 2-D vector
field topology: an approach inspired by Lagrangian coher-

[The02] THEISEL H.: Designing 2D vector fields of arbitrary topology. Computer Graphics Forum 21, 3 (2002),
595–604.

[TRS03a] THEISEL H., R¨OSSL C., SEIDEL H.-P.: Combining
topological simplification and topology preserving compression for 2d vector fields. In Proceedings of Pacific
Graphics (Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 2003), IEEE Computer Society, pp. 419–423.
[TRS03b] THEISEL H., R¨OSSL C., SEIDEL H.-P.: Compression
of 2D vector fields under guaranteed topology preservation. Computer Graphics Forum 22, 3 (2003), 333–342.
[TRS03c] THEISEL H., R¨OSSL C., SEIDEL H.-P.: Using Feature Flow Fields for Topological Comparison of Vector
Fields. In Vision, Modeling and Visualization 2003 (VMV03): Proceedings (Munich, Germany, November 2003), T.
Ertl, B. Girod, G. Greiner, H. Niemann, H.-P. Seidel, E.
Steinbach and R. Westermann (Eds.). Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft Aka, Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 521–528.
[TRW07] THEISEL H., R¨OSSL C., WEINKAUF T.: Topological representations of vector fields. In Shape Analysis and Structuring, L. de Floriani and M. Spagnuolo
(Eds.). Mathematics and Visualization: Shape Analysis
and Structuring. Springer, Berlin (2007), pp. 215–240.
[TS03] THEISEL H., SEIDEL H.-P.: Feature flow fields. In Data
Visualization 2003: Proceedings of the 5th Joint EUROGRAPHICS – IEEE TCVG Symposium on Visualization (VisSym
2003), G.-P. Bonneau, S. Hahmann and C. Hansen (Eds.).
Eurographics Grenoble, France (2003), pp. 141–148.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

1810

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

[TSH01a] TRICOCHE X., SCHEUERMANN G., HAGEN H.: Continuous topology simplification of planar vector fields. In
Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 2001 (San Diego, CA,
USA, 2001), pp. 159–166.
[TSH01b] TRICOCHE X., SCHEUERMANN G., HAGEN H.:
Topology-based visualization of time-dependent 2D vector fields. In Data Visualization 2001: Proceedings of the
3rd Joint EUROGRAPHICS – IEEE TCVG Symposium on Visualization (VisSym 2001), D. Ebert, J. Favre and R. Peikert
(Eds.). Springer, Ascona, Switerland (2001), pp. 117–126.
[TSW*05] THEISEL H., SAHNER J., WEINKAUF T., HEGE H.C., SEIDEL H.-P.: Extraction of parallel vector surfaces in
3D time-dependent fields and application to vortex core
line tracking. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 2005
(Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2005), pp. 631–638.
[TvW99] TELEA A., VAN WIJK J.: Simplified representation
of vector fields. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization ’99
(San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999), pp. 35–42.
[TW02] THEISEL H., WEINKAUF T.: Vector field metrics based
on distance measures of first order critical points. Journal
of WSCG 10, 3 (2002), 121–128.
[TWHS03] THEISEL H., WEINKAUF T., HEGE H.-C., SEIDEL
H.-P.: Saddle connectors – an approach to visualizing the
topological skeleton of complex 3d vector fields. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 2003 (Seattle, WA, USA,
2003), pp. 225–232.
[TWHS04] THEISEL H., WEINKAUF T., HEGE H.-C., SEIDEL
H.-P.: Stream line and path line oriented topology for 2D
time-dependent vector fields. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 2004 (Austin, TX, USA, 2004), pp. 321–328.
[TWHS05] THEISEL H., WEINKAUF T., HEGE H.-C., SEIDEL
H.-P.: Topological methods for 2D time-dependent vector
fields based on stream lines and path lines. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11, 4
(2005), 383–394.
[TWSH02] TRICOCHE X., WISCHGOLL T., SCHEUERMANN G.,
HAGEN H.: Topology tracking for the visualization of timedependent two-dimensional flows. Computers & Graphics
26, 2 (2002), 249–257.
[WCW*09] WIEBEL A., CHAN R., WOLF C., ROBITZKI A.,
STEVENS A., SCHEUERMANN G.: Topological flow structures
in a mathematical model for rotation-mediated cell aggregation. In Topological Data Analysis and Visualization: Theory, Algorithms and Applications, V. Pascucci,
X. Tricoche, H. Hagen and J. Tierny (Eds.). Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.
[WG09] WEINKAUF T., G¨UNTHER D.: Separatrix persistence:
extraction of salient edges on surfaces using topological

methods. Computer Graphics Forum (Proc. SGP ’09) 28,
5 (July 2009), 1519–1528.
[WS01] WISCHGOLL T., SCHEUERMANN G.: Detection and visualization of closed streamlines in planar flows. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 7,
2 (2001), 165–172.
[WS02] WISCHGOLL T., SCHEUERMANN G.: Locating closed
streamlines in 3d vector fields. In Data Visualization
2002: Proceedings of the 4th Joint EUROGRAPHICS – IEEE
TCVG Symp. on Visualization (VisSym 2002), D. Ebert, P.
Brunet and I. Navazo (Eds.). Eurographics, Barcelona,
Spain, (2002), pp. 227–232.
[WSH01] WISCHGOLL T., SCHEUERMANN G., HAGEN H.: Tracking closed streamlines in time dependent planar flows. In
Proceedings of the 6th Fall Workshop on Vision, Modeling and Visualization (VMV 2001) (Stuttgart, Germany,
2001), pp. 447–454.
[WST07] WEINKAUF T., SAHNER J., THEISEL H.: Cores of
swirling particle motion in unsteady flows. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 6
(2007), 1759–1766.
[WT02] WEINKAUF T., THEISEL H.: Curvature measures of 3D
vector fields and their applications. Journal of WSCG 10,
2 (2002), 507–514.
[WT10] WEINKAUF T., THEISEL H.: Streak lines as tangent curves of a derived vector field. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics (Proceedings
IEEE Visualization) 16, 6 (November–December 2010),
1569–1577.
[WTGP10] WEINKAUF T., THEISEL H., GELDER A. V., PANG
A.: Stable feature flow fields. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 17, 6, (2010), 770–780.
[WTHS04] WEINKAUF T., THEISEL H., HEGE H.-C., SEIDEL H.P.: Topological construction and visualization of higher
order 3D vector fields. Computer Graphics Forum 23, 3
(2004), 469–478.
[WTS*05] WEINKAUF T., THEISEL H., SHI K., HEGE H.-C.,
SEIDEL H.-P.: Extracting higher order critical points and
topological simplification of 3D vector fields. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 2005 (Minneapolis, MN, USA,
2005), pp. 559–566.
[WTS09] WIEBEL A., TRICOCHE X., SCHEUERMANN G.: Topology based flow analysis and superposition effects. In
Topology-Based Methods in Visualization II, H.-C. Hege,
K. Polthier, G. Scheuermann (Eds.). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2009), pp. 31–43.
[YN93] YODEN S., NOMURA M.: Finite-time lyapunov
stability analysis and its application to atmospheric

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

A. Pobitzer et al. / Topology-Based Unsteady Flow Visualization STAR

dynamics. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 50, 11
(1993), 1531–1543.
[ZHT07] ZHANG E., HAYS J., TURK G.: Interactive tensor field
design and visualization on surfaces. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 1 (2007),
94–107.
[ZP04] ZHENG X., PANG A.: Topological lines in 3D tensor
fields. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 2004 (Austin,
TX, USA, 2004), pp. 313–320.
[ZPP05] ZHENG X., PARLETT B., PANG A.: Topological lines
in 3d tensor fields and discriminant hessian factorization.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11, 4 (2005), 395–407.
Armin Pobitzer is a PhD candidate at the Department of
Informatics, University of Bergen, Norway. He received his
MS (Diplom-Ingenieur) in Technical Mathematics in 2009
from University of Innsbruck, Austria. His research interests
include flow visualization and semantic flow segmentation.
Ronald Peikert is a Titularprofessor (adjunct professor) at
ETH Zurich. He received his PhD in Mathematics in 1985
from ETH. After a year spent as a visiting assistant professor
at the University of Minnesota, he lead the graphics group
at the Interdisciplinary Project Center for Supercomputing at
ETH and later the scientific visualization group at the Swiss
Center of Scientific Computing. Since 1999 he is a Senior
Researcher at the Computer Science Department of ETH
Zurich. His main interests include flow visualization, feature
extraction, and industrial application of scientific visualization.
Raphael Fuchs graduated in computer science (2006) at
Philipps-University Marburg (Germany) under the supervision of Prof. Volkmar Welker and received his PhD degree in computer science (2008) from the Technical University Vienna (Austria). He is now with the Computer
Graphics Lab at the ETH Zurich (Switzerland). His research interests include vector field visualization and feature
extraction.
Benjamin Schindler is a PhD candidate at ETH Zurich
where he received his MS in Computer Science in 2009. His
research interests include flow visualization and topology,
feature extraction and SPH visualization.

1811

Alexander Kuhn is a PhD candidate at the Faculty of Informatics, Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg, where he
recieved his MS (Diplom-Ingenieur) in Computational Visualistics in 2009. His research interests include flow visualization, topology extraction and sketch-based 3D modelling.
Holger Theisel is a professor at the Otto-von-GuerickeUniversity, Magdeburg. He received his MS (1994), PhD
(1996) and habilitation (2001) degrees in Computer Science from the University of Rostock (Germany). He spent 12
months (1994–1995) at Arizona State University (USA), and
6 months at ICIMAF Havana (Cuba). After being with MPI
Informatik Saarbr¨ucken (2002–2006) and Bielefeld University (2006–2007), he is a full professor for Visual Computing
at the University of Magdeburg since 2007. His research interests focus on flow and volume visualization as well as on
CAGD, geometry processing and information visualization.
Kreˇsimir Matkovi´c is a senior researcher in VRVis Research Center (www.vrvis.at). He received his PhD from Vienna University of Technology in 1998. He has an especially
strong background in the visualization of simulation data
(from the engineering level up to the first class research).
He is successful in bridging the gap between Information
and Scientific Visualization, and focuses on Visual Analytics
for Engineering Applications recently. His research interests
include virtual reality, human computer interaction, tangible user interfaces and human perception, as well. He leads
projects which deal with visualization and with human computer interaction in VRVis. Since 2007 Kresimir Matkovic is
also an assistant professor at Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, University of Zagreb, where he teaches
Virtual Environments.
Helwig Hauser is a professor in visualization at the University of Bergen, Norway (www.ii.UiB.no/vis). He graduated in 1998 with a PhD degree from Vienna University of
Technology, where he also worked as an assistant professor until 2000 (www.cg.tuwien.ac.at). Afterwards, he lead
a research group on visualization at the VRVis Research
Center in Vienna, Austria, before he became the scientific
director of VRVis in 2003 (www.VRVis.at). His interests are
visualization in general and interactive visual analysis, flow
visualization, medical visualization, and the combination of
scientific and information visualization in particular. He has
rich experience with state of the art reports as also documented by recent publications in the respective Eurographics
proceedings.

c 2011 The Authors
Computer Graphics Forum c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

