DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01938.x
Eurographics / IEEE Symposium on Visualization 2011 (EuroVis 2011)
H. Hauser, H. Pfister, and J. J. van Wijk
(Guest Editors)

Volume 30 (2011), Number 3

Assisted Descriptor Selection
Based on Visual Comparative Data Analysis
Sebastian Bremm1 and Tatiana von Landesberger1,2 and Jürgen Bernard1 and Tobias Schreck1
1 Technische

2 Fraunhofer

Universität Darmstadt, Germany
Institute for Computer Graphics Research, Darmstadt, Germany

Abstract
Exploration and selection of data descriptors representing objects using a set of features are important components
in many data analysis tasks. Usually, for a given dataset, an optimal data description does not exist, as the suitable
data representation is strongly use case dependent. Many solutions for selecting a suitable data description have
been proposed. In most instances, they require data labels and often are black box approaches. Non-expert users
have difficulties to comprehend the coherency of input, parameters, and output of these algorithms. Alternative
approaches, interactive systems for visual feature selection, overburden the user with an overwhelming set of
options and data views. Therefore, it is essential to offer the users a guidance in this analytical process.
In this paper, we present a novel system for data description selection, which facilitates the user’s access to the
data analysis process. As finding of suitable data description consists of several steps, we support the user with
guidance. Our system combines automatic data analysis with interactive visualizations. By this, the system provides a recommendation for suitable data descriptor selections. It supports the comparison of data descriptors
with differing dimensionality for unlabeled data. We propose specialized scores and interactive views for descriptor comparison. The visualization techniques are scatterplot-based and grid-based. For the latter case, we
apply Self-Organizing Maps as adaptive grids which are well suited for large multi-dimensional data sets. As an
example, we demonstrate the usability of our system on a real-world biochemical application.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.7 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]: — I.5.2
[Pattern Recognition]: Design Methodology—Feature evaluation and selection

1. Introduction
Exploration of and search in large data sets are important tasks in various application domains such as biology,
finance, architecture, music, or emergency management.
These applications handle objects of various types including
molecules, music files, videos, images, 3D models, etc.
The analytical tasks in these areas are usually supported
by efficient clustering and data retrieval algorithms relying on the calculation of object similarity. Although various methods for measuring data similarity exist, descriptors
of data elements (i.e., multi-dimensional feature vectors, or
feature sets) is commonly used in many applications. Data
descriptors represent objects by a n-dimensional vector of
numerical values (i.e., features). The similarity between objects is then calculated applying vector distance measures.
The results are used as input to data analysis algorithms intec 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

grated in the application. The quality of the data descriptors
has a major impact on the analytical results, therefore a lot
of attention is given to finding suitable data description.
Determination of suitable data description is highly data
and use case dependent. It should capture the relevant information from the input objects. Usually, the objects can be
represented by descriptors in several ways, each capturing
different data properties (see Figure 1 for an illustration).
Which one is used in the analytical task, depends highly
on the current task and semantics of the descriptor. For example, in biochemistry, the analyst may concentrate on aromatic properties of the molecules or on their fragment complexity. Finding an optimal data description (i.e., a multivariate feature vector) is not a trivial task, in particular for
unlabeled data. On one hand, a descriptor with higher dimensionality can be calculated in order to capture as much avail-

892

S. Bremm et al. / Assisted Descriptor Selection Based on Visual Comparative Data Analysis

Input data

Processing

Comparison visualization

Figure 1: Two meaningful data descriptors of biochemical data and their comparison. Each descriptor captures different data
properties (atom resp. nitrogen count). Left: The input data is sorted according to each descriptor. Center: Color is mapped to
the first ordering. The sorting is compared using connectors. Right: Compact comparison view. Color mapping based on object
identity revealing descriptor correspondence.

able information as possible. This can be done by extracting
more features or by combining available descriptors. However, such larger descriptors increase calculation complexity,
may include redundant information and can decrease significance of information about object similarities. In the latter case, distances between points become more equally distributed and therefore less informative (the so-called “curse
of dimensionality”) [AHK01]. On the other hand, if extracting only a small set of features (low-dimensional) necessary information can remain un-captured and different objects may not be discriminated from each other.
To tackle the problem of determining a suitable dimensionality of data descriptors, two main approaches exist.
One possibility is to reduce dimensionality by projection or
combination of similar features into one final dimension. A
disadvantage of this approach is that the resulting dimensions are difficult to interpret, as they do not have a specific
semantic meaning. The second approach is the selection of
distinct important features from the original descriptor (i.e.
multivariate feature vector). A crucial task here is to decide
whether an object property should be disregarded or not,
which is highly data and task dependent. These approaches
often consider features individually disregarding groupings
of features that should remain together.
Selection of the descriptors usually includes comparison
of all possible sets of descriptors. Comparing the various
multi-variate descriptors with differing dimensionality during and after the selection process is difficult [DB04]. Moreover, the evaluation of many methods is possible only in supervised way (objects having known labels). Many datasets
however do not have labels, as they are costly to provide. In
order to support this cumbersome procedure for unlabeled
data, various algorithmic-based selection methods have been
developed (see Section 2). They have common problems:
1. They often work in an automatic way without user in-

volvement and they need a set of properly chosen input
parameters. The setting of these parameters is difficult for
domain experts that do not have expertize in data mining.
2. The algorithms do not take into consideration groupings
of features (e.g., data descriptors composed of several
features) that need to be conserved together.
3. The feature selection algorithm assigns global scores for
decision on feature selections. These scores do not regard local differences in the data descriptions. Such differences occur when a subset of objects is well captured
by the descriptor although the whole data set description
is not satisfactory. The scoring results for data sets with
specific local groupings often fail the scoring threshold
although they may reveal interesting information.
In this paper, we present a novel visual analysis approach for determining data descriptions suitable for the
task at hand. It addresses the problems stated above. We provide users with guidance in the data analysis process, as it
has been shown useful for supporting dimension reduction
tasks [IMI∗ 10]. In contrast to previous work, our approach
is based on comparative analysis suitable for multi-variate
data descriptors with differing dimensionality also for unlabeled data. As description selection consists of several steps,
we support the user in this incremental process. Our contributions are as follows:
1. We introduce a system for comparative multi-variate
data descriptor analysis. It includes automatic descriptor recommendations and guidance highlighting interesting patterns such as borderline decisions of the automatic
analysis. In this way, we support non-expert users.
2. We propose a specialized score for comparing multivariate descriptors with varying dimensionality. The
score is used for automatic recommendation.
3. We propose to use color-coding for comparison of dec 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

S. Bremm et al. / Assisted Descriptor Selection Based on Visual Comparative Data Analysis

scriptors. The color coding provides data comparison in
one single view (see Figure 1 for an illustration).
4. We develop dedicated visualizations for comparison of
multi-dimensional data descriptors. These techniques are
based on low-dimensional data presentation (scatterplotbased and grid-based) using color as comparison attribute. For large data sets, we employ adaptive grids
with clustering properties – Self-Organizing Maps. These
views allow for spotting overall similar descriptors and
locally similar object groups in heterogeneous data sets.
We apply our techniques on real-world (biochemistry) and
synthetic data sets demonstrating their usefulness.
The paper structure: Section 2 presents related work on
algorithmic feature selection, data visualization and their interactive combination. It also introduces the Self-Organizing
Map algorithm. Section 3 depicts our approach. It introduces
the process as a whole, and then describes each part in more
detail. Section 4 explains further aspects of our approach.
Section 5 discusses color map choices. Section 6 shows applications of our approach on real data. Finally, Section 7
concludes and outlines future work.

893

PCA [Jol02], MDS [BG97], Sammon’s mapping [EC01] or
spectral clustering [NJW01]. The resulting dimensions have
no direct equivalence to the original dimensions. Therefore,
the output dimensions are hard to interpret directly.
Feature selection approaches identify a set of meaningful features as subset of the input dimensionality. The final descriptor is built by interactive refinement of feature
selections. These approaches can be classified according to
the applied evaluation criterion into filter and wrapper approaches [KJ97]. Filter methods rely on an evaluation of the
properties of every feature individually. If a certain criterion
(e.g., entropy of distances [DCSL02]) is fulfilled, the feature
is selected as relevant [KR92,Kon94,AD91]. Wrapper methods extend feature selection process with an additional step –
e.g., clustering. The clustering results of the selected feature
sets are evaluated to determine their relevance. However, the
comparison of the results is difficult owing to variable number of resulting clusters and differences in the underlying
feature space dimensionality [DB04].
The usage of algorithmic approaches solely is difficult for
non-expert users as they need setting of, possibly extensive,
number of input parameters and work in a black-box manner.

2. Related Work
Finding an appropriate description for complex data types
such as music [MM05], 3D objects [BKSS07], time series
[Keo06], graphs [vLGS09] or biochemistry [BMGR04] data
is a recent topic in various research areas. This description
can be used for example in various data analysis, classification or search scenarios. Note that in this paper, we assume
unclassified data in an exploratory analysis scenario.
The choice of relevant data descriptions (i.e., feature sets)
is usually supported by feature selection algorithms (see
Section 2.1). For exploration of the descriptors, interactive
visual representations are used (see Section 2.2). Recent Visual Analysis tools combine both approaches in order to exploit their advantages (see Section 2.3).
2.1. Automatic Dimensionality Reduction
Data descriptors consist of a set of features (numeric values)
representing complex data types. However, finding a proper
descriptor is a challenge. Low dimensionality may lead to
under-representation of the objects, and high-dimensional
descriptors may suffer from problems such as “curse of dimensionality”, where the distances between near and far objects converge [AHK01, BGRS99]. To tackle this problem,
two main algorithmic approaches have been proposed: 1) dimension reduction and 2) feature selection. They often consider dimensions individually, disregarding possible semantic groupings of dimensions.
Dimension reduction techniques create an abstract reduced data description by projection or transformation of the
original features into lower dimensional space. Examples are
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

2.2. Visualization of High Dimensional Data
Finding appropriate parameters for various data analysis algorithms is crucial, but difficult for users who are not experts
in data mining techniques (e.g., engineers or biologists). Using an interactive visualization, the user can steer the analysis process more intuitively. Often matrices of different
feature representations are used for comparing high dimensional data. Wilkinson et al. [WAG06] show an overview
of the descriptor space by visualizing scatterplotts for all
pairs of input dimensions. Sips et al. [SNLH09] extend this
approach by showing scatterplot matrices where each displayed axis is a combination of input features. Alternatively,
an interactive visualization of a confusion matrix can be used
to build combination models [TLKT09, KLTH10].
Visualization of high-dimensional data can be supported
by a Self-Organizing Map (SOM). It is a neural network algorithm that combines dimension reduction, clustering and
layout of the data [Ves99, Koh01]. The dimension reduction
is achieved by a projection of multivariate input data onto
a low dimensional grid of prototypes (the map) in a way
that it approximately preserves the topological properties of
the data set (i.e., two data points that are close in original
space are usually close in the lower dimensional space). The
algorithm can handle large data sets and offers good clustering results. A SOM result can easily be visualized using
the SOM grid by showing the reference prototypes (e.g., using multidimensional visualization techniques) or the nearest member to the prototype [Ves99].

894

S. Bremm et al. / Assisted Descriptor Selection Based on Visual Comparative Data Analysis

2.3. Visual Analytics Approaches for Dimensionality
Reduction
Integration of user feedback in the analysis process is crucial when use case dependent parameter adjustment and
result evaluation are required. Many approaches interactively combining automatic calculations with visualization
in the area of feature selection have been proposed. Choo
et al. [CLKP10] presented a framework for data classification combining matrix with parallel coordinates. A scatterplot shows the resulting projection of a Linear Discriminant
Analysis [Fuk90] which is iteratively refined during the classification process. Usually, dimension reduction methods focus on preserving structures of the high dimensional space.
Johansson and Johansson enable the user to rank the importance of those structures by interactive steering of quality metrics [JJ09]. Tatu et al. [TAE∗ 09] proposed analytical methods to find and filter important structures to reduce
the complexity of the resulting visualization. The DimStiller
[IMI∗ 10] framework supports the whole process of feature
selection. Additionally, the user gets guidance in every step
of the pipeline, e.g., regarding parameter choice. It however
focuses on dimension reduction only for individual features
and does not consider local similarities.
Building upon these approaches, we propose a strategy
where the user can decide on the level of process automation
from a fully automatic up to a step by step assisted workflow.

descriptor finding process (see Figure 2). This pipeline consists of several steps that are supported by both algorithmic
and visual means (see Sections 3.1–3.4). Every step of the
pipeline supports visualization and is interactively steerable.
By combining the automatic and visualization functions, the
results can be iteratively refined by the analyst.
First, the input data (a set of descriptors) can be explored
using dedicated visualizations. They support the scalability
w.r.t. the number of input data items. For large data sets, visual clustering using SOM is employed. Then, a pairwise
comparison of the descriptors shows both global and local
similarities between them. These results are used for filtering
of similar descriptors. The final recommendation step shows
an overview of results of automatic pre-processing, recommendations and offers the user the possibility to interactively
refine the results. The analyst receives additional guidance
by the highlighting of interesting or critical patterns. Feedback loops allow the user to interactively refine the results.
3.1. Basis Visualization of the Descriptors
At the beginning of the analysis, it is important to get an
overview of the input data set. When choosing the visualization design, we focused on its re-usability in the whole
workflow. It eases the correspondence of the representations
and possibility to compare the data across displays.

3. Approach
Our approach aims at finding suitable descriptors of a given
dataset. The input consists of several multivariate descriptors
each potentially with a different dimensionality. The output
is a subset of independent descriptors suitable for the use
case at hand. In the workflow, the descriptors are compared
pair wise for finding groups of similar ones and thereby to
choose representatives among them. It supports the scalability of our approach w.r.t. the input dimensionality.

Figure 2: Schema of the descriptor selection process. Every
step (blue) encompasses automatic data processing and visualization part. The input consists of many descriptors for
one data set. These are compared and filtered resulting in a
proposed set of independent descriptors. This is an interactive, guided analysis process. Feedback loops allow the user
to refine results on demand.
In order to adapt the algorithms to a given use case and
improve result specificity, the user is involved in the process.
We offer guidance to ease the analysis for non-expert users.
We have developed a dedicated pipeline supporting the data

(a) Scatterplot

(b) Grid view

(c) SOM view

Figure 3: The visualization approaches. a) Scatterplot with
overplotting for large data sets. b) Grid-based view showing
inhomogeneous data distribution across display and empty
space. The color coding denotes data density in each cell green (low) to red (high)). c) SOM view with homogeneous
data distribution and good usage of the display space.
We have chosen to use a low-dimensional data display
(in 2D), where each multi-dimensional descriptor space is
mapped onto equally dimensionalised space. We employ
both scatterplot-based and grid-based displays of the data
(see Figure 3). The advantage of this display is that it may
be applied to both, the initial overview of the data and the
pairwise comparison of data descriptors (see Section 3.2).
Scatterplot visualization is often used to present the projected descriptor space in two dimensions. The objects are
represented as points, and their size or color indicate their
projection quality [SvLB10]. The advantage of this display
is its familiarity and easy interpretability, however it suffers
from overplotting (in particular for large data sets, see Figure 3). Although extensions of scatterplots overcoming most
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

S. Bremm et al. / Assisted Descriptor Selection Based on Visual Comparative Data Analysis

895

of these shortcomings exist, this problem still prevails for
large complex data sets.

variety of approaches, a selection containing PCA, Kernel
PCA, MDS, Sammons Mapping and SOM is considered.

In order to overcome the overplotting problem in scatterplots, we propose a grid-based data visualization. A simple
approach would be to overlay a regular grid upon the scatterplot and color-code the data density in each grid cell. This
approach is suitable, if the objects are equally distributed in
space. However, in case of heterogeneous data distribution,
important information might be lost (owing to high data density) and parts of the display might remain unused (empty
cells). We address this issue by using an adaptive grid. We
propose to use a Self-Organizing Map (SOM) (see Section
2.2 for more information). This combines dimensionality reduction with a grid-based visualization. It adapts to the density of objects in high dimensional space and therefore offers
a more detailed overview of the data space (see Figure 3).

For descriptor comparison, we extend the scatterplot and
grid-based (SOM) visualization with similarity information.
We propose a dedicated color visualization scheme for pairwise comparison of two descriptors in one single view. The
data of the reference descriptor Da are used for color coding of the data of the compared descriptor Db . We apply a
two-dimensional colormap for color coding as the individual
views of the data are in 2D (see Section 5). The objects of the
compared descriptors are then shown in the two-dimensional
projected space. The color distribution of the objects in the
compared space indicates the similarity of the two descriptors (see Figures 4 and 6).

3.2. Pairwise Comparison of Descriptors
The first step of the pipeline is the comparison of the input descriptors for finding redundant information. Identifying correlated descriptors is a common technique in this respect. However, it often needs class labels or is restricted
to equally dimensioned descriptors. Our approach is able to
handle unlabeled heterogeneous multi-dimensional input descriptors. We propose a new score and dedicated views for
comparing the descriptor similarity.

(a) Reference coloring

(b) Object coloring

3.2.1. Automatic Pairwise Descriptor Comparison
Our proposed similarity score relies on nearest neighbor relations of objects in the two descriptor spaces (see Equation 1). The score is a sum of normalized neighborhood distance distortions over all data objects and is an extension
of the projection precision score presented in [SvLB10] and
applies also to descriptors with variable dimensionality.
Let the l different input descriptors spanning input descriptor spaces D1 ,...,Dl with the dimensionality
Da
a
M D1 , .., M Dl . Let OD
1 ,...,On be the n input objects described
in the space Da , a ∈ 1, .., l. Let further d Da (Ox , Oy ) be the
distance of two objects Ox , Oy in Da . Let IODxa be a sorted list
of the k nearest neighbors of Ox in Da . The similarity of two
descriptors s(Da , Db ), a, b ∈ 1, . . . , l is defined as follows:
n

s(Da , Db ) = 1 − ∑

∑

x=1 y∈I Da

(

d Da (Ox , Oy ) d Db (Ox , Oy )
√
− √
)
M Da
M Db

Ox

(1)
3.2.2. Visualization of the Pairwise Descriptor
Comparison
The visualization of the descriptor comparison builds upon
the visualizations of the data presented in Section 3.1. The
low dimensional visualization relies on topology preservation property of dimension reduction algorithms. From a
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(c) Similar descriptors

(d) Dissimilar descriptors

Figure 4: Scatterplot-based descriptor comparison visualization. Top: Object coloring. Bottom: The descriptor comparison. a) The reference color scheme mapped to the background and b) to the objects in the reference space. c) The
homogeneous color gradient indicates a high similarity, d)
the inhomogeneous gradient shows differing descriptors.

The scatterplot-based comparison of two descriptors relies on the display of individual objects. For comparison,
both positions of one object in spaces Da and Db have to
be shown in one plot. We color code every object in the projection of Da using a 2D colormap (see Figure 4a,b). This
color is assigned to the corresponding objects in projection
p(Db ), respectively. If objects have similar neighboring objects in both projections, their neighbors have similar colors
in the visualization. In this way, local and global similarities of the two compared descriptors can be evaluated. In
general, a homogeneous color distribution indicates a high
similarity whereas a heterogeneous color distribution shows
differences of the two descriptors (see Figure 4c,d).
The grid-based visualization of descriptor comparison is
based on the result of a SOM projection. The SOM gives a
good overview of the input space even for large data sets.

896

S. Bremm et al. / Assisted Descriptor Selection Based on Visual Comparative Data Analysis

In analogy to the scatterplot view, we use a two-dimensional
colormap to indicate the neighborhood coherency. The color
mapping is based on a coloring of the reference grid using a two-dimensional colormap (see Section 5 for details)
and object correspondence between grids. In the compared
comp
grid, the color of each cell Cx
is determined by the color
re f
of an corresponding cell Ccorr in the reference grid. However, in SOM view, objects from one compared cell may belong to several cells in the reference grid. In our approach,
re f
Ccorr is determined by the position of the majority of objects
comp
OCx
∈ Cx comp in Cre f (see Figure 5 for an illustration).
In Section 4, we present further extension of this technique
e.g., to visualize the cell distances.

Figure 5: Schema of the SOM comparison coloring. Left: An
unambiguous color assignment, where all cell members from
the compared SOM are grouped in one cell of the reference
SOM. Right: The color assignment using majority principle
– the cell color is used where the most elements are situated.

(a) Reference colormap

(b) Homogeneous result

redundant descriptors is based on the similarity scores calculated for all descriptor pairs. The result is visualized and
serves as starting point for the interactive analysis process
(see Section 3.4). Note that the pre-filtered descriptors can
be interactively viewed and the pre-filtering can be rejected
by the user in the next step of the pipeline. This is in particular important for borderline decision cases or in cases where
user knowledge contributes to the decision making.
3.3.1. Automatic Descriptor Filtering
The automatic descriptor filtering is based on the pairwise
similarity scores. If the similarity of two descriptors is high,
they contain redundant information which should be included only once within the final descriptor. The filtering
relies on the similarity threshold h, which specifies the maximal distance up to which two descriptors are considered
similar. h affects the number and size of the resulting groups
of descriptors, and is interactively set to specify the target
number of groups desired. Let S be an ordered list of scores
S = {s(Da , Db )}, 1 ≤ a, b, ≤ l starting with the best one (the
highest). All s(Da , Db ) >= h, are regarded as similar. If a
pair of descriptors {Da , Db } satisfying the threshold exists,
the descriptor with the higher average similarity to all other
similar group members remains in S (see below).
1: for all s(Da , Db ) ∈ S do
2:
if s(Da , Db ) ≥ h then
3:
if average(s(Da , Dx )) ≥ average(s(Dy , Db )) :
s(Da , Dx ) ≥ h, s(Dy , Db ) ≥ h then
4:
Remove Db : remove ∀s(Db , Dy ) ∈ S
5:
else
6:
Remove Da : remove ∀s(Dx , Da ) ∈ S
7:
end if
8:
end if
9: end for
3.3.2. Visualization of All Comparison Results

(c) Inhomogeneous result (d) Locally homog. result

Figure 6: Grid-based descriptor comparison visualization
using SOM. a) The reference color scheme, b) homogeneous
color gradient indicating a high similarity, c) the inhomogeneous coloring for differing descriptors, d) locally homogeneous coloring showing descriptors well discriminating subgroups of objects.

3.3. Filtering of Redundant Descriptors
A high similarity of two descriptors implies that both carry
the same information regarding the neighborhood distribution of the described objects. The task is, to remove this redundant information from the descriptor set. The filtering of

To enable the user to get an overview of multiple pairwise
comparisons, we propose a matrix and an ordered list view
of the comparison visualizations. It shows visualizations of
all pairwise descriptor comparisons (see Figure 7a). These
views can be filtered and sorted by a comparison score. This
provides a better overview of the comparisons in particular
for data with many descriptors.
3.4. Recommendation Visualization and Exploration
The automatically calculated proposal for descriptor selection is presented to the user in the last step of the pipeline.
The result inspection is supported by interactive visual exploration of descriptor similarity. The user can choose from
just applying the proposed combination or to inspect and adjust the steps of the process. User involvement in the process is advantageous especially in borderline cases where
the automatic filtering decision is close to the decision criteria (similarity threshold). Interactive data space exploration
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

897

S. Bremm et al. / Assisted Descriptor Selection Based on Visual Comparative Data Analysis

(a) Descriptor comparison matrix

(b) Result view

Figure 7: Visual descriptor comparison. Left: Initial overview of pairwise descriptor correspondence. Right: The result view
after descriptor filtering. The top row shows the selected descriptors with the data views. The bottom row shows the comparisons
of one descriptor with related descriptors (in yellow). This supports understanding of the filtering decisions.

can reveal new information helping the user to make better
decisions on descriptor filtering. For example, the scoring
function cannot reveal local similarities between objects in
two descriptor spaces. However these can be highly relevant
for the usage of descriptors for certain object classes (e.g.,
people in 3D objects). The inspection is supported also in algorithmic way, highlighting such borderline decision cases.
The algorithmic and visual support of the adjustment process
is described in the following.
3.4.1. Automatic Support for the Result Exploration
During the filtering process, we automatically detect cases
recommended for further examination by the analysts. These
so-called examination markers are either cases where the
score s(Da , Db ) was very close to the threshold h. A close
score may indicate low confidence of the filtering decision
or may indicate that the comparison result shows local abnormalities. These local structures are not considered in the
calculation of the pairwise comparison score, but might be
interesting in search scenarios where the local neighborhood
of the input object is more important than the rest (see Section 6 for an illustration).

4. Extensions
For better visual quality of the SOM comparison view, we
have implemented the following additional data representations: color interpolation, color shifting for reference SOMs,
and visualization of color unreliability. All of this options
are interactively steerable.
Depending on the input data structure, the result of the
SOM algorithm can include few empty cells. They represent
a area of the featurespace without data samples. We enable
the user to visually compare this areas in different feature
spaces by interpolation of the colors of neighboring cells
(see Figure 8b).

(a) Original coloring

(b) Interpolation

(c) Color shifting

3.4.2. Visualization of the Proposed Descriptors
The recommended set of descriptors is visualized on the basis of their two-dimensional projections (see Figure 7b top
row). The view includes additional important descriptor information (e.g., the number of similar descriptors or examination markers). This summary overview is an entry point
to a deeper examination of the decision space. For example,
the comparison of one selected descriptor with similar filtered descriptors is shown on demand (see Figure 7b bottom
row). In this way, the understanding and adjustments of the
filtering results are supported. This exploration may lead to
adjustments in the process – feedback to the previous interactive steps of the pipeline.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(d) Coloring with reliability

Figure 8: Visual extensions. Top: Illustration of improvement of visual display. Bottom: Display of coloring quality
in SOM comparison. The columns show examples of SOMs.
Left: a reference SOM, center: a homogeneous SOM, right:
an inhomogeneous SOM.

The SOM forms an adaptive grid, so the distances between neighboring cells are not constant. Therefore, we shift
the colors of the two-dimensional colormap according to the

898

S. Bremm et al. / Assisted Descriptor Selection Based on Visual Comparative Data Analysis

distance of the SOM cell centers (see Figure 8c). This function resembles the so-called U-Matrix which helps to identify the structure of the SOM clustering [VA00].
The SOM coloring uses matching of cell elements between the reference SOM and the compared SOM. In the
easiest case, all objects Oi of the compared cell |Ci | are in
one cell of the reference SOM, so the unreliability of the
cell coloring is zero (see Section 3.2 for details on SOM cell
coloring). If the objects of a cell in the compared SOM (descriptor Db ) are distributed over several cells in the reference
SOM (descriptor Da ), a higher unreliability is expected. The
unreliability of a cell Ci in the compared SOM is measured
by a score uCi , which takes into consideration the distance of
the cells in the reference SOM to which the elements of the
compared SOM cell Ci are matched and the selected majority cell Ri . The distance is calculated as the distance of the
descriptors in the cell centers d(Ri Da , Rk Db ) using Euclidean
distance measure. If the cells are located close, the object
distribution can be handled as similar.
Visualization of the reliability can affect the cell color (via
alpha channel or one of the axes of the color space) or cell
size (reduced corresponding to the unreliability score). Cell
size encoding has turned out to be very effective and intuitive (see Figure 8d). The background color of the reduced
cell is colored in the cell color with a higher, user steerable
transparency. In this way, the impression of the SOM coloring remains stable, so the color gradient is still visible and
on the other hand, the cell reliability is easy to evaluate.

5. Two-Dimensional Color Maps
Coloring the data in a two-dimensional space, such as in
SOM grid, is a challenging task. It is difficult to balance
at the same time the following beneficial properties: a perceptual linearity of the color space, a high color resolution and the preservation of all pairwise prototype distances
[KVK99]. For two-dimensional coloring, in particular SOM
coloring, a number of color-based visualization techniques
were proposed [KK98, Him98, KVK99, KVK00, Him00].
The idea is to apply high-contrast color space to illustrate
the SOM grids distance relations as good as possible. These
approaches use extraction of subspaces from, for example,
the RGB or the CIELab color space. Compared to RGB, the
CIELab color space is perceptually linear, which is beneficial for expressing distance relations with color. In return,
the RGB color space is a regular cube and therefore quite
easy to implement, whereas the CIELab color space has an
irregular 3D shape and suffers from an additional projection
needed to access CIELab.
Our decision for a two dimensional color map is the result
of a comprehensive comparison of current colormap techniques. Figure 9 contains some of the most promising color
map approaches for the grid of 18x12 cells. Note that the
grid resolution can be adjusted. In our opinion, the CIELabs,

(a) CIELab:
regular rect.

(b) CIELab:
stretched rect.

(e) RGB:
(f) RGB:
2 channels (RB) 3 channels

(c) RGB:
(d) RGB:
2 channels (BG) 2 channels (GR)

(g) RGB:
3 channels

(h) XYZ

Figure 9: Comparsion of colormaps for a 18x12 SOM grid.
a) Rectangular cut out of the CIELab color space at L=55.
b) Skewed rectangle cut (CIELab, L=55). c), d) and e) Two
channels of RGB mapped to x and y axis, leaving the third
constant. f) and g) Three channel RGB color scheme, diagonally cutting the RGB color cube [Him00]. h) Color scheme
in XYZ color space.

benefiting from a perceptually linear color scheme, cannot
be adequately exploited, because we can either use only a
little linear subspace with a low color resolution, or need to
apply an additional nonlinear algorithm to project the SOM
grid to the CIELab color space. A demonstration of the poor
color resolution can be seen in Figure 9 a) and b). They
show that the resulting color contrast is so low that adjacent
grid coordinates can not be distinguished clearly. After extensive experiments with the RGB color space, considering
two channel and three channel approaches, we made the decision to follow Himbergs approach [Him00] to use a linear
section of the RGB cube with maximized color resolution.
Our goal was to increase the perception of color differences
in SOM comparison. Thus, our colormap is spanned with the
four corner colors cyan, yellow, blue and red (see Figure 9g).
6. Application
In this section, we demonstrate our approach on a biochemical dataset following the introduced workflow. Researchers in biological and pharmacological sciences analyze large sets of molecules, e.g., as output of High Throughput Screenings (HTS). In HTS, many molecules are tested
for reactivity with one specific molecule of interest. The resulting datasets contain several hundreds or thousands of
molecules with high reactivity. The task of the analysts is
to find few, promising compounds for further examination.
The selection criteria are use case depended. Not only the
data structure, but also user expertise and further factors such
as costs have to be considered. Moreover, as shown in Figure 1, often there is more than one valid description of a
given dataset. Therefore user interaction in the analysis process is needed.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

899

S. Bremm et al. / Assisted Descriptor Selection Based on Visual Comparative Data Analysis

The dataset contains 9989 molecules, described by
18 standard pharmacophore descriptors, divided into two
groups. The first group consists of 11 basic, 1-D Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship (QSAR) descriptors for,
e.g., fragment complexity or the number of hydrogen-bond
donors [BST04]. The second is a set of so called fingerprints, binary descriptors classifying whether the described
molecule fulfills certain conditions or not. The group consists of 7 fingerprints with a dimensionality from 26 to 400.
The analysis task combines two intentions: 1) Finding relevant groups of compounds and structures in the data, and 2)
describing them as compactly as possible. As outcome of the
automatic analysis process, five different groups of descriptors were proposed. Their overview is presented in Fig. 7.
Each group is composed of one or more similar descriptors. Four of them were represented by fingerprints of varying dimensionality (307, 200, 100, 70). Details and iconic
comparison views are provided on demand to analyze the
groups in more detail. The first set, represented by the 307dimensional substructure-based fingerprint contains 11 other
descriptors, ordered by similarity (see Fig. 10a). It points
out that the most similar descriptor, the 79-D EState fingerprint [HK95] exposes very similar local neighborhood relations to the 307-D substructure fingerprint and therefore can
be used as its low dimensional replacement (see Fig. 10a).

(a)

(b)

Figure 10: a) Comparison of the 79-D EState fingerprint
with the 307-D substructure fingerprint, showing their similarity. b) Matrix view on the group of 7 similar descriptors.

To analyze the group in more detail, we switch to the matrix view and filter out SOM clustering results with a poor
object distribution (Fig. 10b). One of the SOM comparisons
shows a very homogeneous color gradient represents the descriptors for wight and number of atoms of the molecules
(Fig. 10b white arrow & Fig. 11a). This validates an expectation of the coherence between weight and size. Looking at the comparison of the ExtendendFingerprint with the
WienerNumber descriptor, we see that many cells are homogeneously colored (Fig. 10b black arrow & Fig. 11b). All of
the purple molecules in the WienerNumber SOM are located
in one cell of the ExtendendFingerprint SOM. If the pharmacologist is interested in these molecules, the WienerNumber
descriptor is preferable. It leads to a higher diversity of the
concerned molecules at a lower dimensionality (1 vs. 26).
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(a)

(b)

Figure 11: a) Comparison of the weight to an atom count
descriptor. The homogeneous color gradient validates the
expected correlation of the descriptors. b) The 1-D WienerNumber descriptor shows a high separability for molecules
which are all in one cell in the SOM of the 26-D ExtendendFingerprint.

7. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we have presented a novel system guiding analysts in the process of selecting suitable data descriptors.
Our approach is based on a novel score for descriptor comparison applicable also for data descriptors with differing dimensionality for unlabeled data. We presented specialized
visualizations for gaining an overview of both the descriptor
space and descriptor comparison. We developed techniques
for spotting high-quality local data descriptions in globally
suboptimal data descriptions. The resulting comparison data
space can be interactively explored.
The presented approach can be applied in various areas
dealing with search and exploration of large data sets. For
example, large video, image, 3D model or graph data sets
can be easily analyzed. In order to demonstrate the usability
of our system, we have used a scenario of selecting descriptors for biochemical data.
In the future, we would like to implement further algorithms for selecting interesting views and work on the estimation of initial parameters and their interactive steering. In
particular, we would like to compare several scoring functions for their expressiveness and extend the pairwise comparison to simultaneous comparison of multiple descriptors.
Combining of descriptors can be improved by additional
heuristic algorithms including user feedback on the proposed
elements. We would like to test our system with users in various application domains.

Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) within the project Visual Feature Space
Analysis as part of the Priority Program on Scalable Visual
Analytics (SPP 1335).

900

S. Bremm et al. / Assisted Descriptor Selection Based on Visual Comparative Data Analysis

References
[AD91] A LMUALLIM H., D IETTERICH T.: Efficient algorithms
for identifying relevant features. In Canadian Conf. on Artificial
Intelligence (1991), pp. 38–45. 3
[AHK01] AGGARWAL C., H INNEBURG A., K EIM D.: On the
surprising behavior of distance metrics in high dimensional
space. Database Theory (2001), 420–434. 2, 3
[BG97] B ORG I., G ROENEN P.: Modern multidimensional scaling: Theory and applications. Springer, 1997. 3

[KJ97] KOHAVI R., J OHN G.: Wrappers for feature subset selection. Artificial intelligence 97, 1-2 (1997), 273–324. 3
[KK98] K ASKI S., KOHONEN T.: Visual Explorations in Finance. Springer, 1998, ch. Tips for processing and color-coding
of Self-Organizing Maps, pp. 195–202. 8
[KLTH10] K APOOR A., L EE B., TAN D., H ORVITZ E.: Interactive Optimization for Steering Machine Classification. In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2010). 3
[Koh01]

KOHONEN T.: Self-Organizing Maps. Springer, 2001. 3

[BGRS99] B EYER K., G OLDSTEIN J., R AMAKRISHNAN R.,
S HAFT U.: When is nearest neighbor meaningful? Database
Theory (1999), 217–235. 3

[Kon94] KONONENKO I.: Estimating attributes: Analysis and extensions of RELIEF. In Machine Learning: ECML-94 (1994),
Springer, pp. 171–182. 3

[BKSS07] B USTOS B., K EIM D., S AUPE D., S CHRECK T.:
Content-based 3D object retrieval. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications 27 (4) (2007), 22–27. 3

[KR92] K IRA K., R ENDELL L.: The feature selection problem:
Traditional methods and a new algorithm. In National Conf. on
Artificial Intelligence (1992), pp. 129–129. 3

[BMGR04] B ENDER A., M USSA H., G LEN R., R EILING
S.: Molecular similarity searching using atom environments,
information-based feature selection, and a naive bayesian classifier. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci 44, 1 (2004), 170–178. 3

[KVK99] K ASKI S., V ENNA J., KOHONEN T.: Coloring that reveals high-dimensional structures in data. In Int. Conf. on Neural
Information Processing (1999), vol. 2, pp. 729 – 734. 8

[BST04] B ÖCKER A., S CHNEIDER G., T ECKENTRUP A.: Status
of HTS data mining approaches. QSAR & combinatorial science
23, 4 (2004), 207–213. 9
[CLKP10] C HOO J., L EE H., K IHM J., PARK H.: iVisClassifier:
An Interactive Visual Analytics System for Classification Based
on Supervised Dimension Reduction. In IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology (2010), pp. 27–34. 4
[DB04] DY J., B RODLEY C.: Feature selection for unsupervised
learning. J. of Mach. Learning Research 5 (2004), 845–889. 2, 3
[DCSL02] DASH M., C HOI K., S CHEUERMANN P., L IU H.:
Feature selection for clustering-a filter solution. In IEEE Int.
Conf. on Data Mining (2002), p. 115. 3
[EC01] E WING R. M., C HERRY J. M.: Visualization of expression clusters using Sammons non-linear mapping. Bioinformatics
17, 7 (2001), 658–659. 3
[Fuk90] F UKUNAGA K.: Introduction to statistical pattern recognition. Academic Pr, 1990. 4
[Him98] H IMBERG J.: Enhancing SOM-based data visualization
by linking different data projections. In Int. Symp. on Intelligent
Data Engineering and Learning (1998), Eureka, p. 427. 8
[Him00] H IMBERG J.: A SOM based cluster visualization and its
application for false coloring. In IEEE Int. Joint Conf. on Neural
Networks (2000), vol. 3, p. 3587. 8
[HK95] H ALL L., K IER L.: Electrotopological state indices for
atom types: A novel combination of electronic, topological, and
valence state information. J. of Chemical Information and Computer Sciences 35, 6 (1995), 1039–1045. 9
[IMI∗ 10] I NGRAM S., M UNZNER T., I RVINE V., T ORY M.,
B ERGNER S., M ÖLLER T.: DimStiller: Workflows for dimensional analysis and reduction. In IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Software and Technologies (2010), pp. 3–10. 2, 4
[JJ09] J OHANSSON S., J OHANSSON J.: Interactive dimensionality reduction through user-defined combinations of quality metrics. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions
on 15, 6 (2009), 993–1000. 4
[Jol02] J OLLIFFE I.: Principal component analysis. Springer,
2002. 3

[KVK00] K ASKI S., V ENNA J., KOHONEN T.: Coloring that
reveals cluster structures in multivariate data. Australian J. of
Intelligent Information Processing Systems 6, 2 (2000), 82–88. 8
[MM05] M IERSWA I., M ORIK K.: Automatic feature extraction
for classifying audio data. Machine Learning 58, 2–3 (2005),
658–659. 3
[NJW01] N G A. Y., J ORDAN M. I., W EISS Y.: On spectral clustering: Analysis and an algorithm. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2001), MIT Press, pp. 849–856. 3
[SNLH09] S IPS M., N EUBERT B., L EWIS J., H ANRAHAN P.:
Selecting good views of high-dimensional data using class consistency. In Computer Graphics Forum (2009), vol. 28, pp. 831–
838. 3
[SvLB10] S CHRECK T., VON L ANDESBERGER T., B REMM S.:
Techniques for precision-based visual analysis of projected data.
Information Visualization 9, 3 (2010), 181–193. 4, 5
[TAE∗ 09] TATU A., A LBUQUERQUE G., E ISEMANN M.,
S CHNEIDEWIND J., T HEISEL H., M AGNOR M., K EIM D.:
Combining automated analysis and visualization techniques for
effective exploration of high-dimensional data. In IEEE Symp.
on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (2009), pp. 59–66. 4
[TLKT09] TALBOT J., L EE B., K APOOR A., TAN D.: EnsembleMatrix: interactive visualization to support machine learning
with multiple classifiers. In Int. Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2009), pp. 1283–1292. 3
[VA00] V ESANTO J., A LHONIEMI E.: Clustering of the selforganizing map. Trans. on Neural Networks 11, 3 (2000), 586–
600. 8
[Ves99] V ESANTO J.: SOM-based data visualization methods.
Intelligent Data Analysis 3, 2 (1999), 111–126. 3
[vLGS09] VON L ANDESBERGER T., G ÖRNER M., S CHRECK
T.: Visual analysis of graphs with multiple connected components. In IEEE Symp. on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (2009), pp. 155–162. 3
[WAG06] W ILKINSON L., A NAND A., G ROSSMAN R.: Highdimensional visual analytics: Interactive exploration guided by
pairwise views of point distributions. Trans. on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 12 (November 2006), 1363–1372. 3

[Keo06] K EOGH E.: A decade of progress in indexing and mining
large time series databases. In Int. Conf. on Very Large Data
Bases (2006). Tutorial. 3

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

