DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01891.x
EUROGRAPHICS 2011 / M. Chen and O. Deussen
(Guest Editors)

Volume 30 (2011), Number 2

Dynamic Display of BRDFs
Matthias B. Hullin †1 ,
1 MPI

Hendrik P. A. Lensch2 ,

Informatik

2 Universität

Ulm

Ramesh Raskar3 ,

Hans-Peter Seidel1,4

3 MIT

4 Universität

Media Lab

and Ivo Ihrke4,1

des Saarlandes

Abstract
This paper deals with the challenge of physically displaying reflectance, i.e., the appearance of a surface and its
variation with the observer position and the illuminating environment. This is commonly described by the bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF). We provide a catalogue of criteria for the display of BRDFs, and
sketch a few orthogonal approaches to solving the problem in an optically passive way. Our specific implementation is based on a liquid surface, on which we excite waves in order to achieve a varying degree of anisotropic
roughness. The resulting probability density function of the surface normal is shown to follow a Gaussian distribution similar to most established BRDF models.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.1: Three-dimensional displays, I.3.7: Virtual reality, I.3.7: Colour, shading, shadowing, and texture, I.3.3: Display algorithms

1. Introduction
We are living in a time where the boundaries between real
and virtual worlds are gradually blurred out. As technology
keeps on evolving, somewhere in the distant future the output of computer displays may become visually indistinguishable from the real world.
In this paper, we focus on one major clue that helps
distinguish real from virtual objects: reflectance. If we
move around an object, and its appearance, the highlights,
etc. change consistently with what we are used to and in
accordance with the surrounding world, this object is more
likely to be perceived as “real”.
In order to achieve full realism for computer generated
content, it therefore stands to reason that the display of the
future will behave more like a showcase window through
which the the real and virtual worlds can interact with each
other, rather than being a strict output device. So far, all types
of computer displays have shown pixels of different colours
that should ideally be as invariant to the viewing and lighting conditions as possible. Our goal is to physically mimic
the characteristic way different surfaces reflect light, often
described in terms of the Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF), and display materials instead of
colours (Figure 1).
In the recent years, many methods have been developed to
fabricate materials with custom reflectance and sub-surface
† hullin@mpi-inf.mpg.de
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

Figure 1: Left: Idea of a “reflectance display” that reacts to
its environment like real-world materials do. Right: Reflection of a checkerboard pattern in a surface that can exhibit
different degrees of anisotropic roughness.

scattering properties. Yet, to our knowledge these properties have not been displayed dynamically. In Section 2, we
discuss the prior work in related fields. The contribution of
this paper is a very first step towards the dynamic display
of materials by means of a physical device that can be programmed to exhibit a range of reflectance distributions. Before we elaborate on our own approach, we lay the founda-

476

M. Hullin et al. / Dynamic Display of BRDFs

tions in Section 3 with a general definition of the problem,
along with a few sketches to its solution.
Of major importance to the appearance of real-world materials is their microstructure, e.g. in the form of surface
roughness. By shaping surfaces, specific reflectance distribution functions can be achieved, as in the case of polished or brushed steel surfaces, or sandblasted glass. Our
approach to dynamically displaying reflectance is also based
on roughness modulation: we start with a liquid surface and
excite surface waves on it. The space of possible appearances
is defined by the reflectance of the base material, and the
achievable surface structures that are in turn governed by the
physics of wave propagation on liquids. In Section 4, we provide the underlying theory, and make a few basic predictions
that will later be checked in experiment.
In Section 5, we present two prototypes that modulate the
angular variation of reflected light in an optically passive
way. We show in Section 6 that our devices can produce a
range of anisotropic BRDFs that match our theoretical expectations. Using implementations of the same principle on
different scales, we show that miniaturisation is not just possible but also desirable. Naturally, as the first devices of their
kind, our prototypes are limited in terms of expressivity and
practical use. We discuss these limitations in Section 7, and
provide directions for future improvement.
A full derivation of the probability density function of
reflection directions from a sine-shaped height field is provided as an appendix.
2. Related Work
From the very early age of computer graphics research, it has
been recognised that reflectance models are a crucial ingredient for realistic rendering. Torrance and Sparrow [TS67]
had been the first to provide a shading model based on microfacet geometry, Phong [Pho75] and Blinn [Bli77] showed
its first applications in computer graphics. As the technical possibilities grew and the demand for physical accuracy increased, researchers began fitting model parameters
against sparse reflectance measurements [War92] and provided databases of measured BRDFs [CUR96, MPBM03].
Ngan et al. [NDM05] related many of the previously introduced analytical BRDF models to dense reflectance measurements taken from real materials.
We use the established Ward BRDF [War92] as a reference model for the reflectance distributions exhibited by our
device.
Rendering with real-world environment lighting can yield
a great degree of realism with moderate technical and artistic effort, as first demonstrated by Debevec [Deb98]. Raskar
et al. [RWLB01] used computer-controlled lighting to make
real objects look in a desired way. Their “shader lamps” require total darkness for best performance. On the observer

Display approach

Optics

Light

Virtual reality

active

virtual

[JMY∗ 07, IKS∗ 10]

active

virtual

Augmented reality [RWLB01]

active

virtual

[Deb98]

active

real

[CNR08, KN08, HLHR09]

active

real

[FRSL08] and fabrication

passive

real

BRDF display (ours)

passive

real

Geometry
/Material
virtual
dynamic
virtual
dynamic
real
static
virtual
dynamic
virtual
dynamic
real
static
real
dynamic

Viewpoint
simulated
real
real
simulated
real
real
real

Table 1: Light and observer-dependent rendering and display techniques at a glance.

Figure 2: Left: optically active setup with a camera, a processing stage (here: negation) and a projector. Right: optically passive setup consisting of an imaging lens and a diffusor sheet to achieve a blurred image.
side, the virtual viewpoint can be controlled by the user
through different means, e.g. through game input devices
or head tracking as in many early Virtual Reality installations. In the recent years, autostereoscopic displays have
been constructed (optionally combined with head tracking)
to achieve freely viewable 3D imagery [JMY∗ 07, IKS∗ 10]
and even more based on lenticular or parallax barrier principle [HL10, KHL10]. Various active devices have been
demonstrated that combine light field sensing and/or display
with intermediate processing [CNR08, KN08, HLHR09].
The last three years have spawned a large amount of work
dedicated to fabricating materials and objects with custom
properties. The efforts include milling of height fields to
reproduce reflectance distributions [WPMR09], printing of
spatially varying BRDFs on paper [MAG∗ 09], fabrication of
subsurface scattering materials [HFM∗ 10,DWP∗ 10], surface
reliefs that show lighting-dependent images [AM10], and
even custom deformability [BBO∗ 10]. The reflectance field
assembly by Fuchs et al. [FRSL08] stacked purely passive
“pixels”, each encapsulating a full 4D transmittance field,
albeit at very limited resolution.
As the key contribution of this work, we see the definition
of the BRDF display as a dynamic alternative to fabrication.
We outline the main characteristics that any BRDF display
should possess, and demonstrate a design that meets all principal requirements. To our knowledge, our device is the first
to be both optically passive and programmable (see Table 1).
3. Displaying Reflectance
A BRDF display is a surface that can be programmed to exhibit varying reflectance distributions. We propose the folc 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Hullin et al. / Dynamic Display of BRDFs

lowing (non-exhaustive) list of criteria to assess the capabilities of a given device:
Principal Criteria
P1 View and light dependence. The reflectance of a BRDF
display must vary with the viewing and lighting direction
in a physically plausible manner.
P2 Immediate response to illumination changes and observer position.
P3 High dynamic range, or the capability to deal with a
very wide range of incident intensities.
P4 Programmability. The display has to be controlled by a
computer in a nonpermanent way.
P5 Light efficiency and contrast. Any setup will fail to convince if it has insufficient light throughput, especially
when competing against undesired effects such as firstsurface reflections.
BRDF Parameters/Properties
B1 Bell-shaped highlights. For many glossy real-world materials (as well as most analytical BRDF models, for
that matter), the highlights follow Gaussian or power-ofcosine distributions, or sums thereof.
B2 Anisotropy, where the reflectance varies with the tangent
orientation of the sample.
B3 Modulation of absolute reflectivity.
B4 Colour modulation.
B5 Multi-lobe BRDFs, for instance the rather popular
model of diffuse+glossy+specular.
B6 “Off-normal” highlights, e.g., when the average microfacet orientation does not coincide with the macroscopic
normal, e.g. scale/sawtooth structures, hair.
B7 Retroreflection, as has been observed for diffuse surfaces [PWKJ07].
Higher-Level Texture Layout
T1 Spatial extent. In order for an observer to appreciate the
reflectance function, a display needs to have a certain
minimum size to display the shape of highlights.
T2 Spatial variation, where the display is formed by an array of individually controllable “texels”.
T3 Normal variation, where the perception of reflectance is
further supported by displaying non-flat surfaces.
3.1. Approaching the Problem in a Passive Way
While our task is rather well-defined—modulate the angular
distribution of light reflected on a surface—it is hard to come
up with “the” one ideal path to its solution. In fact, a host of
different approaches can be imagined, each one with its own
set of advantages and drawbacks.
The very first design decision is whether the display
should be optically active or passive (Figure 2). Active systems are very flexible. They naturally meet Criterion P4 and,
depending on the implementation, are potentially compatible with all of B1–T3. However, the performance of today’s
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

477

light field sensing and output devices is bound to collide with
P2 and P3. Purely optical setups, on the other hand, offer the
fastest possible response (all “processing” being done at the
very speed of light) and virtually unlimited dynamic range.
We argue that, since real-world reflectance is optically passive, it must be possible to mimic it by passive means. The
following families of passive setups can be imagined:
Holography. In principle, holographic techniques could be
applied to display different information, i.e. reflectances, for
different viewing directions. These techniques are referred
to as angle-multiplexed holograms, e.g. [Mok93]. Volume
holographic storage devices [Orl00] are reacting to selective directional illumination. Holographic wavelength multiplexing [RLY92] could even store wavelength-dependent
BRDFs [HHA∗ 10]. However, to our best knowledge, the
combination of these different holographic techniques to
form a reflectance field display has not been demonstrated.
Integral Photography inspired approach. Using an optical multiplexer, the 4D space spanned by the incident and
outgoing hemispheres is mapped to a plane, where the corresponding radiance values can be modulated by a 2D mask.
[FRSL08] implemented a similar idea in transmission; a reflective counterpart could for instance be imagined using
lenslet and mirrorlet arrays. While this approach allows for
almost arbitrary modulation, its resolution is inherently limited. As [FRSL08] demonstrated, an impression of continuity (and hence, the look of reflectance) is hard to achieve
using a lenslet array that shoots out rays from different locations, unless a massive array of identical pixels is being
viewed from a large distance, or an elaborate system of diffusors is employed. More importantly, though, multiplexing approaches trade resolution for efficiency, and inherently
lose a lot of light when sharp highlights need to be resolved.
Considering the above, any implementation of the Integral
Photography idea will have to struggle to meet Criteria P5,
T1 and T2. Also, a dynamic but optically passive device has
yet to be demonstrated.
Redistribution. Since real BRDFs span only a small subspace of all possible 4D distributions, general 4D modulation may not be necessary. A different, more natural approach to our problem is to redistribute the available light dynamically. Inspired by how real materials function on a microscopic level, a desired reflectance distribution can be obtained through a controlled scattering process [WPMR09].
There are numerous (static and dynamic) ways of achieving this, and the principle by itself does not collide with any
of our criteria. What appears particularly interesting in this
context is the idea of stacking functional layers to extend
the space of achievable BRDFs. For instance, by mounting a switchable diffusor (LC-TEC FOS-25x30-PSCT, a
cholesteric LC panel) on top of a mirror, we were able to
switch between two different reflectance profiles: mirroring (with slight haze) and diffuse. We demonstrate another
multi-layer application in Section 6.3.

478

M. Hullin et al. / Dynamic Display of BRDFs

Our own design, which will be covered in the rest of this
paper, belongs to the redistribution family of BRDF displays. We use a liquid surface as the reflecting base geometry, and reshape it over space and time by inducing surface
waves. The design allows for dynamic modulation of the angular spread of the reflected light over a limited range, but
not its intensity. Our prototypes meet Criteria P1–P5, B1–B2
and T1, and further miniaturisation may allow for B5 and T2
as well.

4. Characterisation of Reflectance by Surface Waves
The operation principle of our device is to excite surface
waves in a medium that supports relatively free travel of
these waves. For our experiments, we use an interface between air and water.
We are not aiming at producing standing waves that would
generate oscillating, yet stationary, microgeometry. Instead
we rely on time-averaging of travelling waves. If the generated height field varies fast enough, this results in an impression of a static microfacet distribution at every surface point.
Mathematically, this is akin to averaging over a static height
field of infinite extent.
From the earliest days, microfacet-based models have
been expressing reflectance as the product of a probability density function (PDF) of reflection directions, and additional material, geometry and normalisation terms (see e.g.
Eq. 11 in [TS67]). As a physical surface and Fresnel reflector, our device naturally takes care of all of these, so we can
focus on controlling the PDF.

Assume a sine wave in x direction as depicted in Figure 3:
h(x) = a sin(kx), where k =

(1)

the trigonometric functions can be approximated to an error
of less than 0.4% by the first term of their Taylor series:
sin(φ) ≈ tan(φ) ≈ φ(rad)

and

cos(φ) ≈ 1.

(2)

Also, we can safely assume that interreflections are absent.

(3)

a being the amplitude, k the wave number and λ the wavelength of the excited wave. The angle α(x) of the surface
normal at position x, measured in a mathematically positive
sense with respect to the vertical axis, is related to the slope
of the function as follows:
dh
tan α(x) = h′ (x) =
= ak cos(kx).
(4)
dx
Eq. 1 is met if the roughness ak =: ρ is small. Then, a light
ray incident at x, h(x) under a fixed angle β to the vertical
will be mirrored into the reflection angle δ:
(2)(4)

δ(x) = 2α(x) − β ≈ 2ρ cos(kx) − β

(5)

The PDF f ∆ˆ (δ), i.e., the likelihood of a ray in an ensemβ
ble of rays incident under the angle β to be reflected into the
angle δ, can now be imagined as the limit case of a value histogram of δ(x): the probability for δ to lie within an infinitesimal interval dδ is the combined measure of all intervals dx
which are mapped to dδ.
For symmetry reasons, it is sufficient to look at the first
half-wave of our height field (x ∈ [0, π/k]), where δ(x) is
monotonically decreasing and therefore bijective, so that
f∆ˆ (δ) can be obtained as the derivative of the inverse of
β
δ(x), normalised by the measure of the interval:
f ∆ˆ (δ) =
β

k dx(δ)
π dδ

In the following, we discuss the PDF generated by a single
sine wave of small amplitude. For small angles φ, e.g.
φ < 5◦ ≈ 0.0873 rad,

2π
,
λ

≈
=

1 d
cos−1
π dδ
1
π

δ+β
2ρ
(6)

4ρ2 − (δ + β)2

A plot of this function can be seen in Figure 4 (blue curve).
Without the assumption of Eqs. 2, the PDF turns out slightly
bulkier. Please refer to the appendix for a full derivation.
4.2. Multiple Sine Waves in One or Two Dimensions
1
1 term
2 terms
3 terms
5 terms

0.8

4.1. Single Sine Wave in One Dimension
0.6

β

β

0.4

αα
a
0

0.2

α

h(x)
x
π/k

Figure 3: On a half-wave height field h(x) = a sin(kx) (red),
an incident ray (blue) with an angle β to the vertical (green)
is reflected.

0
−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

Figure 4: PDFs for sum-of-sinusoid functions in the linear
limit (small amplitude, normal incidence, ρ = 0.5). As more
sinusoidal terms are added up, the distribution converges to
a Gaussian profile.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Hullin et al. / Dynamic Display of BRDFs

When we shoot an ensemble of rays at our height field,
the exact shape of the surface is not of importance. In fact,
we can treat the orientation of microfacets as a random variable that follows a probability distribution of Eq. 6. As n
sinusoidal terms are superimposed in our device, this corresponds to an addition of random variables ∆ˆ 1β + · · · + ∆ˆ nβ .
If we can ensure that the ∆ˆ i are independent and identically
β

distributed (iid), the central limit theorem states that the PDF
of the their sum is the n-fold convolution of the individual
PDFs, and that it approaches a Gaussian distribution for a
large number of terms [GS01]. In practice, we observe a satisfactory bell shape already for 5 superimposed sinusoidal
waves, see Fig. 4.
Note that the distribution f ∆ˆ only depends on ρ, i.e. the
β
product of amplitude and wave number. Since the wavenumber is directly related to the excitation frequency through the
dispersion relation of the medium, we can generate identical
distributions (same ρ) using different combinations of wave
number and amplitude.
Independence, in our setting, translates to a vertical motion of every point on the dynamic height field surface that is
as non-repetitive as possible. We choose excitation frequencies that relate like large prime numbers to approximate this.
The variance of a superposition of n identical distributions is related to the roughness as σ2n = nσ20 = n · 2ρ2 ,
where σ20 = 2ρ2 is the variance of the single-sine distribution (Eq. 6). Within the linear approximation, we can thus
generate Gaussian reflectance profiles of a desired variance
by scaling all amplitudes of the sinusoidal terms uniformly.
In our device we are using orthogonally travelling planar
waves in the x- and y-directions. At sufficiently small ρ values, the waves decouple and the two-dimensional PDF of
the reflection directions simply becomes the product of two
y
distributions f ˆx and f ˆ , both of the form in Eq. 6.
∆β

479

Figure 5: Resonance profile of one of the wave generators
in Setup 1, as observed through deflection of a laser beam.
Trajectories were recorded in 1 Hz steps.
5. Construction of Devices
We built two incarnations of the same principle on different
scales. Both setups consist of a flat water surface on which a
pair of actuators excites crossing planar waves. We use voice
coils that are fed with an amplified audio signal from the
computer. Our signal source is the free software Puredata
[Puc] running a patch that synthesises a stereo signal from
sine wave terms of different frequency and amplitude.
Setup 1 (large, slow) consists of the ripple tank system
WA-9897 by Pasco, Inc., a device designed for demonstration experiments in physics classes. We use a pair of ripple
generators (each with a bar-shaped lever and modified to accept audio input) on a flat water tank with wedge-shaped
soft foam beaches at the borders to suppress reflections, and
a surface of approximately 23 × 23 cm 2 .
Setup 2 (small, fast) is a downscaled version built from a
pair of 2.5-inch hard disk drives (Figure 6). The platters and
the controller boards as well as part of the aluminium frames
were removed, leaving only the arm assemblies in place. To
each arm we attached a small bar-shaped piece of plastic to
dip into the water, and mounted both frames crosswise. A
small water receptacle (approx. 2 × 2 cm2 in size) is placed
underneath the actuators.

∆γ

4.3. Connection to Analytical BRDF Models
Since the variances on the x- and y-axes can be chosen independently, our display can reproduce BRDFs with elliptical
highlights as popularised by Ward [War92]. Note that our
variance σ2n describes the reflection angle whereas Ward’s
α2x,y is related to the half-angle. Hence, the distributions are
comparable when σ2x,y ≈ 4α2x,y .
While the surface waves modulate the specular or glossy
part of these models, the diffuse term can be realised by using a ground plane made of Labsphere Spectralon, an almost
Lambertian reflector. The colour of the diffuse reflection can
be influenced by a transmissive filter; we demonstrate this
by dyeing the water prior to modulating the water surface.
In conclusion, our device is capable of displaying microfacet BRDF models with anisotropic Gaussian microfacet
distribution. The parameters of the model can be directly related to the parameters that control our device.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

6. Results
6.1. Characterisation
By deflecting a laser beam, we characterised the achieved
surface normal variation for the “slow” Setup 1. The response of the actuator and its coupling to the water surface
varies with the frequency of the signal. In Figure 5, we see
that the efficiency peak is located around 20 Hz when the
system is in contact with water. The resonance frequency of
the uncoupled actuators is approximately 40 Hz. In Figure 7,
we investigate the 1-dimensional case as described in Section 4.1. The driving signal is a sum of sinusoids with different amplitudes and frequencies. The amplitudes of each
term were individually adjusted to yield a constant roughness parameter ρ on the water surface by adjusting the peak
deflection angle of a laser beam. The resulting brightness
profiles agree surprisingly well with the theoretical predictions. Due to its smaller size, Setup 2 responds considerably
faster than Setup 1. We managed to excite water waves at frequencies as high as 800 Hz, although viscous damping limits

480

M. Hullin et al. / Dynamic Display of BRDFs

Figure 6: Various views of Setup 2 built from a pair of discarded 2.5-inch hard disk drives. From left to right: Components, top
view, close-up on actuator 2, water surface and checkerboard target.

1
0

1 term

−1
2
0

2 terms

−2
3
0

3 terms

−3
5
0
−5

5 terms

0

1

2

3

4

5
t[s]

8
1 term
2 terms
3 terms
5 terms

7
6

Figure 8: Photos of Setup 1 (left, checkerboard pitch 10 mm)
and raytraced simulations (right) of various degrees of
anisotropic blur.

5
4
3
2
1
0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

Figure 7: We verified the insights from Section 4.1 by superimposing sinusoids on the water surface of Setup 1 and
observing the deflection of a laser beam. Top, left: idealised
temporal profile of water wave; right: photos of laser beam.
Bottom: intensity profiles. Note the similarity to Figure 4.

the reach of such high-frequent waves to a few millimetres or
centimetres. We found the setup to be most efficient for frequencies around 200 Hz, with deflection angles of up to 30◦
for single sine waves, or ρ ≈ 0.13. If distortions of the trajectory can be tolerated, deflection angles of 50◦ (ρ ≈ 0.20) are
achievable. Above that, the actuators become unstable but
droplet formation is not observed even for much higher amplitudes. As we relate our deflection angle to Ward’s BRDF
model through the variance (Section 4.2), we obtain a range
of 0 ≤ αx,y < 0.14, which overlaps with the values measured
by Ward (0.04 ≤ αx,y ≤ 0.26).
6.2. Reflectance
In Figure 8, we compare the reflectance of our Setup 1
reflecting a checkerboard pattern with a raytraced simula-

Figure 9: Real-time blur as displayed by Setup 2. The
checkerboard scale is 1 mm.

tion of a comparable setting. The photos are long-exposure
shots, which, given the slow response of the device, were
required in order to achieve satisfactory temporal averaging.
The anisotropic blur of the reflection is very similar in nature
to the simulated result.
The smaller Setup 2 allows for comparable results at a
much faster speed, enabling the observer (or a video camera)
to directly perceive the angular blur. Figure 9 shows four
representative frames from the accompanying video where
the amplitudes in X and Y direction are manually adjusted
in real time.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

M. Hullin et al. / Dynamic Display of BRDFs

481

Setup 2 shows that miniaturisation brings a lot of benefits,
since the achievable frequencies are approximately reciprocal to the geometric scale. Scaling down the setup by another
order of magnitude may for instance enable temporal multiplexing of different lobes.

6.3. Diffuse + Specular
Also using Setup 2, we placed a diffuse reflector underneath
the water surface and dyed the liquid. As can be seen in Figure 10, this adds greatly to the range of displayable BRDFs,
however in our case the shallow water layer leads to an increase of viscous damping.

Figure 11: Reflection of a human eye in Setup 2b filled with
liquid metal. Left: resting. Right: in motion. The distortions
are caused by surface tension.

6.4. Liquid Metal
In order to obtain a higher reflectivity especially for nearnormal directions, we replaced the water in Setup 2 with an
eutectic alloy of gallium, indium and tin. The nontoxic substance has a melting point of −18◦ C and is therefore liquid
at room temperature. The increased viscosity, mass density,
strong surface tension and incessant formation of an oxide
layer make it difficult to control the surface shape. In particular, planar waves are rather hard to obtain even at very small
amplitudes. However, we can still control a slight variation
in the reflectance (Figure 11).
7. Discussion
The limitations of our device can be broadly classified into
two categories: practical issues of our prototypical implementation, and fundamental limitations of the general design. In the following we discuss the major practical limitations of our prototype and suggest alternative ways of implementation.
1. Our display exhibits a limited range of surface roughness.
With higher amplitudes, the nonlinearities in our physical system become hard to predict. By investigating the
dominating effects and modelling them in the predictive
model, it could be possible to achieve wider scattering
profiles.
2. We are currently limited to BRDFs consisting of a single
white Gaussian lobe in conjunction with a fixed coloured
diffuse component. Further miniaturisation, e.g. using
piezos as actuators, might enable temporal multiplexing
of different lobes. The ink-based colouring layer currently used to model the diffuse component can be replaced by a passive transflective display technology.

Figure 10: Macrophotos of Setup 2 (checker size 1 mm). By
adding a diffuse white substrate and injecting coloured inks
(here done manually), we obtain a combination of a dynamic anisotropic glossy and a static diffuse lobe.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

3. The Fresnel reflection factor is currently the one of water.
By adding refractive index altering agents to the medium
in our device, a predictable change of reflectivity could be
achieved that is closer to many real-world solid materials
like plastics, resins or coatings.
4. Currently, we are only using two orthogonally crossing
planar waves to generate BRDFs separable in the two dimensions. A more general implementation of the prin-

482

M. Hullin et al. / Dynamic Display of BRDFs

ciple could make use of multiple point-like actuators,
generating spherical waves, implementing Huygens principle. This way, more general reflectance distributions
could be generated, for instance a rotation of the tangent
frame, which is currently missing in our design.
5. The use of liquids constrains us to horizontal mounting.
Exchanging the water for solid jelly-like substances or
elastic films might allow for arbitrary mounting angles.
This may require the theoretical model to account for effects such as internal stresses and strains.
The only fundamental limitation we are aware of is the
lack of a possibility to vary the normal of the simulated
macro-surface. For this, we would require sawtooth-shaped
waves that can hardly propagate on a strongly dispersive
medium such as a solid or liquid surface. Therefore, Criteria
B6 and T3 are most likely not achievable with the proposed
system.
In conclusion, this paper has introduced the concept of a
reflectance display. We have discussed theoretical requirements, advantages and drawbacks of different potential implementations. We have characterised a promising design
both theoretically and practically by building two prototypes at different scales. An analytic link between Wardlike anisotropic BRDFs and the class of BRDFs displayable
by our device has been established. In experiment, we have
verified that dynamic time-averaged microfacet distributions can give the impression of dynamically changing, programmable reflectance in real time. Our prototype meets the
principal criteria for a BRDF display and offers room for
many extensions. We are confident that this presents a first
step towards future hyper-realistic displays. However, much
work remains to be done.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Michael Wand and Martin Bokeloh for their valuable comments. This work has
been partially funded by the German Research Foundation
(DFG), Cluster of Excellence “Multi-Modal Computing and
Interaction” and Emmy Noether fellowship LE 1341/1-1.
References
[AM10] A LEXA M., M ATUSIK W.: Reliefs as images. ACM
Trans. Graph. (Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH) (2010).
[BBO∗ 10] B ICKEL B., BÄCHER M., O TADUY M. A., L EE
H. R., P FISTER H., G ROSS M., M ATUSIK W.: Design and fabrication of materials with desired deformation behavior. ACM
Trans. Graph. (Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH) (2010).
[Bli77] B LINN J. F.: Models of light reflection for computer synthesized pictures. Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH (1977).
[CNR08] C OSSAIRT O., N AYAR S. K., R AMAMOORTHI R.:
Light Field Transfer: Global Illumination Between Real and Synthetic Objects. ACM Trans. Graph. (Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH)
(2008).
[CUR96] CUR E T:
Columbia Utrecht Texture Database.
http://www1.cs.columbia.edu/CAVE/software/curet/, 1996.

[Deb98] D EBEVEC P.: Rendering synthetic objects into real
scenes. Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH (1998).
[DWP∗ 10] D ONG Y., WANG J., P ELLACINI F., T ONG X., G UO
B.: Fabricating spatially-varying subsurface scattering. ACM
Trans. Graph. (Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH) (2010).
[FRSL08] F UCHS M., R ASKAR R., S EIDEL H.-P., L ENSCH H.
P. A.: Towards passive 6D reflectance field displays. ACM Trans.
Graph. (Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH) (2008).
[GS01] G RIMMETT G., S TIRZAKER D.: "Probability and Random Processes". Oxford University Press, 2001.
[HFM∗ 10] H AŠAN M., F UCHS M., M ATUSIK W., P FISTER H.,
RUSINKIEWICZ S.: Physical reproduction of materials with
specified subsurface scattering. ACM Trans. Graph. (Proc. ACM
SIGGRAPH) (2010).
[HHA∗ 10] H ULLIN M. B., H ANIKA J., A JDIN B., S EIDEL H.P., K AUTZ J., L ENSCH H. P. A.: Acquisition and analysis of bispectral bidirectional reflectance and reradiation distribution functions. ACM Trans. Graph. (Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH) (2010).
[HL10] H IRSCH M., L ANMAN D.: Build your own 3d display.
In ACM SIGGRAPH 2010 Courses (2010).
[HLHR09] H IRSCH M., L ANMAN D., H OLTZMAN H., R ASKAR
R.: BiDi screen: A thin, depth-sensing LCD for 3D interaction
using lights fields. ACM Trans. Graph. (Proc. ACM SIGGRAPH
Asia) (2009).
[IKS∗ 10] I TO K., K IKUCHI H., S AKURAI H., K OBAYASHI I.,
YASUNAGA H., M ORI H., T OKUYAMA K., I SHIKAWA H.,
H AYASAKA K., YANAGISAWA H.: Sony RayModeler: 360◦ autostereoscopic display. In SIGGRAPH Emerging Technologies
(2010).
[JMY∗ 07] J ONES A., M C D OWALL I., YAMADA H., B OLAS M.,
D EBEVEC P.: An interactive 360◦ light field display. In SIGGRAPH Emerging Technologies (2007).
[KHL10] K IM Y., H ONG K., L EE B.: Recent researches based on
integral imaging display method. 3D Research 1 (2010), 17–27.
10.1007/3DRes.01(2010)2.
[KN08] KOIKE T., N AEMURA T.: BRDF display: interactive
view dependent texture display using integral photography. In
IPT/EDT ’08: Proceedings of the 2008 Workshop on Immersive
Projection Technologies/Emerging Display Technologies (New
York, NY, USA, 2008), ACM, pp. 1–4.
[MAG∗ 09] M ATUSIK W., A JDIN B., G U J., L AWRENCE J.,
L ENSCH H. P. A., P ELLACINI F., RUSINKIEWICZ S.: Printing
spatially-varying reflectance. ACM Trans. Graph. (Proc. ACM
SIGGRAPH Asia) (2009).
[Mok93] M OK F. H.: Angle-Multiplexed Storage of 5000 Holograms in Lithium Niobate. Optics Letters 18, 11 (1993), 915–
917.
[MPBM03] M ATUSIK W., P FISTER H., B RAND M., M C M IL LAN L.: A data-driven reflectance model. ACM Trans. Graph.
(Proc. SIGGRAPH) 22, 3 (2003), 759–769.
[NDM05] N GAN A., D URAND F., M ATUSIK W.: Experimental
analysis of BRDF models. In Proc. of the Eurographics Symposium on Rendering (2005), pp. 117–226.
[Orl00] O RLOV P.: Volume Holographic Data Storage. Communications of the ACM 43, 11 (2000), 46–54.
[Pho75] P HONG B. T.: Illumination for computer generated pictures. Commun. ACM 18, 6 (1975), 311–317.
[Puc]

P UCKETTE M. S.: PureData (Pd). http://puredata.info.

[PWKJ07] PAPETTI T. J., WALKER W. E., K EFFER C. E.,
J OHNSON B. E.: Coherent backscatter: measurement of the
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

483

M. Hullin et al. / Dynamic Display of BRDFs
retroreflective BRDF peak exhibited by several surfaces relevant
to ladar applications. In Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation
Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series (Sept. 2007), vol. 6682.

where {δ(x)}−1 (δ) is the inverse of the direction function,
Eq. 7, and f ∆ is the probability density of the reflection directions,

[RLY92] R AKULJIC G. A., L EYVA V., YARIV A.: Optical Data
Storage by using Orthogonal Wavelength-Multiplexed Volume
Holograms. Optics Letters 17, 20 (1992), 1471–1473.

−1

{δ(x)}

tan((δ+β)/2)
ak

cos−1
(δ) =

,

k

(11)

[RWLB01] R ASKAR R., W ELCH G., L OW K.-L., BANDYOPAD HYAY D.: Shader lamps: Animating real objects with imagebased illumination. In Proceedings of the 12th Eurographics Workshop on Rendering Techniques (London, UK, 2001),
Springer-Verlag, pp. 89–102.

and

[TS67] T ORRANCE K. E., S PARROW E. M.: Theory for offspecular reflection from roughened surfaces. J. Opt. Soc. Am.
57, 9 (1967), 1105–1112.

Thus, the probability density function for the reflection direction due to a sine wave is given by:

d{δ(x)}−1
1 1 + tan((δ + β)/2)2
(δ) = −
.
dδ
2 2
tan((δ+β)/2)2
ak 1 −
2
2
a k

[War92] WARD G. J.: Measuring and modeling anisotropic reflection. Computer Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH) 26, 2 (1992),
265–272.
[WPMR09] W EYRICH T., P EERS P., M ATUSIK W.,
RUSINKIEWICZ S.:
Fabricating microgeometry for custom surface reflectance. ACM Trans. Graph. (Proc. ACM
SIGGRAPH) (2009).

A. PDF of a Sine-Shaped Height Field
Given a height field h(x), the reflection direction δ of a light
ray incident at ((x, h(x)) under a fixed angle β to the vertical
is given as
(4)(5)
δ(x) = 2 tan−1 h′ (x) − β.
(7)
Now, consider the wave to generate a microfacet distribution. In our experiments we achieve this situation by timeaveraging over the waves traveling by. As seen from Eq. 7,
the reflection directions directly depend on the derivative of
the height field, h′ (x). Thus, knowledge of the distribution
of the height field derivatives yields the probability density
function of reflection directions caused by the height field.
This can be achieved by considering a random process
which describes light rays as they hit the height field at random positions. The problem then becomes to compute the
probability density of a function of a random variable. The
initial distribution (of hit points) is assumed to be uniform
over the domain of a half-wave (Eq. 3):
f X (X) =

k/π
0

X ∈ [0, π/k]
,
else

k d{δ(x)}−1 (δ)
,
π
dδ

(10)

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(13)

d{δ(x)}−1

(δ) is strictly
where | · | has been dropped because
dδ
negative. Amplitude and wave number enter the equation as
a common factor ρ = ak = 2πa/λ. As a consequence, the
BRDF is invariant to changes in a and k that leave ρ constant.
Changing the incident angle β only results in a shift of the
distribution and does not affect its shape.
A.1. Mean and Variance
In order to quantify the amount of angular blur caused by a
given PDF, we compute its variance. Since there are many
complicating factors in the non-linear regime, we constrain
ourselves to small values of ρ. This allows us to use the
angle-linearised version of the PDF, Eq. 6, for which we can
derive the variance in closed form.
The mean is found at −β, as expected. For the variance
σ20 , we exploit the shift-invariance of the PDF and set β = 0:
σ20 =

Z 2ρ

=

Z 2ρ

(8)

In our case this yields

1 1 + tan((δ + β)/2)2
,
2π ak 1 − tan((δ+β)/2)2
(ak)2

=

to which Eq. 7 is applied to obtain the directional distribution. The choice of a unit distribution is valid if the amplitude of the wave is small such that the microfacets can be
considered as lying in the plane of the macro-surface, only
exhibiting the orientations of the sine wave. From probability theory [GS01] the probability density of the random variable Y generated by applying a function g to another random
variable X is
dg−1
(9)
fY (y) = fX (g−1 ) ·
(y) .
dy

f∆ (δ) =

f∆ (δ) =

(12)

=

−2ρ

−2ρ

δ2 · f∆ˆ 0 dδ
δ2
π

4ρ2 − δ2

1
· 4ρ2 tan−1
2π
1
· 4ρ2 tan−1
2π

dδ
2ρ

δ
4ρ2 − δ2

−δ

4ρ2 − δ2
−2ρ

2ρ

δ
4ρ2 − δ2

(14)
−2ρ

where the integration bounds are due to the domain of the
inverse tangent. To compute the integral we have to take limits from the left at the right boundary and from the right at
the left boundary of the interval [−2ρ . . . 2ρ].
lim

δ→±2ρ

1
2π

· 4ρ2 tan−1

δ
4ρ2 − δ2

= ±ρ2

(15)

The variance of the angle-linearised directional distribution
is thus given by σ20 = 2ρ2 .

