DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01948.x
Eurographics / IEEE Symposium on Visualization 2011 (EuroVis 2011)
H. Hauser, H. Pfister, and J. J. van Wijk
(Guest Editors)

Volume 30 (2011), Number 3

Visualization and Analysis of Eddies in a Global Ocean
Simulation
S. Williams1,2 , M. Hecht1 , M. Petersen1 , R. Strelitz1 , M. Maltrud3 , J. Ahrens1 , M. Hlawitschka2 , and B. Hamann2
2 Institute

1 Computer, Computational and Statistical Sciences Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory
for Data Analysis and Visualization (IDAV), Department of Computer Science, University of California, Davis
3 Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory

Abstract
We present analysis and visualization of flow data from a high-resolution simulation of the dynamical behavior of
the global ocean. Of particular scientific interest are coherent vortical features called mesoscale eddies. We first
extract high-vorticity features using a metric from the oceanography community called the Okubo-Weiss parameter. We then use a new circularity criterion to differentiate eddies from other non-eddy features like meanders in
strong background currents. From these data, we generate visualizations showing the three-dimensional structure
and distribution of ocean eddies. Additionally, the characteristics of each eddy are recorded to form an eddy census that can be used to investigate correlations among variables such as eddy thickness, depth, and location. From
these analyses, we gain insight into the role eddies play in large-scale ocean circulation.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): Computer Graphics [I.3.8]: Applications—
Oceanography Simulation and Modeling [I.6.6]: Simulation Output Analysis—Ocean General Circulation Models

1. Introduction
Oceanography in the early and mid-20th Century was focused on the description and analysis of the mean circulation. This changed later in the century as new observations
produced evidence of a surprisingly vigorous field of often long-lived and deeply penetrating vortices, referred to
as mesoscale eddies. Satellite-based sea surface height altimetry soon produced nearly global maps on which the surface signature of these vortices was clearly evident. Spectral
analysis indicated that a large fraction of the total estimate
of oceanic kinetic energy is associated with these mesoscale
eddies [FS96], transforming our understanding of the fluid
dynamics of ocean circulation.
Oceanic eddies are typically understood as vortices that
are 50-200 km in diameter, may live for several months, and
can propogate across an ocean basin. They are most numerous near strong currents like the Gulf Stream, Kuroshio Current, and Antarctic Circumpolar Current. These eddies have
a significant influence on the earth’s climate: they transport
heat, freshwater, momentum, and mass [LBM02, VLF08].
The flow around eddies isolates the interior waters from the
surrounding ocean; shipboard studies have measured higher
concentrations of carbon, oxygen, and biologically imporc 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

tant nutrients within eddies [MPH∗ 07]. These nutrients are
often transported by the eddies to nutrient-poor waters, increasing the productivity of the food chain.
Around the time that satellite-borne altimeters began producing near-global observations of sea surface height, ocean
general circulation models (OGCMs) crossed into a higher
resolution regime in which the mesoscale eddies began to be
resolved. These models are closely related to those used in
numerical weather prediction and atmospheric modeling in
general, and the ancestry of the first OGCM [Bry69] owed
a great deal to earlier work on numerical modeling of geophysical fluid dynamics for atmospheric science.
The first realistic eddying ocean model simulations focused regionally on the Southern Ocean [FRA91] and on the
North Atlantic [BH89]. A spectral analysis of an approxi◦
mately 41 resolution model, based on the average horizontal spacing between grid points, showed a model sea surface height variability that was lower than that derived from
the altimeter by approximately a factor of two [FS96]. As
computing power increased, first regional and then global
models could be configured and run at horizontal grid reso1 ◦
lutions of around 10
, and their mesoscale variability was
found to come into much better agreement with observa-

992

S. Williams, M. Hecht, M. Petersen, et al / Global Eddy Analysis and Visualization

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) The Okubo-Weiss parameter, a standard metric in oceanography for extracting two-dimenisonal vortices, at the
ocean surface in the North Atlantic. In order to keep scaling consistent, the Okubo-Weiss value is normalized to its standard
deviation. Red regions are those dominated by vorticity, while blue regions are those dominated by strain. The Okubo-Weiss
parameter easily identifies several eddies as red circles, but non-eddy meanders in the Gulf Stream are detected as well. (b) The
Okubo-Weiss parameter visualized at depth by removing all low-vorticity points. The three-dimensional shapes of the eddies
are now made clear: in the region containing the Gulf Stream, several strong eddies reach very deeply into the ocean, while
smaller eddies remain near the surface, and the Gulf Stream itself only dominates near the surface.

tions [SMBH00, MM05]. The mean currents also came into
much better agreement with observations in terms of width,
speed and depth. The Gulf Stream, running from the Florida
Straits and departing from the continental shelf at Cape Hatteras, then feeding into the northward-turning North Atlantic
Current, showed great improvement in path, an indication of
the essential role of eddy-mean flow feedbacks in determining the large scale circulation.
Computer modeling of ocean circulation and modern observing programs together have produced major advances
in physical oceanography. Ocean models save full threedimensional data fields, but publications in oceanography
typically show simple two-dimensional plots of variables on
the surface and in vertical sections. This is partly because
oceanographers are familiar with these views from observational studies, and partly due to the limitations of the visualization tools that oceanographers typically use. Horizontal
velocities in the ocean are 1000 times larger than vertical velocities, so 2D horizontal sections are often the best way to
display the ocean’s currents. A notable exception is the vertical structure of eddies. Questions about their vertical extent,
tilt, and tapering require three-dimensional analysis and visualization.
To this end, we performed parallel analysis on highresolution ocean simulation data on a local computing clus-

ter, extracting eddies and visualizing them in the vicinity
of one of the world’s strongest ocean currents. Eddies are
extracted by extending a standard vorticity metric to further distinguish circular flows from other spurious sources of
high vorticity. Furthermore, by computing geometric information such as the thickness (distance from top to bottom)
of every eddy across multiple daily snapshots of the simulation, we created histograms of eddy distribution and shape
upon the two dimensions of a world map, providing a summarized global view of eddy characteristics. Finally, we use
isolated geometric information from a single snapshot to create more detailed regional two- and three-dimensional maps
to learn how eddy properties are related to each other and to
the overall structure of the ocean. These analyses allow us
to understand where thick, deeply penetrating eddies enable
strong dynamical coupling of the upper and deep reaches of
the ocean, and where biogeochemical activity will be locally
enhanced or suppressed.
2. Related Work
Extracting and visualizing turbulence in vector fields
has long been of interest to the visualization community [PVH∗ 03, LHZP07]. Methods generally focus on either extracting specific structures (e.g., vortices) and drawing a bounding volume [SW97], or extracting the overall
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

993

S. Williams, M. Hecht, M. Petersen, et al / Global Eddy Analysis and Visualization

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2: High-vorticity features extracted from the North Atlantic. (a) Features are colored by Okubo-Weiss value, with highspeed water in translucent gray. Where the Gulf Stream turns, additional non-eddy but high-vorticity features appear. We would
like to filter out these spurious features. (b) The same features, colored based on the angle each point’s velocity vector makes
with an east-pointing vector. Angles are discretized into four domains: angles between east and north (0◦ and 90◦ , colored
purple), north to west (90◦ to 180◦ , green), west to south (180◦ to 270◦ , yellow), and south to east (270◦ to 360◦ , red). Features
that are definitely eddies contain a nearly equal mixture of all four angle domains, while meanders move primarily in one or
two directions and are dominated by one or two angle domains. (c) To use angle domains as a discriminator, we determine for
each high-vorticity feature what percentage of its total volume is flowing in each angle domain. We consider only the minimum:
if the feature is perfectly balanced between the four domains (eddy-like), the minimum percentage of any domain will be 25%.
If the feature contains no points in a domain (non-eddy), its minimum percentage will be 0%. We determined experimentally
that requiring a minimum of 8% (colored green) in each domain discriminates well between eddies and spurious high-vorticity
features—so features colored green here pass the criterion, while features colored red do not.

topology and visualizing it through glyphs or other proxies [HH91, TG09]. For extracting vortex-like structures in
particular, popular methods include finding regions of high
vorticity [VV92], streamline geometry [SP00] or, if the data
are available, by looking for regions of low pressure at the
center of a vortex [BS94].
One can also look for circular behavior in the velocity field directly. Jiang et al look at the problem topologically [JMT02], by looking for neighborhoods in which each
vector in the neighborhood points in a unique direction
range. Similarly, Sood et al [SJBT05] identify eddy centers
by passing a 5 × 5 kernel of the angles between an eastpointing vector and the tangents of a circle centered in the
kernel to find circular flows, then fitting an ellipse over the
entire eddy. We employ a similar method to discriminate
high-vorticity features, to attempt to separate eddies from
non-eddy features.
In 3D visualization, Zhu and Moorhead [ZM95] extract
eddies as a stack of 2D contours and stitch them together to
show their 3D structure in the Pacific Ocean off the coast of
Japan. They develop a new extraction technique, but the restrictiveness of their method appears to preclude extracting
deep eddies, which have been observed to exist in that region. Grant et al [GEO02] developed a method for fitting a
surface to the thermocline—the interface between the upper,
well-mixed ocean and the deep, stratified ocean. His visualc 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

izations show quite clearly the perturbations that eddies can
cause in the thermocline.
Several techniques have also been developed to further refine analysis of the vorticity field. We use the Okubo-Weiss
criterion [Oku70, Wei91], which is known in the visualization community as the Q criterion [HWM88]. This criterion
highlights areas where vorticity dominates strain. Also of
note is the λ2 criterion [JH95], that uses the second eigenvalue of the strain tensor times the sum of the squares of
strain and vorticity to determine whether vorticity or strain
are dominant in a region. We chose the Okubo-Weiss criterion over λ2 because it is the standard vortex criterion within
the oceanographic community.
Numerous studies of satellite data have quantified the
size and distribution of oceanic eddies, mostly based on
consideration of the Okubo-Weiss parameter. Published
works have considered regions including the Mediterranean
Sea [IFGLFGO06], the Tasman Sea [WAB06], the Gulf of
Alaska [HT08] and the full nearly-global domain of all but
the ice-covered seas [CSSdS07].
An eddy census from satellite data is limited to surface
features, while data from vertical ship-deployed profiles and
fixed moorings are sparse and can only capture a very incomplete picture. Ocean models have been used as a means
to study features that are not directly observable at this time,
and therefore to fill in our understanding of the oceans. Much
of the knowledge of so-called eddy transports of heat, salt

994

S. Williams, M. Hecht, M. Petersen, et al / Global Eddy Analysis and Visualization

and nutrients has been derived from the analysis of ocean
models [JM02,YNQ∗ 10]. It is important to note that the discussion of eddy transport in the literature generally refers
to all transport not explicitly accounted for in the mean flow,
which will include any temporal variability in the mean flow,
such as the slow meandering of large-scale currents.
Eddies are understood to provide a principal means of
coupling between the circulations of the upper and deep
ocean [HL75, HH08]. The vertical structure of eddies is also
understood to influence the suppression or enhancement of
biogeochemical activity through their control over nutrient
supply through the base of the euphotic zone (the zone over
which light penetration is sufficient to support photosynthesis). It has been shown that the effect on nutrient supply
and biological activity can be of opposite sign depending on
whether the eddy is a thick one of low vertical mode structure or a thin one of higher vertical mode [AMM∗ 10], motivating our classification of eddies into thick and thin.
3. Methods
Our analysis of eddies focuses on data generated by Los
Alamos National Laboratory’s Parallel Ocean Program
(POP) [SDM92] in the context of a global ocean simula1 ◦
. As explained
tion with grid resolution of approximately 10
∗
in [MBH 08, MBP10], the horizontal grid follows lines of
latitude and longitude in the southern hemisphere, where the
landmass of the Antarctic continent prevents the singularity
in latitudinal spacing that occurs at the South Pole (where all
grid points would share the same southern neighbor, turning
rectangular grid cells into triangles) from imposing an otherwise severe time step limitation on the finite volume discretization of the ocean model. In the northern hemisphere,
where the northern pole is in the middle of an ocean basin, a
more complex discretization is used in order to maintain relatively uniform grid cell areas with horizontal aspect ratios
that do not deviate greatly from one. This is accomplished
using a tripole grid, in which two North Poles are used instead, with one located in Canada and the other in Siberia. In
such a grid, the top row of points forms a line from one pole
to the other and back again, and any degenerate cells occur
on land and are ignored by the simulation.
Oceanic flows take on extreme aspect ratios when considered in three dimensions, with horizontal scales being orders of magnitude larger than characteristic vertical scales.
1 ◦
, or approximately 10 km, is considered exWhereas 10
tremely fine horizontal resolution, the vertical resolution is
much higher, with grid spacing on the order of 10 m near the
surface, reaching 250 m in the deep ocean, with a smooth
transition between. The model output is then a rectilinear
grid of size 3600 × 2400 × 42. These data comprise approximately 1.4 GB per floating-point variable per daily snapshot, so all our visualization and analysis was done on a
local thirty-two core cluster primarily using the visualization toolkit ParaView. We consider two input variables from

the simulation, comprising the two components of horizontal velocity. The vertical velocity does not contribute significantly to the relative vorticity, being several orders of magnitude smaller in scale than the horizontal velocity, as is characteristic of geophysical flows. Any points that lie in land
are assigned a special value of −1034 in all fields, so the
bathymetry (a depth map of the bottom of the ocean) can be
readily inferred.
While the details of the grid are specific to a run of POP—
the simulation code supports different methods for removing the northern pole singularity, like keeping a single North
Pole but moving it so it lies in Canada—one of the inputs
to the POP run (that is similarly available as input to us) is
a mapping from grid coordinates to longitude and latitude.
The mapping is simply a two-dimensional rectilinear grid of
size 3600 × 2400, noting that all points at a particular (i, j)
grid coordinate (i.e., at any depth) share the same longitude
and latitude. This creates a spherical coordinate system of
longitude, latitude, and r as the distance from the center of
the Earth (computed as the radius of the Earth, 6,371 km,
minus the depth of the point in the simulation grid) that can
be easily transformed into Cartesian coordinates for making
the Earth-like visualizations in figures 1 and 2. In these visualizations, depth is exaggerated by a factor of 50, because
with three orders of magnitude separating the radius of the
Earth (6,371 km) from the maximum depth of POP (about
6 km), depth-dependent features (including the bathymetry
of the ocean) are imperceptibly small without exaggeration.

3.1. Eddy Extraction
We begin with one of the ocean community’s canonical
methods for identifying eddies: the Okubo-Weiss parameter. We chose to start with this metric because, while it
certainly is not the only means of identifying vortical features, its popularity among oceanographers puts this work in
a context that can be immediately understood by members
of the ocean community. In general, this parameter divides
the ocean into regions dominated by vorticity, regions dominated by strain or deformation, and a background where
neither effect is dominant. Regions dominated by vorticity
are potentially eddies, though vorticity dominance can be
caused by other effects, such as sharp turns in the mean flow.
Mathematically, the Okubo-Weiss parameter is defined as:

OW = s2n + s2s − ω2

(1)

Here, sn is normal strain (currents pushing against each
other), ss is shear strain (currents running in opposite directions past each other), and ω is vorticity (currents moving in
circles). These three variables can be expressed in terms of
velocity gradients:
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

S. Williams, M. Hecht, M. Petersen, et al / Global Eddy Analysis and Visualization

∂u ∂v
−
sn =
∂x ∂y
∂v ∂u
+
ss =
∂x ∂y
∂v ∂u
−
ω =
∂x ∂y

(2)
(3)
(4)

Here, u refers to the east-west velocity component, and v
to the north-south velocity component. Then, x and y are locally east-pointing and north-pointing vectors, respectively.
(We assume that within a single grid cell, which is about
11km on a side at the equator and smaller at higher latitudes,
the curvature of the Earth is negligible. Thus, we consider
the local coordinate system at each simulation point coplanar with the local manifold of the Earth.) Substituting these
gradients into the original Okubo-Weiss expression provides
an equation that can be solved solely from velocity:

OW =

∂u ∂v
−
∂x ∂y

2

+

∂v ∂u
+
∂x ∂y

2

−

∂v ∂u
−
∂x ∂y

2

(5)

Being defined only in terms of velocity gradients, the
Okubo-Weiss parameter has the advantage of being entirely
local and as a result it scales well to large data. A first approach to visualizing the Okubo-Weiss parameter might be
to consider the parameter solely in terms of positive (straindominated) and negative (vorticity-dominated) domains, but
for numbers close to zero the parameter is dominated by
noise. To select only vorticity-dominated features, then, we
need to apply a threshold to only retain points with negative
Okubo-Weiss values, but due to the parameter being noisy
for very low values, the threshold should be nonzero. The
convention in the ocean community is to divide the OkuboWeiss value by its standard deviation (normalizing it such
that −1 is one standard deviation left of the mean) to provide
relatively data-independent scaling of its values, and only
consider a data point meaningful if it is at least 0.2 standard
deviations from 0 (i.e., remove all points with Okubo-Weiss
above −0.2). We follow this convention, to ensure that our
starting point for eddy analysis is consistent with the baseline assumptions of prior oceanographic studies of eddies.
The Okubo-Weiss parameter is plotted at the ocean surface in Figure 1a. For this study we are interested in eddies
as discrete entities (i.e., seeing the strict boundary of eddies
according to our definition), so we believe volume rendering
would be inappropriate as a visualization technique. Instead
we employ a threshold to keep only points with negative
Okubo-Weiss values at least 0.2 standard deviations from 0,
and render them as solid cubes. We further place these extracted eddies on a bathymetric map also extracted from the
simulation data to geographically orient viewers and to show
the interaction between deep eddies and the ocean floor. The
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

995

resulting visualization is shown for the North Atlantic’s Gulf
Stream in Figure 1b.
From this point forward, eddies (or more precisely, highvorticity features) are defined as connected components of
points that all have Okubo-Weiss values below −0.2 standard deviations. Considering that POP lies on a rectilinear
grid, we define two points as neighbors if their voxels (the
actual volume the points represent) share a face. More colloquially, this is six-way adjacency: each interior point has
six neighbors, so if a point is indexed by (i, j, k), then its
neighbors are (i+1, j, k), (i−1, j, k), (i, j +1, k), (i, j −1, k),
(i, j, k + 1), and (i, j, k − 1).
These pictures indicate that, while the Okubo-Weiss parameter identifies eddies both at and below the surface of the
ocean, it also identifies high-vorticity features that should
not be considered eddies, particularly meanders in the Gulf
Stream and other strong currents around the world, as well
as several small-scale features that we consider noise. To
mitigate this, we have added one more filtering criterion.
We compute the angle between each point’s velocity vector and a vector pointing east. These angles are discretized
into four domains: 0 to 90 degrees (northeast), 90 to 180
degrees (northwest), 180 to 270 degrees (southwest), and
270 to 360 degrees (southeast). Figure 2b shows the same
vorticity-dominated features as Figure 2a, but recolored to
show the angle domain each point falls within.
Since an eddy is a circular flow, we expect that an eddy
should contain velocity vectors in all four angle domains,
and that its center point should be at the intersection of these
four domains. Indeed, the vorticity-dominated regions of the
Gulf Stream that are most likely eddies do show a crossshaped pattern in their angle domains, indicating that the
current is circling around the center of the eddy. However,
several of the larger meanders also contain all four angle domains, either due to making a sufficiently sharp hairpin turn,
or by making S-shaped turns. Instead, for using these angle
domains to discriminate between eddies and other features,
we require that each angle domain make up at least a certain share of the total eddy, as shown in Figure 2c. Based on
experimentation, we arrived at a requirement of 8%.
As our eddy extraction was implemented using ParaView,
the computation is parallelized by breaking the data apart
into roughly equally-sized blocks. Besides projecting velocity from grid space to world space to correct for the distortions introduced by the tripole coordinate system, computing the Okubo-Weiss parameter is primarily dependent on
computing velocity gradients. We apply central differencing
to find approximate gradients, which is a function on up to
six neighbors. In order to further regularize the data across
time, we choose the same normalization factor for the entire
data set: the standard deviation of Okubo-Weiss at the ocean
surface on the vernal equinox (March 21). We use a single
normalization factor for all time steps to ensure that the magnitude of Okubo-Weiss is directly comparable between time

996

S. Williams, M. Hecht, M. Petersen, et al / Global Eddy Analysis and Visualization

steps. We then use ParaView’s threshold filter to remove all
points with Okubo-Weiss above −0.2σ, leaving only highvorticity features behind. At this point, the angle between
each point’s velocity vector and an east-pointing vector is
computed from simple trigonometry, and discretized into
one of the four domains as above.
After the threshold filter is applied, ParaView automatically converts the data to an unstructured grid with the
same connectivity implicit in the rectilinear grid and, since
the threshold automatically breaks connectivity between unconnected eddies (because the points connecting the eddies
have been removed), eddies can be identified with a breadthfirst search. The final implementation consideration is that
in dividing the data, it is quite likely for some eddies to be
split across two processes. In that case, since a breadth-first
search in one process would not automatically cross the process boundary, the split eddy would be represented as two
independent eddies, causing the eddy to be either doublecounted, or more likely, making it too dominant in one or
two angle domains and fail to pass our angle criterion.
There are two obvious solutions: employ message passing
between the processes, or have the boundaries overlap by at
least the size of the largest eddy. We opted for the latter solution, since then each eddy automatically resides entirely in
at least one process. Specifically, each process has a certain
block assigned to it, with points assigned uniquely to blocks
and all points in exactly one block, and each process also
takes an overlap region into its neighboring blocks such that,
while each point is uniquely claimed, it can appear in the
overlap region of up to three other processes. Finally, since
that implies that an eddy in the overlap region will reside in
part or in whole in at least two processes, a process is only
allowed to claim an eddy if the point with minimum OkuboWeiss is not in its overlap region. The only caveat to this definition is that it assumes a unique minimum Okubo-Weiss
value per eddy, further subject to the vagaries of floatingpoint numbers, though floating-point imprecision has not appeared to be a problem in practice. While it might also appear to be a problem that one process might not have the
point with minimum Okubo-Weiss value in either its main
block or its overlap zone, we assume that the overlap zone is
at least as large as the largest eddy. If a point from an eddy
is not contained anywhere in the data available to a specific
process, then the eddy must touch a border and therefore reside entirely in the overlap zone, so it cannot be claimed by
that process.
3.2. Census and Analysis
In addition to visualizing ocean eddies directly, we also developed a capability to analyze the distribution, size, thickness, and depth of eddies around the world. We consider the
following computed quantities for each eddy:
• Volume: computed as sum of the volumes of all voxels in

the eddy, with voxels approximated as cubes (though in
reality they would be rectangular solid angles of a spherical shell)
• Radius: we consider the radius (the radial extent of an
eddy in a latitude-longitude manifold, i.e., in a plane normal to the surface of the Earth) with respect to the depth
containing the most negative (i.e., strongest) OkuboWeiss value; at this depth, the radius is approximated by
computing the area of the eddy at that depth as the sum
of the areas of all voxels (computed as the longitudinal
extent times the latitudinal extent), then by assuming the
eddy is a circle at this depth, taking r = A/π
• Thickness: computed as the maximum difference between
the depths of any two points in the eddy
• Vorticity sign: positive if at least half the points in the
eddy have positive vorticity (spin counterclockwise), and
negative otherwise
Visualizations like those in the previous section are only
useful for looking at snapshots of isolated regions of the
ocean, due to the density of information being displayed.
Here we synthesize 350 global snapshots of daily data to create an eddy census database in order to study the statistical
distributions of eddy metrics.
To generate the census, the world is broken into bins 1◦
on each edge. One statistic we highlight is a count: for each
snapshot, the number of eddies in each bin is counted, then
each bin’s count is averaged across the 350 available daily
snapshots. This census, in Figure 3c, shows strong eddy
activity in the Gulf Stream in the western Atlantic Ocean,
the Kuroshio Current in the western Pacific Ocean, and
the Antarctic Circumpolar Current ringing Antarctica in the
Southern Ocean. Additionally, because of the simplicity of
the statistics in this image, it can easily be qualitatively compared to observational data to confirm its validity. In Figures
3a and 3b we use model and satellite altimetry data to derive sea surface height variability, or, the difference between
instantaneous and averaged sea surface height. The principle observation is that eddies cause bulges on the surface
of the ocean. Averaging the sea surface height over a large
amount of time removes the temporary bulges caused by eddies (providing the sea surface height due to mean flow).
Then, the difference between the average and instantaneous
sea surface height highlights behavior not attributable to the
mean flow, e.g., eddies. Using this approach shows regions
of observed strong surface eddy activity, which correspond
fairly well to the eddy activity regions found by our census.
The surface characteristics of eddies are well known from
satellite observations, but the depth of penetration has been
less adequately observed. With model data we can measure
average eddy thickness, or the distance from the top of the
eddy to the bottom. Figure 3d reveals several thick eddies in
the midst of the Gulf Stream, Kuroshio Current, and Antarctic Circumpolar Current. Focusing on the Atlantic, there are
significant numbers of eddies with depths on the order of
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

S. Williams, M. Hecht, M. Petersen, et al / Global Eddy Analysis and Visualization

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

997

Figure 3: Sea surface height variability in centimeters, defined as the root mean square of the difference between the instantaneous height of the sea surface and its time-mean, can be used as a proxy measurement for eddy activity. To compare model to
observational data directly, we first show sea surface height variability from (a) POP ocean model data and (b) observational
data from the AVISO processing of satellite altimetry. In these images, the simulation shows exceptionally good agreement to
observation. (c) Our global eddy census, showing the average number of eddies per 1◦ of latitude and longitude, averaged
across 350 daily snapshots. Note that the color bar of (c) is reversed relative to that of (a) and (b). Relating the numerical density of eddies in (c) to sea surface height variability, both measures indicate high levels of eddy activity in the same locations.
(d) Average eddy thickness in meters as a function of latitude and longitude. We use thickness to refer to the distance from the
top of an eddy to the bottom. Notably, thick eddies only have a significant signal in the regions of the same three big currents,
the Gulf Stream, Kuroshio Current, and Antarctic Circumpolar Current, where they can get as thick as 5000m.

5000m. This means that some eddies extend from the surface of the ocean to the floor, and several more stretch half
the maximum height of the ocean.
Oceanographers would like to know which eddies are confined to the upper ocean, which extend into the deep ocean,
and if there are isolated deep eddies without surface features.
The upper ocean is well mixed due to wind-induced waves
and turbulence, while the deep ocean is stratified with little vertical mixing. The thermocline—a surface at the depth
where temperature changes more rapidly—lies somewhere
between these two regions of lower vertical temperature gradient, and serves as a depth to separate shallow eddies from
deep eddies in our analysis.
Figure 4a shows a skeletonized view of the region of the
northwest Atlantic we identified from Figure 3d as likely to
contain thermocline-penetrating eddies. Eddy skeletons are
drawn as a cylinder vertically spanning the thickness of the
eddy (so the top of the cylinder is at the same depth as the
highest point in the eddy, and the bottom of the cylinder is at
the same depth as the lowest point in the eddy), and the cylinder passes through the most vortical point in the eddy (where
the Okubo-Weiss value is most negative). The cylinders are
drawn with fixed radius to avoid providing overwhelming
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

amounts of information, as this visualization contains all the
information we need to address the question under consideration. Even from this simplified view it is visually apparent
that there are several eddies beginning near the surface of the
ocean and extending down quite far, but to make the relationship more explicit, we created a two-dimensional map showing where thermocline-penetrating eddies occur. Eddies that
penetrate the thermocline, meaning that they begin above the
thermocline and end below it, are shown as blue squares
if they spin counterclockwise, and red squares if they spin
clockwise. Eddies entirely above or below the thermocline
are represented by gray diamonds. For this map, we use an
estimate of the thermocline depth of 700m [AMM∗ 10].
4. Results
Our results were reviewed by three Los Alamos National
Laboratory scientists specializing in ocean modeling—
Matthew Hecht, Mark Petersen, and Mat Maltrud—who
drew a number of insights from these visualizations. Their
consideration of results begins with Figure 2c, where
discrimination has been performed in order to separate
mesoscale eddies from other high-vorticity features. In this
view of the northwest Atlantic the deeper eddies tend to be

998

S. Williams, M. Hecht, M. Petersen, et al / Global Eddy Analysis and Visualization

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: (a) Skeletonized view of the eddy field in the northwest Atlantic, from −80 to −30 longitude and 20◦ to 50◦
latitude. Eddies are pictured as blue or red cylinders of vertical extent, with black lines projecting subsurface eddies onto the
ocean surface to aid in visual alignment. Blue eddies have positive vorticity (counterclockwise spin), while red eddies have
negative vorticity (clockwise spin). The green translucent layer approximates the thermocline. (b) Two-dimensional map of the
same eddy field. Eddies that penetrate the thermocline (i.e., that have their minimum depth above the thermocline and their
maximum depth below) are represented as colored boxes; these are the eddies that can couple the upper and deep ocean.
Coloration is the same used in the skeletonized view: blue for counterclockwise and red for clockwise. Eddies that exist entirely
above or below the thermocline are gray diamonds. For this region of the Atlantic, the thermocline is at about 700m [AMM∗ 10].
◦

(a)

◦

(b)

Figure 5: (a) Skeletonized view of the eddy field in the Southern Atlantic, from −70◦ to 0◦ longitude and −70◦ to 0◦ latitude.
The thermocline in this region of the ocean is taken to be 500m. (b) Two-dimensional map of the same eddy field.

associated with the Gulf Stream, where some of them have
been formed through a process in which meanders in the
Stream become rings and then pinch off from the main flow.
All of these deep eddies derive their kinetic energy mainly
through the release of potential energy in the upper ocean,
but the depth to which the eddies penetrate enables a transfer of energy to the deep ocean. Figure 3d shows the spatial
distribution of these deep eddies that explain the eddy-driven
circulation of the abyssal ocean, as anticipated in the idealized but highly influential work of [HL75].
Most of the eddies in the interior foreground of Figure 2c,
south of the path of the Gulf Stream, are thin and shallow.
In this region of the North Atlantic surrounding Bermuda,
referred to as the Sargasso Sea, it has been shown that
the tendency of eddies to either enrich or suppress nutrient supply depends not only on the rotational orientation

of the eddy (counter-clockwise versus clockwise, or in geophysical terms, cyclonic versus anti-cyclonic), but also depends on whether the eddy is thick or thin, with the sign
of the effect being reversed if the eddy is thin rather than
thick [AMM∗ 10]. These two criteria of rotational orientation
and thickness are shown more clearly in the skeletonized
view of Figure 4a. [AMM∗ 10] goes on to make the structural
distinction between thin and thick eddies based on whether
the eddy penetrates the thermocline, where higher vertical
temperature gradients exist at intermediate depth somewhere
between the well mixed waters near the surface and the weak
gradients of the deep ocean. In Figure 4b we distinguish,
eddy-by-eddy, between those that are thin and those that are
thick enough to cross the thermocline (being represented by
colored squares in the two-dimensional map).
A similar analysis in Figure 5 of the depth distribution of
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

S. Williams, M. Hecht, M. Petersen, et al / Global Eddy Analysis and Visualization

eddies in the Southern Ocean, where the powerful Antarctic Circumpolar Current circles the Earth nearly unimpeded
by land masses, shows a remarkable concentration of deep
eddies that pass our detection criteria to the bottom of the
ocean. It should be noted that for numerical reasons (i.e.,
how many points are required to get 8% in each angle domain relative to the total number of points) our detection
criteria is stricter in a relative sense in the deep ocean, as
compared with the upper ocean, because deep ocean velocities tend to be smaller. It seems likely that these particularly intense eddies have been “pinched off” as meanders in
the flanks of the Current. The formation process will be examined once our techniques have been extended in a robust
way to the tracking of individual three-dimensional eddies
through time.
The great abundance of thick eddies in the Southern
Ocean, along the path of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, is also very apparent in Figure 3d. It has recently been
argued, again based on idealized study, that the eddies of
the Southern Ocean set the stratification of the much of the
World Ocean [WC10]. Our visualizations show that there is
a vast array of deep eddies spanning the southern extremes of
the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian sectors, capable of exerting
control over the mid-depth stratification of the World Ocean.
Another area in which particularly deep-reaching eddies
appear in Figure 3d is where the westward-flowing Agulhas Current has its “retroflection.” This occurs off the southern tip of Africa, where most of the waters of the Agulhas Current reverse course to become swept up with the
eastward-flowing Antarctic Circumpolar Current, and deep
eddies sporadically break off of the powerful Agulhas Current. This sends masses of Indian Ocean waters spinning
off into and across the South Atlantic where they modulate
the strength of the Atlantic overturning circulation [BBL08].
The Gulf Stream region is also closely associated with the
overturning circulation, with its downstream manifestation,
the North Atlantic Current, believed to have taken a different
course at the time of the Last Glacial Maximum [RMM95],
and this is another region of notably deep eddies. This is
also a region in which a particularly vigorous deep circulation appears to be driven by vertical momentum transfer
through the eddy field. In turn, the deep circulation interacts
strongly with the circulation of the upper ocean, controlling
the path of the Gulf Stream, in a delicate and entirely mutual interaction between upper and lower components of the
circulation [HH08].
5. Conclusion
The complete role of deep, thermocline-penetrating eddies is
not currently well understood. Partly this is because observational data at depth are sparse, and global ocean simulations
have only recently reached the resolutions required to reliably resolve eddies. We began addressing this by extracting
eddies from a tenth-degree global ocean simulation, startc 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

999

ing from the standard Okubo-Weiss parameter. Because the
Okubo-Weiss parameter identifies any feature where vorticity dominates strain, we created a new criterion to select for
circular, more eddy-like vorticity features. From there, we
gathered statistical data about the global eddy field across
350 daily snapshots and visualized them in a summarized
world map of characteristics and distributions, and used
statistics from a single snapshot to make detailed geographical and correlative visualizations of the eddies’ properties.
To this end, we intend to expand our analytical capabilities to include eddy tracking over time, and to allow for
more extensive three-dimensional consideration of correlations with additional variables including temperature, salinity, potential density and enstrophy.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Department of Energy
(DOE) Office of Science (OSC) Biological and Environmental Research (BER) Climate Visualization Program, the
LANL-UC Davis Materials Design Institute, and in part by
NSF grant CCF-0702817. Finally, we thank the members
of the Institute for Data Analysis and Visualization (IDAV),
Department of Computer Science, UC Davis, and the Applied Computer Science group at Los Alamos National Laboratory.
References
[AMM∗ 10] A NDERSON L. A., M C G ILLICUDDY, J R . D. J.,
M ALTRUD M. E., L IMA I. D., D ONEY S. C.: Impact of eddywind interaction on eddy demographics and phytoplankton community structure in a model of the North Atlantic Ocean. Dyn.
Atmos. Oceans (2010), submitted. 4, 7, 8
[BBL08] B IASTOCH A., B ÖNING C. W., L UTJEHARMS J.: Agulhas leakage dynamics affects decadal variability in Atlantic
overturning circulation. Nature 456 (2008), 489–492. 9
[BH89] B RYAN F., H OLLAND W.: A high-resolution simulation
of the wind- and thermohaline-driven circulation in the North Atlantic Ocean. In Proceedings of the ’Aha Huliko’a Hawaiian
Winter Workshop, Muller P., Henderson D., (Eds.), Hawaii Inst.
Geophys. Spec. Publ. U. Hawaii, 1989, pp. 99–115. 1
[Bry69] B RYAN K.: A numerical method for the study of the
circulation of the World Ocean. J. Comput. Phys.4 (1969), 347—
376. 1
[BS94] BANKS D. C., S INGER B. A.: Vortex tubes in turbulent
flows: identification, representation, reconstruction. In VIS ’94:
Proceedings of the conference on Visualization ’94 (Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 1994), IEEE Computer Society Press, pp. 132–
139. 3
[CSSdS07] C HELTON D. B., S CHLAX M. G., S AMELSON
R. M., DE S ZOEKE R. A.: Global observations of large oceanic
eddies. Geophysical Research Letters 34, L15606 (2007), 5. 3
[FRA91] FRAM G ROUP : An eddy-resolving model of the Southern Ocean. EOS Trans. AGU72 (1991), 169–175. 1
[FS96] F U L. L., S MITH R. D.: Global ocean circulation from
satellite altimetry and high-resolution computer simuation. Bull.
Amer. Meteorol. Soc.11, 77 (1996), 2625–2636. 1

1000

S. Williams, M. Hecht, M. Petersen, et al / Global Eddy Analysis and Visualization

[GEO02] G RANT J., E RLEBACHER G., O’B RIEN J.: Case
study: Visualizing ocean flow vertical motions using lagrangianeulerian time surfaces. In Visualization, 2002. VIS 2002. IEEE
(Nov. 2002), pp. 529 –532. 3
[HH91] H ELMAN J. L., H ESSELINK L.: Visualizing vector field
topology in fluid flows. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 11, 3 (1991),
36–46. 3
[HH08] H URLBURT H. E., H OGAN P. J.: The Gulf Stream pathway and the impacts of the eddy-driven abyssal circulation and
the Deep Western Boundary Current. Dyn. Atmos. Oceans 45
(2008), 71–101. 4, 9

of the western Arctic Ocean. Journal of Geophysical Research
(Oceans) 112, C11 (May 2007), 5011. 1
[Oku70] O KUBO A.: Horizontal dispersion of floatable particles in the vicinity of velocity singularities such as convergences.
Deep Sea Research and Oceanographic Abstracts 17, 3 (1970),
445 – 454. 3
[PVH∗ 03] P OST F. H., V ROLIJK B., H AUSER H., L ARAMEE
R. S., D OLEISCH H.: The state of the art in flow visualisation:
Feature extraction and tracking. Computer Graphics Forum 22,
4 (2003), 775–792. 2

[HL75] H OLLAND W. R., L IN L. B.: On the generation of
mesoscale eddies and their contribution to the oceanic general
circulation. I. A preliminary numerical experiment. J. Phys.
Oceanogr.5, 4 (1975), 642 – 57. 4, 8

[RMM95] ROBINSON S. G., M ASLIN M. A., M C C AVE I. N.:
Magnetic-susceptibility variations in Upper Pleistocene deep-sea
sediments of the NE Atlantic – Implications for ice rafting and
paleocirculation at the Last Glacial Maximum. Paleoceanography 10, 2 (1995), 221 – 250. 9

[HT08] H ENSON S. A., T HOMAS A. C.: A census of oceanic
anticyclonic eddies in the gulf of alaska. Deep Sea Research Part
I: Oceanographic Research Papers 55, 2 (2008), 163 – 176. 3

[SDM92] S MITH R. D., D UKOWICZ J. K., M ALONE R. C.: Parallel ocean general circulation modeling. Physica D: Nonlinear
Phenomena60 (1992), 38—61. 4

[HWM88] H UNT J. C. R., W RAY A. A., M OIN P.: Eddies,
streams, and convergence zones in turbulent flows. In Studying Turbulence Using Numerical Simulation Databases, 2 (Dec.
1988), pp. 193–208. 3

[SJBT05] S OOD V., J OHN B., BALASUBRAMANIAN R., TAN DON A.: Segmentation and tracking of mesoscale eddies in numeric ocean models. In Image Processing, 2005. ICIP 2005.
IEEE International Conference on (September 2005), vol. 3,
pp. III – 469–72. 3

[IFGLFGO06] I SERN -F ONTANET J., G ARCÍA -L ADONA E.,
F ONT J., G ARCÍA -O LIVARES A.: Non-gaussian velocity probability density functions: An altimetric perspective of the mediterranean sea. J. Phys. Oceanogr.36, 11 (2006), 2153 – 2164. 3

[SMBH00] S MITH R. D., M ALTRUD M. E., B RYAN F. O.,
H ECHT M. W.: Numerical simulation of the North Atlantic
1 ◦
Ocean at 10
. J. Phys. Oceanogr.30 (2000), 1532–1561. 2

[JH95] J INHEE J EONG , H USSAIN F.: On the identification of a
vortex. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 285 (25 February 1995), 69–
94. 3

[SP00] S ADARJOEN I. A., P OST F. H.: Detection, quantification,
and tracking of vortices using streamline geometry. Computers
& Graphics 24, 3 (2000), 333 – 341. 3

[JM02] JAYNE S. R., M AROTZKE J.: The oceanic eddy heat
transport*. Journal of Physical Oceanography 32, 12 (2002),
3328–3345. 4

[SW97] S ILVER D., WANG X.: Tracking and visualizing turbulent 3d features. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE
Transactions on 3, 2 (apr. 1997), 129 –141. 2

[JMT02] J IANG M., M ACHIRAJU R., T HOMPSON D.: A novel
approach to vortex core region detection. In Proceedings of the
symposium on Data Visualisation 2002 (Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, Switzerland, 2002), VISSYM ’02, Eurographics Association, pp. 217–ff. 3

[TG09] T RICOCHE X., G ARTH C.: Topological methods for visualizing vortical flows. In Mathematical Foundations of Scientific Visualization, Computer Graphics, and Massive Data Exploration, Farin G., Hege H.-C., Hoffman D., Johnson C. R., Polthier
K., Rumpf M., (Eds.), Mathematics and Visualization. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 89–107. 10.1007/b106657_5. 3

[LBM02] L EACH H., B OWERMAN S. J., M C C ULLOCH M. E.:
Upper-ocean eddy transports of heat, potential vorticity, and volume in the northeastern north atlantic—“vivaldi 1991”. Journal
of Physical Oceanography 32, 10 (2002), 2926–2937. 1
[LHZP07] L ARAMEE R., H AUSER H., Z HAO L., P OST F.:
Topology-based flow visualization, the state of the art. In
Topology-based Methods in Visualization, Hauser H., Hagen
H., Theisel H., (Eds.), Mathematics and Visualization. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 1–19. 10.1007/978-3-540-708230_1. 2
[MBH∗ 08] M ALTRUD M., B RYAN F., H ECHT M., H UNKE E.,
I VANOVA D., M C C LEAN J., P EACOCK S.: Global ocean modelling in the eddying regime using POP. CLIVAR Exchanges 44,
1 (January 2008), 5–8. (unpublished manuscript). 4
[MBP10] M ALTRUD M., B RYAN F., P EACOCK S.: Boundary impulse response functions in a century-long eddying global ocean
simulation. Environmental Fluid Mechanics 10, 1-2 (APR 2010),
275–295. 4
[MM05] M ALTRUD M. E., M C C LEAN J. L.: An eddy resolving
1/10◦ ocean simulation. Ocean Modelling8, 1–2 (2005), 31–54.
2
[MPH∗ 07] M ATHIS J. T., P ICKART R. S., H ANSELL D. A.,
K ADKO D., BATES N. R.: Eddy transport of organic carbon and
nutrients from the Chukchi Shelf: Impact on the upper halocline

[VLF08] V OLKOV D. L., L EE T., F U L.: Eddy-induced meridional heat transport in the ocean. Geophys. Res. Lett.35 (Oct.
2008), 20601–+. 1
[VV92] V ILLASENOR J., V INCENT A.: An algorithm for space
recognition and time tracking of vorticity tubes in turbulence.
CVGIP: Image Understanding 55, 1 (1992), 27 – 35. 3
[WAB06] WAUGH D. W., A BRAHAM E. R., B OWEN M. M.:
Spatial variations of stirring in the surface ocean: A case study
of the tasman sea. J. Phys. Oceanogr.36, 3 (2006), 526 – 542. 3
[WC10] W OLFE C. L., C ESSI P.: What Sets the Strength of the
Middepth Stratification and Overturning Circulation in Eddying
Ocean Models? J. Phys. Oceanogr.40, 7 (2010), 1520–1538. 9
[Wei91] W EISS J.: The dynamics of enstrophy transfer in twodimensional hydrodynamics. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena
48, 2-3 (1991), 273 – 294. 3
[YNQ∗ 10] Y IM B. Y., N OH Y., Q IU B., Y OU S. H., Y OON
J. H.: The vertical structure of eddy heat transport simulated
by an eddy-resolving ogcm. Journal of Physical Oceanography
40, 2 (2010), 340–353. 4
[ZM95] Z HU Z., M OORHEAD R. J.: Extracting and visualizing
ocean eddies in time-varying flow fields, 1995. 3

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

