12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Hypertext of the ecclesiastical architectural heritage of the Padova historic centre
Andrea Giordano, Luisa Bifulco, Riccardo Lovato and Cesare Barnes
Università degli Studi di Padova
Dipartimento di Architettura, Urbanistica e Rilevamento
{ andrea.giordano@unipd.it, luisa.bifulco@unipd.it, ric.lovato@virgilio.it, barnez07@libero.it }
process; a process that Vittorio Gregotti recognised as
the distance from material concreteness when he states
that the architect doesn’t produce houses but rather
designs them [1]. The project, in fact, considered as the
point where the architect’s idea is expressed and takes
shape as it develops and organises itself, is nearer, in a
logistical process, to the theoretical concept than to the
practical execution: nearer to the world of ideas, of
thought and of logic.
Architecture, therefore, conceived in the mind of the
architect, finds its expression not so much in reality but
rather in a mediation that represents and establishes not
only spatial values, but also metric or functional ones:
architecture, to become real, has to be represented.
Considering the many meanings of the term “represent”,
the main ones can be identified immediately: mimeticreproduction
(re-present),
historical-documentary
(record) and descriptive (show/demonstrate), are all
meanings that, even if as objective and neutral as
possible, are attached to the analytical aspect of the
knowledge and communication of the architecture, rather
than to the project (at this point it should be noted that, in
this case, representation can take on synthetic subject
connotations, such as for a survey drawing in which too
much neutrality and objectivity would reduce the
operative significance and the planning value).
Therefore it is the meaning of “model” that connotes
the representation as a further state (alongside historical,
theoretical and technical) of architecture: other than
including all the aforementioned meanings of
representation – mimetic, descriptive and historical –, the
model also takes on other more meaningful significances
that qualify it as architectural double: it positions itself
both as a medium between theory and construction as
well as being a way of bringing about the piece of
architecture itself, that is to say from its first idea to its
realisation.
In order to represent the architecture, an ability to
create a geometric model of that piece of architecture is
essential.

Abstract

It is possible to recognize the importance of
knowledge of configurative geometry for creative
thinking, the scientific knowledge and the practice? Do
we can attribute to a geometric knowledge a founding
and fundamental role for the correct displaying of the
knowledge of the cultural heritage? The answers are
affirmative certainly understanding that if this
knowledge not only allows manual graphics processing
(and, consequently, digital), at the same time rigorous
and expressive, but is also fundamental for the
construction of charming and realistic in motion
computer images. Moreover, flexible geometry still
ensures achieving a high level of expressive capacity,
spendable in any other experience of architects and
engineers, aimed at both the documentation and the
design of complex and articulate spaces and structures.
Being inadequate the only paper for the restitution of the
aspects of dynamism and of going trough architectural
spaces, we propose the management, in a hypertext, of
drawings, surveys, maps and historical iconography,
real and digital movies of CAD reconstruction (taking,
as a case study, the ecclesiastical architectural heritage
of the Padova historic centre); management which, in
different ways, provides the highest level of completeness
and speed through an analysis of different resources.
Keywords--- configurative geometry, architectural
representation, hypertext, hyper-representation.

1. Introduction
As can be plainly seen, architecture is identified via
its realisation and construction, establishing not only an
operational relationship with the material used, but also
satisfying a “living” need of human beings. If however
an architecture is inhabited only by its owner and he who
comes into direct contact with that building, by handling
the materials and the instruments from which it is made,
is considered the constructor (and the builder), it is in the
transition from an initial idea of architecture to its
realisation which traces out the complexity of the project

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.98

433

– comes in the form of a drawing, or rather a graphical
model of those configurational ideals: the code is once
more geometry, that translates those ideals into a
rigorous plan, likewise guaranteeing the coexistence of
metric and therefore objective connotations, together
with a series of relational connotations compliant with
the original meaning of symmetry – that is
psychological.
Initially, however, only a synthesis of the idea’s
totality is obtained, a schematic reduction, a model as
previously stated, that acts as building instructions for
the executer, and to the designer as explicit and visible
support in the verification, control and perfectioning of
the idea: geometry, already seen as a methodological
instrument for considering the architecture in speculative
projection, becomes a special code for constructing the
drawing in the discontinuous model form, as support of
the message along which the thought becomes a
construction.
Geometry also plays a part in the latter phase, a
strictly operational form of geometry, that has no place
in speculative thought or on the cartographic plane – in
terms of “marks on paper” –, but rather in the material
dimension of the building itself and the practicality of the
building yard. Contrary to popular opinion, this stage is
far from easy, as the geometric culture and sensitivity of
the operator comes into play here. Let’s try to imagine a
Medieval constructor intent on building a cross vault: he
would know that the groins, from which the building
work starts, form the lines of intersection of two equal
dimension semi-cylindrical vaults, that are not circular
but elliptical. There is a double-sided problem: the
determining of the model of the said intersection, the
building and sizing of two semi-ellipses, that in turn
must be transformed into centerings and each drawn to a
scale of 1:1. It is obvious that the practical difficulties
become insurmountable without an adequate knowledge,
not only techno-constructive, but above all geometric: it
is indeed not uncommon to find that the centrings of the
cross form two simple semicircles, relying on more
arbitrary strategies for the construction of the vault’s
remaining parts, which obviously result in abnormal
shapes from the confused and irregular positioning of the
stones or bricks.
Lack of geometric knowledge is not only reflected in
the construction of the building itself but also in the
practical difficulties of configuring the individual
elements that characterise it. The simple squaring of a
stone block requires a certain technical ability, but the
operation is complicated further if the masonry structure
requires special cuts, as is the case of vaults or arches, of
the cutting of truncated-conical block of columns or even
more complex structures such as oblique or curved
tunnels, flying buttresses and trompes, where geometric
control does not stop at the correct modelling of every
construction component, but rather weds itself to the
total harmony of the building. Even if the art of
stereotomy [4] had been long carried out empirically and
passed down as on the job experience, such experience
was not able to compensate for the lack of geometric

2. Architecture and geometry
The debate regarding the relationship between
architecture and geometry, even if the focus of the issue
has changed over time, is as relevant today as it was in
the past: the importance of the problem is acknowledged
even if over time the connection has sometimes been
denied – in terms of intention if not in reality – and
geometry has been considered on the one hand merely a
speculative abstract science, whilst on the other that the
contributions made in the field of architecture are
associated with a rigid idea blocked by stereometries,
that take into account only the elementary aspect of
geometry.
In the Prologo of De re aedificatoria (1452) [2],
Alberti suggests that architecture should be considered a
collection of principles, and that “Symmetry” is of
particular importance: it should be noted that the term
symmetry was not meant as its current meaning gives, i.e.
rigorously mathematical, but rather a more general
harmony between the elements, and between the
elements and the whole. Therefore only in a few cases
can it translated into proportional numerical relationships
[3]. According to these principles, an absolute and
necessary reciprocity exists between architecture and
geometry throughout the entire design process and is
furthermore present at all the construction phases of the
project. Through his imagination, fuelled by a
complexity of visual-cultural inputs, the architect
conceives an architectural idea which, although still at a
cerebral level, begins to appear, form and exist.
Obviously, the creative elaboration requires stimuli,
rethinking and adjustment that cannot ignore the
graphical verifications of the first spatial intuitions and
therefore the vital contribution of geometry. It is indeed
geometrical culture – using the term culture not only in
the sense of “collective knowledge” – that aids the
formation of the idea, acting as an incentive for a formal
intervention into all living spaces.
Filtered from the architect poetics, a network of
values is programmed – not only aesthetically speaking,
but also functionally, technically and managerialy etc. –
that will be expressed in the works’ construction
continuum. Also in the creative phase, architecture has
its own completeness, presenting in nuce the
characteristic of continuity: in fact, in the uninterrupted
flow of thought and configurations that translate it, those
spaces are highlighted, for their relational and structural
aspects mediated by geometry rather than for their metric
properties. It is the configurative and generative
properties, from geometry itself, that stimulate the
invention, in a constant exchange between rational
thought and poetic expression.
Again, the transition from the conceived space to its
realisation, from the idea-project to the actual building,
occurs via the mediation of a message, whose decipher
code belongs to he who communicates the idea, in our
case this is the architect, and to those who construct the
building. Such a message – in terms of notice, notion
and knowledge sent out to others in written or oral forms

434

knowledge, neither could the geometric authenticity of
the act itself cancel the wealth of knowledge and study
that led to the formulation of a real branch of geometry,
known as “stone cutting”.
Geometry as a principle of architecture is also part
of the heritage belonging to the contemporary designer,
whose projects are considered to be tied to formal and
therefore restricted characteristics: in fact the adjective
geometric is associated at the most elementary plain
figures and solids, in which only metric properties appear
– exactly those properties that characterise elementary
geometry.

theories of Euclide) named by him prospectiva
artificialis. The projective properties are, in fact, those
that the figure maintains when projected onto a plane,
exactly those that allow the recognition of the shape and
an evaluation of size and distance, despite the apparent
deformations with which the objects and space present
themselves in our vision.
Recently more intrinsic topological properties [11]
than the metric and projective properties have come to
light: these, apparently less evident than the others – and
for this reason discovered later – are in reality
acknowledged with extreme immediacy: topological
properties are in fact those that the figure retains even
when it is subject to such significant transformations,
such as continual deformation, that it loses all other
properties, both metric and projective [12].

2.1. Prejudice about geometry
In order to understand the role of geometry it is
necessary to rid ourselves of a series of prejudices: the
majority of people seem to believe that geometry is
merely the study of the metric properties of figures and
space, properties that instead characterise elementary
geometry. Such prejudice seems to endorse a lack of
study which seems, even if unjustifiably so, bristling
with difficulties and, as such, is rejected.
Geometry is therefore attributed with an extremely
reduced role, that of being an instrument for the formal
definition of the bodies and spaces, thus considering
every other aspect of the discipline belonging exclusively
to abstract mathematical study and therefore of little
application to architecture. This opinion is not entirely
unjustified because, despite the visible immediacy that
characterises synthetic geometry, all research in this field
has been long abandoned by mathematicians, favouring
algebraic and analytical problems, that render the
problem abstract and distant, thus limiting its divulgation
and discouraging potential cognitive approaches. There
arises the need for a different use of classical geometric
theory, whose recognised flexibility allows an efficient
adaptation to the new vision of architecture and
representative space.
The etymological meaning has been lost that gave
geometry the primitive role of measuring the land when, in Ancient Egypt, it was necessary to reinstate the
borders of agricultural terrain, wiped out by the periodic
flooding of the Nile. Those basic principles took on a
whole new meaning via the Greek philosophers, who
discovered the numerous properties that the figures
possessed – in particular conics [5] – and which led to
the formulation of a general and complex theory, of
which Elementi [6] by Euclide, and another treatise
(particularly significant to us), by the same author,
entitled Ottica [7], are valid testimonies. Subsequently, a
series of different but just as important properties other
than the metric ones were discovered, specifically known
as projective properties [8]: these properties, formulated
in a relatively recent period [9], but already understood
by fifteenth century artists - the most relevant
contribution coming from Piero della Francesca, under
the title De prospective pingendi [10] -, allowed for the
development and codification of that rigorously scientific
method (because it is based on the geometric and optical

2.2. Hypertext of the ecclesiastical architectural
heritage of the Padova historic centre
Given that geometry has now overcome its
aforementioned limits through the discovery of more
general and profound properties in addition to its metric
ones, geometric language – which, as we have seen,
assists the entire design process – has become the most
appropriate instrument for the definition of the structure
of architectural spaces as they take shape: geometric
structure, identified via a gradual process of abstraction
and characterised by the mutual relationship between the
parts, builds up a significant matrix of any piece of
architecture.
Therefore teaching methodology for geometry and
its development takes on a basic and fundamental role in
the training and education of engineers, architects or
anyone else involved in managing architectural space.
It is essential to recognize the importance of
knowledge of configurative geometry for creative
thinking, scientific knowledge and practice. Furthermore
it is possible to attribute geometric knowledge with a
founding and fundamental role in the appropriate display
of cultural heritage knowledge: this knowledge not only
allows rigorous and expressive manual graphic
processing (and, consequently, digital), but is also
fundamental for the construction of charming and
realistic in motion computer images. Moreover, flexible
geometry still ensures a high level of expression, usable
in other contexts by architects and engineers, aimed at
both the documentation and design of complex and
articulate spaces and structures. Due to the inadequacy of
paper as a resource for the restitution of the aspects of
dynamism and of moving through architectural spaces,
we propose the management, in a hypertext [13], of
drawings, surveys, maps and historical iconography, real
and digital movies of CAD reconstruction - taking, as a
case study, the ecclesiastical architectural heritage of the
Padova historic centre -, management which, in different
ways, provides the highest level of completeness and
speed through an analysis of different resources (fig. 1).

435

Figure 1 Starting page of the Hypertext

And this hypertext would become a hyperrepresentation: if in fact, the hypertext - unlike the more
classical and canonical form of knowledge, the text,
whose information comes, to the reader, in a linear and
sequential form - is a free interactive and associative link
between information placed at various points of the same
document, the hyper-representation becomes a structure
composed of nodes - ie written information and graphics,
which may appear in the form of text, image or whatever
- and of links, namely the interconnections that allow
you to connect nodes with each other and therefore the
same information, with the possibility of directing and
guiding it, depending on the representative intentions
that hyper-representation itself is finalized with (figg. 2,
3).

Conclusions
If we consider this instrument for representation not
only as a way of reproducing or imitating reality, but also
for recognising its enormous analytical/cognitive
potential, that is its fundamental role as an instrument of
knowledge for getting what is real to take shape, it is
possible to understand that the most interesting quality of
any cognitive medium (classical-representation or hyperrepresentation) is not its capacity for imitation but rather
simulation and interpretation and, consequently, its
ability to create possible worlds: the aim of the hyperrepresentation (as for drawing) lies therefore in its
creative potential.

Figure 2 Interconnections

436

Figure 3 San Francesco church genesis of composite vault hyper-representation

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

Cfr. GREGOTTI, Vittorio, Il territorio dell’architettura,
Feltrinelli, Milano 1977.
Cfr. ALBERTI, Leon Battista, De re aedificatoria,
Firenze 1948, anastatic reprint Milano 1966.
PACIOLI, Luca, De divina proportione, anastatic reprint
Milano 1982.
The first eighteen century text on stereotomy was written
in 1728 by Jean Baptiste de La Rue, in which we find
tables of such exceptional graphical quality that Monge
used in his course on the applications of descriptive
geometry for stone cutting (J. B. de La Rue, Traité de
coupe de pierres, Paris 1728). The one by Frézier (A. F.
Frézier, La Théorie et la pratique de la coupe des pierres
et des bois, pour la construction des voûtes et autre
parties des bâtiments civils et militaires, ou Traité de
stéréotomie à l’usage de l’architecture, Strasburg 1737)
is the most complete. Cfr. SGROSSO, Anna, La
geometria nell’immagine. Tra Rinascimento e Barocco,
Utet, Torino 2001; GIORDANO, Andrea, La geometria
dell’immagine. Dal secolo dei Lumi all’epoca attuale,
Utet, Torino 2002.
Archimede di Siracusa (287-212 a. C.) and Appollonio di
Perga (?-190 a. C.) made an important contribution to the

[6]

[7]
[8]

437

subject. For the first cfr. CHASLES, Michel, Aperçu
historique sur l’origine et le développement des
Mèthodes in Géométrie, Bruxelles, 1837, anastatic
reprint Sceaux 1989. The second was the celebrated
author of Trattato delle Sezioni coniche, whose version
in Latin dates back to the end of the XIX century. Cfr.
FREGUGLIA, Paolo, Fondamenti storici della
geometria, Garzanti, Milano 1982.
The work obtained by us is certainly not in its original
form, but it is the version that the accademics consider
the most reliable and complete is the editio princeps of
Basilea (1533). Cfr. DE ROSA, Agostino, La geometria
nell’immagine. Dall’Antichità al Medio Evo, Utet,
Torino 2000.
Cfr. OVIO, Giovanni. (a cura di), L’ottica di Euclide,
Milano 1918.
The new properties –the ones that do not change with the
projection and are therefore called projective are as
follows: three point co-linearity (the projection of three
aligned points remain three aligned points, or rather each
line projects in a line); three lines belong to a bundle (the
projection of a bundle of straight lines remains a sheaf of
straight lines, possibly with centre at infinity); one point
belongs to one line, straight or curved (this involves the
projection of tangents in tangents and secants in secants;

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

the invariance of the number of common points or more
straight line or of a sheaf of four straight lines (the
relationship of two simple relationships between
segments defined by four points of an orientated straight
line, or between the angles defined by a sheaf of four
straight lines; the bi-relationship is the only projective
invariance of a metric nature).
During the nineteenth century there was a decisive move
towards the maximum mathematical generalisation of
perspective, with the codification of projective geometry
through the work of the Swiss mathematician Jean Victor
Poncelet. His conclusions were inserted -as already seen
with Monge- into a previous speculative area which,
through alternative investigations into perspective by
some academics and brought about latent anticipation.
This extraordinary mathematician, from the study of
Monge’s work and probably that of others such as
Desargues and Pascal, was able to set out the most
general principles of all modern methods of geometric
representation, discovering those properties, defined as
projective properties, that the figures do not lose through
projection from a point onto a plane even when they have
lost all or part of their original metric properties. Cfr.
PONCELET, Jean Victor, Traité des propriétés
projective des figures, Paris 1822.
Piero della Francesca (1410?-1492), De prospectiva
pingendi, critical editino by G. Nicco Fasola, Firenze
1942.
Mathematician Ferdinand Möbius (1790-1860) remains
one of the academics involved in the new branch og
geometry known as analysis situs, and more commonly
known as topology. Cfr. MÖBIUS, Ferdinand, Sulle
superfici a una sola faccia, Lipsia 1858.
Given that at the base of every geometrical theory lies
the concept of equivalence, let us remind ourselves that
in elementary geometry this concept coincides with
congruency: a figure is equivalent at another if it
conserves its metric properties – shape and dimensions -,
that is to say those properties that remain unchanged by
rigid motion such as translation and rotation; in
projective geometry we have seen that the equivalence
between two figures is guaranteed when one is the
projection of another and therefore maintains the
projective properties; topological equivalence, or
equivalence for homeomorphisms is even more evident
than the second case even if its invariant properties are
more intrinsic and profound than the previous ones: the
main information giver of this type of equivalency is the
connection order. It should be remembered that the most
important surfaces studied in elementary geometry
(cones, cylinders, spheres etc) are connected, and it is
worth mentioning that any two points of such a surface
can be joined together via a curve belonging to the
surface; this condition does not apply to the two layer
hyperboloid (or elliptic hyperboloid). Cfr. SGROSSO,
Anna, Topologia e architettura, in “Op. cit.”, n°45,
Napoli 1979; GIORDANO, Andrea, La geometria
dell’immagine. Dal secolo dei Lumi all’epoca attuale,
Utet, cit.
The term hypertext - very topical today, because now
everybody knows one of the largest models, the World
Wide Web - has deeper and older roots, based on the
innate human tendency to acquire innumerable
knowledge and information and to be able to categorize
and organize it in complex structures, physical and
mental, and to be indexed to facilitate future access to

curves etc); the bi-relationship of four points on a
them. The hypertext is essentially a text form that allows
any reader to get to know a lot of information, or in a
predetermined way set by the author or, better yet, in a
more casual and free way, entrusted to the reader.

438

