12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Visualising Ancient Maps as Cultural Heritage: A Relational Database of the
Spanish Ancient Cartography

1

Pilar Chias1, Tomás Abad1
Department of Architecture, School of Architecture and Geodesy, University of Alcalá (Spain)
pilar.chias@ciccp.es, tabad@ciccp.es
Abstract

Although we find it is not essential to have an
exhaustive knowledge of the context of each map to get
a meaningful interpretation of it [2] [3], it is necessary
to achieve some basic specific concepts on the theory
of the cartographic expression and design (about map
projections, symbols or representation of relief, for
instance), because the lack of them can difficult the
right interpretation of the document and distort the
results of the investigations [4].
Although the spanish cultural offices are making a
strong effort to digitalise the public collections of
historical documents, the problems posed by the
different locations, techniques, sizes and preservation
conditions, are delaying the prompt achievement of
their diffusion.
And we have to mention another problem that is
associated to the difficulties of finding those maps,
because they are frequently included into other
documents or inside bundles of old papers, and remain
yet undiscovered.
Assuming all those circumstances, the former
stages of our search have focused on finding, studying
and cataloguing all kind of cartographic documents
that are preserved in the main spanish collections,
archives and libraries, as the Archivo General de
Simancas (AGS, Valladolid), Archivo Histórico
Nacional (AHN, Madrid), Archivo de la Real
Chancillería de Valladolid (AChV), Biblioteca
Nacional de España (BNE, Madrid), Archivo del
Palacio Real (PR, Madrid), Instituto Geográfico
Nacional (IGN, Madrid), the Centro Geográfico del
Ejército (CGE, Madrid), Biblioteca del Monasterio de
El Escorial (BMEsc, San Lorenzo de El Escorial,
Madrid), Biblioteca de Estudios de la Universidad de
Salamanca (BEUS), Museo Marítimo del Cantábrico
(MMC, Santander), or the Archivo General Militar
(AGM, Madrid), among others.
Finally, the principal aim of this project is to
diffuse the old cartographic treasures that compose a
relevant part of the spanish cultural heritage, that

The analysis of the historical evolution of the
territories and landscapes has been seldom based upon
the study of old cartographic documents; they have
been always set in a second place after texts and
writings. Trying to bridge this gap, we have designed
and implemented a relational database of the ancient
maps and charts that are already preserved in the main
spanish collections, archives and libraries, that
includes the possibility to access to a a high resolution
digital image of each one of them. The personalized
queries to the database will allow the scholars and
searchers to visualise the document together with its
main features.

1. Introduction
Ancient cartography, as well as old pictures,
drawings and photographs, has not been used
traditionally as a reliable source of information about
the history and the evolution of the land- and the
townscape. Those graphic materials have been usually
considered as ‘second order’ documents, mainly
because of the difficulties that their interpretation can
sometimes involve [1] due to the different conventions
that are applied in each case by the cartographer.
But this is not the only reason why cartography is
so seldom used in the historical searches, because there
are other problems related to the difficulties of their
localisation and visualisation that have to be
considered.
Obviously, it is not easy to access to an original
big size and small-scale map that is sometimes
composed by several printed sheets; and it is also
difficult to see properly the symbols employed in the
map and read its texts when it is imposed to handle a
reduced hardcopy or a low resolution digital image.

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.46

453

actually remains unknown to the public and even to a
great number of specialists.

- ‘Bibliography’, that includes the complete
bibliographical references that appear in the field
Bibliography of the table ‘Cartography’.
- ‘Libraries, Archives and Museums’, is the table that
includes the complete references of the collections that
have been visited, and that appear just as an acronym in
the field Collection and Signature of the table
‘Cartography’.
The three tables have been designed sharing at
least one field that allows crossing the datafiles and
economizes data length in the databases [Figure 1].

2. A database of antique cartography
The study and diffusion of the cultural heritage in
its various forms (that are extended to the architectural,
urban and territorial scales) applying the most
innovative technologies such as GIS and databases, is
the main target of our team of searchers in the School
of Architecture and Geodesy of the University of
Alcalá (Spain) [5]. Of course, the ancient
cartographical documents compose an important set of
this cultural heritage whose knowledge becomes
increasingly demanded and useful.
The definition of cartographic document that we
have managed is the one formulated by Harley and
Woodward [6], that includes every graphic
representation that facilitates a spatial understanding of
things, concepts, conditions, processes or events in the
human world. This definition allows to incorporate to
the study the topographical views as well as the
topological schemes or sketches, with no restrictions
due to techniques, functions or origins [7].
We decided firstly to limit our search in the
temporal field and to catalogue all those maps, as well
manuscript as printed, that have been drawn before
1900, because during the 20th century the cartographic
production has very much increased in many senses
and its study must be afforded separately.
Another spatial restriction has had to be imposed
to the search, this time related to its spatial field: we
decided that the maps must concern the actual spanish
territories [8].
After the above mentioned first stages of the
search, that consisted on an exhaustive investigation
which aims of detecting every map, we have designed
the different datafiles of the relational database.
The relational database has been designed as an
open one to allow including new registers in the future
and even adding new fields or tables, to update the
contents to the new needs without damaging the
existing ones.
Moreover the concept ‘relational’ implies the
possibility of crossing the data of the different tables
and reducing their weights, making easier the data
management and the queries [9] [10].
Our methodology includes three main tables, that
are the following:
- ‘Cartography’, that contents all the registers
concerning the cartographic documents.

Figure 1. Scheme of the projectʼs databases.
The whole work can be consulted by the searchers
in the CEHOPU Library, Madrid.

2.1 The design of the table ‘Cartography’
During the definition of the different fields that
this table contains we have followed the ISBD norms
of cataloguing, and are the following:
Place or Subject (text field): Refers to the
geographical place that is represented in the document
and the province it belonged to, since the reform of
1831. To define clearly the territorial limits, the old
councils or boundaries are also included. And to
determine the original uses of the map, it is also
specified if it is a general, thematic (geological,
military, statistic, cadastral, etc.) or a topographical
map or plan.
Date (numerical field): as precisely as the
document can be dated. If it is only an approximated
date, it is quoted among square brackets.

454

Kind of Cartographic Document (text field): it
defines if it is a map or plan, a chart, a portolan or a
view, or even a terrestrial globe.
Size (text): width and high of the image in mm; it
is also included the total size of the sheet(s) (or other
supporting materials) and the number of pieces or
sheets that compose the ensemble of the document.
Collection and Signature (text): the collection that
preserves the document and the signature; the first one
is quoted through an acronym and the second one is
abbreviated according to the norms (its total extension
can be consulted in the table ‘Libraries, Archives and
Museums’).
Original Title (text): quoted among inverted
commas if it is literal, as it is written in the document;
otherwise it is defined among square brackets through
its main features.
Author(s) (text): names of the author(s) if the map
is signed; in case of ascription, the name(s) appear
among square brackets; they can be also ‘unknown’.
Scale (text): it is defined graphically or as a
fraction, detailing the different units employed; when
there is no definition scale, appears ‘without scale’.
Projection (text): details the projection employed
with its different elements: grid, references,
orientation; it is also referenced the use of different
projections, for instance profile or section added,
axonometrics or perspective views, with their own
distinctive elements, and even the case of large scale
plans.
Technique (text): makes a distinction between
manuscripts and printed maps, as well as the drawing
surfaces and techniques, specifying the uses of colour.
Short History (of the map, text): place of edition,
editor, or if it is a part of a big compilation or atlas. It is
also mentioned where it comes from or the precedent
owners, and the date of purchasing.
Bibliography (of the map, text): abbreviated and
following the international system for scientific
quotations ISO 690-1987.
Image (object/container field): it is included a low
resolution image in highly compressed jpg format of
the cartographic document. By clicking twice over the
image, it is possible to display a high resolution one in
a tiff format that allows to see the details and to read
the texts. If the map is composed by several sheets, the
image shown is the composed one, and it is possible to
click over each one of them to get an enlargement
[Figure 2].

Figure 2. Anonymous, Plan of Aranda de Duero,
1504. Archivo General de Simancas, Mss.
Valladolid (Spain).
Other Remarks (text): in the case of a printed
map, includes other collections that have a copy, or
variations of the plate, as well as manuscript notes, etc.
Date (of the catalogue, autom.).

2.2 The design of the table ‘Bibliography’
This table defines completely the abbreviations
and acronyms used in the other tables. The quotations
follow the ISO 690-1987 Norm.
The fields are in this case:
Author(s) (text).
Date (of edition, numerical).
Title (of the book, text).
Article’s Title (text).
Periodical or Book (in case of articles or book
chapters, text).
Publisher (text).
Place (text).
Volume (numerical).
Pages (text).
Quotation (text): as it appears in the other tables.

2.3 The design of the table ‘Libraries, Archives
and Museums’
This table makes possible to identify the acronyms
used in the Collection and Signature field. It contains
the following fields that complete the location of the
documents:

455

Abbreviation (text).
Collection (text).

Searches can be as wide or restrictive as are the
criteria applied in each case. The logical boolean
expressions as ‘and’, ‘or’, ‘xor’, ‘included’, etc. are
commonly used to formulate the queries.
Finally, we have designed a complete filling card
that can be consulted through the database, that joins
the essential features of each cartographical document
[Figure 4].

3. Conclusions
Ancient cartography can no longer be considered
a secondary source of information [11].
The possibilities that ancient cartography bring to
the study of the history of the territory and the
landscape are very useful because maps are an
important data-source because they give us an image of
them at a specific moment [12].
When the aim is to analyse the evolution of those
territories, it becomes essential to get a map series that
allows to reconstruct the spatial sequences and patterns
that have characterised the successive moments in the
history [Figure 3].

Figure 3. Main map collections and ancient
cartography in the different historical periods.

Figure 4. The design of the filling card.

Other possibilities are the usual informs, lists and
queries to the databases, that can be made in several
ways:
- Selecting fields, for instance Date and Collection and
Signature in the table ‘Cartography’, and then entering
‘1750’ and ‘BNE’ (Biblioteca Nacional de España).
- Ordering registers, in one or more fields: for instance
Date and Place or Subject: ‘1850’, ‘León’ and
‘Tordesillas’.
- Making simple or combined searches in several fields
at the same time: in this case it is also possible to select
all the registers or limit the search to a group of them
by entering a chain of search. For instance: Date and
Collection and Signature and Projection: ‘1605’ and
‘BNE’ and ‘SGE’ and ‘Mercator’ and ‘Bonne’.

The results have been designed with the aim of
getting the best perception and display of the data sets,
according to the visualization techniques exposed by
Ware [13], Spence [14]and Tufte [15], among others.
This search will improve the knowledge and the
access to the different and scattered ancient
cartographic documents of Spain. Other teams of
searchers will be able to consult this database, that will
be helpful and useful in future investigations on the
history of the town, the territory and the landscape
[Figure 5].
The exhaustive compilation that contains the
cartographic database will allow a better knowledge of
the changes that land has experienced in the different
historical periods, and this will be also useful
information to the historians and urban planners.

456

[5] Chías, P., T. Abad et al. A GIS in Cultural Heritage based
upon multiformat databases and hypermedial personalized
queries. ISPRS Archives XXXVI-5, 2006, pp. 222-226.
[6] Harley, J.B. and D. Woodward. “Preface”. In: The
History of Cartography: Cartography in Prehistoric, Ancient,
and Medieval Europe and the Mediterranean. The University
of Chicago Press (Chicago, Ill.), 1987, Vol. I, p. xvi.
[7] Seta, C. de (ed). Cittá d’Europa. Iconografia e vedutismo
dal XV al XIX secolo. Napoli, 1996.
[8] Kagan, R.L. Imágenes urbanas del mundo hispánico,
1493-1780. Ediciones El Viso (Madrid), 1998.
[9] Chías, P. Bases de datos y gestores de bases de datos
para los sistemas de información geográfica. Publicaciones
de la Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura, Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid, 2004.
[10] Chías, P. La imagen de los fenómenos geográficos en un
sistema de información geográfica. Publicaciones de la
Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura, Universidad
Politécnica de Madrid, 2004.
[11] Liter, C., F. Sanchís and A. Herrero. Cartografía de
España en la Biblioteca Nacional. Siglos XVI al XIX.
Biblioteca Nacional, Madrid, 1994.
[12] Martín López, J. Historia de la Cartografía y de la
Topografía. CNIG, Ministerio de Fomento, Madrid, 2002.
[13] Ware, C. Information Visualization. Perception for
Design. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, 2004.
[14] Spence, R. Information Visualization. Design for
Interaction. Pearson, London, 2007.
[15] Tufte, E.R. Visual Explanations. Images and Quantities,
Evidence and Narrative. Graphics Press, Cheshire,
Connecticut, 2005.

5. Aknowledgements
Figure 5. The main Spanish Libraries and
Archives that locate the ancient maps of Castilla,
from 1500 to 1899.

This paper is a result of two main searches:
- The Project EH-2007-001-00 “that has been financed
by the Centro de Estudios Históricos de Obras Públicas
y Urbanismo (CEHOPU-CEDEX) of the Ministerio de
Fomento (Spain).
- The Project PAI08-0216-9574 “La cartografía
histórica de la Comunidad de Castilla-La Mancha en
los principales archivos españoles”, financed by the
Consejería de Educación y Ciencia de la Junta de
Comunidades de Castilla-La Mancha.
Both are inscribed into our searchers’ guidelines
on the investigation of the cultural heritage through the
application of the most innovative technologies, as GIS
and multiformat databases, that set up an essential basis
for the knowledge of the history of the territory, the
landscape and the town. Since a decade our team is
engaged on setting up different useful methodologies
that are being implemented in the Technical School of
Architecture and Geodesy of the University of Alcalá.

The inner potentials of the different kind of
documents that have been studied are clearly exposed
in the variety of the contents and the reliability of the
databases, whose richness and relevance is
unquestionable.

4. References
[1] Harley, J.B. “The Evaluation of Early Maps: Towards a
Methodology”, Imago Mundi 22, 1968, pp. 68-70.
[2] Skelton, R.A. Looking at an Early Map. University of
Kansas Library (Lawrence, Kansas), 1965, p. 28.
[3] Andrews, J.H. Meaning, Knowledge and Power in the
Philosophy of Maps. In: The New Nature of Maps. Essays in
the History of Cartography. The Johns Hopkins University
Press (Baltimore, Maryland), 2005, pp. 21-58.
[4] Vázquez Maure, F. and J. Martín López. Lectura de
Mapas. Instituto Geográfico Nacional (Madrid), 1989.

457

