12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Visual Presentation Challenges for Mobile Spatial Applications:
Three Case Studies
Peter Fröhlich1, Matthias Baldauf1, Peter Reichl1, Robert F. Tobler2
1
Telecommunications Research Center Vienna (ftw.)
2
VRVis Research Center, Vienna
{froehlich | baldauf | reichl}@ftw.at; tobler@vrvis.at
traditional notion of ‘location-awareness’ or ‘locationbased services’.
A visionary concept important for this research was
proposed by Egenhofer [2] in the late 1990ies. His ideas
comprise ‘Smart Compasses’ which direct users to specific locations, ‘Geo-Wands’ that enable users to point at
objects of interest to receive more information about
them, and ‘Smart Horizons’ creating a virtual representation related to their current field of view (see Figure 1).
Another early project paving the way for MSI was ‘CyberGuide’, a prototypical mobile location- and orientation-aware tour guide for visitors of Atlanta’s Georgia
Tech university campus [17] . Since then, MSI has experienced an enormous boost in terms of both technological and market potential, and it is by now strongly
pushed by the mobile handset industry, as is clearly indicated by the current trend towards location-aware mobile
phones with integrated compasses [7] .

Abstract

Using mobile devices for exploring and interacting
with the user’s physical environment is among the most
promising candidates for commercially successful future
telecommunication services and applications. This trend
is confirmed by the rollout of latest mobile phones
equipped with advanced navigation features like built-in
GPS receivers, digital compasses and acceleration sensors. The increasing technological potential of Mobile
Spatial Interaction (MSI), however, requires a wider
comprehension of appropriate visualization possibilities
for spatially referenced content in the field of Mobile
Human-Computer Interaction.
In this paper, we argue for an integrated approach
comprising innovations in MSI with latest advances in
visualization. In order to demonstrate the potential of
this joint approach, we present a series of three related
projects and highlight in each case research challenges
and results in the field of Mobile HCI and mobile application development as well as corresponding advances
of the underlying server-side rendering algorithms.

Geo-Wands

Keywords--- Mobile Spatial Interaction, Mobile
HCI, Rendering, Visualization
Smart Compasses

1

Figure 1: Smart Compasses, Geo-Wands,
and Smart Horizons

Introduction

The idea of combining geospatial information with
mobile communication technology is gaining increasing
interest in academia and industry alike. Currently, new
forms of georeferenced services, such as map-mashups
[1] , are emerging almost on a daily basis.
Recent research projects are dealing with ways on
how mobile devices can be used as an interface to this
growing body of geo-spatial information, to enable direct
access and interaction in the user’s surroundings. The
common denominator of these research endeavors is that
they are dealing with ‘Mobile Spatial Interaction’ (MSI).
MSI aims at creating a sense of orientation and direct
mapping between the user’s environment and related
digital information. To this end, MSI goes far beyond the

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.30

Smart Horizons

The primary application field currently targeted by
industry is navigation and wayfinding for in-car and pedestrian use. A strong advantage of MSI is the very intuitive and direct access to content attached to the surroundings, so-called points of interest (POI). If, for example,
someone is interested in the price of apartments that are
going to be built at a certain construction site, one could
imagine an application where she could immediately get
this information onto her phone, simply by pointing at
the spot of interest. Another advantage MSI offers is
exploration by means of augmented reality. The capabilities of today’s mobile technology for exploration have

533

been demonstrated by Schall et al. [5] , who enabled
field workers to maintain underground infrastructure that
would otherwise not be visible.
Despite of such promising prospects, MSI still requires a great deal of applied research to make its applications truly acceptable for the mass market (cf [3] ).
The manifold challenges to be faced range from purely
engineering-related spatial sensing issues to rather economic topics, such as scalability of content provision or
business modeling. Nevertheless, the ‘sine qua non’ for
the success of MSI is still the intuitive design and the
technical fidelity of the user interface.
In this paper we address the fundamental question of
how to present spatially-related content to users of MSI
applications. To this end, in sections 2 to 4 we present
and discuss ‘Point-to-Discover’, ‘Creative Histories – the
Josefsplatz Experience’ and ‘WikiVienna’ as a series of
three exemplary research projects which allow to demonstrate how the combination of strong competences in
mobile application development and information visualization leads to significant advances in the field of MSI
(for more details we refer to http://msi.ftw.at).
Within each of the project descriptions, research
problems and results in two specific areas are highlighted: (1) Mobile HCI research and application development, and (2) the development of the underlying server-side rendering algorithms. The paper ends with a brief
summary and an outlook on future work.

2

2.1

Design dimensions of MSI applications

The overarching goal for MSI applications should be to
provide an efficient referential relationship between the
virtual and the real world [8] . For example, if a user is
looking for a pizzeria in the vicinity, the p2d application
should present a recommendation such that the referenced restaurant can easily be found by the user. But
how should such an interface look like? To properly address this challenge, decisions within a multidimensional
design space are necessary. The most important dimensions can be sketched as follows:
Orientation-awareness. Orientation-awareness describes the capability of phones with spatial sensors such
as compasses to rotate the display in alignment to the
physical surroundings, so that what is in front of the user
is displayed on the top of the display. From a cognitive
perspective, users should be supported by orientationaware displays, because they can directly match the virtual information with its real counterpart. Previous empirical research has partly substantiated this hypothesis,
at least for indoor navigation [9] . Our comparative user
study with a Wizard-of-Oz prototype showed that POIs
are much easier accessible with orientation-aware displays than with a standard static version [6] .
Representation of environmental objects. An important consideration is how to represent surrounding objects. Whereas theoretically, a photorealistic mapping
may be most desirable, there are several reasons to also
take simpler representations into account. In order to
achieve a maximum of efficiency, only the information
relevant for POI access should be shown to the user (e.g.
which object is currently selected), other details may
even be distracting. Furthermore, mobile phones will in
the foreseeable future impose constraints on the fidelity
of graphic rendering. We thus designed two relatively
simplistic environmental representations of the surroundings: a 2D billboard model and a 3D block model (see
Figure 2). Preliminary results indicate that 2D billboard
representations are not satisfactory, but that 3D block
representations are very efficient in terms of POI access,
and are difficult to be surpassed by more realistic representations with textures.

Point-to-Discover (p2d)

Our first example, the project Point-to-Discover
(p2d, http://p2d.ftw.at), demonstrates the technical feasibility of mobile spatial telecommunications services.
Together with our industrial partners mobilkom austria
and Siemens Austria, a mobile operator and a mobile
service developer, we have built the software platform
necessary for MSI telecommunications services. As at
the time of project conduction no commercial telephony
handset featured the necessary combination of positioning (GPS) and orientation sensing (compass and 3D accelerometers), we have built a prototype sensor board
communicating with a standard mobile phone over Bluetooth. The measured location and orientation is processed at a server-side platform, hosting an environment
block model and geo-referenced services.
For our demonstrator we chose a mobile restaurant
service for the inner city district of Vienna, enabling
people to walk through an area of about 3 km² and to get
recommendations about restaurants in their vicinity,
simply by pointing at them.
Two lines of HCI and visualization-related research
were conceived within the p2d project. First, we explored and structured the design space for visually presenting spatially anchored services or points of interests
(POIs). Second, we developed a set of spatial selection
algorithms enabling the presentation of POIs that are
currently visible for the user: the Local Visibility Model
(LVis).

Figure 2: 2D billboard model (left) and 3D block
model (right)

534

Perspective. Conceptually, users could be confronted
from several perspectives with virtual representations of
their visible environment and their nearby POIs. Of
course, if a direct match between surroundings and virtual representation is desired, the first-person view from
a horizontal perspective is preferable (see (1) in Figure
3). However, a more elevated perspective could provide
a better overview of the surroundings. This could either
be realized by the bird’s eye perspective (2) or a vertical
view (3), as known from maps. Our informal investigations have so far not yielded a clear preference in this
regard.

jects that are not. Interactive, ego-centric maps on mobile
devices provide added value if they contain indications
of the visibility of surrounding features, as has been
shown by [6] . Visibility information enables entirely
new interaction metaphors on mobile devices equipped
with advanced sensors such as GPS and digital compass,
as has been described by [2] and [15] .

3

Creative Histories

The Creative Histories project has been started in
order to create a digital version of a set of historic buildings and their contained artifacts, namely the square Josefsplatz in Vienna. One of the challenges of the project
was to provide intuitive access to the digital re-creation
of these buildings through a number of historic epochs.
Based on the reconstruction of the architecture and
artifacts, the project presented a host of additional information, such as videos, texts and audio files in the form
of a virtual walkthrough. Specialized viewer applications
for both a desktop and mobile devices provide simple
navigation through the 3D models and the associated
media files. An important aspect of this project was the
conceptual simplification of this large information space,
such that it can be presented to the user in a comprehensible form even on limited mobile devices.

Figure 3: First person view (1), bird’s eye perspective (2) and vertical view (3)
Field of view. Another question of interest is how much
of the surrounding terrain should be shown to the user
(Figure 4). It is still a matter of empirical research
whether this should be the whole surrounding scene, or
only the portion that is visible in front of the user. First
experiences within the project, however, indicate that the
field of view should not be restricted, simply because
pedestrians often turn around, which would otherwise
result in objects popping in and out of the screen.

Figure 4: Different fields of view
Figure 5: 3D representation of Vienna’s
Josefsplatz

2.2

The Local Visibility Model

In contrast to traditional geo-spatial search queries returning point-shaped references to geo-coded content, a
specialized query engine considering a user’s actual field
of view had to be developed for p2d. This Local Visibility Model (LVis) not only contains the visible POIs but
also an abstraction of the surrounding’s actual geometry
formulated in XML.
Information that is related to objects, geographical
features or buildings that are visible to the user may be
contextually more relevant than information about ob-

3.1

A window to the past

From a mobile HCI perspective, we were interested
in the multidimensional exploration of the surrounding
space, using the above-described spatially aware mobile
sensor prototype. Going beyond the pure POI access
focus in p2d, we developed a mobile exploration technique that turns the phone screen into a ‘window to the
past’ [4] . This encompasses a historically accurate 3D
model of the site and its monuments, viewed exactly

535

from the user’s current real world position and orientation. Looking for instance towards the Austrian National
Library at Vienna’s Josefsplatz and aiming the mobile
device in the same direction allows the user to sweep
back in time to experience how this building has changed
during the last decades. After adding appropriate small
icons to the rendered 3D model, linked to various kinds
of documentary such as sound, speech, text, and video,
the user is able to experience a multimodal presentation
of Vienna’s cultural heritage (see Figure 5).

3.2

bilities on mobile devices for e.g. guidance and representation of geo-referenced content. Apart from displaying
realistically looking 3D model snippets on the mobile
phone, an appropriate server-side rendering engine can
provide on-the-fly calculated images beyond common
maps in vertical view. Further on, the applied techniques
will even enable augmented reality applications on mobile phones where the video stream of a built-in camera
is overlaid with geo-coded information.
WikiVienna pools the experiences and results gathered in p2d and Creative Histories. In combination with a
powerful server-side reconstruction and rendering service, the project is going to demonstrate manifold novel
visualization possibilities for the representation of geocoded content on mobile phones.

Managing rendering data for highly heterogeneous devices

Most current rendering and modeling applications
and geometric reconstruction methods are designed for
modeling large and detailed models for consumption on
ever more powerful desktop computers or game consoles. Due to our intention of providing a geometric representation of the Josefsplatz on both the desktop and on
mobile devices [16] , it was necessary to develop adequate methods for simplifying the highly complex geometric models while retaining the correct meta-data associations.
In cooperation with the OeFAI, the Austrian Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence, we developed
an adequate data representation that accommodates these
widely diverging requirements for geometric models.
Thus the Creative Histories project has demonstrated
that, despite of the limitations of the graphical capabilities of mobile devices, appropriate geometric simplification methods can be used to provide geometric models
that retain a large part of the contextual and semantic
information available in the full models. Note, however,
that the actual geometric model had to be created by specialists and was therefore fairly resource intensive.

4

4.1

Advanced device-aware visualization

As WikiVienna’s mobile client is aimed at a mass
audience, one of the major technical challenges is to enable all of the features for mass market phones and, at
the same time, offer novel visualization and interaction
possibilities for high-end devices. The system’s deviceawareness is supposed to ensure the best user experience
possible using a specific mobile phone.
Device-aware content presentation. Whereas in the
p2d project a simplified urban block model with cylindrical buildings (the building’s area elevated by its average height) was applied and in ‘Creative Histories’ a
certain square in Vienna was fully modeled in 3D, WikiVienna comprises an extensive urban 3D model. In
order to make use of this model on mobile phones and
thus take a step towards more realistic 3D representations of geo-referenced content, a server-side simplification of the requested part of the model has to be performed. This device-aware adaption reduces the count of
necessary polygons, thus enabling a smooth rendering on
different mobile phones. The underlying model enables a
variation of the degree of realism: a user might e.g. request a shaded or a textured version, resulting in different file sizes. Alternatively, a device-adequate rendering
could be applied transparently to the user.
Examples for already implemented services providing rendered images, which might be more suitable for
low-end devices, include renderings of a certain field of
view or 360° panorama images. A content adaption service suits the size and compression/quality of the generated images to the hardware and network capabilities of
the requesting mobile device. Reusing the visibility engine presented in section 2.2, the visible POIs can be
determined and further plotted correctly onto the rendering. Figure 6 shows an exemplary shaded panorama view
(rendered with a virtual whereabout at Michaelerplatz, a
square in Vienna’s first district) augmented with selectable symbols visualizing available referenced
multimedia content. Again, the degree of realism is customizable but does not significantly affect the size of the
transferred data.

WikiVienna

The ongoing project ‘WikiVienna’ consequently
continues the work presented so far. WikiVienna enables
the user to create a detailed 3D model of her home town
by contributing photos of buildings via her mobile
phone. The model is further enriched with locative media
und semantic information. Participants steadily augment
the model with multimedia content (photos, audio and
video) recorded and submitted via a client application on
their mobile phones which are also used as the interface
to the user-generated geo-referenced content. The goal of
the project is to build up a medium for city exploration
and to provide interaction via mobile phones with this
information space. The resulting framework is applied to
the city of Vienna.
WikiVienna’s strong visualization aspect and its focus on mobile phones differ from related work studying
the attachment of digital data to real world locations (e.g.
[10] [11] ). The availability of an extensive, detailed 3D
urban model offers completely new visualization possi-

536

A prototypical panorama viewer for mobile phones
has been developed in order to experiment with different
input types depending on the phone’s technical features.
On low-end devices the panorama may be rotated using
the numerical or cursor keys. If the mobile phone is
equipped with acceleration sensors the view is adapted to
the measured tilt. Finally, a digital compass enables a
really intuitive orientation rotating the panorama according to the user’s turn. Independent from the chosen type
of interaction, the POI closest to the display center is
dynamically selected and can be activated pressing a
certain key.
Applying the visibility engine introduced above, an
augmented reality view is going to be implemented for
high-end-devices equipped with GPS, compass and acceleration sensors, to conclude the different visualization
possibilities. The vision of a switchable content representation is depicted in Figure 6 using a shaded rendering
and an augmented reality panorama view. Related work
dealing with augmented reality on mobile phones mainly
relies on visual markers like matrix barcodes as orientation point for the overlaid information (see for instance
[13] [14] ), whereas first steps towards pure sensor-based
augmented reality on mobile phones were taken in [11] .
With the opportunities of WikiVienna’s 3D object
rendering and the augmented reality views, we will be
able to widen our understanding of the MSI design
space. An important related HCI research issue is the
identification of the extent to which the augmented reality view improves the access of nearby POIs, as compared to the simple 3D block models investigated in the
p2d project. A related design issue is the additional information required for orientation (e.g., street names,
directions) that needs to be superimposed over the reality
layer.

played in a device-accurate manner, e.g. in a 3D view, on
the mobile phone. Pressing the phone’s numerical keys
the user may switch between the objects (e.g. highlighting or magnifying the active building) and finally select
the one she wants the recording to be attached to. In this
manner, no verbose text input like address information to
specify the location is needed: only a few intuitive keystrokes are necessary to precisely spatially annotate the
user-generated data. Such an object-oriented selection is
not possible with commonly used static map images
lacking of semantic information. Further position and
object selection possibilities enabled by the underlying
urban model are being evaluated.

4.2

3D reconstruction

As already mentioned, in the sketched collaborative
reconstruction effort participants supply and upload images to the server. In order to provide an adequate geometric model based on these images, it is necessary to
enhance and modify the current reconstruction algorithms.
Most of these algorithms have been developed for
use with high-quality cameras that can be elaborately
calibrated for the reconstruction task. The participants in
WikiVienna will use a wide variety of cheap cameras to
provide data for reconstruction of the buildings in the
central part of Vienna. In order to achieve the necessary
quality in the resulting geometric models we are working
on methods that use a simplified model provided by the
city of Vienna as a basis [18] , and use various geometric
reconstruction methods in order to hierarchically reconstruct geometric detail on these simple models.

5

High-precision device-dependent content annotation.
In order to correctly anchor the contributed media in the
information space, the location of the mobile device
(where the recording has been taken) has to be submitted
to the server as well. If the device is not equipped with a
GPS receiver and hence, the location cannot be determined by the mobile device itself (as is currently still the
case with most mobiles), a server-side network-based
localization method is used. Since the resulting inaccuracy may amount to a few hundred meters in urban environment, whereas the precision of the geo-references of
the content is crucial for the overall system quality, we
plan to offer a precision control based on the available
urban model. The range of inaccuracy can be used to
select the set of surrounding buildings which then is dis-

Conclusions

This paper has dealt with an integrated (and interdisciplinary) approach for investigating future mobile
services. We have seen that the strong current trend of
enhancing mobile devices with advanced navigation
sensor technology like built-in GPS receivers, digital
compasses and acceleration sensors will open the path
towards highly intuitive interaction between the user and
her physical surrounding, but at the same time has to be
complemented by state-of-the art rendering technology
on the server side. Therefore, we have argued for a joint
approach integrating MSI and visualization, whose
potential has been demonstrated with three consecutive
application-oriented projects exploring different ways of
representing the user environment on the mobile device
in order to allow for efficient and intuitive modes of user

Figure 6: POI overlay for a rendered and an augmented reality panorama view

537

order to allow for efficient and intuitive modes of user
interaction.
Whereas these case studies have shown that visualization
is clearly one of the central issues in this context, our
current MSI research activities go far beyond and additionally strive for integrating also audio and gesturebased approaches as further important features and options for a natural mode of user interaction. For example,
within our focus on device-awareness, we are looking
into possibilities of controlling orientation by tilt-sensors
only, thus alleviating the requirement of having a compass embedded in a certain device.

6

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

Acknowledgements
[11]

This paper has been partially funded within the Austrian
Kplus and COMET frameworks, the Vienna Science and
Technology Fund (WWFT), mobilkom austria AG, and
Siemens Austria AG. The authors would like to thank
their colleagues Rainer Simon and Stefan Maierhofer for
many helpful discussions. Many thanks to Vienna’s city
government (MA41) for providing us with data their 3D
city model.

[12]

[13]
[14]

7

References

[1]

ProgrammableWeb.
http://www.programmableweb.com/mapping
Max J. Egenhofer. Spatial Information Appliances: A
Next Generation of Geographic Information Systems.
First Brazilian Workshop on GeoInformatics. 1999.
Peter Fröhlich, Rainer Simon and Lynne Baillie. Introduction to the special issue on Mobile Spatial Interaction.
To appear in: Personal and Ubiquitous Computing Journal. 2008.
Lynne Baillie, Harald Kunczier and Hermann Anegg.
Rolling, Rotating and Imagining in a Virtual Mobile
World. Proceedings of MobileHCI. 2005.
Gerhard Schall, Erick Mendez, Ernst Kruijff, Eduardo
Veas, Sebastian Junghanns, Bernhard Reitinger and Dieter Schmalstieg. Handheld Augmented Reality for
Underground Infrastructure Visualization. Special Issue
on Mobile Spatial Interaction, Journal on Personal and
Ubiquitous Computing. 2008.
Peter Fröhlich, Rainer Simon, Lynne Baillie and
Hermann Anegg. Comparing conceptual designs for
mobile access to geo-spatial information. Proceedings of
the 8th conference on Human-computer interaction with
mobile devices and services. 2006.

[2]
[3]

[4]
[5]

[6]

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

538

Ric Ferrardo. The Year of Location-Based Services
(LBS). Ric Ferrardo’s blog, Friday, February 15, 2008.
http://mobverge.blogspot.com/2008/02/year-of-locationbased-services-lbs.html
Annti Oulasvirta, Sara Estlander and Annti Nurminen.
Embodied interaction with a 3D versus 2D mobile map.
Accepted for: Journal of Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing, Special Issue on Mobile Spatial Interaction.
2008.
Fabian Hermann, Gerald Bieber and Antje Duesterhoeft.
Egocentric Maps on Mobile Devices. Proc. International
Workshop on Mobile Computing. 2003.
Per Persson, Fredrik Espinoza, Petra Fagerberg, Anna
Sandin and Rickard Cöster. Geonotes: a location-based
information system for public spaces. Designing information spaces: the social navigation approach. Springer,
London. 2003.
Giles Lane. Urban tapestries: Wireless networking, public authoring and social knowledge. Personal Ubiquitous
Computing, vol. 7. 2003.
Markus Kähäri and David J. Murphy. Mobile Augmented
Reality
Applications.
(2006).
URL:
http://research.nokia.com/research/projects/mara/index.ht
ml
Daniel Wagner. Handheld Augmented Reality. Dissertation, Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz
University of Technology. 2007.
Anderes Henrysson. Bringing Augmented Reality to
Mobile Phones. Dissertation, Linköping University, Department of Science and Technology. 2007.
Rainer Simon, Peter Fröhlich and Peter Anegg. Beyond
Location Based - The Spatially Aware Mobile Phone.
Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Web
and Wireless Geographical Information Systems (W2GIS
2006), Hong Kong, China, December 4-5, 2006. Springer LNCS, vol. 4295/2006, pp. 12-21.
Robert F. Tobler, Stefan Maierhofer, Konrad Karner and
Mario Sormann. Creative Histories – The Josefsplatz
Experience, The e-volution of Information Communication Technology in Cultural Heritage. Project Papers of
the CIPA/VAST/EG/EuroMed 2006, Nicosia, Cyprus.
November 2006.
Gregory D. Abowd, Christopher G. Atkeson, Jason Hong, Sue Long, Rob Kooper and M. Pinkerton. Cyberguide: a mobile context-aware tour guide. Wireless
Networks, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 421-433, 1997.
Vienna’s 3D city model, licensed by Vienna’s city government (MA41)
http://www.wien.gv.at/stadtentwicklung/stadtvermessung
/geodaten/stadtmodell/produkt.html

