12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Voyage Analysis Applied to Geovisual Analytics
Patrik Lundblad, Mikael Jern, Camilla Forsell
Visual Information Technology and Applications (VITA)
Department of Science and Technology, University of Linköping
Norrköping, Sweden
{Patrik.Lundblad@itn.liu.se, Mikael.Jern@itn.liu.se, Camilla.Forsell@itn.liu.se}
sources is, however, a more difficult task since the
information has to be merged both on a geospatial plane
as well as time and attributes plane.
One area where merging multiple information
sources is very important is within shipping, which for
hundreds of years has been one of the major
transportation methods for goods. A ship travelling from
one port to another has to take into consideration many
parameters such as which way is the shortest relative to
safety and consumption, how the weather will affect both
performance of the ship and how to avoid getting into
danger. Also the shipping company will want to make a
profit and make sure that no unnecessary time is spent
either in port or out at sea.
For a shipping company managing one single ship
this might not be a hard equation to solve in order to get
as good performance as possible out of a journey, but as
the number of ships and cargo increase, problems arise
with logistics and costs, especially when the weather
interferes with a voyage. Some of these problems can
easily be solved when the ship operators use
meteorological companies to supply them with weather
data and suggestions of route to take in order to
maximize the profit and minimize damage during a
voyage.
To meet these needs the VISPER software was
created in collaboration with the Swedish Meteorological
and Hydrological Institute (SMHI) as an aid for the
shipping companies. VISPER uses data sources from
both SMHI and a shipping company. The multivariate
data in VISPER containing both spatial and temporal
information is difficult to analyze through the use of a
single type of graph [2]. In order to detect complex
patterns within the data it is more convenient to view it
through a number of different visual representation
methods, each of which is best suited to highlight
different patterns and features. It is also necessary to
achieve balance between non-abstract and abstract visual
representation. Some problems are best solved with one
or the other; however many require the services of both
representations. We have adopted a multiple and
coordinated views approach. In this context a view is
referred to as a clearly defined region on the screen. The

Abstract
This paper demonstrates the synergy of common
InfoVis and GeoVis interaction techniques and the
logistic application domain demonstrated in the
customized Visualize Performance Data (VISPER)
application. In VISPER multi-dimensional, multi-source,
time-varying and geospatial digital information from
voyage analysis is represented to facilitate decisionmaking. Using common InfoVis components for
multivariate data together with logistics visualization in
a new synergy aids the users in their work examining
ship and route performance. An evaluation of the
usability was performed to gather insights for future
development. The results from the evaluation show that
the overall impression of VISPER was highly positive
and participants enjoyed using it. Feedback obtained
was highly valuable and directly applicable for
improvements and further development.
Keywords Voyage Analysis, Geovisual Analytics,
Visual Data Exploration and Analysis, Usability
Evaluation.

1. Introduction
The large and ever-increasing amounts of multidimensional, multi-source, time-varying and geospatial
digital information represents a major challenge for the
future. The need to analyze and make decisions based on
these information streams, often in time-critical
situations, demands integrated and sophisticated
interactive tools that aid the user to manage, process,
visualize and interact with large information spaces. In
this paper we demonstrate such a challenge from the
logistics application domain of shipping.
GeoAnalytics is used for many tasks where
geospatial information is available, such as weather data,
transportation routes and travelling optimization.
Analyzing this information on its own is easy and today
there are many methods for viewing and interacting with
geospatial information [1]. Fusing data from different

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.32

381

notion of arranging views is generic and is found in
many visualization systems.
To assess VISPER a formative evaluation was
performed. This evaluation involved a group of relevant
domain experts and the main objective was to identify
potential usability problems and investigate how the
application might support/affect visual explorative data
analysis in its targeted domain.
The key tasks for the development of VISPER have
been:
• To allow the users to see the difference between
the actual result from a voyage and the
theoretically calculated result.
• To compare this output with data stored from
earlier voyages in order to find trends or
differences.
• To define an aggregated method to calculate an
average performance value for a ship or a route
which can then be used in comparisons.
• To integrate route and weather information to
faciliate decision-making.
• To perform an evaluation to assess the usability
of VISPER and gather insights for future
development
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Some relevant background and related work is provided
in section 2. A general description of VISPER together
with an example use scenario is provided in section 3.
The next section, 4, presents a description of the system
implementation. Thereafter the usability evaluation is
presented in section 5. Finally, the paper concludes with
the general results and a discussion in section 6 which
also outlines some issues for future work.

optimize flight routes when avoiding hazardous weather.
The challenges lie in effectively integrating route and
weather information in the same application to facilitate
decision-making”.
Looking at other information visualization software
one got Improvise by Chris Weaver which is a desktop
application for building visual interfaces that is used for
interactive querying of multidimensional datasets [7].

3. VISPER
Before a voyage begins a shipping company may
contact a meteorological company and inform about the
intended route, preferred arrival time and what fuel
consumption is acceptable. The meteorological company
then calculates a route for the voyage where weather,
hazards and other types of parameters are considered.
During the voyage both the ship and the meteorological
company store weather factors such as wind direction,
wind speed, swell height and swell angles in databases
for later use.
When a voyage is completed the shipping company
can order a post voyage analysis (PVA), in which a
marine meteorologist plots how the weather and currents
have affected the voyage. Based on this it is possible to
calculate an estimated speed that the ship should have
performed which in turn makes it possible to see if the
ship performed well or not. Since these PVAs are
performed on a daily basis, the amount of information
adds up quite quickly. Until now, shipping companies
have not had any visualization systems to support tasks
like comparison between estimated and actual
performance of a voyage or to compare data stored from
earlier voyages. Instead they are left with paper based
plots and use different types of calculating matrices to
get key values. Data from each voyage has to be
inspected first and then, if of interest, it has to be added
to the matrix. To provide a more suitable tool to support
this work VISPER was developed.
VISPER is composed of three different views as
shown in figure 1. The upper area of the graphical user
interface (GUI) is a world map representation with
voyages plotted as lines on the map. The lines are drawn
using the latitude and longitude position for the ship
which are reported once per day. The middle area
contains list boxes showing different categorical
attributes. In the bottom area there is a parallel
coordinate (PC) representation of the numerical
statistical data where each line represents a voyage.
The coordination between the three views in
VISPER is exemplified by the following actions:
1. When one or several voyages are selected in the
map view, the corresponding voyages are
selected (and highlighted by color) in the other
views.
2. When one or several items are selected in the
list boxes, the corresponding voyages are
selected in the other views.

2. Related work
Earlier work on shipping logistics has focused on
different areas. A lot of effort has been devoted to
finding optimization methods for calculating the most
effecient route for a voyage. Chen [3] presents a robust
optimization model for container shipping which helps in
ship deployment and slot allocation. Using mathematic
optimization in this way, an operator can plan which
route and cargo to take. The MayaViz company has
focused on using single types of graphs for ship voyage
planning. “TransViz allows logisticians and planners
responsible for moving tons of equipment around the
world to develop “What if" scenarios and explore
alternatives without slowing down or disrupting finely
tuned systems.” [4]
Many other transportation domains also use route
planning to increase efficiency, especially in real time
[5]. With route constraints added to the planning the
mission criteria can more easily be fulfilled. Most
domains within transportation depend heavily on weather
forecasts to avoid delays and damage. Within avionics
dispatchers have to gather weather information before
dispatching a plane. A paper concerning weather
avoidance [6] notes that “the proposed paradigm shift to
a free-flight environment offers an opportunity to better

382

Figure 1 The VISPER user interface with its three components; the world map view the list box view and the parallel
coordinates view (please note that the list box view is minimized due to secrecy).

3.

When one or several lines are selected in the PC
the corresponding voyages are selected in the
other views.
4. When moving the sliders in the PC all voyages
removed by this filtering action are also
removed in the other views.
5. When the filter button is used in the list boxes
to remove items these are also removed from
the other views.
Menus and buttons for interaction with VISPER are
located at the top of the application window and also
above the list box view. This separation has been decided
on since some of the buttons’ functionality only applies
to the list box view.

information about a voyage, since not all information is
visualized at the same time and many attributes are not
needed in the visualization. This document also includes
data for the waypoints and calculations based on
weather.

3.2. Example usage scenario
A typical use scenario for VISPER could be to
search for ships whose journey has been delayed for
some reason. For example a shipping company might
like to find the ten percent of its total voyages that had
delays during a certain period of time. In order to answer
such questions the analyst has to find the locations for
delays, examine the existing conditions (affected by, for
instance, weather factors) at that position and try to
identify what factors might have contributed to the delay.
Using traditional methods all old PVA documents
would first have to be consulted to see which voyages
have had a major negative time difference (difference
between estimated and actual time of arrival). To do this
one also has to decide what is considered as a major
negative time difference. It is not always obvious
whether a delay of twenty hours is acceptable or not.
This is a time-consuming task since comparisons have to
be made between values for large numbers of attributes.
Having defined the event considered as a negative time
difference, data is reduced leaving only the voyages that
remain within this range. The next step is to examine the
values for the attributes that seem likely to have had an
impact, for instance weather and current factors. If these
seem to have been the cause, waypoint data for the actual
voyages is further examined to see where on the route
the delay occurred. Altogether this scenario requires
much effort and is a typical example case of reviews

3.1. Data for VISPER
Input data for VISPER consists of reports sent in by
ships once per day including their position, time,
observed weather and fuel usage. This information is
complemented by weather data from Gridded Binary
(GRIB) [8] files used by SMHI. GRIB is a
mathematically concise data format commonly used
within meteorology to store historical and forecasted
weather data. For each position and time reported one
can extract the weather and current data from the grib
files using interpolation. Thus the reported data can be
compared with the calculated data to find inaccuracies in
the reports. In the top tool bar in the VISPER application
there is a button labelled “Information”. This option
provides a textual description of the ship together with
data about the voyage in terms of performance values.
Also the marine meteorologist is able to add comments.
Finally, when using VISPER one can compile and
print PVA documents. A PVA contains all the

383

frequently performed by shipping companies. Other
scenarios could be to investigate high fuel consumption
or breakdowns.
To conduct this data exploration and analysis using
VISPER one could begin by exploring data in the PC
view. Since the values are plotted on a linear axis, it is
easy to compare all visual profiles and decide what area
of interest to work on, i.e. to define the range of the
negative time difference. By adjusting the filter sliders
on the attribute axes, an event is defined that keeps only
the voyages having this major negative time difference.
Then one can change to continue in the map view. Here
the remaining voyages are plotted according to the
attribute selected in the menu and one can examine the
values for weather and current factors. Also, one can
view the difference between calculated performance and
actual performance. Finally, to get the exact values and
additional information one can now use PVA documents
or ship logs. This scenario would probably take hours
using a traditional method like the one described first.
VISPER on the other hand would reduce total time to
minutes.

extremely sophisticated) suitable for many forms of data,
allows versatile interaction methods drawn from many
research areas and integrates mechanisms for
transformation of the data through both mathematical
and statistical analysis.
The components used in VISPER and their
functionality, described below, have been determined in
cooperation with experienced marine meteorologists and
product managers at SMHI. Other components to be used
for representation of data exist in GAV [9] which may be
added to VISPER during later development.

4.1. Parallel coordinates view
In the PC view each vertical axis corresponds to one
numerical attribute. The minimum and maximum values
of each attribute are displayed as the top and bottom
ending points of its axis. Range sliders are used to define
events and axis position can be altered by dragging and
dropping. A voyage is plotted as a line intersecting the
axes. Using this view it possible to look for relations
between attributes, to compare visual profiles of voyages
in order to find differences or similarities between them,
as well as perform dynamical filtering on one axis at a
time. This can be of importance for users when they want
to remove voyages that do not fulfil a search criterion. In
the current application, the following eleven attributes
for values aggregated over an entire voyage are
visualized; year, month, distance, steaming time, average
speed, weather factor (how many knots the ships has
been slowed down due to weather), current factor (how
the currents have affected the speed in knots),
performance speed (actual speed), time gained/lost,
calculated
total
consumption
and
over/under
consumption.

4. Implementation
The development of the VISPER software has been
carried out using the GeoAnalytics Visualization (GAV)
Framework [9]. The GAV Framework has been under
development for some time [10, 11] and allows for rapid
prototyping, first with simple components which can
then be followed by the customization of more advanced
task specific components.

4.2. World map view

Figure 3 Voyages plotted as lines in the
Mediterranean where weather factor is used as
attribute.
In the world map view each voyage is plotted as a
line using the waypoints for the voyage and the reported
position from the ship (figure 3). The line displays data
on numerical attributes (one attribute at a time) which are
selected in a menu placed at the top toolbar, see figure 4.
The line is divided into segments colored by numerical
intervals. These intervals are displayed in the legend
placed in the top left corner of the view. This makes it
possible to see how the values of an attribute have
changed during different parts of a voyage as illustrated

Figure 2 Example of GAV visualization components.
GAV, as shown in figure 2, incorporates a wide
range of visual representations (from the simple to the

384

in figure 4. The attributes are currently wave height,
performance speed (difference in knots between charter
speed and actual speed), current factor, weather factor,
good weather (if the wind is below 17 knots or not) and
diff performance which is the performance speed
subtracted from the theoretical performance speed. The
last attribute is important for an operator because it will
display if a ship has over- or under-performed.

programming (1). Although this group cannot be
expected to fully consider and predict the needs and
actions of the intended end users, this distribution of
participants with their respective domain knowledge was
assumed to provide a wide variety of opinions and
insights into the use and usability issues of VISPER.

5.2. Procedure
Participants used the system on a one-on-one basis.
Before the evaluation session began background
information was obtained concerning occupation,
experience with shipping and weather data, voyage
analysis, and visualization tools. The evaluation session
consisted of two parts. First, there was a demonstration
of VISPER. This prepared tutorial provided an overview
of the system and a step-by-step walk-through of its
interface components and basic functionality. The
participants were then presented with a list of ten tasks.
These were chosen to be representative of typical end
user tasks and operations (e.g., to locate and identify
relations between attributes, specific areas of interest and
outliers) and were also chosen in order to include using
as much of the systems functionality as possible. The
tasks include to; correlate, The main interest regarding
task performance was not in clear yes/no answers but to
gain as much information as possible. Therefore the
participants were assisted when asking for help to
resolve any confusion. They were also encouraged to
think aloud when performing the tasks. In this vein,
valuable information about benefits and problems with
the interface, exploration strategies and suggestions for
improvements, etc. were gathered throughout the
evaluation session.
After using the system participants completed a
subjective satisfaction questionnaire containing 4-point
answer rating scales (of strongly disagree to strongly
agree) on 40 statements concerning various aspects of
the system. These statements were based on recognized
usability principles and guidelines from Humancomputer interaction (HCI) [13] together with more
specific principles proposed for information visualization
[14, 15, 16]. The statements were grouped into the
following categories; overall impression of VISPER,
data exploration, visual representation, system status and
feedback and interaction mechanisms (these categories
are also used below to structure the description of the
results). The motivation for using a forced-choice
response scale (with an even number of responses and
hence no middle neutral or undecided choice) was to
force participants to decide whether they leaned more
towards the disagree or agree end of the scale. Also, to
let participants give more precise and elaborate
explanations to answers follow-up questions were asked.
Finally, it should be pointed out that participants were
encouraged not to feel any pressure to respond positively
in any way although they knew that one of the
administrators was involved in the development of
VISPER. On the contrary, they were told to be as critical
as possible since the study aimed at improving the

Figure 4 Attributes plotted in the map view.
The world map has different types of interaction
mechanisms. One can zoom in and out of the map and
pan it around using the mouse. Picking (selection) can be
done to select individual or multiple voyages in the map.
As described above (see section three), voyages selected
in the map are also selected in the other components.

4.3. List box view
In each box in the list box view a categorical
attribute is presented. In the current prototype these are
shipping company, ship name, voyage identification
(ID), departure port and destination port. One can select
one or multiple items by clicking in each list box and
then filter on this attribute/s.

5. Usability evaluation
To assess VISPER a formative evaluation was
performed on the system prototype. It was based on
inspection methods [12] and involved participants
examining the interface by accomplishing a set of tasks,
and also judging its compliance with a set of statements.
The main objective was to explore qualitative usability
issues such as advantages and disadvantages in visual
representations, interaction mechanisms and the support
of visual explorative data analysis. It also aimed to
gather opinions regarding potential use and future
development. Results would determine first what issues
are to be considered before system release, and secondly
how to conduct a more complex future study with
intended end users.

5.1. Participants
Six persons participated in the study (a suitable
number according to the method used). They were all
employees at SMHI. Their occupations were in graphical
design (1), marine meteorology (3), global product
manager of weather routing (1) and technical

385

system. A full evaluation session lasted approximately
one hour (including the introductory part).

that being able to see all critical attributes simultaneously
in different views, that are dynamically linked and
coordinated, together with the diverse opportunities to
try out different combinations between the attributes,
connections can be made that might not otherwise be
discovered or would require a lot of effort using
traditional methods. The PC view, novel to all
participants but one, was considered as especially
powerful for exploring details, trying out different
relations between attributes to find which conditions had
contributed to an outcome. To further support correlation
analysis, however, one participant requested a scatterplot
for a visual overview and exact values.
With regard to the visual representation participants
found the spatial organization of views as logical and
clear, information was easy to find and interpret and
placed in ways that corresponded to a good workflow.
When asked about its cognitive complexity, participants
commented on the number of attributes that can be
simultaneously visualized in the PC view (restricted only
by the horizontal resolution of the view). When working
on large quantities of attribute axes, methods to alter the
set in order to optimize this screen space were requested.
Options to explore would include ways to hide and
remove attributes not of current interest. Further, all
commented on the default view in the World Map
(showing all voyages from a shipping company) being
too dense. This feature was a result of the pilot version
showing data from several shipping companies; however
the problem may remain with a system handling large
databases. It was suggested that the default view should
display the result of the most recent query performed. In
this vein it should be meaningful and also serve as a
simple history function.
Participants agreed that the system’s capacity to
inform on its current status and give feedback on actions
was clear in most cases. However, some issues were
commented on. When filtering on attributes using the
PC, feedback on which axes are selected is only provided
by the position of their sliders. Additional feedback was
considered to be useful in particular when sliders are just
slightly adjusted or for communication purposes. This
could be achieved by using color or form, for instance by
changing the axis label to a bold font. Further, in
addition to all the benefits of linked views the visual
feedback across them may be disturbing. In VISPER,
when filtering on an attribute in the PC view this action
scrolls the list box view. One participant complained
about being disturbed by visual flicker. This might cause
visual fatigue and needs a solution.
Concerning the interaction mechanisms provided,
overall, participants were pleased with these features.
Since the majority (n=5) were novices to this type of
system, this further reflects its learnability. However,
some improvements were suggested.
Options for
interaction and functionality of controls in the PC could
be indicated more clearly and appropriate visual cues
will be investigated. Further, one issue causing
unnecessary frustration was the lack of some standard
functionality in the prototype. This flaw was experienced

5.3. Results
From the background survey, all participants except
from the global product manager of weather routing had
limited experience with visualization tools and no
previous experience of the parallel coordinates
visualization. All three marine meteorologists had
significant experience with weather data and some
experience in performing pre- and post-voyage analysis
but generally used software for route planning together
with spreadsheet style interfaces to support that work.
The graphical designer and the technical programmer
had little exposure to the actual use of visualization tools
for performing such work but were highly skilled in
layout and interaction and software development
respectively.
All participants completed all tasks. When asked
about how they experienced the evaluation all stated that
the demonstration part covered their needs to be able to
perform the evaluation. They also considered that giving
comments while solving the tasks was not distracting;
rather they stated that they enjoyed this approach.
They all showed great enthusiasm for the system.
This was also reflected in the ratings. When filling in the
questionnaire responses varied from a group median
value of 3 (agree) to 4 (strongly agree) resulting in an
overall positive rating on all statements. (Due to limited
space and the fact that the qualitative results are
considered more valuable than the actual ratings at this
stage of development figures will not be reported
further). Follow-up questions discussing these,
sometimes general, statements in greater detail gave a
more nuanced and informative picture of opinions and
several usability problems were indicated.
Regarding the overall impression of VISPER it was
highly positive and the participants enjoyed using it. The
application was considered as easy to grasp and operate
and highly efficient for exploring and analyzing data.
This was also reflected by spontaneous comments such
as, “it is really easy to understand how it works and you
do not really need a manual to learn this” and “it is
fantastic what you can accomplish with this and in such
effortless ways”. These have also been common
reactions of people when demonstrating the system for
potential customers.
Participants discussed the visual data exploration
process using VISPER in comparison with using
traditional tools currently employed in the application
domain. The ability to start an analytical process with the
big picture provided by several representations showing
data from different perspectives and then being able to
dig down into the data by examining patterns and
exceptions that caught their eye were considered major
advantages. To be able to interact directly with the data
and the fact that dynamic queries immediately reflected
the visual contents in all views was also highly
appreciated and considered as very useful. All agreed

386

as constraining and slowing down task execution. First,
zoom and pan actions could only be performed by using
the mouse and all participants requested complementary
standard buttons in the toolbar. Second, there was a lack
of buttons for undo and redo actions. When wanting to
change a query, participants could only use the
“unselect” button (figure 1). This action reset the entire
query. Consequently, they had to redo the whole thing
going through a tedious sequence of actions rather than
being able to just step back and forwards in the system.
Naturally, these deficiencies will be resolved
immediately by implementing appropriate mechanisms.
In addition to these results, several other changes
and desirable features to be included in the application
were suggested:
•
•

•

•
•

•

•

•

cargo, the area of the ship’s location and its
direction) which would provide flexibility for
task execution, in particular for experienced
users.

6. Conclusions
In this paper we demonstrate the synergy of
common InfoVis and GeoVis interaction techniques
integrated with
shipping related logistic methods
demonstrated in the customized VISPER domain
application. VISPER will benefit from InfoVis
exploratory data analysis (EDA) techniques applied in a
multiple-linked and coordinated views interface. The
advantages to “see” and interact with time-oriented
logistic container traffic data simultaneously from
different perspectives and scenarios are discussed. We
recommend the reader to visit the GAV web site [8] and
experience in real-time the optimized visual user
interface (VUI) techniques based on dynamic and direct
data manipulation that permit the data analytical process
to become more interactive and focused.
Also the synergy between multivariate data in the
PC and the logistics visualization in the map has been a
new area for us that have yet to be explored. Our
usability study has demonstrated that VISPER gives the
user a new powerful geovisual analytics tool to explore
the, multi-source, time-varying and geospatial digital
information that has for years been available to the
shipping companies, but never previously fused together
and analysed visually.
To summarize the evaluation, reactions to VISPER
were very positive, indicating that it is a promising
application. All participants expressed that VISPER
seemed very useful and that it most probably should be
superior to the traditional tools currently used by
shipping companies today.
In summary, especially appreciated features in the
system were:
• The ability to have, within an eye span on a
single screen, several dynamically linked and
coordinated representations showing
geospatial-time-multivariate data from different
perspectives.
• The ability to interact directly with data (and the
on-screen graphics) and that dynamic queries
immediately reflected the visual contents in all
views.
• The opportunities for data exploration using the
PC view. A wide variety of variations and
relations could be tried quickly in order to
explore which conditions that had contributed to
an outcome or not.
The most prominent requests for improvements were
related to options for detail on demand, history functions
and flexibility of use. These needs can easily be met by
implementing components already present in the GAV
toolkit such as time and trend graphs, snapshots and
scatter plots and by allowing personal customization.
Some design flaws had already been noted before the

The ability to change the default numerical
intervals of attribute values in the legend in the
world map and in the PC.
More options for details-on-demand. Clicking
on an element in the interface could result in a
graphical representation or a pop-up window
providing precise details. For example, clicking
on a particular segment of a voyage in the world
map could provide details on the values (for the
selected parameters) of that segment. This
feature could also be considered in the PC to
provide details on voyages and axis attributes
when precise values are necessary.
An option to capture and organize results for
later recall and communication to others. This
can be achieved by “snap-shots”, a feature in
GAV [9] that remembers and records system
information enabling users to return to previous
states.
Custom-made buttons in the toolbar to program
for routine tasks tailored to customers’ specific
needs and wants.
Options for compiling and printing documents
other than PVAs. For example “performance
preview documents” which generates tabular
attribute data on selected voyages compared.
A possibility to rotate the map to change the
center of view and, for instance, focus on the
Pacific Ocean rather than the Atlantic. Also, the
map could be made more aesthetic by adding
some texture and structure to the continents.
Since no data is displayed on land, careful use
of such visual effects would not be assumed to
distract from the data.
Visual feedback on the status of voyages in the
map view. Currently, this is only conveyed in
the list boxes through port of destination and
port of arrival. An option would be to join each
line with a symbol having a silhouette of a ship
heading one direction and also showing its type,
cargo and whether it is loaded or not.
An option in the list boxes to perform search by
voyage ID (a prefix defined by type of ship,

387

evaluation was undertaken but several usability problems
were indicated by the evaluation which had not been
previously noticed during development. The trouble
spots that were indicated and the implementation of
some desired features will be considered in order to
enhance and finalize the first version of the system
before release. Finally, it should be discussed that results
from the evaluation depend on the participants’
qualifications; their opinions are subjective and may vary
accordingly to their respective domain of expertise. Also,
the interface was tested with a simplified version of the
system. These facts, obviously, influence the outcome
and have to be taken into consideration. Experts can miss
important issues that will be noticed by end users, neither
can they fully predict their specific information needs,
tasks and actions to be performed.
Future work for VISPER is getting the software
implemented in shipping company’s daily work
environment and tested in a real-life situation. We expect
that more improvements to interaction and more methods
for giving the customer help are needed. Another
important area is also to visualize real time data that
show ships on their way as well as displaying current
weather factors and estimates for the coming days. This
allows for shipping management to make decisions
whether a route is worth taking. Future evaluations are
planned in which the end users will assess the refined
finalized version in its specific application area. These
will include a summative evaluation validating the
system towards specific usability goals and
performances. This work will further tailor the usability
of the system towards the intended end users’
expectations, specific needs, and working behavior.

[4]
[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]

Acknowledgements
This applied research study was supported and
monitored by SMHI [17] (Special thanks to Lennart
Cederberg). The research is also supported, in part, by
funding from the Swedish Knowledge Foundation (KKStiftelsen).
Many thanks to our colleagues in the Visual
Information Technology and Applications group at ITN,
Linkoping University. Special thanks to everyone in the
GAV development team.

[16]

[17]

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

O.M. Ostensen and P.C. Smits. ISO/TC211:
Standardisation of Geographic Information and Geoinformatics. In IGARSS '02: Proceedings of Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Symposium. IEEE International, vol.
1, pp. 261-263. June 2002.
J. Roberts. Exploratory visualization with multiple linked
views. In A. MacEachren, M.J. Kraak and J. Dykes
(Eds).
Exploring
Geovisualization.
Amsterdam:
Elseviers, 2004.
C. Chen and Q. Zenq. Robust optimization model for
container shipping line. In Proceedings of the

388

International Conference on Convergence Information
Technology. IEEE, pp. 2072-2077. Nov. 2007.
MayaViz url: http://www.mayaviz.com
R.J. Szczerba, P. Galkowski, I.S. Glicktein and N.
Ternullo. Robust algorithm for real-time route planning.
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic
Systems, Volume 36, Issue 3, pp. 869-878
C.D. Michael, O. Olofinboba, S. Pratt, I. Wilson and C.
Herbster, An experimental evaluation of weather
avoidance using route optimization. In Proceedings of
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetic. Oct 2002.
C. Weaver, Building Highly-Coordinated Visualizations
in Improvise. In Proceedings of IEEE International
Symposium on Information Visualization, pp. 159-166.
Oct 2004.
Grib files url:
http://www.nco.ncep.noaa.gov/pmb/docs/on388/
GAV Framework url: http://vita.itn.liu.se/GAV
M. Jern, J. Johansson and J. Franzén. The GAV Toolkit
for Multiple Linked Views. In Proceedings of IEEE 11th
International Conference on Information Visualization,
pp. 85-97. July 2007.
M. Jern and J. Franzén. Integrating GeoVis and InfoVis
components. In Proceedings of IEEE 11th International
Conference on Information Visualization, pp. 511-520.
July 2007.
J. Nielsen and R.L. Mack (Eds). Usability Inspection
Methods. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
J. Nielsen. Heuristic Evaluation. In: J. Nielsen and R.L.
Mack, eds. Usability Inspection Methods. New York,
NY: John Wiley & Sons, 1994, pp. 25-61.
T. Zuk and S. Carpendale. Theoretical Analysis of
Uncertainty Visualizations. In Proceedings of SPIEIS&T Electronic Imaging, Vol 6060,
606097 C,
Visualization and Data Analysis. Jan 2006,
C.M.D.S. Freitas, P.R.G. Luzzardi, R.A. Cava, M.A.
Winckler, M. Pimenta and L P. Nedel. On Evaluating
Usability of Information Visualization Techniques. In
AVI’02: Proceedings of Advanced Visual Interfaces.
May 2002.
B. Shneiderman. The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type
Taxonomy for
Information Visualizations. In
Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages
1996, pp. 336-343. Sept 1996.
The Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute
url: http://www.smhi.se

