12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Creating Local Geographies for Map-Based Cyber Navigation
Sabine Cikic, Sabina Jeschke, Fritz Lehmann-Grube
Technische Universit¨at Berlin, University of Stuttgart, Technische Universit¨at Berlin
cikic@math.tu-berlin.de, sabina.jeschke@rus.uni-stuttgart.de, lehmannf@math.tu-berlin.de
Abstract

still scarcely to be avoided, even within an individual website if the site’s navigation has not been thoroughly thought
through.
Web navigation as a whole can be regarded as a real
challenge, but Internet users, strangely enough, seem to
have become habituated to this and to have come to terms
with the fact that the Internet is a place where there are no
maps. However this does not prevent metaphors connected
to physical space/rooms being used for the Internet and
other virtual environments - cyberspace, virtual space, data
highway, portal, chat room, homepage, website, multi-user
dungeon etc. So there does seem to be a real need to make
virtual space/cyberspace conceptually more tangible.
Using the ViCToR project as an example, this work examines whether it is possible to enable cyber navigation
by map. In section 2 the current level of advancement of
online maps is briefly described. The ViCToR project is
introduced in section 3. Section 4 outlines the fundamental
principles that have to be considered, followed by a description of the map elements to be visualised in section
5. Rules concerning the distribution of rooms on the map
are the subject of section 6, the paper then closes with an
outlook into the future of the project.

Although Internet and WWW phenomena are often described using spatial metaphors, the commonest means of
geographic orientation - the map - is little used in online navigation. Maps of the physical world are however
available online, as are maps illustrating physical Internet topography, semantic maps showing content linkages
and maps of gaming environments, usually realistic simulations. Lacking an underlying geography, maps of entire
virtual spaces such as cooperative knowledge spaces seem
impossible or impractical as long as their sites are conceived only as unstructured (or at most hierarchical) addresses.
The ViCToR project (Virtual Cooperation in Teaching and
Research) at the Technische Universit¨at Berlin uses a room
metaphor to implement a shared, user-defined space for
carrying out cooperative work in education and research.
So far navigation in the hierarchically structured rooms
is poorly developed. This paper explores the possibilities
for implementing map-based domain navigation using a
community-created local geography based on coordinates.
Keywords— cybergeography, virtual space, map-based
navigation, computer-supported cooperative work.

2
1

Introduction

The more the Internet permeates and pervades the lives
of ordinary people, the more we find that it is impossible to
conduct our daily lives without it. There seems to be a dedicated online service, an information resource, a forum or
platform for every single task - performing a bank transaction, finding a telephone number, buying or selling goods,
sharing holiday photos, researching for seminar presentations or even submitting homework electronically. Be this
as it may, it is by no means always easy to locate the particular information or appropriate service for a given purpose. “Surfing” the Internet is a fairly apt metaphor, and
much time is taken up searching rather than finding. The
sheer quantity of data included grows exponentially, while
the actually number of websites has long defied estimation.
Search engines have brought considerable improvement,
but for Internet users a feeling of being “lost in space” is

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.62

State of the art

There have been previous attempts to map the Internet
itself. We found impressive examples of this in the famous
“Atlas of Cyberspace” [6]. The main problem with mapping the Internet is that it has no inherent geography. Instead of locations there are IP addresses, and it is pretty
well accepted that it is not practical to assign IP addresses
to locations. Actually IPs would not be enough - one would
in fact have to consider the set of all URLs that can be requested via http.
Applications of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies
usually subsumed under the notion of semantic maps or
topic maps derive visual (sometimes interactive) representations from metadata of information resources, but this
does not mean that the input data - an amount of information - originally embodied the geography in question. By
altering the query (and/or reconfiguring the mapping tool
or for example including an additional record) different se-

397

mantic maps of the same area, which typically show similar style and function but dissimilar geography, can be produced in different contexts or for different purposes. Geometric structures and clusters of elements etc. are not visually recognisable. In the “Atlas of Cyberspace” Dodge &
Kitchin call this maps and spatializations: “More recently
it has been recognized that the process of spatialization where a spatial, map-like structure is applied to data where
no inherent or obvious one exists - can provide an interpretable structure to other types of data. In essence, maps
and spatializations exploit the mind’s ability to more readily see complex relationships in images, providing a clear
understanding of a phenomenon, reducing search time, and
revealing relationships that may otherwise not have been
noticed.” [7]
Maps of virtual worlds in computer games, on the other
hand, straightforwardly represent a purposely designed
underlying physical model. These models are relatively
stable, which allows the viewer intuitive understanding,
recognition and identification.
Finally, digital maps of the real world are increasingly
becoming a frequently used feature of web design in many
contexts. This is especially due to the easy integrability
of Google Maps into any web sites through the Google
Maps API [9]. It is however expected, that other, more
specialised cartography will soon appear online, since new
approaches to cartography have “resulted in innovative, usable and ’immediately available’ geospatial resources.” [1]
New technologies from this source will enhance state of the
art in terms of web design. They may very well be used for
the mapping of abstract worlds too.

can be deposited. Each individual room is in a way a world
of its own, with various documents and other artefacts and
with users currently in attendance. We have suggested in
[2] that the most crucial property of such rooms should be
that both objects (e. g. content) and subjects (users) can be
inside the room or outside it.
The rooms are created by users themselves, and can
likewise be deleted. Having “built” the room, the user can
determine which users or groups are to have access to it.
Access, interaction rights and general key rights are regulated via a key management system [3].

3

3.3

3.2

At present the rooms are hierarchically structured, i. e.
in parent/child relationships. The top room in this structure
is known as the “hall.” For navigation and overview purposes a pull-down menu and an automatically generated
map showing an overview of the rooms are provided. Although this map allows direct access to rooms when they
are clicked on (relevant key rights permitting) the layout
quickly becomes unclear when large numbers of rooms
are added. Since the map cannot be directly modified by
users, or to put it in a more sophisticated way: its generation has not been controlled by human intelligence, it
does not support intuitive navigation. For the new map,
the tree hierarchy of the elements will be replaced by a
more informal hierarchy of clusters of clustered elements
or agglomerations of rooms.

The ViCToR project

Domain overview

In our application scenario, visual recognition is intended to be specifically helpful to develop a sense of
“home” or “workplace” in the users’ minds. The map
serves as a launch page leading to the laboratories, archives
and other venue places. New rooms may be added to the
ViCToR-Space at any time. Also, old rooms may be moved
or deleted. This is in contrast to the real world, where
changes happen comparatively slowly. In the real world, it
is thus sufficient to remake a map once or sometimes twice
a year to cover for things like streets being built or changed
or river-beds wandering. The timescales of such changes
are slow enough that it is easy to keep up with mapping.
In ViCToR-Space, however, the challenge is to present a
recognisable, apparently static, “quasi-geographical” map
to the user in spite of the frequent and quick changes that
may occur.
Imposing a rather simple “physical model”, we can let
the community of users undertake the construction of the
knowledge landscape. Nonetheless the maps can feature
modern standards of visualisation and interaction.

The ViCToR project (Virtual Cooperation in Teaching
and Research) is in the process of developing a cooperative knowledge platform to be employed for education and
research purposes particularly in the fields of mathematics,
the natural sciences, and engineering [4]. It is based on the
computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) platform
CURE [5] which originated at the FernUniversit¨at in Hagen, Germany’s largest distance learning university, where
it is already being used intensively to support students in a
range of courses.

3.1

Locating rooms

CSCW using a room metaphor

In contrast to almost all other extant knowledge management systems, CURE closely follows a room metaphor
throughout [11]. The system is built up of various rooms
each representing a separate entity in the database. We refer to the totality of these rooms as “space”; or in our case
ViCToR-Space.
Viewed in terms of a content management system, in
ViCToR the rooms serve as containers into which content

398

4

Fundamentals

a system of rights. As part of this process we will be able
to benefit from the past experience of work using CURE,
and add to this various space planning methods. Allowing the creator of every room to choose its location, the
resulting structure of distance and neighbourhood encompasses the semantics of the rooms more powerfully than
a hierarchical tree. The rooms created are not usually so
short-lived that they last just one day but will generally be
in use over a longer period - throughout a semester or even
longer. Thereby users can easily recognise the “world”
without confusion from one visit to the next.

To design a map of a ViCToR-Space we have to consider the rooms as objects of our virtual world. However,
they cannot simply be represented directly on a map. There
is no basis for such a representation, or more precisely no
underlying physical model - the rooms have no geographical home, no coordinates. Because the virtual space that
we want to represent is so far a place without topographical
locations we have to use a construction.

4.1

Creating local geographies

The set of room entities is to be equipped with a new
basic structure, namely location instead of hierarchy.
To do this we simply add an additional data domain
to the database, to wit two or three numerical attributes
(x, y(, z)) for each room object. The former ”parent” attribute may then be omitted. Two-dimensional coordinates
suffice for the present, but it should be no problem to add
an additional, third, dimension if appropriate projection
mechanisms are introduced. It is not regarded as a disadvantage that the map will initially only have two dimensions (most maps of the physical world have only two anyway). These rooms can and should have a more complex
structure in their interior; that is not the subject of this paper.
The introduction of coordinates means that the rooms
now have inter-relationships of closeness and distance, and
a relative position. Any three rooms for example together
form a triangular connection with fixed angles.
The question of whether rooms should have explicit/dual neighbour relations can initially be left open.
One option is of course to enable a logical, direct connection between rooms (e. g. in the form of n:n relations from
room to room, with a function allowing the user to jump
directly from one room to another via a hyperlink). This
could play a significant role for navigation. For example,
the focus on a selected room could be moved from one
to the other of the links using arrow keys. However this
would not affect the geography. The question of hyperlinks between rooms will be further studied in the ongoing
project.

4.2

4.3

Collecting semantic input

The chosen proximity and relative position of rooms
may fulfil various different purposes: should rooms which
have closely related technical content (e. g. Physics Lecture & Physics Experiments) be located close together, or
should the type and functionality of the rooms decide their
degree of closeness (e. g. Physics Lecture & Law Lecture)?
If we assume that clusters will form, this issue can also be
considered at a superordinate level: should Universities in
Berlin be grouped together, or rather for example the TU
Berlin be placed near the TU Munich because they are both
technical universities?
Questions like this should be solved by the user community, through discussions and by trial and error once the
spaces are up and running. These discussions will have to
be moderated, and suggestions will have to be formulated
in a technically correct manner. New specifications for
the metadata design may well prove to be a particularly
significant result of this discussion process. The challenge
to find a good place for e. g. a special virtual laboratory
will inspire its creator to consider and discuss possible
semantic structures of the knowledge landscape. In this
sense the map itself may become a scientific outcome as
representing a collective mental map.

5

Visualisation

Unlike on a normal geographic map, where most of the
displayed items such as streets, houses, lakes have a spatial dimension and occupy a certain area, our rooms have
the form of points and do not yield a volume by nature.
This corresponds to the fact that they represent addresses
of room entities. Also it enables deliberately dense clusters, and the system cannot run out of space not even in
small regions. Thus the design of the map is made of
the representation of single rooms on the one hand and a
space-filling background on the other.

Positioning rooms

We want to avoid random distribution of rooms. The
interface for creating and modifying rooms - itself not
exactly a simple process - will also feature a location allocation function. Our intention is to make the ViCToR
platform a living entity, in which the user community can
at any time add new rooms, delete or move them. This of
course has to be organised: Rules for prevention of any
potential misuse will have to be formulated and then implemented technically and in terms of content by means of

5.1

Background design

Because the relative position of a room to the background does not change (unless the room’s position is

399

edited), the background becomes a feature of the rooms.
Therefore, the chosen background is important and
should be static. Also, because the rooms will usually have
inter-relationships, we expect the room distribution on the
map to follow a cluster distribution.
The simplest approach to the background is to leave it
blank. This would correspond to a solid coloured area with
no features whatsoever except for the room icons added
later. Other possibilities include coloured zones or abstract
grids.
Another option is to add a completely unrelated image
to the background in the same way many users choose a
desktop background. As the images used are usually not
vector-based they do not scale properly.
One might also use a real map (such as from Google
Maps [10]) as a background. While this would make localisation for new rooms easy in many cases (just use the
address of the user or institute), the result would not be
a semantic map. In other words, rooms that have similar content or are otherwise related would not end up near
each other. This would make searching and understanding
of such a map unnecessarily difficult.
The advantage of adding some sort of background in
the form of an image or real map or even in the form of an
invented landscape would be to provide a framework for
orientation on the map. In fact, it is probable that users
will automatically seed clusters around these landmarks.
As much as this would enhance user’s ability to recognise
the map and to memorise specific locations on it, it would
on the other hand hinder/constrict a semantically meaningful distribution of the room elements on the map.
In order to keep the first prototype of the map as simple
as possible and as abstract as necessary a grid approach is
rather favoured (see the figure on page 5). While such a
grid does not inherently possess meaning or content, it can
acquire and carry meaning as an environment of the individual rooms – a randomised grid may still feature some
prominent, easily remembered positions that can serve as
focal points for clusters.
The creation of the very first room provides the world
with a sort of centre if it did not have one before, and
from this point further rooms can be placed either close
to rooms which are somehow related, or for a deliberate
reason placed at a distance. It is desirable that clusters are
generated, or local structures with a centre and a periphery.
Also grid lines can be used as orientation lines for further
expansion similar to streets in the real world.

5.2

vidualised by means of name, purpose, time and occasion of creation, content, users authorised to access the
room, community and even - situationally - logged-in
users. More classifying labels like laboratory, tutorial or
private as well as thematic labels such as biology or algebra can all be used to define the representation of a single
room on the map. Such metadata is available in a standardised XML format and can therefore conveniently be taken
as input for visual design [8]. One approach would be to
provide a library of SVG vector graphic icons, which differ in shape, colour, size, pattern and textual labelling, and
choose one for every single room according to its metadata.
For simplicity this is the case in the first prototype (see the
figure on page 5). More advanced approaches could be
to allow room icons to be chosen and configured by the
room’s creator and further embellished during dynamic visualisation. E. g. rooms that this user has previously visited may be highlighted. Some visual indication as to the
number of users currently in a room may be provided. Hyperlinks between rooms might be shown as well, perhaps
limited to hyperlinks this user has travelled along before.
As a desired feature we take into account that rooms lying close to each other may be represented by overlapping
icons on a map, or one may even be totally covered by
another. This may occur especially in cases where closeness is sought. This issue should be overcome by sufficient
zooming in all cases, supposing the icons are not resized at
zooming. Overlapping icons will then simply flow apart.
For a nicer solution an attempt will be made to zoom icons
at a lower rate than space, e. g. logarithmic.

6

Guiding the architects

Since the advent of Web 2.0, users in general seem to
greatly enjoy and find useful the opportunity to mould and
modify the Internet, i. e. to really use it, not just passively
sit and observe. The ViCToR platform is communitydriven, so enabling users to actively determine the where
as well as the simple what seems to be just appropriate and
transparent. This evolutionary process should be based on
as few paradigms and as much democracy as possible.
A room is generated by a known and authenticated user,
who we might call the architect. She/he has a vision of the
role and function of the room, determines its initial equipment, has a certain target audience in mind and defines the
key rights. As the architect of the room s/he wants to have
the best possible location for it. It can be assumed that
some individual locations are better or more suitable than
others - the most important criterion will thus be the relative position of the new room to other existing rooms.
As we allow every registered user to modify the virtual
world by adding and locating rooms, stringent rules are required to prevent chaos. These will have to be simple, so

Rooms as map elements

Although the rooms in ViCToR-Space do not have an
outside dimension, their visualisation must have a finite
size (or they would be invisible). The rooms are indi-

400

Figure 1: Demo of a ViCToR-Space
Prototype of a map of ’rooms’. A simple schematic background is given in form of a grid to support initial clustering. The
rooms are displayed by different icons according to metadata such as type, state, etc. or even by individual icons (at the
bottom). Users can enter the rooms by clicking on the icons.
that architects are able to understand easily and their creativity is not impaired.
It is crucial, that every room has exactly one pair of coordinates (x, y), and no two rooms have the same coordinates. Further rules might turn out to be necessary (cf.
outlook), but are not regarded as obligatory at this stage.

create individualised variants of the positions of the rooms
in those users’ own view.
It should be pointed out that the problem discussed in
this paper applies to the presentation of all knowledge
spaces, especially those which are edited by many users
simultaneously: examples would be wikis, social networking platforms or the presentation of competencies of a large
company.

Conclusion & Outlook
This paper discusses the requirements for visually mapping the structure of the ViCToR cooperative knowledge
platform. The rooms in ViCToR are tagged with coordinates whereby local geographies can be achieved. This enables users to navigate through the knowledge landscape in
a much faster and more intuitive way.
Furthermore, our suggestions allow users to not only
edit their data on the ViCToR platform, but also to design
the virtual space in which this data resides, thus providing
an additional semantic classification.
Both, the easier navigation and the increased control
over the presentation, should greatly increase acceptance
and usability of the ViCToR platform.
To protect selected important areas against overcrowding and/or spamming, future developments will include
’claim’ regions with exclusive permissions. Other features
to be explored include indidualised views. On the one
hand, this could apply to filtering and mark-up of the visualisation. On the other hand it could be possible for users to

References
[1] William Cartwright. Maps on the Web. In Michael P.
Peterson, editor, Maps and the Internet, pages 35–36.
Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2003.
[2] Sabine Cikic, Sabina Jeschke, Fritz Lehmann-Grube,
and Jan Sablatnig. Using a Room Metaphor for EForensic Working Environments. In Proceedings of
the First International Conference on Forensic Applications and Techniques in Telecommunications, Information and Multimedia (E-Forensics 2008), Adelaide, Australia, 2008. to appear.
[3] Sabine Cikic, Sabina Jeschke, Nadine Ludwig, and
Uwe Sinha. Virtual Room Concepts for Cooperative,
Scientific Work. In Conference Proceedings of World
Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia
& Telecommunications (ED-MEDIA 2007), Vancouver, Canada, 2007. to appear.

401

[4] Sabine Cikic, Sabina Jeschke, and Uwe Sinha. Concepts for Cooperative Knowledge Spaces in Mathematics and Natural Sciences. In CW ’06: Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on Cyberworlds, pages 99–106, Washington, DC, USA, 2006.
IEEE Computer Society.

[8] Vladimir Geroimenko and Chaomei Chen, editors. Visualizing Information Using SVG and X3D.
Springer, London, 2005.
[9] Google
Maps
API
website.
http://code.google.com/apis/maps/.
Last visited: 2008-04-22.

[5] CURE website. http://cure.sf.net, 2007.
Last visited: 2008-04-22.

[10] Google
Maps
http://maps.google.com/.
2008-04-22.

[6] Martin Dodge and Rob Kitchin. Atlas of Cyberspace.
Addison-Wesley, Amsterdam, 2001.

[11] Saul Greenberg and Mark Roseman. Using a Room
Metaphor to Ease Transitions in Groupware. In
M. Ackerman, V. Pipek, and V. Wulf, editors, Sharing
Expertise. Beyond Knowledge Management, pages
203–256. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, Jan. 2003.

[7] Martin Dodge and Rob Kitchin. Atlas of Cyberspace.
page 2. Addison-Wesley, Amsterdam, 2001.

402

website.
Last visited:

