12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Identifying Event Impacts by Monitoring the News Media
Robert M. Patton & Thomas E. Potok
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA
{pattonrm, potokte@ornl.gov}
exports between countries [1] .
The grand vision is to automatically detect events
that may cause a global reaction before that reaction
occurs. In an attempt to move towards this vision, this
paper describes a novel approach to discovering and
analyzing evidence of the impact of events on different
aspects of society. This work narrowly focuses on
resolving a specific problem:
identifying and
characterizing the impacts of natural disasters as they
relate to physical infrastructure and social behavior using
information obtained via news reports. The work
reported here is a preliminary investigation into solving
this problem.
Section 2 discusses some background information
and related works that provide the context under which
this new event impact analysis approach was developed.
Section 3 describes the design and process for this
approach. Section 4 describes the application of this
analysis approach to natural disasters that occurred in
2007. Sections 5 and 6 provide observations and
summary, respectively.

Abstract

Assessing the potential property and social impacts
of an event, such as tornado or wild fire, continues to be
a challenging research area. From financial markets to
disaster management to epidemiology, the importance of
understanding the impacts that events create cannot be
understated. Our work describes an approach to fuse
information from multiple sources, then to analyze the
information cycles to identify prior temporal patterns
related to the impact of an event. This approach is then
applied to the analysis of news reports from multiple
news sources pertaining to several different natural
disasters. Results show that our approach can project
the severity of the impacts of certain natural disasters,
such as heat waves on droughts and wild fires. In
addition, results show that specific types of disaster
consistently produce similar impacts when each time
they occur.

1. Introduction

2. Related Works

As global connectivity continues to grow, the
worldwide relevance of local events has become much
more significant. Events that decades ago would be
isolated news reports, now have the potential to create a
cascading effect resulting in global reaction. The
development and expansion of the Internet as a news and
information source provides much of the fuel for this
cascading effect. News of events can now travel the
globe at nearly the same rate at which the event itself
unfolds. A recent example is that of the controversial
Danish cartoons published in September 2005.
Immediately, these cartoons created a strong negative
reaction from the local Muslim community in Denmark.
Within several months, this event led to a global reaction
resulting in approximately 139 people dead, extensive
property damage, and various bans on imports and

Investigating the impacts of natural disasters on
society is not a new research area. There are many
works relating to the identification of different impacts
as well as different studies that have been performed [2]
[3] [4] . Many of these works and studies, however,
have identified impacts that are difficult to measure
quantitatively either before, during, or after the event. In
addition, some works have relied on remote sensing
techniques for assessing and monitoring disaster
situations [5] [6] [7] . For this work, the goal is to
develop an approach that would support a quantitative
view of the event impact based on field reporting of the
event.
Others have also investigated the impact of events
from news reports, but in different ways. In the work of
[8] , information from blogs was analyzed with respect to
the actual sales of a book. The authors discovered that
there was a direct relationship between blog chatter prior
to a book release and the actual volume of book sales
after the book release. The more people talked about a
book on their blogs prior to its release, then the higher
the volume of sales for the book after its release. The
authors show clearly that blog chatter is a good indicator

Notice: This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under
contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy.
The United States Government retains and the publisher, by accepting
the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States
Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide
license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or
allow others to do so, for United States Government purposes.

1550-6037 2008
U.S. Government Work Not Protected by U.S. Copyright
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.49

333

of the impact that a book release will create on sales
volume. In the work of [9] [10] , the relationship
between financial news and stock prices was
investigated. The foundation of these works is the
premise that financial news can have either a positive,
negative, or natural impact on the price of a stock, and
that the time lag between the news and the stock price
was minimal, if any. The authors observed that, in fact,
some of the financial news could provide indications as
to the direction of the stock price (up, down, unchanged).
However, their results are based on market simulations
using real data.
Regardless, their work provides
evidence that events and event impacts can be monitored
and gauged using news reports.
In the field of time-series analysis, there is also work
involving the temporal aspects of events and their
impacts. In the work of [11] , a time-series is
decomposed into three sub-series referred to as seasonal,
trend, and noise. The goal is to find complete or partial
periodic patterns in a time-series with trends. Their work
provides an approach to observe both short and longterm periodic patterns. They demonstrate their approach
on atmospheric CO2 levels as well as stock prices.

are retained. In this approach, a Haar wavelet basis is
used for the analysis due to its efficient computational
structure.
The Haar wavelet coefficients of each
component time-series are computed, and any
coefficients whose square falls below a certain threshold
are set to zero. The resulting sets of coefficients are
transformed back to the time domain to yield a filtered
version of the time-series. The next section will describe
the application of this approach to real data.

4. Application
To demonstrate this approach, we focus on natural
disaster events. In terms of events and event impacts,
natural disasters are fairly simple and well defined. In
addition, they generally have a short duration (usually
measured in hours or days, but rarely weeks) and rarely
have any preceding or subsequent events. Consequently,
impacts of the event should be more easily identifiable.
We believe the current approach should be applicable to
other domains such as finance and medical.
When natural disasters occur, they often make
significant impacts on society. As discussed in section 2,
there have been investigations into the various impacts
caused by natural disasters. For this work, the research
performed by [14] provides the foundation for the
impacts to be investigated. This work was chosen for its
simplicity and extensibility. In [14] , impacts can be
observed in 4 areas: Technical, Organizational, Social,
and Economic. Technical refers to the infrastructure of a
society (roads, bridges, power grid, water systems, etc).
Organizational refers to areas such as service crews that
maintain or respond to the Technical aspects. Social
refers to areas related to housing, shelters, provisions for
human needs, etc. Economic refers to the impacts on the
economy. This work focuses on the Technical and
Social impacts of a natural disaster.

3. Approach
In this work, the primary focus is to detect, analyze,
and characterize the impact of events as observed in the
news reports. Much like the work of [8] [10] , the
relationship between event impacts and the news media
is investigated. Unlike these works, however, this work
also incorporates the concept of decomposing news timeseries into sub-series as discussed in [11] . Figure 1
shows the conceptual view of our approach.

4.1 Data
We gathered and analyzed news reports from the
time period of January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2007.
These reports consisted of closed caption data from
ABC, CBS, NBC, CNN, and Fox News. For brevity,
only the results from January 2007 and February 2007
are discussed here.
Every word and phrase observed from these sources
is counted each day. Each particular word or phrase has
an associated vector of how many times that word or
phrase was used across all of the information sources
over a specific time period.

Figure 1. Concept of approach
The original data begins as a time-series of all of the
word and phrase counts that are observed in a set of news
articles. Next, a “textual prism” is created that is
comprised of a set of taxonomies that describe the words
and phrases related to the topics of interest by the user.
Each taxonomy is defined by the user and is applied to
the original time-series in order to produce a component
time-series. This component time-series shows how the
words and phrases of the taxonomy change over time.
Once the component time-series are created,
wavelet-based noise filtering is then performed on each
component series [12] [13] . Using a wavelet-based
approach allows a multi-resolution analysis of the signal,
whereby small fluctuations in the signal due to noise can
be filtered out while the larger, more meaningful spikes

4.2 Taxonomies
Next, a set of taxonomies were developed for both
the Technical and Social categories as shown in Table 1.
These taxonomies were developed manually by
analyzing news reports from the time period of August
25, 2005 to September 5, 2005. This is the time period
when Hurricane Katrina made landfall in the Gulf Coast

334

of the United States [15] . This natural disaster created
significant and widespread damage and resulted in
extensive impacts on U.S. society. The news reports
during this time period were analyzed to determine the
most popular words and phrases that were used to
describe specific conditions. These words and phrases
were then categorized according to the framework
defined in [14] as shown in Table 1.
As a specific example, the Shelters taxonomy
consists of word and phrases such as: taking cover,
taking shelter, seek refuge, shelters. The Movement
taxonomy consists of words and phrases such as:
mandatory evacuation, dawn curfew, flights canceled,
etc.

45
Power
Communications
Roads
Lights
Water
Outage

40
35

Count

30
25
20
15
10
5
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Day

Figure 3. January 2007 Technical Components

Table 1. Natural Disaster Impact Taxonomies
Social
Water (Health)
Movement
Medical
Health Hazards
Crime
Shelters

140
Water
Movement
Medical
Health Hazard
Crime
Shelters

120

100

Count

Technical
Power
Communications
Roads
Lights
Water (Systems)
Outage

80

60

After creating these taxonomies, they are then
applied to the original time-series as a form of “textual
prism” to create component time-series as described in
Figure 1. The following figures show the time-series
results from applying the taxonomies to the original
time-series. Figures 2 and 3 show the Social and
Technical components for the month of January 2007.
Figures 4 and 5 show the same components for the
month of February 2007.

40

20

0

15

20

25

30

Figure 4. February 2007 Social Components
60

Water
Movement
Medical
Health Hazards
Crime
Shelters

25

10

Day

35

30

5

Power
Communications
Roads
Lights
Water
Outage

50

Count

Count

40

20

15

30

20

10
10

5

0

5

10

15

20

25

0

30

5

10

15

20

25

30

Day

Day

Figure 5. February 2007 Technical Components

Figure 2. January 2007 Social Components

5. Observations
In 2007, several natural disasters occurred in North
America. Table 2 shows a sample of these disasters. In
January, several tornadoes and an ice storm occurred
[16] [17] . In February, several tornadoes and a winter
storm occurred [16] [18] [19] .

335

components on Feb 23 – 27. These spikes are directly
attributed to the tornadoes that occurred on those same
days.
Like January, the tornadoes in February created
maximum amplitudes in Shelters followed by Power. On
the other hand, the winter storm created significant
amplitudes in Power, Outage, Shelters, and Movement.
These patterns were similar to the ones observed for the
ice storm in January.
Table 3 summarizes the impact characteristics that
were observed for the various natural disasters shown in
Table 2. Using the approach described here, these
impacts are identifiable and consistent. Future work will
explore additional natural disasters as well as additional
impacts.

Table 2. Selected Natural Disasters in 2007
Event Type

Begin

Peak

End

Tornadoes

01/04

N/A

01/07
01/24

Ice Storm

01/11

01/14

Tornadoes

02/02

N/A

02/02

Winter Storm

02/12

02/14

02/20

Tornadoes

02/23

N/A

02/24

Areas
Impacted
LA, MS, AL,
GA
Central &
Eastern U.S.
FL
Midwest &
Eastern U.S.
KS, LA, MS,
AR

In Figures 2 and 3, significant spikes occur in the
Shelters and Power components on Jan 7. These spikes
are directly attributed to the tornadoes that occurred on
those same days. In addition, there are significant spikes
that occur in the Shelters, Movement, Power, and Outage
components on Jan 12 – Jan 20 with the highest peaks
occurring on Jan 14. These spikes are directly attributed
to the ice storm.
Tornadoes are difficult to predict, and are much
more destructive on homes than an ice storm.
Consequently, the Shelters component for the tornadoes
has much higher amplitude than the Power component.
In contrast, the ice storm is a more predictable event and
has a more destructive impact on infrastructure such as
the power grid and roads than on homes. Therefore, the
Power and Outage components created much higher
amplitudes than Shelters and Movement. In addition,
since the ice storm is more easily predicted than
tornadoes, the Movement component created much
higher amplitude for the ice storm than for the tornadoes.
These patterns in the Social and Technical
components for the tornadoes and ice storm in January
are also evident in the month of February. In Figures 4
and 5, significant spikes occur in the Shelters and Power
components on Feb 2. These spikes are directly
attributed to the tornadoes that occurred on those same
days. In addition, there are significant spikes that occur
in the Shelters, Movement, Power, and Outage
components on Feb 12 – Feb 16. These spikes are
directly attributed to the winter storm.
Finally,
significant spikes occur in the Shelters and Power

Table 3. Dominant Impacts
Winter & Ice Storms
Power
Outage
Shelter
Movement

6. Summary
This work focuses on identifying and characterizing
the impacts of natural disasters as they relate to physical
infrastructure and social behavior using information
obtained via news reports. In this work, an approach is
proposed that enables event impacts to be discovered and
characterized. Results indicate that events such as
tornadoes, winter storms, and wildfires create consistent,
measurable and specific impacts on the physical
infrastructure and social behavior as reported by the
news media. This approach leverages the news media to
further enhance situational awareness of natural
disasters.
While this approach provides a fresh perspective on
events and their impacts, future work will explore
additional natural disasters, additional types of impacts,
and more challenging events such as man-made events.
[5]

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

Tornadoes
Shelter
Power
Outage
Medical

[6]

Wikipedia: Danish cartoons, Current February 2008,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JyllandsPosten_Muhammad_cartoons_controversy
Alexander, D. The Study of Natural Disasters, 1977-97:
Some Reflections on a Changing Field of Knowledge,
Disasters, Vol. 21, No. 4, pages 284–304, December
1997.
Little, R.G., Toward more robust infrastructure:
observations on improving the resilience and reliability
of critical systems, Proc. of the 36th Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, January
2003.
Kreimer, A., Arnold, M., and Carlin, A., Building Safer
Cities: The Future of Disaster Risk, World Bank
Publications, 2003.

[7]

[8]

[9]

336

Llinas, J., Information fusion for natural and man-made
disasters, Proc. of the 5th International Conference on
Information Fusion, July 2002.
Chi, T., et. al., Research on information system for
natural disaster monitoring and assessment, Proc of the
2003 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Symposium, July 2003.
Hussain, M., et. al., Emerging geo-information
technologies (GIT) for natural disaster management in
Pakistan: an overview, Proc. of the 2nd International
Conference on Recent Advances in Space Technologies,
June 2005.
Daniel Gruhl, et. al., The predictive power of online
chatter, Proceeding of the eleventh ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge discovery in data
mining, Chicago, Illinois, 2005, pp. 78-87.
Gabriel Pui Cheong Fung, et. al., Stock prediction:
Integrating text mining approach using real-time news,
Proc. of the 2003 IEEE International Conference on

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

Computational Intelligence for Financial Engineering,
2003, pp. 395-403.
Gabriel Pui Cheong Fung, et. al., The predicting power
of textual information on financial markets, IEEE
Intelligent Informatics Bulletin, Vol. 5, No. 1, June 2005.
Jeffrey Xu Yu, et. al., Patterns discovery based on timeseries decomposition, Proc. of 5th Pacific Asia
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2001.
Percival, D. B., and Walden, A. T., Wavelet Methods for
Time Series Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 2000
Vetterli, M., and Kovacevic, J., Wavelets and Subband
Coding. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1995.
Bruneau, M., et. al. A Framework to Quantitatively
Assess and Enhance the Seismic Resilience of
Communities, Earthquake Spectra, Vol. 19, No. 4, pages
733-752, November 2003.
Wikipedia: Hurricane Katrina, Current February 2008,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hurricane_Katrina
Wikipedia: Tornadoes of 2007, Current February 2008,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tornadoes_of_2007
Wikipedia: January 2007 North American ice storm,
Current
February
2008,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/January_2007_North_Ameri
can_ice_storm
Wikipedia: February 2007 Central Florida tornadoes,
Current
February
2008,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2007_Central_Florida_torna
does
Wikipedia: February 2007 North America Winter Storm,
Current
February
2008,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/February_2007_North_Ame
rica_Winter_Storm

337

