12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Use of Analogy in Synthesizing Novel Visualizations
Richard Brath
Oculus Info Inc.
rbrath@oculusinfo.com

2.2 Design Ideation

Abstract

Alternative visualization designs provide different
solutions that may be more effective for various tasks.
Methods such as mechanical, symbolic and natural
analogies aid ideation of alternative information
visualizations. Issues include metaphor entrapment and
implementation effectiveness.

There has been a lot of work on design criticism and
design analysis. Techniques for synthesis of new designs
is discussed less, but there are some examples:
• Christopher Alexander in Notes on the Synthesis
of Form discusses design processes though a
process of problem decomposition into
requirements and trade-offs in synthesis. Although
there is not a detailed discussion of ways to
synthesize new design ideas (ideation), he does
note, “People recognize the importance of
intuition…” [6]
• Ideation techniques are discussed by different
authors and available on various websites (e.g.
Synectics, Lateral Thinking). Websites such as
Wikipedia and Mycoted provide useful collections
and overviews of different ideation techniques
[7,8].
• Graphic Designers have long used various
heuristics in the creation of novel designs. There
are many books with regards to the composition of
graphics in general (e.g. layout, composition,
form); but not necessarily ideation, and not
ideation specific to information graphics. There
are a variety of guidelines with regards to making
information graphics more effective in print,
dashboards and visualization e.g. [1,2,9,10,11].
There are some websites with rich examples
created by news artists e.g. newsartists.org;
newsdesigner.com.
• Interface Designers, similar to graphic designers,
do not publish specifically on ideation techniques,
although there are many publications on interface
design guidelines, case studies and examples; e.g.
icon design, workflow design, information
architecture, interface design, e.g. [12, 13, 14].

1. Introduction
Novel techniques in information visualization have
the potential to create new ways to aid comprehension
and analyze complex data. But how does one generate a
new visualization technique? InfoVis is still a new field:
how does one generate many new visualization
techniques? Ideation through the use of analogy is a
useful technique for generating alternative information
visualization design concepts.

2. Background
2.1 Creating Novel Techniques
Two very different approaches have typically been
taken to creating new visualizations:
• Generation: Through a set of heuristics alternate
visualizations can be computationally generated.
There are various heuristics related to mapping
visual attributes to data types [1,2] as well as
automated systems that encode these heuristics,
such as Sage [3].
• Design: As noted by James Thomas [4], “Some of
these new techniques work well and have
generated great excitement. However, the number
of successful new computer-mediated visual
representations today is small compared to the
number of highly evolved and widely used
metaphors created by human information
designers. Human-designed visualizations are still
much better than those created by our information
visualization systems.” Further, the information
visualization community is still very interested in
both novel visualization techniques as well as
design studies [5].

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.69

3. Importance of Ideation to InfoVis
Information
visualization
imposes
unique
requirements on ideation. Rather than create a specific
instance of a design, such as an architect designing a
specific house or a graphic artist designing a specific

481

information graphic, a visualization design has the
unique requirement of being a framework for data: the
actual design cannot be fully understood without being
populated by data. Visualization design differs from
designs of layout templates (e.g. web page layout
templates) because layout templates can be evaluated
with simple stand-in content (e.g. the phrase “lorem
ipsum”) whereas visualization design evaluation requires
real-data:
• First, the overall layout of the representation
(which may be dynamically generated) must
facilitate the target visual analysis tasks, such as
visual
comparison,
estimation,
scanning,
grouping, etc.
• Secondly, the component visual elements (e.g.
glyphs) must effectively represent the discrete
data.
Because of this uncertainty inherent in visualization
design, it may be expected that there is a more
experimental nature associated with the creation of novel
visualizations, and varying degrees of effectiveness to
different tasks in novel visualization designs than would
occur in other long established design professions.
Therefore, it could be valuable to have alternative novel
concepts available and it would be useful to have design
ideation techniques to facilitate the generation of
alternative visualization concepts.

information. Purely artificial visual metaphors can
actually hinder understanding. [15]”
Norman’s final point is also important: it is
necessary for the designer to not become entrapped by
the metaphor (e.g. some early desktop interfaces were
limited by a literal representation of an office desktop).
Rather, in design ideation the goal is to generate new
concepts and ideas. The metaphor is used as a starting
point for ideas: if the design has some merits but is
limited by the metaphor, then the underlying analogy can
be dropped while retaining the positive elements of the
design.
Consider that the typical windows based interface
combines analogies from the iconography of Byzantium
as well as 20th century paper-based office filing system:
sixth century religious symbology was not carried
forward into the interface design.

5. Types of Analogies for Information
Visualization Design Ideation
There are many potential types of metaphors that
can be useful to ideate new concepts. For example:

5.1 Mechanical Analogs
Mechanical devices such as levers, balances, sliding
layers, twists, springs and clocks imply both potential
visual relationships and interaction affordances. For
example, a client was interested in both the overall
magnitude of money flowing between two entities; and
the ratio of the flow between the two. The metaphor of a
balance (or a beam with a center of gravity) was a
starting point for the visual design (figure 1 left image).

4. Using Analogy in InfoVis Ideation
Using analogy and metaphors in visualization design
is a straight-forward process of mapping the visualization
requirements onto another domain. For example, one
could use the analogy of an aerial view of rectilinear
roads and farm fields of the American midwest and relate
that to the requirements to display a hierarchy of objects
sized based on a data attribute to generate an information
visualization design concept of a treemap (this is not to
imply that treemaps were ideated this way, but could
have been ideated this way).
Note, the use of the term metaphor here is not the
same as the notion of a “visualization metaphor” found
in literature. A visualization metaphor is a reference to a
visualization technique, such as a treemap or themeriver.
In this paper we consider the use of a metaphor or an
analogy as an aid to the genesis of the design idea rather
the final visual representation.
Use of analogies and metaphors provide additional
value beyond ideation of novel techniques. The analogy
may be useful as a means to explain the visualization
technique. The analog can aid learning and reduce
cognitive load if the analog is an intuitive representation
that the end-user can understand both the analog and its
application in the new visualization technique, i.e.
“Naturalness Principle – Experiential cognition is most
effective when the properties of the visual representation
most closely match the information being represented.
This principle supports the idea that new visual
metaphors are only useful for representing information
when they match the user’s cognitive model of the

Figure 1 Balance and Wedges Analogy

The design evolved into two wedges with the
intersection being a visual indicator of the ratio (figure 1
right image). The design further evolved into a 3D
variation that emphasized the wedges showing both
magnitude and ratios when viewed from the side (figure
2 left); and added a bit of depth so that when viewed
from above, the representation showed only the ratios.
The depth was added to create a more compact
representation potentially required in an overview when
hundreds to thousands of there relationships could be
displayed at once (figure 2 right).

Figure 2 Wedges concept in 3D

482

Physical techniques can also be utilized to generate
design ideas. For example, the notion of layers, popular
in geographic software, was preceded by the use of
physical layers of transparent paper that could be added,
removed, shifted in the plane. The notion of shifting and
sliding layers was used as a point of departure in a
timeseries analysis interface (figure 3). In the design, the
separation between the layers (i.e. each timeseries) is
significant and the interface for shifting the alignment of
layers was completely reworked, such that the original
analogy is largely irrelevant to the understanding or the
operation of the visualization.

Figure 5 Data Driven Glyphs in Visualization

The use of iconic analogs to generate concepts and
add information in intuitive representations could be a
useful area of exploration: for example, Cheng’s Iraq
casualties’ graphics, and Rose’s Social Stratification
[23], convey information through size, color, and the use
of many variants and additions to the form to convey 410 or perhaps many more data attributes within glyphs.

5.4 Extension and Mash-up Analogs
Another point of departure for a design is to start
with an existing technique (e.g. a paper based pie chart)
and attempt to extend the existing metaphor and/or
combine it with another metaphor (e.g. how to utilize the
radius; or what happens if it is combined with a graph).
In one of our visualizations, the initial design
starting point was a mechanical stock ticker and the
question “what happens to all the ticks when they reach
the end of the ticker”? By extending the metaphor, we
were able to generate a number of different ideas. For
example, stacking each individual tick into piles based
on tick type after it traverses the length of the ticker,
provides an indication of the level of activity (figure 6).

Figure 3 Layered Timeseries (click and drag controls
along right edge coordinate sliding of timeseries)

5.2 Natural and Biologic Analogs
Natural forms can imply groupings, magnitudes and
relationships. Trees and circulatory systems may
provide inspiration for graph systems. Cartographic
principles have been used as a basis for refining the
visual quality of Self-Organizing Maps [16]. We have
used geographical analogs in the generation of variants
on tree maps. Representations of computer malware have
been generated using genetic algorithms creating entities
with visual similarity to viruses and bacteria [17].

5.3 Iconic Analogs

Figure 6 Extended Ticker

Metaphor mashing combines multiple analogies and
uses elements from each source analogy to generate a
more encompassing solution than could be achieved
using any single metaphor. E.g.
• An icon metaphor and file system metaphor.
• Maps with push-pins and string art.
• Conveyor belts and a warehouse.

The rich visual language of icons, road signs, flags,
medieval heraldry, building types, etc can be used as a
basis for generating glyphs and small multiples. The
technique has a long history (e.g. [18]), was popularized
in the 1930’s by Otto Neurath [19], and the technique
continues to be prevalent in information graphics, for
example, as shown in figure 4 [20,21].

Figure 4 Symbols in Information Graphics

The use of complex multidimensional glyphs does
not seem common in procedurally generated information
visualizations today, although there are examples such as
Chernoff faces [22] as well as some examples in our own
work (figure 5).

Figure 7 Grid of bars on map (left)
Desks with rows of slide rules (right)

483

Figure 7 shows an example of a visual design
combining geographic maps and a rectangular array of
stacked bars [24]; and a visual design combining a floor
plan of desks, each with rows of “slide rules”.

References
[1]
[2]

6. Challenges with Analog Ideation
In addition to metaphor entrapment previously
discussed, another challenge with creating a novel
visualization through analogy is validation of the
efficacy of the idea. To validate the idea, it needs to be
implemented and tested with real data. A mockup done
with Adobe Illustrator or Macromedia Flash does not
readily express the working condition. Issues to address
include scalability (number of data elements); robustness
(does the design work with extreme values or missing
values); legibility (are the visual elements decipherable
when depicted with target data on target screens);
implementability (is there an algorithm that can express
the design); understandability (is the representation easy
to understand); etc.
Some of our design ideas have not been effective
when applied to the intended data sets. E.g.:
• A graph layout algorithm that seemed effective on
test data was ineffective on the target dataset.
• A visual technique of sizing fonts based on data
generated unreadable text.
• 3D designs that seemed workable in sketches
resulted in too much occlusion when using realdata necessitated design refinements.
To quickly evaluate the effectiveness of a design
idea, rapid prototypes are recommended.

[3]

Conclusions and Future Work

[14]

Design ideation using analogy has proven an
effective technique for generating multiple alternative
design ideas. This is important for us because:
• We have been required to generate five or more
different visualization concepts for five different
clients in the last two years. Techniques such as
analogy that help us generate alternatives help us
meet these requirements.
• Clients have responded more favorably when
provided with more alternatives; and have directly
expressed this in design review sessions, e.g.:
o “I like these alternatives: my analogy is you’re
batting and you’ve got 4 base hits in 6 at bats.”
o “I like the combination of creativity and
innovation.”
o “We are very comfortable using analogies to
understand our business. Show us more
designs.”
Evaluating design effectiveness could be improved with
better tools for rapid prototyping. Discovery of potential
analogies could be enhanced through collections of
relevant, but lateral, visual domains to information
visualizations, such as maps, icons, machinery, infographics, etc.

[15]

[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]

[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]

484

J. Bertin. Semiology of Graphics. University of
Wisconsin Press, 1983.
J. Mackinlay. Automating the Design of Graphical
Presentations. In ACM Transactions on Graphics, Vol. 5,
No.2. ACM. April 1986.
J. Goldstein, S. Roth, J. Kolojejchick, and J. Mattis, A
Framework for Knowledge-Based, Interactive Data
Exploration. Journal of Visual Languages and
Computing, 5, December 1994, pp. 339-363.
J. Thomas and K. Cook. Illuminating the Path: The
Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics.
IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA. 2005.
IV08 Call for Papers. url:
vis.computer.org/VisWeek2008/infovis/papers.html
C. Alexander. Notes on the Synthesis of Form.
Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press. 1964.
Mycoted Creativity Techniques url:
www.mycoted.com/Category:Creativity_Techniques
Wikipedia History of Creativity url:
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_creativity
E. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT,
Graphics Press. 1990.
S. Few. Show Me the Numbers. Oakland, CA. Analytics
Press. 2004.
R. Brath. 3D Interactive Information Visualization:
Guidelines from experience and analysis of applications.
In Design of Computing Systems: Social and Ergonomic
Considerations. 865-868 Elsevier Science, 1997.
S. Caplin. Icon Design: Graphic Icons in Computer
Interface Design. New York, NY. Watson-Guptill
Publications. 2001.
R. S. Wurman. Information Architects. Graphics Press.
NY. 1996.
D. Norman. The Design of Everyday Things. Basic
Books. 2002.
D. Norman. Things That Make Us Smart. Reading, MA.
Addison-Wesley. 1993.
A. Skupin. The World of Geography: Visualizing a
Knowledge Domain with Cartographic Means.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 101
(Suppl. 1) 5274-5278. 2004.
A. Dragulescu. Malwarez. url: www.sq.ro/malwarez.php
T. Clarkson. Essay on the Slavery and Commerce of
Human Species. In Visualizing Information for
Advocacy. url: apperceptive.com/infodesign.pdf
O. Neurath. International picture language /Internationale
Bildersprache. Department of Typography & Graphic
Communication University of Reading. 1936/1980. url:
imaginarymuseum.org/MHV/PZImhv/NeurathPictureLa
nguage.html
A. Cheng. A Year in Iraq. New York Times, January 6,
2008. url:
www.nytimes.com/2008/01/06/opinion/06chart.html
USA Today. Leading causes of child fatalities. url:
www.usatoday.com/snapshot/news/nsnap103.htm
H. Chernoff. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, Vol. 68, No. 342 (Jun., 1973), pp. 361-368
S. Rose. Social Stratification in the United States. The
New Press. 1976.
C. Ratti. New York Talk Exchange. url:
senseable.mit.edu/nyte/index.html

