12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Visualizing Statistical Properties of Smoothly Brushed Data Subsets
Andrea Unger1

Philipp Muigg2

Helmut Doleisch2

1

University of Rostock
Rostock, Germany
{aunger, schumann}@informatik.uni-rostock.de

Abstract

Introduction

Statistical characteristics are used in many application fields to analyze simulation data. For the analysis
of continuous data, one important statistical measure is
mean, which encapsulates information about the general
behavior of a data set. In addition, standard deviation
and the range of values, given by minimum and maximum, communicate the distribution of values in a data
set. Although these characteristics are highly useful for
analysis tasks, deriving them globally for complete data
sets reveals little detail about the inner structure of a data
set. Instead, from our experiences, data analysts also demand to analyze local characteristics because they can
strongly deviate from global values, especially in large
data sets. To analyze local characteristics, relevant sub-

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.29

2

VRVis Research Center
Vienna, Austria
{muigg, doleisch}@vrvis.at

sets need to be chosen from the data set. To this end, the
analyst brushes subsets of interest. Considering an appropriate visualization, the brushing of subsets and the
visualization of statistical characteristics cannot be accomplished within a single view, because data subsets
of interest can arise from complex relationships in space,
time, or between multiple attributes.
Hence, we propose in this paper to coordinate a view
designed to evaluate the statistical properties of subsets with other visualization views used to interactively
brush relevant subsets of the data. The coordination with
other views avoids that uncertainties about the analyzed
subsets are introduced that result from their reduction
to statistical values. Our concept is integrated into the
SimVis system [6], a visualization framework providing
multiple coordinated views for the analysis of large multivariate and time dependent data sets. Per time point,
multiple data items are present due to, for example, an
underlying spatial grid or multi-run simulation. An important feature of the system is smooth brushing [8], a
focus + context concept. Smooth brushing provides a
continuous transition from data in focus to context data.
Taking this continuous transition into account, the visualization of statistical properties can lead to additional
insights about the local behavior within a subset. Since
smooth brushing affects the formal description of data
subsets, we will consider the influence of the concept
both in the specification (Section 3) and visualization
(Section 4) of statistical properties.
Our visualization concept focuses on two aspects.
First, the visualization of a single subset is introduced
(Section 4.1) with an emphasis on the parameter time
as analysts are highly interested in temporal developments of statistical properties. In addition, comparing
the statistical properties of multiple subsets is important
for the analysis of local variances within a data set. Our
approach includes visualization concepts to compare either the general behavior of subsets on the one hand and
small deviation between subsets on the other hand (in
Section 4.2). In Section 5, an application example about

In many application fields, the statistical properties of data sets are of great interest for data analysts.
Since local variations can occur especially in large data
sets, it is useful to visualize not only global values, but
also the properties of user-defined subsets. Hence, we
present in this paper a visualization of the statistical
characteristics of subsets, with an emphasis on the temporal development. The visualization is coordinated
with other views. They provide details about the data
and allow for smooth brushing of subsets, a concept that
introduces a continuous transition from data in focus to
context data. Our approach accounts for smooth brushing in both the derivation and the visualization of statistical properties in order to visualize variations within
subsets. To analyze differences between multiple subsets, our approach further integrates visualization concepts for the comparison of statistical properties. An
application example from the simulation of biological
systems demonstrates the benefits of our approach.

1.

Heidrun Schumann1

233

the visual analysis of data from the simulation of a biological system exemplifies the benefits of our concept.

2.

Related work

In many visualization systems based on multiple coordinated views (see [13] for an overview), mechanisms
to brush data of interest are inherent, while functionality
to analyze statistical properties of these subsets is often
not explicitly included. One example has been presented
by Ericson et al. [9]. Scatter plot views for mean and
standard deviation are provided for each subset that has
been defined by brushing in parallel coordinates. Andrienko et al. [1] visualize the characteristics of data
subsets by equal-frequency subintervals, represented by
envelopes or ellipsoids in parallel coordinates. General
examples for visual representations of statistical properties are box plots [16], error bars and range bars [15].
The statistical properties we regard can generally be
described as aggregates. Beyond describing the statistical properties of subsets, data aggregates have a high
relevance within visualization [2] in order to cope with
large data sets. By reducing the data volume to display,
data aggregates serve to gain an overview of complete
data sets. But every aggregation involves information
loss. The uncertainty due to information loss needs to
be communicated, either by including multiple coordinated views on the data or by integrating appropriate visual cues. While transparency and blurriness are often
considered as intuitive representations, uncertainty can
be in principle encoded with every graphical attribute
from color over position to animation or sound [10].
Another aspect that is relevant to our work is the effect of smooth brushing on the properties of data subsets. Smooth brushing is an important focus + context
concept in the SimVis framework [8], which has to be
considered in the evaluation of brushed subsets. An
analogy for degrees of interest within a data subset, as
they are introduced by smooth brushing, can be found
in fuzzy set theory. Here, degrees of memberships are
used to describe a data set. Bertholt and Hall [4] visualize multidimensional fuzzy clusters in parallel coordinates. They make use of color shades that decline from
the centroid of the cluster toward the standard deviation
according to the degree of membership.
At last, the visual comparison of data is a subject in
this work. To generate comparative visualizations, two
approaches exist: the data sets are either combined into
one data set that is visualized, e.g., as a difference image
(data level comparison), or each data set is shown separately (image level comparison) [12]. Nocke et al. [11]
summarize research on comparative visualization.
Although a lot of related research is present in the

(a) Hierarchy levels of FDL tree

(b) Logical combination of two DOI functions (red and blue), assigned to a list of data items, into one DOI function

Figure 1. Feature Definition Language tree
(a) and composition of one Degree of Interest function from two functions (b).

literature, the existing approaches do not provide complete solutions to visualize the time dependent statistical
properties of smoothly brushed data subsets.

3.

Statistics of smoothly brushed subsets

One important step toward the visualization of statistical properties is the derivation of statistical values from
data subsets. As the main challenge, smooth brushing
introduces a continuous transition from focus to context
data. To express these variations, we introduce a modified specification of statistical properties in this section.
As a starting point, the data structure is described for
representing subsets in the SimVis system.
3.1.

Description of data subsets

The description of data subsets in the SimVis system is based on the feature definition language (FDL)
tree [7]. Every node in the FDL tree is specified by a
time dependent degree of interest (DOI) function that is
assigned to the data set. The leafs of the tree are userdefined by smooth brushing, one leaf is generated for every brush. DOI values in the continuous range [0, 1] indicate the smooth transition from data in the focus (with
DOI = 1) to context data (DOI = 0). Nodes on higher
levels in the FDL tree (Figure 1a) are composed by either conjunction or disjunction (Figure 1b) of their children’s DOI functions. All brushes within one view are

234

composed into one node on the level of feature components. DOI functions defined in different views are logically combined in feature descriptions (by conjunction)
and feature descriptions (disjunction).
The data subsets we refer to are closely connected
to the nodes of the FDL tree. For each node, the corresponding data subset consists of all data items whose
DOI value is non-zero. Since the DOI function is time
dependent, the data subset is variable over time.
3.2.

Figure 2. A subset’s time dependent statistical properties of one attribute. Mean
and standard deviation are weighted by
degree of interest, value ranges are shown
for different levels of interest, encoded by
the opacity of the surface.

Specification of statistical properties

This section is related to the derivation of the statistical characteristics mean, standard deviation, and the
range of values for data subsets with respect to the effects of smooth brushing. Due to smooth brushing, variable degrees of interest in the continuous interval [0, 1]
occur within a subset. Therefore, we propose a modified
derivation of the statistical measures in the following.
For mean and standard deviation, the individual data
items are weighted by their degrees of interest. That
way, the impact of a data item on the resulting statistical
value corresponds to the interest the user has assigned to
the item. For a data subset consisting of the data items
i, mean m and standard deviation d can be derived from
the degrees of interest doii and the values valuei of an
attribute by the following equations (compare to [3]).
m=

4.

In the previous section, statistical characteristics
were derived for smoothly brushed subsets. A suitable
visual representation of these statistical properties will
be in the focus of this section with an emphasis on temporal developments. In Section 4.1, we discuss the visual representation of one subset. Due to the variations
between data subsets, the comparison of multiple subsets is an important analysis task. Approaches for a visual comparison are therefore discussed in Section 4.2.

i

1
sumdoii ∗ sumi

(doii ∗ valuei )

4.1.
d=

1
sumdoii ∗ sumi

Visualization of statistical properties

Visualizing the properties of one subset

i

(doii ∗ valuei − m)2

In this section, we introduce our visualization concept for the statistical properties of one smoothly
brushed subset. The modified derivation of statistical
values (Section 3.2) is considered in the visualization.
To communicate the temporal developments of statistical properties, the visualization is based on the parameter time. Instead, relations between multiple attributes
are neglected to reduce visual clutter. Our general visualization approach thus shows the time dependent statistical values for one attribute. Based on time graphs,
time is mapped to the horizontal axis and the currently
selected attribute to the vertical axis. An axes scaling independent from the analyzed subset is achieved by scaling the axes according to the global minimum and maximum values of time and the current attribute.
An example of our visualization approach is shown
in Figure 2. Mean and standard deviation, which are
weighted by degree of interest, are encoded as lines by
connecting the values of the time points in order to show
temporal developments. The location of standard deviation below and above mean is adapted from error bars.

Since our approach aims at communicating the temporal
developments of statistical properties, mean and standard deviation are derived for every point in time by
considering all data items currently belonging to the data
subset. Hence, for every time point, mean and standard
deviation are expressed by one value.
To determine minimum and maximum values of a
data subset, a different approach is needed since these
values represent limiters of a data subset. They are not
composed from a number of values. Hence, we propose to derive the range of values for different degrees
of interest. To this end, the data subset is further subdivided based on the data items’ degrees of interest. Given
a degree of interest doi, the subset Sdoi consists of all
items whose degree of interest is greater than or equal
to doi. Minimum and maximum values for one attribute
are then specified for every subset Sdoi . Again, to account for temporal developments, these values are derived for every point in time separately.

235

To distinguish both characteristics, different line widths
are used. While mean and standard deviation are represented by one value per time point, the range of values
is present for different degrees of interest. Visualizing
the value range as a continuous area over time offers an
intuitive visual representation to encode range values for
different degrees of interest. The degree of interest of a
range of values is encoded by the opacity of the area.
In Figure 2, the continuous DOI range [0,1] has been
subdivided into 256 equidistant levels resulting in 256
subsets and the same number of minimum and maximum values for each time point. This exceeds the number of opacity values the human eye can separate. Thus,
the impression of a continuous transition between the
value ranges for different levels of interest is created.
As additional features, the minimum DOI value for
the derivation and visualization of statistical properties
can be adjusted to analyze the subset for different degrees of interest in detail. Also, the visualization of the
individual statistical characteristics can be switched on
and off depending on the analysis task.
The statistical view is only beneficial in coordination
with other views since it shows an abstraction of the subset; it does not visualize detailed information about the
items of the subset. Specifically, compared to the relations among data items shown in the statistical view, the
other views provide a much broader scope for the brushing within the data set. Thus, other views are needed to
relate the subset to the whole data set, to provide details
about data items, and to provide the brushing functionality for the subset definition.
4.2.

(a) One image for each data subset, aligned beside each other.

(b) Three data subsets (red, green and blue) superimposed.

(c) Two data subsets superimposed (green and red), the third subset
(blue) shown in an interactive lens.

Figure 3. Alternative representations to
compare the statistics of multiple subsets.

overview on the general behavior, the data subsets can
be arranged in separate images aligned side by side.
Second, small deviations between subsets can be analyzed by overlaying the statistics of subsets. An alternative is provided by the lens concept in order to cope with
occlusions introduced by overlaying.
To compare data subsets arranged in separate images,
all images are equally sized and based on the same axes
scaling to provide an intuitive and reliable comparison
among the images. Preventing from occlusions, separate images provide a good overview on the general behavior, as shown in Figure 3a. However, small deviations between subsets can hardly be discriminated and
the limited display size of the statistical view has to be
fractioned by the number of data subsets.
For a detailed comparison of subsets in the statistical
view, the visual representations of subsets can be overlaid (Figure 3b). Compared to separate images, the approach allows to span all subsets over the available display size. However, the overlay of subsets is problematic if the visualization includes value ranges, encoded
by closed surfaces. Using transparent value ranges, colors of overlaid subsets are mixed. Opaque value rages,
on the other hand, result in occlusions of subsets in the
background and an alternative representation of value

Visual comparison of subsets

The visual representation of a single subset provides
limited capabilities to analyze the variations within a
data set. We thus consider the visual comparison of multiple subsets as an important task. The comparison of
subsets can be performed for a broad range of analysis
tasks. For example, it may be useful to compare subsets
defined by single or combined brushes or to evaluate the
influence of single subsets in a combination. In addition, the characteristics of subsets can also be compared
to those of the whole data set. The unified description
of all data subsets as nodes in the FDL tree (Section 3.1)
allows to account for this broad range of analysis goals.
Providing this flexibility for the selection of subsets
hinders a data-level approach for comparison, as the
subsets do not necessarily share the same data items.
Thus, our approach follows the idea of image-level comparison. Based on the visual representation introduced
in Section 4.1, our approach supports three general concepts, related to different analysis goals. To give an

236

ranges by lines produces visual clutter. By interactively
adjusting the transparency of the value ranges and by
a reordering of subsets from back to front, a mixing of
colors becomes traceable for the user and occlusions are
made visible. Furthermore, subsets and single data characteristics can be interactively switched on and off to
support the comparison of details in the data.
As an alternative for the analysis of small deviations,
we propose to make use of the lens concept [5, 14]. As
the general idea, one of the subsets to be compared is
shown in a rectangular lens whose size and position can
be interactively adjusted (Figure 3c). In the lens, only a
fraction of the visual representation of the subset’s statistical characteristics is shown, according to the position and size of the lens. The background of the lens is
opaque to avoid a mixing of colors, which overcomes
one drawback of the overlaid display. The interactive
adjustment of the lens dimensions is an integral feature
to perform the visual comparison: the user can sequentially explore the differences between the data subsets
by moving and resizing the lens interactively.
Even more than for the visualization of a single subset, the visual comparison requires the coordination with
other views to maintain an overview about the analyzed
subsets. This includes an update of the statistical characteristics after the corresponding brushes have been refined. In addition, a visual connection between the statistical view, the display of the FDL tree, and the other
views helps the user to associate subsets with their statistical characteristics. To this end, the FDL tree is visually
linked to other views by highlighting the views belonging to a node. The nodes included in the statistical view
can be selected via choice boxes by the labels used in the
FDL tree. A color legend accompanying every choice
box connects the FDL tree nodes to the visualization of
the corresponding subset in the statistical view.
Our visualization concept is also applicable to compare the statistics of multiple attributes in the subsets, by
comparing the resulting images or overlaying the visual
representations in one view.

5.

functions. The underlying model of the simulation was
built by transforming a system of ordinary differential
equations (ODE) into a model suited for discrete simulation, which requires additional parameters that are not
present in the original ODE model.
Our visualization approach was used to evaluate the
dependence of the system behavior to these unknown
parameters. In particular, we considered the unknown
reaction rate for the binding of two molecules (denoted
as A1 and A2 ) into B. The reaction rate describes the
speed of the reaction. Since the rate for the reverse unbinding reaction depends linearly on the binding rate,
both reaction rates are affected if one reaction rate is
adjusted. The simulation experiments were performed
for 9 different reaction rates, each experiment was replicated 10 times. Snapshots of the system state, described
by the current quantities of the different molecule types,
were taken every millisecond. 1000 time points were
monitored for each run, resulting in a simulation of the
biological processes of one second.
Analyzing the data set with the SimVis system, we
aim at an impression on how the variation of the reaction rate affects the number of A1 and B molecules over
time. To this end, brushing is used in a first step to partition the simulation data into subsets based on the reaction rates used in the simulation. In other words, the
brushed subsets contain the time-depending and multivariate data resulting from a number of simulation runs
with specific reaction rates. To build subsets based on
reaction rates, scatter plots are used as shown in Figure 4 at the top of the screen shot. In both scatter
plots, the reaction rate, denoted as param, is shown
on the horizontal axis and the number of molecules A1
on the vertical axis. Besides selecting data based on
the reaction rate, the scatter plots reveal a dependency
between higher reaction rates and lower quantities of
the A1 molecule. However, the temporal development
of the number of molecules is not visible in the scatter plots. To analyze the influence on the number of
molecules B over time, two data subsets are smoothly
brushed in these scatter plots with respect to the corresponding reaction rate. In one subset, data items with
low reaction rates are in focus. The other subset focuses
on data items derived from high reaction rates. In the
statistical view, significant differences between each of
the two subsets and the whole data set appear. While
very low reaction rates result in a constantly lower number of B molecules over time, the number is increased
for high reaction rates. These local temporal characteristics of the data set are only apparent from the visual
representation of smoothly brushed subsets in the statistical view, they are neither present in the scatter plots
nor in the global statistical values. Resulting from this

Application example

To exemplify the usefulness of the statistical view for
data analysis, an application example is presented in this
section. Although the SimVis system has been originally designed for simulation data from computational
fluid dynamics, we will show that it is suited for data
from discrete stochastic simulation as well. The data
we regard in the example was derived from the simulation of biochemical processes. The simulation aims
at analyzing the interactions between different types of
molecules. These interactions are described by reaction

237

Figure 4. Screen shot of the SimVis system. On the left, the FDL tree (top) with nodes for the
two scatter plots (denoted by Low rates and High rates) and the option panel (bottom) for the
statistical view are shown. The screen shot gives an overview on the impact of the unknown
reaction rate to the quantities of molecules. The two scatter plots (top) show the impact of the
reaction rate (horizontal axis) on the quantity of molecule A1 (vertical axis). In the left scatter
plot, data items with low reaction rates are smoothly brushed (data in focus: red, degree of
interest is mapped on saturation), data items with high reaction rates are smoothly brushed in
the right scatter plot. The statistical view (bottom) visualizes the impact of the reaction rate
on the number of molecules B over the simulated time. Statistics for the whole data set (left)
are shown as gray, the subset derived from simulation runs with low reaction rates (middle) as
blue and the subset derived from simulation runs with high reaction rates (right) as red curves.

analysis, it can be stated that the unknown reaction rate
has a significant influence on the behavior of the system.
In general, higher reaction rates lead to a higher number
of B molecules over the complete simulated time.
This influence is examined in more detail. To this
end, three subsets including data from simulation runs
with different low reaction rates are brushed and compared by their statistical values. The results are shown
in Figure 5a. If the reaction rate is lower, the number of
B molecules is decreased. In contrast, this dependency
does not appear for high reaction rates (Figure 5b). The
statistical values for high reaction rates resemble each
other. As a conclusion from the presented example, the
system is expected to be very sensitive to low reaction
rates, while high reaction rates do not cause strong vari-

ations of the system behavior. This is a valuable insight
for the further modeling of the system.
By this application example, we are encouraged to
use the SimVis system for further visual analysis of data
from discrete stochastic simulation. The insights gained
by visual analysis do not only support the understanding
of validated models. As shown, they can also help in the
modeling and validation of incomplete models.

6.

Conclusion

To support visual analysis, we propose in this work
to coordinate a visualization of the statistical characteristics of data subsets with other views that provide the

238

References
[1] G. Andrienko and N. Andrienko. Parallel coordinates
for exploring properties of subsets. In CMV ’04: Proc.
of the 2nd International Conference on Coordinated &
Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization (CMV’04),
pages 93–104, 2004.
[2] N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko. Exploratory Analysis
of Spatial and Temporal Data - A Systematic Approach.
Springer, 2006.
[3] G. Beliakov, A. Pradera, and T. Calvo. Aggregation
Functions: A Guide for Practitioners. Springer, 2007.
[4] M. Berthold and L. Hall. Visualizing fuzzy points in parallel coordinates. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems,
11(3):369–374, 2003.
[5] E. A. Bier et al. Toolglass and magic lenses: the seethrough interface. In SIGGRAPH ’93: Proc. of the 20th
annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 73–80, 1993.
[6] H. Doleisch et al. Interactive feature specification for
simulation data on time-varying grids. In Proc. of the
Conference Simulation and Visualization (SimVis 2005),
pages 291–304, 2005.
[7] H. Doleisch, M. Gasser, and H. Hauser. Interactive
feature specification for focus+context visualization of
complex simulation data. In Proc. of the 5th Joint IEEE
TCVG - EUROGRAPHICS Symposium on Visualization
(VisSym 2003), pages 239–248, France, 2003.
[8] H. Doleisch and H. Hauser. Smooth brushing for
focus+context visualization of simulation data in 3D.
Journal of WSCG, 10(1):147–154, 2002.
[9] D. Ericson, J. Johansson, and M. Cooper. Visual data
analysis using tracked statistical measures within parallel coordinate representations. In CMV ’05: Proc. of the
Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization (CMV’05), pages 42–53, 2005.
[10] H. Griethe and H. Schumann. The visualization of uncertain data: Methods and problems. In SimVis, pages
143–156, 2006.
[11] T. Nocke, M. Flechsig, and U. Bohm. Visual exploration
and evaluation of climate-related simulation data. In
Proc. of the 2007 Winter Simulation Conference, pages
703–711, 2007.
[12] H.-G. Pagendarm and F. H. Post. Comparative visualization - approaches and examples. In Visualization in
Scientific Computing. Springer, 1995.
[13] J. C. Roberts. State of the art: Coordinated & multiple
views in exploratory visualization. In CMV ’07: Proc.
of the 5th International Conference on Coordinated and
Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization, pages 61–
71, 2007.
[14] M. Stone, K. Fishkin, and E. Bier. The Movable Filter
as a User Interface Tool. In CHI ’94: Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems, pages 306–312, 1994.
[15] A. Unwin, M. Theus, and H. Hofmann. Graphics of
Large Datasets - Visualizing a Million. Springer, 2006.
[16] L. Wilkinson. The Grammar of Graphics. Springer,
2005.

(a) View for lower reaction rates. Red curves (in lens): reaction
rate 0.01, blue curves: reaction rate 0.05, green curves: reaction
rate 0.1. In general, lower reaction rates cause lower quantities of
the reaction product B

(b) View for higher reaction rates. Red curves (in lens): reaction
rate 10, blue curves: reaction rate 50, green curves: reaction rate
100. No dependence between the reaction rate and the number of
resulting molecules B can be seen.

Figure 5. Statistical view for the number
of B molecules for different reaction rates.
The statistics for the complete data set are
shown in gray shades.

brushing of data subsets. Accounting for the effects of
smooth brushing, the derivation of statistical values is
modified. The visual representation of statistical characteristics has been designed with respect to these modifications. Temporal developments are emphasized in
the visualization because it is important for the user to
realize whether attribute values are constant, increasing,
or decreasing over time. We also include techniques to
compare both the general and detailed behavior of subsets to each other or the complete data set.
In the future, brushing functionality will be added to
our statistical view and the inclusion of other statistical
measures like median, absolute and relative frequencies
or the value distribution will be considered. Besides accounting for brushed subsets, our approach will be extended to include statistical characteristics of subsets resulting from analysis methods such as clustering.

Acknowledgments
We thank Matthias Jeschke for preparing the data for
the application example. The cooperation between the
University of Rostock and the VRVis Vienna has been
supported by the DFG graduate school dIEM oSiRiS.

239

