12th International Conference Information Visualisation

The Chemical Table: An Open Dialog between Visualization and Design
Francis T. Marchese
Department of Computer Science, Pace University, New York, NY 10038
fmarchese@pace.edu
melting points of the chemical elements must be
considered a visualization of abstract data organized on a
conceptual substrate such as a xy grid.
Chemical tables are designed artifacts. They are
created to organize chemical knowledge, and used as
tools in the reasoning about it. They are dynamic as well.
Their structure has been changed and adapted over time
to accommodate new chemical data and chemists'
perceptions on how to better organize it. As Cohen has
observed: “tables are components of and contributors to
the material culture of chemistry” and “share a legacy of
visual practices” [1] integral to chemical research and
education.
The purpose of this paper is to review the chemical
table from an historical perspective as a designed tool for
information visualization whose form and use have
changed over time based on chemists' evolving
understandings of chemical knowledge. This paper may
be viewed as an open-ended case study that
communicates a sequence of snapshots of the on-going
process of information visualization in chemistry. The
following sections cover chemical information expressed
as tables, charts, and models. The paper concludes with a
comparison and analysis. In particular, it emphasizes the
process of periodic table design, and suggests why the
two dimensional periodic table remains the standard
design. For those interested in the early history of
chemical tables see Cohen's review [1]. Scerri [2] and
van Spronson [3] review the history of the periodic table.
Mazurs [4] organizes and catalogs the myriad of
representations. An on-line tabulation of periodic tables
with references is found at the Meta-Synthesis website
[5]; while two of the many interactive periodic tables
may be viewed at WebElements [6] and as a Wikipedia
entry [7].

Abstract
With a history of over 300 years, the chemical table
is the textbook case of information visualization. This
paper explores the development of the chemical table as
a tool designed for chemical information visualization. It
uses a historical context to investigate the purpose of
chemical tables and charts, and suggests reasons why
the two-dimensional periodic table remains the de facto
standard for chemical information display.

1. Introduction
The chemical table may be one of the earliest
successful examples of information visualization.
Created over 300 years ago as a tool to organize and
visualize chemical reactivity, these tables have evolved
into representations of chemical periodicity known today
as periodic charts and tables. Moreover, during the past
150 years over seven hundred visualizations of chemical
periodicity have appeared, including fans, two and threedimensional spirals and loops, as well as a diverse array
of two-dimensional tabular forms. The sheer number of
visual depictions not only points to the importance
played by chemical tables and charts as organizing
constructs for the fundamental components of the
chemical knowledge but also the continued search for a
complete, coherent, systematic representation of the
organization of chemical information. Yet, despite the
sea of charts that has been devised to date, the twodimensional periodic table remains the de facto
representation that not only defines the chemical
information domain, but also is used as an icon for the
organization of information in general.
Chemical tables and charts are visual representations
of chemical information composed of data such as
atomic weights, ionization potentials, oxidation states,
reaction rates, melting points, crystal structures, and
alike. Although these are experimentally measurable
quantities, many of which represent complex atomic or
molecular processes, they have neither intrinsic nor
causal geometric correlations such as those found in the
three-dimensional arrangement and bonding patterns of
atoms within molecules. Hence, a table or chart of the

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.79

2. Tables
2.1 Early Tables
One of the earliest chemical tables was published in
1718 by Étiénne-François Geoffroy [8]. The “Table des
différents rapports observés en Chimie entre différentes
substances” (Figure 1) was designed to systematically
organize the rapidly accumulating chemical reaction data

75

and to be used as a guide to laboratory practice. The
table of chemical affinities is organized as a grid,
displaying cells that contain symbols representing the
chemical substances defined in the table’s legend. At the
head of each vertical column is the symbol for a specific
chemical substance; below it are its reactive partners,
arranged in decreasing order of degree of reactivity.

2.2 Rise of Mendeleev's Table
Designs for periodic tables of the elements began in
the early nineteenth century, when the availability of
reasonably accurate atomic weights made it possible for
chemists to postulate the possible patterns of
relationships that were expected to exist among the
chemical elements. Doing chemistry at that time in
history meant experimentation and classification, the
ultimate goal of which was to discover Nature’s designs the underlying schemes that govern the structure,
function and development of chemical systems. In effect,
the design of a chemical table should reflect the natural
organization of the elements.
Beginning with William Prout’s 1815 hypothesis
that all chemical elements possessed atomic weights that
were whole number multiples of hydrogen, chemists
attempted to order elemental properties based on atomic
weight. Such data was employed in numerological
experiments in which atomic or equivalent weights were
averaged, ratioed, or algebraically related. A periodic
table published by John Newland's in 1863 was based on
his Law of Octaves, that likened the repetition in atomic
property for every eighth element in his table to the
eighth note in the musical octave. This table was much
ridiculed because of its metaphorical underpinning; yet
in retrospect, it did order many of elements correctly.
The watershed event in periodic table design came
when Dimitri Mendeleev reported his periodic table in a
paper presented to the Russian Chemical Society on
March 6, 1869 (Figure 2) [9]. Instead of taking an
algebraic approach, Mendeleev developed his design by
arranging sixty-three index cards, each representing a
known element, onto which he had written a collection
of known physical properties. He set out to find their
associations by placing each card on a table, row by row,
according to increasing atomic mass. A new row was
begun whenever an element exhibited physical properties
similar to the element above it on the table. Conversely,
positions were left empty if an element’s properties did
not match with neighbors. In the end, Mendeleev arrived
at the table shown in Figure 2.
Mendeleev’s table is important for both what it does
and does not show. First, elements with common
properties are arranged along rows into families (e.g. Li,
Na, K, Rb, Cs, and Tl). Second, empty positions in his
table (denoted by question marks, which include
estimated atomic weights), are places where elements
would be expected to occupy if they had been
discovered. In the latter case Mendeleev used his
periodic table as a foundational theory to predict in detail
the properties of the missing elements that were later to
be called scandium, gallium, technetium, and
germanium. This use of the periodic table as a predictive
tool is what sets apart Mendeleev’s table from other
representations of his time, and garners him the prestige
of being labeled the father of the periodic law.
It should be noted that Mendeleev’s first table was
far from his last. He constantly tinkered with its
organization. Bensaude-Vincent has observed [10] that

Figure1 Étiénne-François Geoffroy’s “Table des
différents rapports.
Geoffroy designed the table as a tool in order to
show a chemist how to go about selecting specific
chemical procedures. For example, if a chemist wanted
to separate silver from a nitrous acid silver mixture he
could look at column three of table to find a substance
that possessed a greater affinity for nitrous acid. Here he
would find that either lead (ħ) or iron (♂) would react
better with the acid and displace silver (Ͻ) because each
held a higher position in the column.
What is notable about Geoffroy’s table is the large
number of empty cells – places where future affinities
should reside. Geoffroy commented that this was a
design decision with the expectation that future research
would fill in the blanks. His agenda is clearly evident in
column two of the table where the last cell is occupied by
gold (ʘ), leaving two empty cells between it and
mercury ( ).
The usefulness of Geoffroy’s table found its
momentum in the latter quarter of the eighteenth century
with chemists adding new columns for new substances.
The culmination was a 59 column by 50 row table
published by Torbern Bergman in 1783 (c.f. [1]).
Compared to Geoffroy’s single page document of sixteen
columns, Bergman’s multi-page table was unwieldy and
difficult to use. Bergman’s table was an example where
completeness trumped usefulness; indicative of a design
that did not scale or evolve to accommodate the greater
complexity of information.

76

over the course of eight editions of his textbook
Principle of Chemistry, he changed his table many times
- displaying five variations within the sixth edition alone!
Clearly, he did not favor any one representation, because
none were completely satisfactory. Yet, the periodic
table’s plasticity provoked tinkering as part of his
chemical reasoning process. This point will gain
emphasis further along into this paper as more tables are
considered.

earths (Be, Mg, etc.), when it should be aligned with the
other elements of the noble gas family (Ne, Ar, Kr).
This problem points to the issue of point-of-view in
the use of the periodic table. Chemists require the
periodic table’s design to be consistent with their
perceptions of how the elements organize into groups
based on an element’s chemical properties. But because
much of chemistry is reducible to physics, in particular
quantum theory, the periodic table’s design should
reflect in some way its theoretical physical foundations.

Figure 3 Janet’s periodic table of 1927.
Today’s standard periodic table is a variation of
Janet’s
proposed
design,
reflecting
chemists’
requirement of natural chemical grouping, given the
constraints of atomic physics. In the contemporary table
exemplified by the United States National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) Periodic Table shown
in Figure 4 [12], all of the s-block elements except for
helium are moved to the left-hand side; helium is placed
above the noble gases. The electron shells are still filled
in a logical manner, consistent with experiment. For the
sake of graphical layout, the f-block elements consisting
of the lanthanides and actinides are placed below the
main group. This arrangement makes the f-block appear
as an independent entity, as seen in many renderings, but
the NIST table maintains the connection with the main
table by using a ribbon. This overall graphical design is
important to making the contemporary table a usable tool
because it can easily fit on letter or A4 size pages, in
textbooks, and now web pages.

Figure 2 Mendeleev’s periodic table of 1869.

2.3 Contemporary Tables
Experiments in atomic physics at the end of the
nineteenth century and development of quantum theory
during the first two decades of the twentieth century
provided new ways of assessing and representing the
interrelationships among the chemical elements. In
particular, the use of atomic numbers (i.e. the number of
protons in an atom’s nucleus), and an element’s electron
configuration, made systematic arrangements of the
elements more precise, but not necessarily more
accurate.
For example, the left-step periodic table of Charles
Janet (1927) [11] arranges the elements by how the outer
electron shell of each element is filled (Figure 3). The
chart is systematic, logical, and reflects the physical
structure of each element at the atomic level. From leftto-right, the elements form blocks based on the electron
configurations – f to d to p to s electrons. The table is
read by beginning with the top right columns, moving
across from H to He to fill the 1s electron shell. Then the
reader drops to the second row, moving from Li to Be to
fill the 2s shell. Moving across row three fills the 2p and
3s shells; and so forth.
For a physicist who is interested in atomic structure,
this may be a perfectly fine arrangement, but for a
chemist who is concerned with the properties of
substances (i.e. collections of atoms), there are problems
with this design. In particular, Helium (He), a noble gas,
is situated at the far right of the table with the alkaline

Figure 4 Contemporary Periodic Table by NIST.

2.4 Other Designs
The contemporary table is by no means the last word
in periodic table designs. Since it represents a

77

compromise between usability and an ideal, it continues
to stimulate rearrangement and adaptation. Two such
examples are show in Figures 5 and 6. The first is a
pyramidal table originally devised by Thomas Bayley in
1882 [13], revised by Jørgen Thomsen in 1895 [14],
Neils Bohr in 1922 [15], and recently revised yet again
by William Jensen in 1989 [16]. It is a long table
designed to show the symmetry of the periodic law as it
relates to each period. Finally the periodic spiral by
Electric Prism [17] breaks with the enforced
regimentation of the xy grid, embedding the elements in
a hexagonal lattice. Designed by Jeff Moran, it attempts
to address the issue of where to place hydrogen in the
table. The chemistry of hydrogen suggests it could be
placed either above lithium or fluorine in the
contemporary table. Moran’s table solves this problem
by making hydrogen a neighbor of both. It is situated
next to helium as well, showing that hydrogen precedes
helium in the filling of electron configurations.

representation, where elements spiraled around a
cylinder (Figure 7). This is a remarkable proposal,
considering
that
few
three-dimensional
data
visualizations existed through the first two-thirds of the
nineteenth century. Somehow de Chancourtois made the
leap beyond the xy plane, not just into the orthogonal z
direction, but into a new reference frame - cylindrical
coordinates. Where would he get an idea for such a
construction?
It is possible that de Chancourtois's charting practice
was inspired by a recording device of the time - the
cylindrical drum and stylus. Because de Chancourtois
was interested in detailed classifications of phenomena
such as earthquakes, ground waves, and oscillations, he
was familiar with these recording devices, particularly as
they applied to seismology. A method of chart recording
invented by Thomas Young, and advanced by Charles
Wheatstone and Abraham-Louis Breguet had existed
since 1807, used a drum rotated by clockwork. As the
drum rotated on its axis, it descended past a fixed stylus.
For every 360o turn, the drum sank a quarter inch. The
net result was a smooth spiral traced across the drum's
surface.

Figure 5 Bayley-Thomsen-Bohr Periodic Table.

Figure 7 de Chancourtois’s Telluric Screw.
©Science Museum, London. Used with
permission.

Figure 6 Periodic Spiral by Electric Prism, Inc.

3. Charts and Physical Models

It is proposed here that de Chancourtois utilized the
stylus/drum metaphor to devise a paper tool that would
allow him to explore the periodic relations among the
elements. He first created a plot of atomic weights along
the 45o diagonal of a sheet of graph paper. De
Chancourtois could then roll the paper into a cylindrical
spiral. The spiral would be tightened or relaxed until
elements exhibiting similar properties were in vertical

3.1 Chemical Charts
The earliest use of a chart to demonstrate the
periodic nature of the elements was Alexandre-Émile
Béguyer de Chancourtois’s Telluric Screw of 1862 [18].
De Chancourtois proposed a three-dimensional helical

78

alignment. He found that by aligning elements in
multiples of 16 weight units, he arrived at a period repeat
of 16. This alignment correctly creates families of
elements such as oxygen, sulfur, selenium, and tellurium;
and lithium, sodium, and potassium.
A spiral/radial alignment chart was published by
Gustavus Detlef Hinrichs in 1867 [19], predating
Mendeleev’s table by two years. A relatively recent
spiral chart designed by Theodor Benfey’s in 1960 is
shown in Figure 8 [20]. In the color encoded version
illustrated here, the elemental families radiate out from
the center of a clockwise spiral with hydrogen at its
origin.

Figure 9 Schaltenbrand’s helices of 1920.
Two examples of physical models will be presented.
The first considered is an early physical model
constructed by William Crookes in 1888 [22] called the
pretzel model. Figure 10 shows his model which
currently resides in the collections of the London Science
Museum. Crookes designed the pretzel model to
illustrate the sequence in which the elements were
created during the evolution of the universe (e.g. H, He,
Li, etc.). It was meant to be an improved diagrammatic
tool for depicting the periodic table by extending his two
dimensional xy periodic plots into the third dimension.
As with Mendeleev, Crookes' design also contained
positions for future elements. But from a chemist’s
perspective, this model's design was poor because all
periods were of the same length.

Figure 8 Benfey’s spiral table of 1960.
These kinds of charts may be quite complex as well.
Figure 9 displays a chart created by Georg Schaltenbrand
in 1920 [21]. It is composed of two parts, each showing a
different view of helices of varying sizes consisting of 2,
6, 10, and 14 elements. The top segment of the chart is a
perspective projection of the three dimensional helices
viewed on side, and the bottom segment contains a
parallel projection looking down through the structure.
Mazurs has commented that this chart “must be
considered to be the best table for presenting the periodic
law in all its details,” [4] because each 360o turn of the
helix clearly shows each chemical period. But from a
design viewpoint, it is undoubtedly both difficult to
construct and to read. Moreover, the three dimensionality
of the helices would be better served by creating a three
dimensional physical model.

3.2 Physical Models
A few three dimensional physical models of the
periodic system have been built. Physical models are
attractive from a design perspective because they occupy
the three-dimensional space of the user and provide
tactile feedback. They can be oriented and reoriented,
measured, assembled, disassembled, and rearranged by
hand. The most significant problem facing model
builders is the model's complexity. A model of
Schaltenbrand's helices would be difficult and time
consuming to build.

Figure 10 Crooke’s pretzel model of 1888.
©Science Museum, London. Used with
permission.
The second model was built by Roy Alexander
(Figure 11) [23], whose design advances the cardboard
model constructed by Courtines [24] and Clark [25] in
1925, by accurately integrating the actinides and
lanthanides into the table. Alexander’s model is an

79

excellent educational tool. The student version is
supplied as a collection of die cut sheets of cardboard
that must be colored and assembled. This makes
modeling of the periodic table a participatory process.

elements within it. In an analysis of tables, Wainer [27]
[28] has put forward four rationales for table usage:
exploration, communication, storage, and illustration. In
exploration, tables help answer questions about the data.
In communication, tables provide effective means for
presenting data - each table has a story or stories to tell.
Storage archives data, supporting a historical context and
aiding in data retrieval. In illustration, tables are used as
graphics in support of narrative.
Wainer's rationales may be employed to analyze
chemical tables in general. Here Geoffroy's table (Figure
1) is utilized as a specific example. Geoffroy's table was
designed to answer questions about reactivity. Chemists
explored his table to find the best displacement reaction
to solve their laboratory separation problems. It was an
efficient communication medium as well, because it
translated the chemical narrative detailing the
systematics of chemical reaction selection into an easily
understandable graphic form. Geoffroy's table was an
open-ended storage medium containing a history of
chemical practice that could be appended to over time.
His table design functioned so well as a tool that its size
ballooned into Bergman's behemoth of 1783. Finally,
Geoffroy's table is an illustration that serves the greater
narrative of chemical synthesis, acting as a focal point
for analysis and discourse.

Figure 11 Alexander’s periodic model.

4. Analysis
At the beginning of this paper it was stipulated that
the two-dimensional periodic table remains the de facto
representation of chemical information. Clearly, complex
three dimensional charts and physical models covered
here (and those compiled by Mazurs [4]) are difficult to
construct, and even more difficult to interpret without
machine intervention. Yet, the advances in computer
graphics and interface technology of the past four
decades have not been employed to build systems that
display these complex relationships. Instead, these
technologies have been used to transform the way
chemists view and interact with three dimensional
molecular structure and dynamics. In contrast, chemists
have capitalized on web technologies to construct
interactive periodic tables exploiting its contemporary
design as a user interface to give access to a wealth of
chemical information (e.g., WebElements Scholar
organizes sixty different elemental properties). This point
is of particular note. Since chemists themselves are the
primary builders of their own visualization systems [26],
they could have synthesized interactive threedimensional periodic charting software. Evidently, two
dimensional tables fulfill a richer set of design
requirements.

4.2 Table Design
A table's design must reflect the kinds of questions
that will be asked of the data it contains [26][27]. There
are three levels of inquiry.
First, elementary questions about data involve single
category data inspection or extraction. In a modern
periodic table (c.f. Figure 4) each location is a box, a
container that displays atomic data. Electron
configurations, atomic numbers and weights, crystal
structures, freezing and boiling points are all tossed into
the bin. This is in direct contrast with a chemical chart
that represents elements as points in space (e.g. Figure
9). Hence, the advantage of the table over the chart is
that points are merely placeholders, while boxes are
containers with spatial extents that encapsulate
collections of data.
Second, intermediate questions about data involve
comparisons, trends, and relationships among data
entries. Chemical tables were designed for this purpose –
to organize chemical information so the relationships
among chemical properties may be exposed. Indeed,
since each element in the contemporary table is
represented by a geometric primitive (typically a
rectangle), its graphic attribute may be adjusted to
highlight trends across families of elements or to
pinpoint elemental outliers. Color is used widely, but
other primitives have been employed. For example,
scaled circles displayed at table locations are used to
convey relative atomic size. Overall, chemical tables are
coherent graphical entities consistent with Bertin's rules
for visual encoding [29].

4.1 Table Usage
It is well understood that tables are important data
visualization tools and the first stage in the information
visualization pipeline that organizes raw data into a form
that may translated into graphics such as the periodic
charts presented in Figures 8 and 9. Here, though, the
table is the visualization itself, each cell of which
contains chemical iconography (e.g. the alchemical
symbols found in Geoffroy's table (Figure 1) or the
standard chemical symbols used in periodic tables
(Figures 2 and 4)).
The power of the table as a visualization medium is
that it is a compactly organized structure that facilitates
understanding of relationships among different data

80

[9]

Finally, general questions about data require a
thorough understanding of the underlying data structure
and the ability to build a level of abstraction for the
entire data set. The chemical table's continued design and
redesign demonstrates chemists' evolving understanding
of the underlying conceptual abstractions that define the
nature of chemical elements and their associations.

[10]

[11]

4.3 Tool Design
The chemical table carries the added responsibility
of being a research and teaching tool. Some requirements
for a well designed visualization tool include: direct
access to data, accurate encoding of information, easy
integration into work practice, and short learning curve.
Two dimensional chemical tables meet these
requirements – charts and models do not. Moreover,
interactive chemical tables implemented in hypermedia
technology fulfill a further set of requirements including:
the ability to readily display meaningful patterns, trends,
and exceptions; the use of visualization best practices;
and the dynamic linking of table contents to supporting
chemical documentation and narrative.

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

Conclusion
This paper has explored the development of the
chemical table as a tool designed for chemical
information visualization. By examining tables in
general, it has shown why the design of the twodimensional periodic table remains the de facto standard
for chemical information display. Finally, considering
the practice of chemical table and chart designers, this
paper has emphasized the fact that the periodic table is
not a static iconic representation, rather it, and each box
contained within it, is dynamic, the design and content of
continues to change with chemists' needs.

[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

References
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

B.R. Cohen, "The element of the table: Visual discourse
and the preperiodic representation of chemical
classification," Configurations 12, 1, Winter 2004, pp.
41-75.
E.R Scerri, The Periodic Table: Its Story and Its
Significance, Oxford, Oxford University Press. 2007.
J.W. van Spronson, The Periodic System of the Chemical
Elements: A History of the First Hundred Years,
Amsterdam, Elsevier, 1967.
E.G. Mazurs, Graphic Representations of the Periodic
System During One Hundred Years, 2nd Edition,
University of Alabama Press. 1974.
Meta-Synthesis, http://www.metasynthesis.com/
webbook.html , accessed March 14, 2008.
WebElements, http://www.webelements.com/, accessed
March 14, 2008.
Wikipedia Periodic Table, http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Periodic_table , accessed March 14, 2008.
É-F Geoffroy, “Table des differents rapports observés en
chimie entre differentes substances,” Mem. Acad. R.
Soc. 1717, pp. 202 -212.

[23]
[24]
[25]
[26]

[27]
[28]

[29]

81

D. Mendeleev, “Sootnoshenie svoistv s atomnym vesom
elementov,” Zh. Russk. Khim. Obshch. 1, 1869, pp.
60-77.
B. Bensaude-Vincent, “Graphic representation of the
periodic system of the elements.” In Tools and Modes of
Representation in the Laboratory Sciences edited by U.
Klein, Kluwer Academic Publisher, Dordrecht, The
Netherlands, 2001, pp. 133-161.
C. Janet, “La structure du noyau de l’atome, considerde
dans la classification periodique des elements chimques,”
Beavis, Novenbre, 1927.
NIST Periodic Table, http://physics.nist.gov/
PhysRefData/PerTable/index.html, accessed March 14,
2008.
T. Bayley, “On the connection between the atomic
weight and the chemical and physical properties of the
elements,” Phil. Mag. 13, 1882, pp. 26-37.
J. Thomsen, “Systemachische gruppierung de
chemischen elemente,” Z. Anorg. Chem. 9, 1895. pp.
190-193.
N. Bohr, “Drei aufsätz űber spektren und atombanu.”
Braunschweis: F. Viewes & Sohn, 1922.
W.B. Jensen, “Classification, Symmetry, and the
Periodic Table,” Computing and Mathematics with
Applications 12B, 102, 1989, pp. 487 -510.
Electric Prism Periodic Spiral,
http://www.periodicspiral.com/ , accessed March 14,
2008.
A.E. Beguyer de Chancourtois, “Vis tellurique:
classment naturel des coups simples ou radicaux obtenu
au moyen d’un systeme de classification helicoidal et
numerique,” Paris. 1863.
G.D. Hinrichs, Programm der Atomechanik, oder die
Chemie eine Mechanik der Panatome. Iowa City, 1867,
pp.7-8.
T. Benfey, http://homepage.mac.com/
dtrapp/periodic.f/spiral.html , accessed March 14, 2008.
G. Schaltenbrand., “Darstellung des periodic des
periodischen systems der elemente durch eine raumliche
spirale. Z. Anorg. Allgem. Chem. 112, 1920, pp. 221-224.
W. Crookes, “On the position of helium, argon, and
krypton in the scheme of the elements,” Proc. Roy. Soc.
(London) 63, 1898, pp. 408 – 411.
R. Alexander, “Periodic Tables,“
http://allperiodictables.com/ClientPages/AAEpages/apt_
3_DeskTopper.html, accessed March 14, 2008.
M. Courtines, J. Chem. Educ. 2, 1921, p. 107.
J.D. Clark, J. Chem. Educ. 10, 1921, p. 675.
F.T. Marchese. “Molecular visualization at the
interface.” In Trends in Interactive Visualisation /
Advanced Information and Knowledge Processing Series
edited by Elena Zudilova-Seinstra, Tony Adriaasen and
Robert van Liere, Springer-Verlag, 2008. in press.
H. Wainer, “Understanding graphs and tables,”
Educational Researcher, 21, 1, January- February 1992,
pp. 12-23.
H. Wainer, “Improving tabular displays, with NAEP:
Tables as examples and inspirations,” Journal of
Educational and Behavioral Statistics, Spring 1997, 22,
1, pp. 1-30.
J. Bertin, Semiology of Graphics (translated by W.J.
Berg), University of Wisconsin Press, 1983.

