12th International Conference Information Visualisation

The Potential of Crowd Simulations for Communication Purposes in Architecture
Remo Burkhard
Chair for Information Architecture
ETH Zurich
burkhard@arch.ethz.ch

Stefan Bischof
Department of Architecture
ETH Zurich
sbischof@student.ethz.ch

Andres Herzog
Department of Architecture
ETH Zurich
aherzog@student.ethz.ch
are architectural drawings, charts, computer renderings
and physical models, sometimes animations or flythroughs. While for experts and trained people these
means are highly effective, the same means can be
insufficient for mass communication purposes. The
reason for this is that the average non-trained user still has
difficulties to “read” such architectural drawings. Here
computer renderings help a lot.
We propose a complementary method by bridging the
two fields: architecture and crowd simulation. Our
hypothesis is that commercial crowd simulation tools help
architects and urban designers to simulate how planned
architectural or public places will potentially be used by
people. If their computer aided architectural design tools
(CAAD) are working seamlessly with such crowd
simulation tools it could even lead to a paradigmatic shift
in communicating architectural or urban projects in the
next decade. The shift could be described as a shift from
simulating the geometry of a space towards simulating
how people use a space.

Abstract
This article discusses an early stage of research on the
potential of crowd simulation tools for (marketing)
communication purposes in architecture and urban
planning. We argue that today, in architecture and urban
planning, agent-based simulation tools have been
primarily used for analytical purposes, such as the
simulation of pedestrians or fire escape scenarios in
buildings, and only rarely for the creation of videos for
communication purposes, for example for marketing
purposes. We found that even with the best available
software tools the cost-benefit ratio for architects is not
yet optimal and that architects might – from an economic
point of view – today be more effective if they outsource
such a task to an animation specialist.
This paper is relevant for architects, urban designers,
communication and PR experts and for researchers in the
fields of architecture, knowledge visualization,
communication science, agent-based simulations.

1. Introduction

2. Theoretical Context

In this paper we present early stage research results on the
potential of the crowd simulation tool “Massive
Software” for architecture and urban planning. More
specifically we investigate the purpose of communicating
with agent based simulations as to how people might use
a planned but not yet built architectural or urban space.
This research question is currently being investigated
in the elective course “Information Architecture”
(www.ia.arch.ethz.ch) with 15 architectural students at the
department of architecture at the ETH Zurich. This article
was written by two of the 15 students, Stefan Bischof and
Andres Herzog, under the supervision of Remo Burkhard.
The context where this research is embedded is
architecture and urban design. Here, increasingly new
planned projects can only be built if all involved
stakeholders are supporting such a project, especially in
urban planning. To succeed, increasingly a good project is
not enough and communication becomes more and more
important. Today, the predominant communication means

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.31

Architects are experts when it comes to knowledge
visualization, i.e. the use of complementary analogue and
digital visual means to create and disseminate knowledge
to different people. In previous works [1] we firstly
introduced “Knowledge Visualization” as the name for a
field which investigates the use of complementary visual
representations to transfer knowledge between at least
two peolple. In later works, we structured such computer
and non-computer based methods and proposed a
systematic framework, entitled “Knowledge Visualization
Framework” [2]. Finally, we proposed a thematic shift
from understanding the field as a meta science towards
understanding the field as a problem solver, a field that
identifies fundamental problems and solves these
problems by using complementary new and existing
visualization methods. In the “Visualization Summit” we
identified several challenges, which can be summarized in
two directions: (1) Improving the knowledge transfer and

403

individual behavior. In [20] the authors describe a study
where they simulate realistic and coherent population
behaviors in normal life situations to determine the
perception and actions of people before hazardous events.
In conclusion, these approaches are a help for
analytical purposes, but are not appropriate for
communication purposes, especially for non experts.

knowledge creation in business [3] and (2) visualizing
future cities [4].
This early stage research has to be seen in the context
of these existing works.

3. Related Works
Crowd simulations are software tools that simulate larger
crowds through so called agents. Crowd simulations can
be divided into two main areas of application:
applications for analytical and for communication
purposes. This paper only researches crowd simulations in
the context of architecture and urban design [6, 7].

3.2. Crowd Simulations for Communication
Purposes
Another area of application is the rendering of scenes
with large crowds for a movie, such as “The Lord of the
Rings”.
In the movie industry, the need for crowd simulation
tools arises when a scene in a movie calls for more
characters than can be animated manually. The challenge
for the movie industry is to render as realistically as
possible. Such crowd simulation tools make use of
artificial intelligence to guide the agents based on one or
more functions. Examples for functions can be sight,
sound, basic emotion, energy level, aggressiveness level,
etc. The agents are given goals and then interact with one
another similar as members of a real crowd would do.
Often the agents are programmed to respond to changes in
environment, enabling them to climb hills, jump over
holes, scale ladders, etc.
There are series of related works about crowd
simulation in architecture and urban planning. In general,
the more realistic visualizations of human behaviors are,
the more complex and time-consuming the simulation
calculations become. According to [21] there are many
new challenging research topics in human animation. In
[22] the authors describe a movement algorithm for
multiparty conversations. In [23] a description language
for individual behavior simulation was introduced. Here
the future aim is to conduct simulations where agents and
humans coexist.
To control the complexity of autonomous agent based
simulation the authors propose in [24] a new, two-layer
model. Also, [25] discusses a hierarchical model dividing
human crowds in groups and individuals to increase the
complexity. In [26] the authors integrate internal and
external stimuli for creating natural behaviors such as
agents talking to nearby agents, or glancing at something
of interest. These actions are generated by the crowd
simulation algorithm itself.
In [27] four categories of crowd simulation are
presented.
In conclusion, various technical approaches exist.
However, so far we are not aware of studies in which state
of the art commercial crowd simulation software tools
were used to communicate how people might use a
planned architectural or urban space for knowledge
transfer and marketing purposes.

3.1. Crowd Simulations for Analytical Purposes
Analytical crowd simulation tools can be used in
architecture and planning to assess, evaluate and optimize
systems. There are a variety of software tools, often
customized for a specific application domain. Simwalk
(Figure 1) is an example for a specialized commercial
tool, which allows the simulation of people, traffic and
evacuation scenarios. Another direction is the use of
modeling and animation software, e.g. “Maya” and
integrate crowd systems, as it has been done in [8].

Figure 1. Example of an agent-based simulation tool for
analytical purposes. (Copyright: www.simwalk.ch)
Such analytical tools are being used today both in
architecture and urban design.
Examples in architecture are fire escape scenarios in
buildings [9] and other emergency situations [10, 11],
evacuation simulations [12, 13], simulation of the
shopping behavior [14] or people in shops, large crowd
stadium situations [15] and many other fields of
applications.
Examples in urban design are the simulation of traffic
[16], evacuation behavior of pedestrians [17], and
simulation of people in cities or large scale terrains [18,
19]. Such evacuation simulations address the topic of

404

4. Case Studies with Massive Software

Visualizations of such a situation would allow us to better
convey the information and to focus more precisely on
one specific element of the problems in a slum. Such
visualizations
would
therefore
improve
the
communication concerning the situation and in a future
step allow urban designers to improve the structure of the
street network.

This section introduces two case studies. Both case
studies originated from an elective course with 15
architectural students. That’s why they are not totally
consistent with the research question. However, we
believe that these early research results still are relevant
for discussion. Especially because we need this dialogue
to continue in a transdisciplinary setting for our next
steps. In this teaching studio the students were using the
commercial software tool Massive.

4.1 Methodology
In the course preparation existing crowd simulation tools
have been analyzed. Based on this analysis we have
1
chosen
the
commercial
software
Massive
(http://www.massivesoftware.com) for this research. The
reason for this is that we believed that this tool is the most
advanced tool for simulating large amount of crowds.
Massive is a commercial high-end computer animation
and artificial intelligence software package used for
generating visual effects for the film industry. One of its’
features is the ability to easily create thousands or
millions of agents that all act as individuals. Furthermore,
this behavior can be defined and programmed in the
software, so that every agent responds individually to its
surroundings.
All authors are trained architects and have previous
knowledge in computer aided architectural design tools
(CAAD) but no experience with crowd simulation tools or
other agent-based simulations. All three authors did not
have previous knowledge in using the tool Massive.
Firstly, the three authors were learning the tool with the
help of the provided tutorials. Secondly, they were trying
to solve their architectural and urban planning cases.
Thirdly, they then evaluated together where the tool
makes most sense in architecture and urban planning.
Here they also learned from the examples from their 14
peers who also experimented with own cases.
In total, each author spent about 2 weeks to familiarize
with the commercial tool and 2 weeks to create an own
movie. Next, we will discuss two case studies.

Figure 2. Still image of a video sequence on the behavior
of people in a slum created with the software “Massive”
(Author: Andres Herzog).
The main questions are therefore: can Massive be used
for visualizing people in a complex street network? Can
the flow of people thereby be simulated and illustrated
sufficiently with regard to the application for architectural
purposes? The operational research hypotheses are:
(1) We assume that we can simulate and visualize
people walking to a water distribution point as their
destination.
(2) We assume that with such a simulation we can
illustrate the movement of the people in a realistic way
and better understand the transportation problem in slums.
(3) We assume that letting the agents draw lines on the
ground can be an effective method to visualize and
analyze the social behaviour. Exporting these lines into a
diagram for further analysis would be the next logical
step.
Methodology: First we learned the basics of the
software as described, and then we modelled the
landscape and the structure of the houses using the CAAD
Software “Rhinoceros 4.0”. In the next step, we have
chosen the commercial, so called ‘locomotion’ agent from
Massive Software and adjusted it so it could find the way
to the water points using noise channels. In the last step
we created a paint output channel to trace the movement
on the ground to test the third assumption.
Discussion: Our first finding is that Massive is a
useful tool to visualize simple crowd situations in 3D and
to generate images or video sequences in a more
comprehensive way (Figure 2) than the more analytical
tools.
The second finding is that Massive does not provide an
intuitive user interface for architects and urban planners to

4.2 Case Study 1: Visualizing People in a Slum
In a slum (e.g., in Nairobi, Kenya) the street network is
normally very poor and the roads are often in very bad
condition. Therefore, people have to walk on foot to move
along. The density and high frequency of change make it
very difficult to collect statistical data on the walking
behavior of the inhabitants. Hence it is important for
urban planners to understand the movement of the people.
1

This research was not funded by Massive Software.
ETH Zurich bought the teaching licences without special
reductions. None of the authors is linked to or involved in
this company.

405

on their preferences. Additionally, we did 3 qualitative
interviews with two Swiss individuals and one female
manager, with backgrounds in business administration in
the ages of about 37 years. Thirdly, we also held an
interview with one female neighbour 55 years of age. We
did not strive for a representative in-depth qualitative
study, firstly because this was not the focus of our
research, secondly because the quality of the video was
not good enough for a sound evaluation study, and thirdly
because we cannot compare the video with a picture.
Nevertheless, our qualitative interviews uncovered some
interesting insights, which are discussed next.
Discussion: Our first finding is that Massive is a useful
and easy to use tool to animate and control actions of
people and to create movies which communicate the
possibilities of architectural projects in a more
comprehensive way than with a static rendering.
Secondly, we found that it is difficult to trigger
satisfying results by relying mainly on acoustic and visual
perception of agents. The massive function “Flow fields”
allow a more strict control of the movement of agents,
and make them more predictable. This forces the user to
choreograph the actions of the agents to a high degree and
longer movies demand a much longer development time.
Thirdly, we think that Massive is strong in visualizing
very large crowds over a short period of time. However,
in architecture, smaller crowds are often more appropriate
to visualize in everyday life situation of a future project.
Fourthly, with regard to the evaluation of the
qualitative interviews we can say that both approaches
were very much liked. Everybody agreed that both
approaches are useful but context depended. It cannot be
stated that one approach replaces the other, but that both
complement one another. The main benefit of the static
rendering is that it can integrate situations that are not
possible to render with Massive, such as the projected
idea of a fireplace or interactive molecule (Figure 4).
Such a single picture can tell more stories than a thousand
animated frames in the video. Finally, what has also to be
stated is that the time investment for the two different
means is different: about 1 day for the static rendering
versus 1 week for the video (not including the time for
learning the tool).
As a next step, we would like to optimize the artificial
intelligence (in Massive called brain structures), of our
agents to have them behave in a more realistic way. We
also intend to enhance the level of interaction between
agents to reduce the time-consuming choreography of
their actions and to be able to produce a setup which is
more dynamic than our previous efforts. We plan to also
show our movie to a wide range of audiences to get a
quality feedback.

design or modify the artificial intelligence (in Massive
called “brain structures”), and that for certain situations
the agents’ movements are insufficient or too
monotonous.
Our third finding is that Massive is limited when it
comes to more analytical applications and output. For
architectural purposes it would be helpful to have a more
spatial output method than two-dimensional drawings or
images.
As a next step we will simulate people in more realistic
ways and try to optimize the structure through the
visualization of the movement. To achieve this it is
necessary to further improve the intelligence of the
agent’s artificial intelligence and to focus increasingly on
interpersonal reactions rather than on physical
movements. In conclusion the last two of the three
operational hypotheses are false with regard to this case
study. We neither got a better understanding of slums and
the behaviour of people in slums, nor could we better
communicate the behaviour compared to photos or videos
taken in the slum.

4.3. Case Study 2: Visualizing People in a Hall
In Switzerland public building projects, paid by the tax
payer, often cannot be built because of a neglected
communication. In particular the aspect of describing how
these buildings will be used by its future users.
The questions of this second case study are: can
Massive be used for creating a movie with a realistic
rendering of the behaviour of people in a planned new
building? More generally, is Massive a useful tool for
simulating people in a building? If yes, is it also possible
to illustrate the flow of people in buildings? The
operational hypothesis we tested are:
(1) On a theoretical level, we assume that the realistic
simulation of people in a movie helps to explain the
spatial quality and the use of a main space of a building
faster and more emotional compared to static renderings.
(2) On a technical level, we assume that we can easily
choreograph the behavior of the agents by means of the
internal Massive functions, such as the “flow field”
function that allows to easily define areas where people
should walk, or acoustic and visual perceptions of the
agents.
Methodology: First we learned the basics of the
software as described previously, then we modelled the
geometry of the hall with the CAAD Software “FormZ”.
In the next step we have chosen the commercial ‘ambient’
agent from Massive Software to create the movie. Then,
we compared two visualizations of this space with ten test
people. First, a picture (Figure 4) which has been used to
communicate this central space. Second, our movie
(Figure 3). We did six qualitative interviews with male
and female architectural students at ETH from
Switzerland and Germany in the ages of around 23 years.
We asked open questions on the general impression and

406

appropriate. Here, two dimensional representations of
agents might have been faster and more accurate for the
investigated question.
Our fourth finding is that Massive is suitable for
visualizations of crowd situations that contain relatively
simple situations with a focus on complex physical
activities such as walking or fighting. Architectural
visualizations though demand a tool that is able to deal
with more complexity in human interactions and every
day life behavior of people. The perfect simulation of
physical aspects is less important than a variety of simple
human actions and interactions.
As a last point, we think that since architects do not
have the knowledge and time to deal with the artificial
intelligence (in Massive called brain structures), Massive
might organize its brain in a more hierarchical way. The
hierarchy should divide the brain in a part for analytical
decisions and a part for movement related functions. This
would allow the user to focus on the important decisions
while excluding the whole movement part for analytical
purposes.
In conclusion, the described two case studies plus
insights from the other students made clear that Massive
can be used for creating movies for communication
purposes in architecture and urban planning, but to
achieve convincing results one has to invest a lot of time
in mastering Massive. As a next step, we are considering
to organize a workshop with an interdisciplinary team
with experts from fields, such as architecture, urban
planning, digital animation, visual narratives, sociology
and artificial intelligence.

Figure 3. Still image of a video sequence on the behavior
of people in the main hall of a new building (Author:
Stefan Bischof).

Figure 4. An image of the same space which was used to
communicate the main idea of this space to the public
(Author: Michael Meier, www.vasp.ch)

5. Summary
In this paper, we have argued for the benefits of crowd
simulation for communication purposes in architecture
and urban planning. In doing so, we have highlighted the
potential of a leading commercial software to
communicate architectural scenarios of different scales.
Our conclusion is that Massive is a powerful
visualization tool for simple actions with complex
movements. For the application in the field of architecture
the software should provide a more intuitive user
interface, as well as the ability to coherently simulate
normal life situations with the focus on interaction and
not on physical activities.
A more realistic and easier to use integration of basic
human interactions would allow architects to quickly
visualize their projects with the software Massive and to
communicate their projects more fully.

4.4. Discussion: The Pros and Cons of Massive
Based on our experience in architecture with video and
non animated renderings and the three authors’
experiences to work with Massive our insights are:
Firstly, all the 15 students who worked with Massive
say that they believe that crowd simulations offer
interesting ways to communicate architectural and urban
design projects to a wide audience. Also, all agree that the
software is still too complicated for architects. Improving
the user interface could already help a lot.
Secondly, the authors did not manage to create movies
exactly as they imagined. Even with a high commitment
of time. Therefore, in professional practice, one has to
always think all the way to the end and to maybe
outsource it to a specialist.
Thirdly, we believe that one has to clearly decide
whether the simulation tool should be used for analytical
purposes or for communication purposes. In the first case
study we tried to combine both aspects and partly failed.
For purely analytical studies the tool Massive seems not

References
[1 ]

407

R. Burkhard. Learning from Architects: The Difference
between Knowledge Visualization and Information
Visualization. In Eighth International Conference on

[2 ]
[3 ]
[4 ]
[5 ]
[6 ]
[7 ]
[8 ]
[9 ]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

[19] C. Loscos, D. Marchal, et al. Intuitive crowd behavior in

Information Visualisation (IV 2004), London, July 14-16,
2004.
M. Eppler, R. Burkhard. Knowledge Visualization. In
Encyclopedia of Knowledge Management, D. Schwartz,
Ed. New York, Idea Press, 2005.
M. Eppler, R. Burkhard. Visual Representations in
Knowledge Management. In Journal of Knowledge
Management, 11 (4), pp. 112-122. 2007.
R. Burkhard, G. Andrienko, et al. Visualization Summit
2007: Ten Research Goals for 2010. In Information
Visualisation Journal, (6), pp. 169–188. 2007.
K. Lynch. The image of the city. Cambridge, MIT Press.
1960.
A. Ulmer, J. Halatsch, et al. Procedural Design of Urban
Open Spaces. In Proceedings of eCAADe 2007, Frankfurt,
Germany, 2007.
P. Müller, P. Wonka, et al. Procedural Modeling of
Buildings. In Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 /
ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2006.
S. Baek, I.-K. Jeong, et al. Implementation of Crowd
system in Maya. In SICE-ICASE, International Joint
Conference, Oct. 2006, 2006.
H. Li, W. Tang, et al. Behaviour based motion simulation
for fire evacuation precedures. In Theory and Practice of
Computer Graphics, 2004.
A. Shendarkar, K. Vasudevan, et al. Crowd Simulation for
Emergency Response using BDI Agent Based on Virtual
Reality. In Winter Simulation Conference, 3-6. Dec 2006,
2006.
R. Hartley, G. Varley. The design and evaluation of
simulations for the development of complex decisionmaking skills. In Advanced Learning Technologies, 6-8
Aug. 2001, 2001.
A. Braun, S. R. Musse, et al. Modeling individual
behaviors in crowd simulation. In Computer Animation
and Social Agents, 16th International Conference, 8-9 May
2003, 2003.
O. P. Ratner, D. C. Brogan. Simulating crowds with
balance dynamics. In SIGGRAPH, July 2005, 2005.
C. Baydar. Agent-based modeling and simulation of store
performance for personalized pricing. In Simulation
Conference, 7-10 Dec. 2003, 2003.
S. Trojansky, F. Hu, et al. Rule-based crowds: generation,
animation, cloth and renderings of 15.000 unique human
characters. In SIGGRAPH, July 2003, 2003.
T. Wang, S. Tang, et al. 3D urban traffic system simulation
based on geo-data. In ITRE, 2nd International Conference,
28 June-1 July 2004, 2004.
G. Tanaka, A. Kojima. A modeling of crowd behavior
based on model predictive control. In SICE-ICASE,
International Joint Conference, Oct. 2006, 2006.
T. Wen, R. W. Tao, et al. Real-time crowd movement on
large scale terrains. In Theory and Practice of Computer
Graphics, 2-5 June 2003, 2003.

[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]

408

dense urban environments using local laws. In Theory and
Practice of Computer Graphics, 2-5 June 2003, 2003.
D. C. de Paiva, R. Vieira, et al. Ontology-based crowd
simulation for normal life situations. In Computer Graphics
International, 22-24 June 2005, 2005.
N. Magnenat-Thalmann, L. Moccozet. Some new
challenging research topics in human animation. In
Computer Graphics, 25-28 April 2001, 2001.
D. Jan, D. R. Traum. Dynamic movement and positioning
of embodied agents in multiparty conversations. In 6th
international joint conference on Autonomous agents and
multiagent systems (AAMAS), May 2007, 2007.
Y. Murakami, T. Ishida, et al. Scenario description for
multi-agent simulation. In 2nd international joint
conference on Autonomous agents and multiagents
systems (AAMAS), July 2003, 2003.
T. Hamagami, H. Hirate. Method of crowd simulation by
using multiagent on cellular automata. In Intelligent Agent
Technology, 13-16Oct. 2003, 2003.
S. R. Musse, D. Thalmann. Hierarchical model for real
time simulation of virtual human crowds. In Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 7 (2), pp. 152-164. 2001.
A. Lerner, E. Fitusi, et al. Behavior-graph for crowd
simulation. In SIGGRAPH, Aug. 2007, 2007.
S. Raupp Musse, B. Ulicny, et al. Groups and crowd
simulation. In SIGGRAPH, July 2005, 2005.

