12th International Conference Information Visualisation

The Complexity of Terrorist Networks
Philip Vos Fellman, Southern New Hampshire University

Abstract— Complexity science affords a number of novel
tools for examining terrorism, particularly network
analysis and NK-Boolean fitness landscapes. The following
paper explores various aspects of terrorist networks which
can be illuminated through applications of non-linear
dynamical systems modeling to terrorist network
structures. Of particular interest are some of the emergent
properties of terrorist networks as typified by the 9-11
hijackers network, properties of centrality, hierarchy and
distance, as well as ways in which attempts to disrupt the
transmission of information through terrorist networks
may be expected to produce greater or lesser levels of
fitness in those organizations.
Index Terms—NK Boolean Fitness Landscapes, Terrorism,
Terrorist Networks.

I. INTRODUCTION

O

source acquisition of information regarding
terrorist networks offers a surprising array of data which
social network analysis, dynamic network analysis (DNA) and
NK-Boolean fitness landscape modeling can transform into
potent tools for mapping covert, dynamic terrorist networks
and for providing early stage tools for the interdiction of
terrorist activities.
PEN

II. MAPPING TERRORIST NETWORKS
One of the most useful tools for mapping terrorist
organizations has been network analysis. A variety of maps
and mapping techniques have emerged in the post 9-11.
World. One of the earliest and most influential maps was
developed by Valdis Krebs (Krebs, 2001) shortly after 9/11
[1] :

This map yields a number of interesting properties. Using
measures of centrality, Krebs‘ work analyzes the dynamics of
the network. In this regard, he also illuminates the centrality
measure‘s sensitivity to changes in nodes and links. In terms
of utility as a counter-intelligence tool, the mapping exposes a
concentration of links around the pilots, an organizational
weakness which could have been used against the hijackers
had the mapping been available prior to, rather than after the
disaster, suggesting the utility of developing these tools as an
ongoing mechanism for combating terrorism.
III. CARLEY’S DYNET MODEL
The most developed version of these tools is probably the
Dynamic Network Analysis (DNA) model developed by
Carley et al. [2]

Manuscript received March 17, 2008.
Philip V. Fellman, B.F.A., California Institute of the Arts (1974),
M.A.., Cornell (1979), M.B.A. Yale, (1986), M.A. (Cornell, 1988), Ph.D.
(Cornell, 1990), is Professor of International Business Strategy at Southern
New Hampshire University in Manchester, New Hampshire, U.S.A.
Dr. Fellman has been a frequent contributor on terrorism to a wide
variety of conferences and publications. He is an active member of the New
England Complex Systems Institute, where he is currently involved with Dr.
Yaneer Bar-Yam and Dr. Ali Minai in co-authoring a volume on using
complex adaptive systems to counter terrorism, insurgency, regional and
ethnic violence.

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.107

338

As indicated in the figure above, Models of the 9-11
Network, the Al Qaeda network which bombed the U.S.
Embassy in Tanzania and other terrorist networks also show a
characteristic emergent structure, known in the vernacular as
—the dragon“. One element of this structure is relatively
large distance [3] between a number of its covert elements [4]
which suggests that some elements of the network, particularly
certain key nodes [5] may be relatively easy to remove
through a process of over-compartmentation or successive
isolation, thus rendering the organization incapable of
transmitting commands across various echelons.
IV. SYMMETRIES AND REDUNDANCIES
On the other hand, the 9-11 Network also demonstrates a
high degree of redundancy as illustrated by the following
diagram [6].

Above:
Network.

Node Isolation from Carley [2] for a Standard

Above:
Network.

Node Isolation from Carley [2] for a Cellular

VI. TERRORIST NETWORKS AND FITNESS LANDSCAPES
This mapping suggests, in turn, that while the network may
be highly distributed [7], the redundancies built into it suggest
cohesion at a number of levels as well as an hierarchical
organization [8,]. A number of systems analysis tools [9] have
been developed to deal with the problem of covert networks
[10] and incomplete information [11].
V. ISOLATION AND REMOVAL OF NETWORK NODES
DNA, for example, provides a number of insights into what
happens when leadership nodes are removed from different
kinds of networks [12], yielding very different kinds of results
depending upon whether the network is cohesive or adhesive
[2]. In particular, Carley et al. [4] demonstrate how isolation
strategies (also suggested in Fellman and Wright [3]) will
yield different results based on the nature of the network
involved. This is shown below in the comparison of node
isolation impact in standard vs. cellular networks [2].

The dynamic NK-Boolean fitness landscape models
developed by Stuart Kauffman [13,14] for evolutionary
biology have attracted increasing interesting in a number of
fields involving social phenomena. In particular, it offers a
substantial degree of promise in providing new models for
understanding and evaluating the strategic performance[15] of
organizations [16]. An agent-based simulation conducted in
1999 and 2000 by Pankaj Ghemawat and Daniel Levinthal
[17] using an NK-Boolean fitness landscape framework for
strategic management decision-making, has yielded some
results differentiating the effects of interpolating non-optimal
values into the decision-making processes of hierarchical vs.
interdependent organizational structures which have some
interesting results with respect to isolation and disinformation
operations against terrorist networks [18]. When they explore
the difference between an optimal preset of policy
configurations between hierarchical, central and random
simulation arrays they find that disrupting lower order policy
variables is likely to have little relative effect on the
robustness of the organization as compared to the misspecification of higher order values, particularly in

339

hierarchical organizations, as illustrated below.

complexities of terrorist networks, and in particular, in
directing long-run operational and strategic planning so that
tactics which appear to offer immediately obvious rewards do
not result in long term damage to the organizations fighting
terrorism or the societies which they serve.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

Valdis Krebs, “Uncloaking Terrorist Networks”, First Monday, 2001
Kathleen Carley, and Philippa Pattison (eds.), Dynamic Social Network
Modeling and Analysis: Workshop Summary and Papers, 313-323.
Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press
[3] Philip V. Fellman and Roxana Wright —Modeling Terrorist Networks Complex Systems at the Mid-Range“, paper prepared for the Joint
Complexity Conference, London School of Economics, September 1618, 2003
http://www.psych.lse.ac.uk/complexity/Conference/FellmanWright.pdf
[4] Kathleen Carley, Jana Diesner, Jeffrey Reminga and Maksim Tsvetovat
—Toward an end-to-end approach for extracting, analyzing and
visualizing network data“, ISRI, Carnegie Mellon University, 2004
[5] Carter T. Butts "An Axiomatic Approach to Network Complexity."
Journal of Mathematical Sociology, 24(4), 273-301
[6] Philip V. Fellman and Mark Strathern —The Symmetries and
Redundancies of Terror: Patterns in the Dark“, Proceedings of the
annual meeting of the North American Association for Computation in
the Social and Organizational Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University,
June 27-29, 2004.
http://casos.isri.cmu.edu/events/conferences/2004/2004_proceedings/V.
Fellman,Phill.doc.
[7] Carter T. Butts "Predictability of Large-scale Spatially Embedded
Networks." In Ronald Breiger, Kathleen Carley, and Philippa Pattison
(eds.), Dynamic Social Network Modeling and Analysis: Workshop
Summary and Papers, 313-323. Washington, D.C.: National Academies
Press.
[8] Kathleen Carley, “Modeling —Covert Networks”, Paper prepared for
the National Academy of Science Workshop on Terrorism, December
11, 2002
[9] Carley, Kathleen M. and Butts, Carter T. (1997). "An Algorithmic
Approach to the Comparison of Partially Labeled Graphs." In
Proceedings of the 1997 International Symposium on Command and
Control Research and Technology. June. Washington, D.C.
[10] Kathleen Carley, Ju-Sung Lee and David Krackhardt —Destabilizing
Networks“, Connections 24(3): 31-34, INSNA (2001)
[11] Jonathan P. Clemens and Lauren O‘ Neill—Discovering an Optimum
Covert Network“, Santa Fe Institute,. Summer, 2004.
[12] Kathleen Carley, “Dynamic Network Analysis in Counterterrorism
Research”, Proceedings of A Workshop on Statistics Analysis, National
Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007 pp.169 ff.
[13] Stuart Kauffman, The Origins of Order, Oxford University Press, 1993.
[14] Stuart Kauffman, At Home In the Universe, Oxford University Press,
1996.
[15] Winfried Ruigrok and Hardy Wagner, Hardy—Internationalization and
performance: A meta-analysis (1974-2001)”, Management International
Review, Special Issue, Autumn 2006.
[16] A. Caldart, and J. E. Ricart, J E, “Corporate Strategy Revisited: A View
from Complexity Theory”, European Management Review, 1 96-104,
2004.
[17] Pankaj Ghemawat and Daniel Levinthal —“Choice Structures, Business
Strategy and Performance: A Generalized NK-Simulation Approach”,
Reginald H. Jones Center, The Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania, 2000,
http://www.people.hbs.edu/pghemawat/pubs/ChoiceStructures.pdf
[18] Philip V. Fellman, Jonathan P. Clemens, Roxana Wright, Jonathan Vos
Post and Matthew Dadmun, “Disrupting Terrorist Networks: A Dynamic
Fitness Landscape Approach”, 7th International Conference on Complex
Systems, November, 2007. arXiv:0707.4036v1 [nlin.AO]
[19] Mark Sageman, Understanding Terror Networks, University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2004.
[20] Reuel M. Gerecht, “The Counterterrorist Myth”, The Atlantic Monthly,
July-August, 2001
[21] Angelo Codevilla, “Doing it the Hard Way”, Claremont Review of
Books, Fall, 2004
http://www.claremont.org/writings/crb/fall2004/codevilla.html

In dealing with terrorist organizations, which are primarily
hierarchical in nature [19], what this finding says is that
disinformation is a useful tactic (or strategy) only if it
succeeds in influencing one of the key decisional variables. In
other words, disinformation at the local level is unlikely to
have any lasting impact on terrorist organizations. This
finding also challenges the institutional wisdom [20] of
assigning case officers in the field to this type of counterterrorism operation [21]. In fact, from an operational point of
view, the hierarchical nature of terrorist organizations means
that there may be something of a mismatch in the entire
targeting process. As Ghemawat and Levinthal note, “Less
central variables not only do not constrain, or substantially
influence the payoff of many other choices, but they
themselves are not greatly contingent upon other policy
choices. Being contingent on other policy choices facilitates
compensatory shifts in policy variables other than the one that
is preset. As a result of the absence of such contingencies, the
presetting of lower-order policy choices is more damaging to
fitness levels under the centrality structure.” (p. 27)
Another striking feature of this set of simulations concerns
how few of the optima with preset mismatches constitute local
peaks of the fitness landscape. Given the importance of
configurational effects, one might reasonably conjecture that
constraining one variable to differ from the global optimum
would lead to the selection of a different, non-global, peak in
the fitness landscape. However, in the actual simulation runs
this result was unexpectedly absent.
VII. CONCLUSION
Terrorist networks are complex. They are typical of the
structures encountered in the study of conflict, in that they
possess multiple, irreducible levels of complexity and
ambiguity. This complexity is compounded by the covert,
dynamic nature of terrorist networks where key elements may
remain hidden for extended periods of time and the network
itself is dynamic. Network analysis, agent-based simulation,
and NK-Boolean fitness landscapes offer a number of tools
which may be particularly useful in sorting out the

340

