12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Maestro: Design Challenges for a Group Calendar
Billur Engin, Mehves Cetinkaya, Elif Ayiter, Murat Germen, Selim Balcisoy
{billurengin@su.sabanciuniv.edu, mehvesc@su.sabanciuniv.edu, ayiter@sabanciuniv.edu,
balcisoy@sabanciuniv.edu, muratgermen@gmail.com}
(Figure 2). This added feature will help the users in any
occasion like family meeting, work conferences etc.

Abstract
Maestro - 3D group calendar visualizer aims at
handling multiple schedules and highlighting common
free times. One of the most powerful skills of Maestro is
scalability according to the number of group members,
which can be up to 18 users. The use of color and shape
intends to create a more lucid picture of an
organization’s
schedule,
as
opposed
to
traditional calendars which can overwhelm the user with
information.
The goal is not to produce yet another calendar
application, but to define an interactive information
visualization technique. This work concentrates on
highlighting the relevant information, using primitive
shapes and color differentiation to avoid a complicated
depiction.

Figure 1. In Public Display Mode, the rotation of
the main shape enables the user to see the load
of the week at a glance.

Keywords--- Calendars, Design Process, time sheet,
schedule, 3D Organizer, Information Visualization, Graphical
Representation, Interactive Animation, 3D Graphics, Cylinder .

1. Introduction
Regardless of the intention to create another
calendar application, Maestro has the main purpose to
generate a new approach to one of the gaps in calendar
applications which is also one of the main problems in
information visualization; asthetics[1].
One important requirement for an interactive
calendar is detecting the common free times of group
members. Synchronizing the calendars of individuals and
setting a time for a meeting or group work can be a
problem, because of the possibility of scheduling
conflicts between group
members.
Maestro’s
contribution lies in finding a 3D layout solution to
visualize the load of complex calendar constraints, and
highlighting the common free times of the group
members using visual clues. Thus, Maestro proposes a
system that visualizes members’ weekly calendars and
the daily calendar of the group. Users can both see the
weekly (Figure 1) and the daily state of their agenda, and
get a quick idea about the upcoming events at a glance.
Maestro can also compare the calendars of the group
members in its system and show common free times

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.91

Figure 2. In Interactive Mode, Common Free
Time option highlights available hours in groups
calendar.
As with some former approaches [2], Maestro tries
to visualize time in 3D space but also lets the user
display multiple time spans [3] at a glance in public
display mode. In this mode, users can not only see a

491

Figure 3. Important Aspects of Maestro
combining calendars of different users in a group. Lattice
introduces “Translucent
Shadows” to
display
relationships between users. This technique produces
complex objects and involves challenging interactions.
The design language created in order to separate each
calendar, offers a much more readable visualization.
Showing the ‘load’ of a calendar has also been a
common goal in previous designs. As Tessler reported
[3], the ‘Busy-ness’ level is shown with length-changing
bars, or sometimes with numbers of primitives. One
ca n int u it ive l y u nder st a nd t he ‘ busy-ness’ level
of a week in the public display mode by comparing the
area occupied by opaque and transparent regions and
the load of a day from the interactive mode. In order to
visualize the continuous flow of time, Carlis [6] used a
spiral, in which periodic events are placed on the radius.
Maestro represents the hourly schedule of a day on a
sliced disk and duplicates the other days one after
another, forming a cylinder through the replication of the
individual disks (Figure 3). “Availability Bars” [7] also
show multiple calendars, slicing a day into hourly
regions. According to Faulring this design approach
allows the user quick visual inspection. Finding the
common available times of users, Maestro can show up
to 18 people’s schedules at a time, at best, while
“Availability Bars” is capable of showing the most 3

week’s activities at a glance, but can also figure out the
state of available free time of each day in that week.
This paper organizes the literature survey on
temporal information visualization in the related work
section, Maestro’s working principles under the system
section, the design path in the design process section and
concludes with summarizing the solutions for the specific
problems faced during the design process.
This research is the outcome of a transdisciplinary
learning approach between fine arts / communication
design and computer sciences, fostering group
collaboration. The specifics of this approach have been
reported upon elsewhere [4].This type of research skills
are also considered as one of the main factors enhancing
the recent expansions in information visualization [5].

2. Related Work
Computer-based calendars are mostly 2D
applications designed for single users, which are
adequate to store and manage data, identical to those
paper-based calendars used in offices. Mackinlay [2]
attempted different methods for 3D representations of
calendars such as Spiral Calendar and Time Lattice. The
Lattice attempts a technique similar to Maestro,

492

3.1. Public Display Mode
In the Public Display Mode, Maestro shows the
activities of a week. By switching into this mode, users
get a general idea about the load of the upcoming week
at a glance. Each schedule is represented with a unique
color. The frontal pie is the present day; other days are
placed behind one other, forming a cylindrical shape.
(Figure 3)
Visualization of a whole group’s weekly schedule
on a 3D environment results in losing some information
due to occlusion. In order to overcome this problem,
main body rotates through its axis so that each schedule
will be on the unoccluded region successively.
Tessler [3] states that many other scheduling
programs offer the user different time spans: monthly,
weekly or daily schedules which can be viewed. Yet, in
most of the calendars, showing the daily and weekly
schedules together is not a common feature. In the public
display mode of Maestro, the main body rotates very
slowly and gives the observer a chance to have an
overview not only about the week, but also about each
day. The Public Display Mode can also be used as a
screen-saver or can be displayed on an individual screen
for continuous monitoring.
For the Public Display Mode, an extra projection
screen in communal areas was stipulated, such as school
labs, lobbies etc, where users can get a quick idea about
their own or their co-workers programs within seconds
(Figure 5). Since the main purpose of this mode is giving
a quick insight about the schedule’s load, as a design
decision, offering any text based information was
avoided. Any detail about schedule entries can be
reached via interactive mode.

Figure 4. Google Calendar with 10 Users
important people’s schedules and summarizing other
people’s availability on a histogram due to space
limitations.
Google Calendar, Microsoft Outlook and iCal are
some of the well-known computer-based calendar
programs where the user can also have multiple
organizers and find the common free times across these
calendars. However these approaches provide limited
scalability. Google Calendar is sufficient to organize one
person’s schedule or a small group, but as the number of
group members increases, Google Calendar becomes
complex and some what misleading, causing users to
make extra efforts to find available common times
(Figure 4).
Maestro has daily and weekly scheduling modes, as
do other internet based calendars. Those calendars
display detailed information regardless of time frame’s
size. Thus as time interval gets wider, information
density increases. On the other hand, Maestro doesn’t
include any text based information for weekly schedule
display mode and prefers to give a quick insight about
work load and availability of week, rather than
“overinforming” the user. As a result, information
density of the visual language is kept constant.

3. System
Maestro consists of two parts: a public mode to
give an overview about the group’s weekly ‘busy-ness’
and an interactive mode to enable users get detailed
information.
Maestro imports the users' agendas and illustrates
data with common demonstrations: the "pie chart figure",
for example stands for daily schedules, a "cylindrical
figure" consisting of daily schedules placed behind each
other, stands for the weekly schedule. By switching
between daily schedules, one can see the status of other
users and highlight the common free times of the
corresponding day. Maestro can also be used to unite
multiple calendars created by one user. Thus, the user
will have the ability to look at all of the calendars at once
or individually.

Figure 5. An Example about the Setup of
Maestro’s
Public Display Mode in real life

3.2. Interactive Mode
By switching on the interactive mode, the details of
schedules can be accessed. There are two axes on the
interface of this mode: the upper-horizontal axis enables

493

users to view the activities day by day and contains
stable data. The left-vertical axis of the interface enables
users selecting another group member in order to look
over his/her weekly schedule. This axis can be
personalized according to the particular needs of
an organization.

responsible about creating an honest schedule and
attending scheduled group meetings.

3.3. Technical Details
There are three steps in implementation process:
building the 3D model of the main body, designing the
interface, synchronizing animations with menu
commands.
Maestro 3D model was developed with C++,
making use of OpenGL library. The model is built up
from polygons and assigned proper alpha values to each
tile, to create a transparency difference between occupied
and unoccupied tiles (hours).
Interface of Maestro was designed using Photoshop
and covered on the screen as a texture. Connection
between menu and animations is done via detecting
mouse clicks and movements.
The group calendar data visualized is imported to
Maestro as XML files to give flexibility to apply users’
schedules exported from some online calendar
applications such as Google Calendar.

Figure 6. Maestro’s Interactive Mode, showing
daily schedule of a group

4. Design Process
4.1. Shapes

Since a calendar’s main purpose is to plan social
events, the time span represented in a day is limited.
Each pie is tiled horizontally into 19 hours, which starts
from 09:00 am and ends at 03:00 am. Represented time
increases as the slices get bigger from inside to outside.
By clicking on the related slice, users can screen the
details of an entry. (Figure 6)

In the beginning, Maestro’s main body was a
simple sphere figure separated by latitudes and
longitudes. With longitudes, the sphere was sliced into 7
equal volumes, and according to the number of users in
the group, each slice was separated with latitudes. To
represent the data, each part was extruded according to
schedules. This attempt created a rough shape, which
was hard to identify with busy schedules and many users
(Figure 8.a).
As a second stage, for the perception of the separate
schedules, the sphere was composed of thin bars. The
bars were paired into groups, where each group
represented a day and each bar represented the schedule
of a member. Although distinguishable colors were used,
realizing each day-group was an important problem.
Furthermore sphere figure was hard to tile in equal
shapes and was impossible seeing the bars positioned at
sphere’s back side.
Giving the user an overview of the schedule of an
entire week or a day was one of the main goals in
Maestro’s design process. With the spherical
representation, described above, having an overview was
almost impossible, even with zooming into and through
the rotation of the sphere. Without having an overview
comparing the schedules and finding common free times
in a day also became impractical (Figure 8.b).
In order to visualize the information as simple as
possible 2D and 3D views were combined. 2D views are
more convenient to show text based information in a

Figure 7. Maestro’s Interactive Mode, showing
weekly schedule of a group member
In addition, by enabling the "common free time"
option the user can highlight the common available hours
of the day (Figure 2). The Common Free Time mode
creates an unavoidable honesty between the members of
a group. The “you-know that-I-know” [8] factor in the
common free time mode makes the group members more

494

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 8.Maestro’s Design Steps
schedule, whereas a 3D view is more suitable to
demonstrate the load of a week or a day at a glance
To create a self-expressive system, using primitive
shapes and highlighting the relevant relationships was
the bottleneck of the method. Inspired by pie charts,
each day was presented as a pie, which forms a cylinder
when all the group members’ calendars are shown
together. Between each slice there is a blank space, to
ensure differentiation of each slice. Since a 360⁰ full pie
is divided into the number of users; increasing the
number of members will narrow slices and the
representation space as well.
Placing daily pies in a row, created the weekly
representation. This formed a bigger cylinder-looking
shape. Showing Maestro in isometric view diminished
the artifacts of occlusion and created an understandable
overview (Figure 8.c).

and %70 brightness values, but 0 Hue and Saturation
values) were used for all the elements on the interface.
Using circles to generate buttons had the intention to
create a common language between the main body and
the interface. The rounded font “Bauhaus” for all textual
elements was also selected to maintain a harmony
between all the components.
A legend was created on the left side of the screen,
in which each color represents one user and each of these
colored lines is followed by the name of that user.

5. Conclusion
The concentration of the work presented here has
been the creation of a new information visualization
method for calendar applications. In the design process
of Maestro, space and color limitations restricted the
scalability of the model. For different sizes of groups,
versions of Maestro were developed. Corresponding to
increasing number of members, representation surface
for each person gets smaller. Likewise, numbers of
differentiable colors are finite. Thus, to visualize the
schedules up to 18 people, the model performs
sufficiently.
Maestro’s approach to group scheduling problem
comes out with a solution, that assumes members to have
common free times. This scenario may not always be the
case, because of conflicts common available hours may
not exist. Besides, information obtained from people’s
agendas may contain some complexities. Some activities
may not be mentioned on calendars and some activities
may be addressed in shorter/longer time intervals, which
leads to debatable hour suggestions. In a further study,
this problem can be partially solved by letting Maestro
find the partialy scheduled time frames where most of
group members are available, but some aren’t. As
Maestro highlightes common free hours with bright
colors, color shade of the partially scheduled time frame
can change as the percentage of the free space within the
time frame changes. The shade can get lighter as the free
time increases and viceversa, e.g. 90% and 80% free
hours will be shown with a light green and a darker
green, respectively. By higlighting these alternative
hours, members can negotiate with occupied members

4.2. Colorization
Each user was mapped with a separate color, in
order to represent another dimension of information.
Based on the traditional color theory, which was firstly
designed by Sir Isaac Newton in 1666, firstly 3 pigment
colors (red, blue, yellow), which can not be created
through the combination of other colors were used.
Through the mix of 2 colors out of these three, 3
secondary colors were obtained. Mixing one primary
color with one secondary color enabled to acquire 6
tertiary colors. In this way, a 12-Color Wheel was
created including the primary, secondary and tertiary
colors in color theory. Colors from this color wheel can
be used in schedules up to 12 people. Versions of the
tertiary colors can also be added to create a schedule up
to 18 people. Using Maestro for more than 18 users can
make the public display mode harder to differentiate
between users. Since bright colors are used, putting a
gray tone for the background, created a neutralizing
effect on the foregrounded colors. (Figure 9)

4.3. Layout
To create a balance between the colorful
representations of schedules, light gray colors (with %45

495

Figure 9. Color Palettes for various numbers of users
about arranging their schedules for a meeting. By letting
users define their priorities in their schedules and
therefore including an importance coefficient into the
program, members may assign importance levels to their
activities.
The target was to accomplish all three activities of a
user while using a calendar, i.e. the implementation of a
“glance-look-interactive” [9] approach. After users attain
a sense of the density of a week at a glance in the public
display mode, they can look up the details of their
program by choosing the day from the menu in the
Interactive mode. Users can also use the common free
time feature to see the group’s availability status at this
particular day.
A reminder option to alert some activities, the
switching mode between users and ubiquitous access
may be added as part of future work. The animations
within the application can also be improved, as well as
added on to, for extended interaction and visualization
capability.
Like “Many Eyes”[10], a web site that offers
visualization services to users, which enables
visualization of uploaded datasets, Maestro may be
published as a plug-in to calendar applications, for
visualizing uploaded schedules.
Lastly, there is a design question left: “May this
visualization technique be applied to different
multidimensional datasets?” This is the point where
future work on Maestro will be based on.

Chen, C. , (Jul. 2005) “Top 10 Unsolved Information
Visualization Problems”, IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 25,
4

[2]

Mackinlay, J. D.. (1994), "Developing Calendar
Visualizers for The Information Visualizer". UIST,pp.
109-118.

[3]

Tessler, F. N. (1993), "Desktop Calendars", MacWorld,
pp. 104-109.

[4]

Ayiter, E., Balcisoy, S., Germen, M., Artut, S.,
"Propagating Collaboration:
An
instructional
methodology for artists and engineers". Proceedings of
"CC2007: Seeding Creativity: Tools, Media and
Environments". Editors: Schneiderman, B., Fischer, G.,
Giaccardi, E., Eisenberg, B., Publisher: ACM. USA.
2007. Pages: 45 - 52.

Lau, A., Moere, A.V., (2007) “Towards a Model of
Information Aesthetics in Information Visualization”,
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
Information Visualization, IV. IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC, 87-92.

[6]

Carlis, J.V, and Konstans, J.A., (1999) “Interactive
Visualization of Serial Periodic Data”, Proceedings of the
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization

[7]

Faulring, A. and Myers, B. A., (1999) “Availability bars
for calendar scheduling”, Extended Abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems

[8]

Erickson, T. & Kellogg, W. (2000). “Social translucence:
An approach to designing systems that support social
processes” In ACM Transactions on Computer-Human
Interaction, 7(1), pp. 59-83.

[9]

Tullio, J., Goecks, J., Mynatt, E. D., and Nguyen, D. H.,
(October, 2002),
“Augmenting Shared Personal
Calendars”, Proceedings of the 15th Annual ACM
Symposium on User interface Software and Technology ,
Volume 4,Issue 2, pp 11-20.

[10] Danis, C. M., Viegas, F. B., Wattenberg, M., and Kriss, J.
(2008). Your place or mine?: visualization as a
community component. In Proceeding of the TwentySixth Annual SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI '08

References
[1]

[5]

496

