12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Interactive Quantification of Categorical Variables in Mixed Data Sets
Sara Johansson, Mikael Jern, Jimmy Johansson
Link¨oping University, Dept of Science and Technology (ITN), Sweden
sara.johansson, mikael.jern, jimmy.johansson@itn.liu.se
Abstract

knowledge of a specialist user has no influence on the algorithm and due to this important knowledge might not be
made use of.
This paper presents an approach to quantification of categorical data that utilizes the efficiency of an algorithm as
well as makes use of the knowledge of a user. The quantification process is carried out in an interactive environment
that facilitates user control of the computational process,
implemented using the GAV framework [11, 4]. The efficiency of the approach is demonstrated using two mixed
data sets. The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as:

Data sets containing a combination of categorical and
continuous variables (mixed data sets) are difficult to analyse since no generalized similarity measure exists for categorical variables. Quantification of categorical variables
makes it possible to represent this type of data using techniques designed for numerical data. This paper presents
a quantification process of categorical variables in mixed
data sets that incorporates information on relationships
among the continuous variables into the process, as well
as utilizing the domain knowledge of a user. An interactive
visualization environment using parallel coordinates as a
visual interface is provided, where the user is able to control the quantification process and analyse the result. The
efficiency of the approach is demonstrated using two mixed
data sets.

• A description of a quantification method for categorical variables in mixed data sets that incorporates information about relationships among continuous variables.

Keywords— Categorical data, mixed data, parallel coordinates, quantification, correspondence analysis, clustering.

1

• A presentation of an interactive environment providing user domain knowledge in the quantification process, using parallel coordinates as a visual interface.

Introduction

Data sets containing only categorical variables or
a combination of categorical and continuous variables
(mixed data sets) exist in many research areas. These data
sets are difficult to analyse since no generalized similarity measure exists for the categorical variables and due to
this a certain amount of knowledge of the data and of the
goal of the analysis is needed to understand the relationships between categories. Because of this the efficiency
of visualization techniques for data containing categorical
variables are often specialized and application dependent.
However, by quantifying the categorical variables (assigning order and distance to the categories) it is possible to use
more general visualization techniques designed for continuous variables to represent this type of data.
Two main approaches for quantification of categorical
data exist. The first is to order the categories manually,
making use of the domain knowledge of the data analyst.
This is a time consuming process for high cardinality data
and the efficiency depends entirely on the knowledge of
the analyst. The second approach is to use an algorithm to
compute distance and order of categories. A disadvantage
of this approach is the lack of user control. The domain

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.33

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents
related research. Section 3 describes the data analysis technique used in the paper. Section 4 presents the details of
the quantification process and the interactive environment.
Section 5 presents the results and is followed by conclusions and future work.

2

Related work

A number of visualization techniques specifically designed for visualization of categorical data exist. Fourfold
displays [3] visualize two-by-two tables, representing the
cell frequencies by quarter circles. Mosaic displays and
mosaic matrices [3, 9, 1, 2] represent multi-way tables with
tiles whose sizes are proportional to the cell frequencies.
CatTrees [13] are extentions of Tree-maps [12] that visualize hierarchically structured categorical data.
Parallel sets [14] is a visual representation that has a layout similar to parallel coordinates [10]. The categories of
a categorical variable are represented by a set of boxes that
are sized according to the category frequency. Visualization of mixed data sets is done by dividing the continuous
variables into bins. Havre et al. [8] present a technique that

3

extends parallel coordinates to handle categorical data. To
avoid data overlay, meaning data items being concealed by
other data items, the lines are spread over additional axes
and sorted according to what categories they belong to in
the adjacent axes.
These techniques are related to the technique presented
in this paper since they attend to visualization of categorical and mixed data sets. However, they suggest visualization techniques, whereas this paper focus on efficient
quantification methods.
Several attempts on quantification of categorical data
have been done. Ma and Hellerstein [15] suggest a technique for ordering of categorical data, focusing on visualization in scatter plots and parallel coordinates. They form
clusters of categories based on domain semantics and order the categories in a way that minimizes the distances
within the clusters. Rosario et al. [18] quantifies categorical data based on the distance and association of categories
in a categorical space. The quantification is achieved using
Correspondence Analysis (CA) [7] as described in detail in
section 3. Patro et al. [17] incorporates this technique into
a framework for mapping of diverse data types.
CA has been used in different ways in visualization.
Friendly [1, 2, 3] use CA to reorder categories in a mosaic display. Greenacre [7] describes a number of ways
to visualize the result of CA using scatter plot techniques,
such as CA Maps, where CA is used to position categories
in a plot, and CA Biplots where each row and column of a
table is displayed as a point. Greenacre [7] also suggests
using CA for quantification of categorical data to be able
to apply statistical techniques that require numeric data.
Quantification of categorical data is a pre-processing
approach that enables visualization using general techniques for multivariate data. This paper presents a quantification process that is mainly inspired by the work of
Rosario et al. [18], but that is an improvement through
its ability of handling mixed data and utilizing the domain
knowledge of a user.

3

Table 1: A contingency table containing frequency information on staff-groups and smoking categories for members of a company [7].
Senior Managers
Junior Managers
Senior Employers
Junior Employers
Secretaries
Total

None Light Medium Heavy Total
4
2
3
2
11
4
3
7
4
18
25
10
12
4
51
18
24
33
13
88
10
6
7
2
25
61
45
62
25 193

Table 2: The relative frequencies of the rows in the contingency table.
Senior Managers
Junior Managers
Senior Employers
Junior Employers
Secretaries

None Light Medium Heavy Total
37
18
27
18 100
22
17
39
22 100
49
20
23
8 100
20
27
38
15 100
40
24
28
8 100

Table 3: The first principal axis when SCA has been applied to table 1.
Senior Managers
-0.0658
Junior Managers
0.2590
Senior Employers -0.3806
Junior Employers
0.2330
Secretaries
-0.2011

tionships between row categories can be achieved, e.g. the
junior employers and junior managers have similar smoking habits, close to 40 percent of them are medium smokers, while approximately 20 percent are none smokers.
The rows in a contingency table can be thought of as
points in a space defined by the columns. CA defines independent dimensions in this space, where the first independent dimension (also called the first principal axis) explains
most of the variance within the space. With every succeding dimension the amount of variation explained decreases.
Based on the Optimal Scaling approach of CA [7], where
the goal is to find values leading to maximum variance, the
first principal axis can be used to quantify the corresponding categories. Table 3 shows the first principal axis when
SCA has been applied to table 1. As can be seen junior employers and junior managers are quantified to values close
to each other, and should hence be interpreted as being similar, which is also implied by table 2.
To analyse a set of variables, Multiple Correspondence
Analysis (MCA) is used. The computation of MCA is to
apply SCA to a Burt table, N, which is a table of all twoway contingency tables of the variables in the data set. The

Correspondence Analysis

Correspondence Analysis (CA) is a data analysis technique that can be used to analyse the association between
categories of a categorical variable. The computation is
performed on a table where the rows represent the categories [7, 6, 18].
The most basic case of CA is Simple Correspondence
Analysis (SCA) where the relationship between two categorical variables is to be analysed. Here a two-way contingency table (table 1) is used, where each cell represents the
frequency of a combination of two categories, for example
25 of the senior employers are none smokers whereas 4 of
them are heavy smokers. By looking at the relative frequencies of the rows (table 2) an understanding of the rela-

4

USER
INTERACTION

INPUT DATA

CATEGORIZATION
OF CONTINUOUS
DATA

USER
INTERACTION
CONTINGENCY
TABLE

SIMILARITY
COMPUTATION

TRANSFORMED
DATA

INTERACTIVE
ANALYSIS

OUTPUT DATA

Figure 1: The quantification process is divided into three main steps: categorization of continuous data, computation of
category similarities and interactive analysis and modification of result. Step one and three provide user interaction.
correspondence matrix, P, is computed by dividing N with
its grand total, n (equation 1). P is then normalized and
centered using equation 2, where r and c are vectors of
the row and column sums and Dr and Dc are diagonal
matrices with r and c as diagonals [7, 6].
P = N/n

(1)

S = Dr −1/2 (P − rcT )Dc −1/2

(2)

The independent dimensions are found using singular
value decomposition (equation 3), where U and V are unitary matrices, and Σ is a diagonal matrix where the diagonal values are the singular values of S [5]. The principal
axes, F, of the rows are determined using equation 4.
S = UΣVT

(3)

F = Dr −1/2 UΣ

(4)

Figure 2: The GUI of the interactive environment. The bottom parallel coordinates display the whole data set, and the
top parallel coordinates display the continuous variables,
using colour to show the category belonging of the data
items.
3. Interactive analysis and modification of transformed
data.

The first principal axis of the MCA is used to quantify
the catgories, represented by the rows in the Burt table, as
described in Greenacre [7] and Rosario et al. [18]. Using
this technique categorical variables are quantified using a
similarity measure that is based on the association of the
cateogries and all other categories in the data set, without
taking the closeness of table cells into consideration.

4

The similarity computation is, in this paper, achieved
using MCA [6], as described in section 3. However, any
technique able to compute similarities between categories
can be used.
The quantification process is performed in an interactive environment where the user is able to view and influence the result of the process. The data set is visualized
using parallel coordinates, which is chosen because it is
a technique where distance is easily perceived and where
a large number of variables can be visualized simultaneously. Combined with a Graphical User Interface (GUI,
figure 2) the parallel coordinates are used as a visual interface. The colour of the axes of the parallel coordinates
indicates variable type, as set by the user, using white axes
for categorical variables and grey for continuous. Initially
categories are ordered according to their occurence in the
data set.

Interactive quantification of categorical
variables

This paper presents an interactive quantification process
for the categorical variables in mixed data sets. The work
flow of the process is shown in figure 1 and can be divided
into three main steps:
1. Categorization of continuous variables in order to fit
them into a table.
2. Computation of similarities between categories.

5

Categorical
Bin 1

Bin 2

Bin 3

A

2

1

1

B

1

1

1

C

1

1

2

D

1

2

1

A
B
C
D

Continuous
Bin 1

Bin 2

Bin 3

Figure 3: The contingency table of a categorical and a continuous variable when the continuous variable has been categorized by division into three equally sized bins.

4.1

Figure 4: Interactive categorization of a continuous variable. A category center point is set and the range of the
category is adjusted by moving the sliders. Category belonging is indicated by colour.

Categorization of continuous data

Since MCA is applied to Burt tables the continuous
variables of a mixed data set have to be categorized. For
this the continuous variables are displayed in separate parallel coordinates in the interactive environment.
In the categorization process the numerical distances of
the continuous variables need to be taken into consideration, since the MCA process is only affected by cell frequencies and not by the closeness of table cells. If a continuous variable is divided into a number of equally sized
bins along an axis, as in figure 3, a bin would be considered to be just as close to the bin farthest away as it is to an
adjacent bin in the MCA process. When MCA is applied to
the table in figure 3, bin 1 is considered to be just as close
to bin 2 as it is to bin 3. This leads to a loss of similarity information contained in the continuous variables, a loss that
can be reduced by using a more effective categorization.

s(i) =

b(i) − a(i)
max(a(i), b(i))

(5)

A silhouette value of 1 indicates that i is assigned to an
appropriate cluster, whereas a value of -1 indicates that i is
missclassified. An adequate number of clusters are found
if the quality of the clustering is acceptable based on the
silhouette values of the data items, e.g. if 80% of the data
items has got a silhouette value above 0.75.
In this paper k-means clustering [16] is used since it
is a straightforward and commonly used algorithm. However, any clustering algorithm can be used. Some clustering techniques are influenced by random processes and due
to this two clusterings of the same data set are not necessarily identical, although equally relevant. To reduce the
influence of any random process the category similarities
are computed a number of times with MCA, using a new
clustering and updating the Burt table for every computation. The mean similarity values of all computations are
used for quantification.
Figure 5 displays the results using two different categorization methods, visualized in parallel coordinates. The
left axis represents a categorical variable and the remaining axes represent continuous variables. The distribution
of data along the continuous variables implies that the blue
category is closer to the red category than it is to the green
category, and that the green category is closer to the red
category than it is to the blue category. In figure 5(a) categorization is achieved by dividing the axes into ten equally
sized bins, and in figure 5(b) by clustering. As can be seen
the quantification in figure 5(b), where the green category
is closer to the red category than to the blue, agrees more
with the expected result than the quantification in figure

Two categorization possibilities are suggested in this paper. The first is an interactive category assignment performed by the user. This categorization is achieved by assigning a category center to one of the continuous variables, and then setting the range of the category using sliders, as shown in figure 4. The second categorization possibility is to apply a clustering algorithm to the continuous variables of the data set, and by this divide the continuous data into bins based on the distance of data items.
An appropriate number of clusters are found using the silhouette approach described in Rousseeuw [19], where the
relative quality of a cluster is defined as a ratio between
the within dissimilarity and the between dissimilarities of
the clusters. For each data item i of a cluster A the average dissimilarity, a(i), of i to all other items in A is computed, as well as the average dissimilarity, d(i, C), of i
to the data items in any other cluster, C. The silhouette
value of an item, s(i), is computed using equation 5 where
b(i) = minC=A (d(i, C)) is the average dissimilarity of i
and its neighbour cluster.

6

First dim.

First dim.
Yellow

Yellow

Green

Green

Turquoise
Blue
Black

Red

Red

Turq./Blue

Second dim.

Black

Second dim.

Figure 6: The distance of colour categories after a quantification process (left). The T urquoise and Blue categories
are close to each other and are hence grouped, using their
mean value to represent the new category (right)

(a) Categorization by dividing the axes into ten equally sized bins

Table 4: The contingency table (table 1) where difference
between the frequencies of first and last row is affected by
a weight factor of 0.5.
Senior Managers
Junior Managers
Senior Employers
Junior Employers
Secretaries
Total

(b) Categorization using the mean similarity values of ten k-means clusterings

Figure 5: Quantification in a mixed data set using different
categorization methods for the continuous data. The left
axis visualizes a categorical variable, the remaining variables are continuous.

Table 5: The normalized values of the first principal axes of
the original (left) and weighted (right) contingency tables.
Senior Managers
0.4922 0.4855
Junior Managers
1
1
Senior Employers
0
0
Junior Employers 0.9593 0.9817
Secretaries
0.2806 0.3516

5(a), where the green category is closer to the blue category than to the red.

4.2

None Light Medium Heavy Total
4
2
3
2
11
4
3
7
4
18
25
10
12
4
51
18
24
33
13
88
7
4
5
2
18
58
43
60
25 186

Interactive analysis and modification

When categorization is achieved and MCA is applied a
quantification based on the first principal axis of the MCA
is displayed in the bottom parallel coordinates of the interactive environment (figure 2). At this time the user can
analyse the result and interactively modify the quantification.
For high cardinality variables categories can be grouped
together to reduce the number of categories. Categories
that are similar are quantified to values close to each other,
and based on this a grouping of categories that are sufficiently close can be done. The categories of a variable are
displayed in a two dimensional scatter plot, where the categories are mapped onto the first and second independent
dimension, obtained from the MCA. Categories whose distance is smaller than a threshold value, set by the user,
are grouped and their mean value is used as quantification
value, as shown in figure 6. By using both the first and
second independent dimension more of the variance and
similarities within the data set are taken into consideration
during the grouping process than if only the first dimension is used. However, if preferred the analyst can choose

to base the grouping on the first dimension only. Besides
this an interactive grouping can be performed by selecting
several categories that are to be grouped together.
The categories can be interactively reordered by employing a drag and drop approach to the categories of a
selected variable, or reordered by recomputation of the category similarities. As shown in figure 1 recomputation
can be accomplished in two ways, both followed by MCA:
1) recategorization of the continuous variables using the
available methods described in section 4.1, 2) addition of a
weight factor to the distance between categories.
The weight factor is used to influence the similarities
of two categories, and affects the frequencies in the Burt
table before applying MCA. The difference between table
row frequencies is changed relative to the weighting factor. Table 4 shows table 1 with a weighting factor of 0.5
affecting the similarity between senior managers and secretaries, as can be seen the frequency difference between

7

senior manager and secretaries are halved for each column.
The quantification achieved by applying CA is altered according to the weight factor, as shown in table 5 where the
center column is the normalized first principal axis of the
original contingency table (table 1) and the right column
is the normalized first principal axis of the weighted contingency table (table 4). When an adequate quantification
is achieved the transformed data is stored to enable future
analysis and visualization of the data set.

5

Result

Two mixed data sets, available at [20], are used to
demonstrate the result. The first contains information on
automobiles, with variables such as fuel type, engine location and weight. It contains 205 data items and is made up
of 10 categorical and 16 continuous variables. The second
data set is made up of 7 categorical and 8 continuous variables, containing 194 data items. It contains information
related to flags of different countries, containing variables
such as country name, religion, language and main hue.
To demonstrate the result of the proposed quantification
process the categorical variables of the automobile data set
are quantified using two methods. Figure 7(a) displays the
quantification result when applying MCA only to the categorical variables of the data set. Two car makes, Mazda
and Subaru, are pointed out with red arrows. In figure 7(b)
the quantification process is based on the whole mixed data
set, using clustering to categorize the continuous data and
applying MCA to the categorical variables as well as the
cluster information, as described in section 4. The quantification values present a suggestion of similarities and dissimilarities between categories. When the whole data set
is taken into consideration (figure 7(b)) Mazda and Subaru
are positioned close to each other, and are hence considered similar, whereas they are considered more different
from each other when applying MCA solely to the categorical variables.
By taking a closer look at the continuous values of the
data items belonging to the Mazda and Subaru categories
(figure 8) it is visible that the data items follow a similar
pattern along these variables. Hence, the Mazda and Subaru categories should be considered to be more similar to
each other if the whole data set is to be taken into consideration than if the quantification is based on the categorical
variables only. As shown in figure 7(b) this is the result
when using clustering to categorize the continuous data.
Assume that the data analyst has got some knowledge of
the data that is to be analysed, for instance on similarities of
categories within some of the categorical variables. This is
knowledge that a fully automatic process would not make
use of, which the quantification process described in this
paper is able to utilize.
The analyst of the automobile data set might for in-

(a) Quantification is achieved by applying MCA to the categorical variables solely.

(b) Quantification is achieved by applying MCA to the whole mixed
data set, using clustering to categorize the continuous data.

Figure 7: The categorical variables of the automobile data
set after quantification. Two car makes, Mazda and Subaru, are pointed out with red arrows.

stance has some knowlegde on drive wheels, and does not
consider the result of the quantification process (figure 9,
left) to agree with her/his knowledge. By adding weight
values to the drive wheel categories, as described in section 4.2, the analyst can adjust the result. The weighting
performed by the analyst uses the fwd category as starting point. Weight values are set to the other categories
based on their distance to fwd (figure 9, left) and on the
knowledge of the analyst. Assume as an example that the
analyst has the opinion that fwd is more similar to rwd
than to 4wd. According to this the rwd category is given

8

Figure 10: The categories of the names variable mapped
to the first two dimensions of the MCA. Colour indicates
group belonging.

Figure 8: The continuous values of the Mazda and Subaru
data items. The data items follow a similar pattern and the
categories should thus be positioned closer if quantifying
based on the whole data set, compared to when quantifying
using only the categorical data.

Figure 9: Quantification of drive wheel categories before (left) and after (right) category weighting is applied.
Wheight values are given based on distance to the fwd category, which is pointed out together with the rwd category,
that where given a low weight value.

Figure 11: Cardinality of the names variable before (left)
and after (right) grouping is performed.

of the MCA. The colour of the glyphs represent the group
belonging when a distance threshold of 0.1 is used. The
mean values of the groups are used to represent the categories within. By grouping the data the clutter of the names
variable is reduced without loosing the overall structure of
the data, as shown in figure 11, where the cardinality before (left) and after (right) grouping is displayed.

a low weight value (below one) whereas 4wd is given a
high weight value (above one). The quantification result
succeding the weight process is shown on the right axis
in figure 9. As can be seen rwd has moved closer to the
fwd category, whereas 4wd has moved further away from
it, according to the weighting of the analyst.
The categorical data of the flags data set are quantified
using ten cluster iterations. Figure 11 (left) displays the result of the quantification for the names and landmass variables. As can be seen names is a high cardinality variable
where the number of categories cause clutter in the display. To reduce the number of categories for this variable
the grouping possibility using the first two independent dimensions of the MCA is employed. Figure 10 displays the
name categories mapped to the first and second dimension

6 Conclusions and future work
This paper has presented a process for quantification
of categorical variables in mixed data sets, using Multiple Correspondence Analysis, where information about relationships among the continuous variables was incorporated into the process by categorization of the continuous
data, using clustering. An interactive environment is provided, in which the user is able to control and influence the

9

quantification process and analyse the result, using parallel coordinates as a visual interface. The environment offers possibilities of interactive categorization of continuous variables, different ways of reordering the categories
as well as grouping of categories in high cardinality variables.
The presented results indicate that clustering of the continuous variables is an effective way of incorporating relationship information of the continuous data into Multiple
Correspondence Analysis. It has also been shown that the
proposed weighting of categories results in a quantification
that is influenced by the relationships within the data set as
well as by the domain knowledge of the user.
Future work includes incorporation of further distance
computation and clustering techniques into the interactive
environment, as well as implementation of additional interactivity and data analysis techniques to improve the process. Furthermore, an evaluation of the efficiency of the
quantification process and interactive environment will be
carried out.

[10] Alfred Inselberg. The plane with parallel coordinates.
The Visual Computer, 1(4):69–91, 1985.

References

[14] Robert Kosara, Fabian Bendix, and Helwig Hauser.
Parallel sets: Interactive exploration and visual analysis of categorical data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(4):558–568,
2006.

[11] Mikael Jern, Sara Johansson, Jimmy Johansson, and
Johan Franz´en. The gav toolkit for multiple linked
views. In Fifth International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization, CMV ’07, pages 85–97. IEEE Computer Society, July 2007.
[12] Brian Johnson and Ben Shneiderman. Tree-maps: A
space filling appoach to the visualization of hierarchical information structures. In Proceedings of IEEE
Conference on Visualization 1991, pages 284–291,
October 1991.
[13] Erica Kolatch and Beth Weinstein.
Cattrees:
Dynamic visualization of categorical data using
treemaps. http://www.cs.umd.edu/class/spring2001/
cmsc838b/Project/Kolatch Weinstein/index.html,
May 2001.

[1] Michael Friendly. Mosaic displays for multi-way
contingency tables. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 89(425):190–200, 1994.
[2] Michael Friendly.
Extending mosaic displays:
Marginal, conditional, and partial views of categorical data. Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics, 8(3):373–395, 1999.

[15] Sheng Ma and Joseph L. Hellerstein. Ordering categorical data to improve visualization. In IEEE Information Visualization Symposium Late Breaking Hot
Topics, pages 15–18, 1999.

[3] Michael Friendly. Visualizing categorical data: Data,
stories, and pictures. In Proceedings of the TwentyFifth Annual SAS Users Group International Conference, April 2000.

[16] Boris Mirkin. Clustering for data mining a data recovery approach. Chapman & Hall, 2005.
[17] Anilkumar Patro, Matthew O. Ward, and Elke A.
Rundensteiner. Seamless integration of diverse data
types into exploratory visualization systems. Technical report, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, 2003.

[4] Gav framework. http://vita.itn.liu.se/gav, 2008.
[5] Gene H. Golub and William Kahan. Calculating the
singular values and pseudo-inverse of a matrix. J.
SIAM Numer. Anal., Ser. B(2):205–224, 1965.

[18] Geraldine E. Rosario, Elke A. Rundensteiner,
David C. Brown, Matthew O. Ward, and Shiping
Huang. Mapping nominal values to numbers for
effective visualization. Information Visualization,
3(2):80–95, 2004.

[6] Michael Greenacre. Multiple Correspondence Analysis and Related Methods. Chapman & Hall, 2006.
[7] Michael Greenacre. Correspondence Analysis in
Practice, 2. ed. Chapman & Hall, 2007.

[19] Peter J. Rousseeuw. Silhouettes: a graphical aid to
the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis.
Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics,
20(1):53–65, 1987.

[8] Susan L. Havre, Anuj Shah, Christian Posse, and
Bobbie-Jo Webb-Robertson. Diverse information integration and visualization. In Proceedings of SPIE
- The International Society for Optical Engineering,
January 2006.

[20] Uci machine learning repository.
http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/, 2008.

[9] Heike Hofmann. Categorical displays of a million
cases. Technical Report 2, ISU Statistics Series,
2004.

10

