12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Coordinated and Multiple Views for Visualizing Text Collections
Danilo Medeiros Eler

Fernando Vieira Paulovich
Maria Cristina Ferreira de Oliveira
Rosane Minghim
Instituto de Ciˆencias Matem´aticas e de Computac¸a˜ o, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo
Av. Trabalhador S˜ao-carlense, 400 S˜ao Carlos, SP, Brazil
{eler,paulovic,cristina,rminghim}@icmc.usp.br
Abstract

collections, CMV techniques are necessary due to the
various possible representations of such collections and
also due to the inherent semantics. In this paper we
propose a framework for coordinating multiple views of
document collections. The visualizations dealt with are
mostly based on multi-dimensional projections and point
placement strategies, commonly used to display multidimensional data sets. The goal is to provide a mechanism
that favors gaining insight by analyzing relationships across
different views.
The following section presents a background on visualization of text collections; previous work in coordinating
views of document collections and in coordination models
is reviewed in Section 3. Section 4 introduces the coordination framework proposed, and Section 5 exemplifies its instantiation on a particular text visualization system. Finally,
conclusions and further work are addressed in Section 6.

Multiple Views have been put forward as an alternative to assist exploration of evolving phenomena or associations between distinct data sets or distinct presentations
of a single data set. Coordinating between views is a challenge that must be met to improve visualization support
for exploratory tasks. This is particularly true for highdimensional data, such as document collections. We introduce a coordination framework for multiple views of document collections created using projections and point placement visualizations. Coordination can occur between different views of a single data set or between views of multiple data sets. Multiple coordinations are also admitted.
Three new types of coordination are presented to illustrate
the framework; these have been implemented in a multipurpose multi-dimensional visualization system called PEx
(Projection Explorer).

2
1

Introduction

Content-based text visualizations can assist users in exploring information and finding relevant reading material
in increasingly complex document collections. A common
approach to extract structure from text collections is to apply a dimension reduction technique over a vector representation of the collection. In particular, multidimensional
projections [16] have been intensively explored in this context. They typically map the document vectors into a pdimensional space where p = {1, 2, 3}, while retaining, in
the projected space, information about similarity relationships among the documents in their original vector space.
In other words, documents with similar content are expected
to be projected closer than those with different content.
The typical process to create this kind of document map
requires first creating a multidimensional vector representation of the collection. The vector space model is created by
mapping each document into a vector whose spatial coordinates are calculated from the frequency of its relevant terms.
The set of resulting vectors form a matrix of documents x

Interacting with multiple visualizations to analyze a single data set, or to associate patterns present in different data
sets [8] is one approach to overcome drawbacks of specific
visualization techniques and increase the exploration capability offered by visualization systems. Nonetheless, showing different views is likely to overload the user, who must
adapt to different contexts. Coordinated multiple views
(CMV), where actions performed in one view are propagated to others according to some semantically meaningful
effect, help users to benefit from the different views effectively. Many challenging problems remain in developing
CMV-based visualization systems. These systems are not
only expected to handle very large data, they must also handle complex patterns from multiple data sources [6]. The literature hitherto focuses mostly on the multiple views, rather
than on the coordination process.
In the particular case of visualizing textual document

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.39

Background

246

terms in which each term is weighted according to its term
frequency inverse document frequency (tfidf) [13].
The following step is to employ a (usually cosine-based)
distance metric [5] to calculate the dissimilarity between the
documents as the distance amongst their vectors; finally a
multidimensional projection technique (e.g., LSP [11]) or a
point placement strategy (e.g. the NJ projection [4]) may
be applied to create the visual representation, also called a
document map. The map represents documents as points,
or nodes, on a plane, taking advantage of the user’s ability to recognize clusters of elements – as point proximity
supposedly indicates content similarity among documents.
A common visual representation employs circles to represent the documents, and possibly edges to represent relationships amongst them.
This is the overall approach adopted in the PEx (Projection Explorer), a visualization system [12] for multidimensional data which also handles text 1 . Figure 1 shows PEx
main window, as well as three different document maps being coordinated. Some interesting features of the system in
the context of this work are: (1) it offers different ways of
identifying the neighbors of a document – depicted as edges
on the map – based either on the distances on the plane or
on the original multidimensional space; (2) it displays topics – shown by yellow boxes – automatically extracted from
the documents to help users in identifying the main subjects
discussed on certain areas; (3) it allows additional information to be mapped to the color or size of the circles, e.g., the
frequency of a particular word or group of words.
Although PEx has distinctive features regarding the
projection techniques used and the interactions provided,
other text visualization solutions are available that also
employ projections to generate document maps, such as
Infosky [1] and Galaxies [18], both incorporated into the
IN-SPIRET M system2 . Coordinations discussed here are
meaningful for any documents maps generated with point
projection and placement techniques.

3

Figure 1. PEx main window with three maps
in coordination.

evolution over time, analyzing word co-occurrence to detect trends and research topics in a specific domain.
A system by Seeling and Becks [14] employs CMV to
explore both structured and unstructured data. It allows
topic exploration in a document map through a view which
shows a pre-defined ontology. Selecting a topic in the
ontology visualization highlights related objects in other
views. Nonetheless, limited work has been reported hitherto on general approaches to coordinate document maps.
Many solutions adopt straightforward coordinations, eg.
brushing-and-linking. Solutions that support coordinated
exploration focused on topics usually require a pre-defined
ontology [7] or are applicable to a specific domain [15].
Previous work on general coordination models is motivated by the need for flexible coordination mechanisms,
which requires a model to formalize how the information is exchanged among the multiple views, specifying
what elements can be coordinated, and how. Such an
approach is adopted in the Snap Together Visualization
environment[10]. Snap is actually an architecture conceived
to integrate multiple views created with tools from different developers, while still supporting coordinated views. A
flexible coordination model is based on the databases underlying relational data model. The visualizations represent
a table or a relation from database, where graphical markers map data records and markers graphical properties map
data attributes. A coordination among different views can
be described based on the relational joints defined among
the data tables displayed in the multiple views.
Another attempt to create general coordination models is
reported by Boukhelifa and Rodgers [2], whose model handles multiple aspects in different stages of a visualization
process (e.g., data preprocessing and data mapping, in addition to data display). Coordination objects implement dif-

Related Work

The complexity of patterns found in general textual data
sets poses a major challenge, which may be faced by coordinating multiple visualizations of these patterns Heijs [6].
In fact, coordinated views in document-related visualizations are common. For example, the Citespace II system
[3], which visualizes co-citation networks, employs multiple views to explore the evolution of the knowledge domain,
displaying the most frequent words along time. Mane and
B¨orner [9] also proposed techniques to analyze document
1 PEx can be accessed at http://infoserver.lcad.icmc.
usp.br
2 see http://in-spire.pnl.gov/

247

Fto (ρ, σ) = [id1 , . . . , idn ]: given a vector space model
and a topic (set of terms), returns the IDs of all documents associated to this topic in the map; i.e., those documents whose vector models include all the terms defining
the topic;
Fct (ρ1 , ρ2 ) = T S: given two vector space model matrices, returns the set of terms common to both;
Fcm (M, T S) = ρc : given a map and a set of terms,
returns a new vector space model matrix formed only by
the terms in T S;
Fnn (ρ, v, k) = [id1 , . . . , idk ]: given a vector space
model matrix and a document vector, returns the k nearest
neighbors of the document in the given space model.

ferent types of coordination, and translation functions are
implemented for views to communicate with coordination
objects. Weaver proposed a coordination model [17] for a
visualization system called Improvise, also based on the relational data model. It combines a mechanism of direct coordination named Live Properties, that admits user interaction through views, sliders and other widgets, with a mechanism of indirect coordination named Coordinated Queries,
which is a visual abstraction language. The result is a powerful interactive system in which users can interactively create, destroy, coordinate, and specify the contents of views.
In the following section we introduce a proposal for
coordinating multiple general document maps, created directly from the textual contents. Our goal is to illustrate the
exploratory power that coordination may add to knowledge
discovery tasks in text collections, describing the elements
that define a map and how they can be coordinated.

4

Now, given two document maps, Ms e Md , the goal of
a coordination mechanism is to establish an association between elements from both maps according to some semantics that is meaningful to an analyst. This will ultimately
require associating a list of document IDs from the source
map with a list of associated document IDs in the destination map. Many different ways of establishing such an association are possible - in the following we describe three
of them.
Identity Coordination
Given a source map and a destination map, Ms and Md ,
when a user selects a sub-set of documents in Ms the corresponding documents, if present, are highlighted in Md .
A set of 2D spatial positions defines the user selected
documents on Ms . Therefore, function Fpd is employed to
recover the corresponding document IDs, let us call this resulting set IDMs , where IDMs ⊆ ΔMs . These IDs specify
the documents to be highlighted in Md .
Distance Coordination
Given Ms and Md , when a document is selected on Ms its k
nearest neighbor documents on Md are indicated (k is user
defined). The similarities are computed based on a vector
model formed by the terms common to both maps.
Again, the 2D spatial position of the selected documents
defines a vector of document positions. Function Fpd is
employed to recover the corresponding document IDs, let
us call the resulting set IDMs . A new vector space model
is constructed for map Md using the terms common to both
Ms and Md - common terms may be obtained with function
Fct , and the new vector model ρc is constructed using function Fcm . Given each document in set IDMs , function Fnn
can be employed to obtain the IDs of its k nearest neighbors
in ρc , and these are highlighted.
Topic Coordination
Given a set of topics identified in a source map Ms , all documents in a destination map Md that contain terms appearing in the given topics are identified. The coordination only
needs to use function Fto on map Md to get the set of document IDs for highlighting.

Modeling Coordination
A document map may be described by a tuple:
M = Δ, ρ, P, δn , T

where M is the map, and each element is described in the
following:
Documents (Δ): set of the unique identifiers (IDs) of
all documents contained in the map. Universal document
identifiers are defined for any document contained in a corpus to be visualized;
Vector Space Model (ρ): documents x terms matrix,
each line is a vector that represents a particular document,
identified by its ID;
Spatial Positions (P ): vector containing the 2D spatial
projected coordinates of each document;
nD Distances (δn ): distance matrix in the original vector space, each line informs the distance of a particular document to all the others, computed in the n-dimensional vector space;
Topics (T ): set of topics associated with the map, at a
particular time. Each topic consists of one or multiple terms
of the vector space model.
In addition to the above elements, a set of functions may
be defined to recover information as required by a particular
coordination mechanism. A sample of possible functions 3
that can be defined is described below:
Fpd (M, spi ) = IDi : given a map and a 2D spatial coordinate, returns the ID of a corresponding document;
Fdv (ρ, d) = v: given a vector space model matrix and a
document ID, returns the corresponding document vector;
3 Function names relate to their input and output parameters. The meaning of each function is: Fpd - Function Position Document; Fdv - Function
Document Vector; Fto - Function Topic; Fct - Function Common Terms;
Fcm - Function Common Model; Fnn - Function Nearest Neighbors

248

pus. Some documents have been selected and the topic represented by the words “data, visualization, view, information” was identified as representative of the selection. Topic
identification in the maps is performed automatically by an
algorithm based on co-occurrence of terms[12] in the selected document sub-set.
Now, we want to find papers related to this topic that
appeared in the other two conferences. Figure 3(b) shows
a document map, created with the LSP projection [11],
of papers from IV and InfoVis. By activating the Topic
Coordination between both maps, documents related to the
topic of interest identified in the NJ map are highlighted
in the LSP one. In this case, all documents in the LSP
map that share the set of terms appearing in the topic
(namely, “data, visualization, view, information’) are thus
highlighted. The most significant documents highlighted
have been labeled with their titles.

Figure 2. Illustrating Identity Coordination.
Note that coordinations may be established among a
source map and multiple destination maps, in similar fashion.

5

The coordination mechanism supports the simultaneous
activation of different coordinations on a set of maps.
Figure 4 illustrates the use of two types of coordination
simultaneously. Three views are shown, created from
two different data sets, employing distinct projection
techniques. The main view (Figure 4(c) depicts an LSP
projection of the corpus formed by grouping the IV and
InfoVis papers. Some documents have been selected on
this map and related with the topic “knowledge, visualization”. This map is coordinated with other two views,
both depicting NJ maps of the CMV corpus, using the
Distance and Topic coordinations, respectively. Figure 4(a)
shows the documents highlighted in the CMV map by
the Distance Coordination and Figure 4(b) shows the
documents highlighted in the CMV map by the Topic
Coordination. In the top map, the documents highlighted
are those most similar in content to those selected in the
main view. In this case, the two nearest neighbors to each
selected document in the main view are highlighted. In
the middle map, the documents highlighted are those that
include the topic terms, ’knowledge’ and ’visualization’,
generated in the main view.

Instantiating the Model: Coordination in
PEx

The above coordinations have been implemented within
the Projection Explorer (PEx) tool. Figure 2 illustrates
the identity coordination at work. The three maps at
the top have been built using three different document
collections on different scientific subjects – Case-Based
Reasoning (CBR), Inductive Logic Programming (ILP),
and Information Retrieval (IR) (from left to right). The
bottom map has been created from these three collections
put together. On the bottom map a group of documents is
selected containing CBR and IR documents. Note that the
group is still identifiable on the CBR map (top left), but it
is split into two on the IR map (top right). If this map is
zoomed out, the two separate groups are actually visible
on the bottom map. In this case, position coordination
gives the user both an overview and a detailed view of a
document collection.

6

Figure 3 illustrates a Topic Coordination between two
different document maps, created with distinct projection
techniques and document collections. Three document collections are available that contain papers published at three
information visualization conferences, namely the Coordinated & Multiple Views (CMV) conference (corpus includes
papers from 2003 to 2007), the Information Visualization
Conference (IV) and the IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (InfoVis), the latter two corpora including papers published in editions from 2000 to 2006.
Figure 3(a) shows an NJ projection [4] of the CMV cor-

Conclusions

We have shown that a coordination framework may be
defined to explore multiple views of document collections
that allows coordinating different types of information embedded in the document maps. A set of possible coordinations was introduced, namely identity, topic and distance
coordinations, which can help users to investigate different
visual representations simultaneously and associate related
document collections.
The Topic Coordination approach relates sets of docu-

249

(a) Distance Coordination of CMV documents.

(a) NJ projection representing CMV documents
(2003 to 2007).

(b) Topic Coordination of CMV papers.

(b) LSP projection of IV and InfoVis documents (2000 to
2006).

Figure 3. Topic Coordination between two different projections of two different document
collections.
(c) Main view (IV and InfoVis documents).

Figure 4. Topic Coordination and Distance
Coordination.

250

ments in a very useful way for exploratory tasks. Once the
user selects a group of documents in a view and the group
is identified with a topic, the Topic Coordination highlights,
in the remaining views, those documents that include the
terms defining that topic.
The Distance Coordination technique has several interesting applications. For instance, consider a document collection that has been split into several sub-collections based
on the dates of its documents, and that different projections
have been created for each sub-collection. It is possible to
coordinate the resulting views to explore similarity relationships between documents created in different time periods.
In the case of scientific papers, this can help to locate seminal papers - e.g., papers that bear no content similarity to
their contemporary documents in the same map, but bear
similarity to documents that appeared later, and are thus
present in subsequent maps. Distance coordination may
also be employed to detect the emergence of new research
areas.
Concerning CMV, we are concentrating efforts on coordination techniques in order to propose novel ways to discover relationships and patterns between different data sets,
or variations of the same data set, using functional coordinations. These techniques do not rely on using a single data
set, as usual in most systems that implement coordination,
but are based on establishing a functional link between documents displayed in different views.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

7

Acknowledgements

This work is supported FAPESP (the State of So
Paulo Research Funding Agency) grants 2004/07866-4
and 2007/04241-1 and CNPq (the Brazilian Research
Funding Agency) grants 305861/2006-9,305861/2006-9,
304758/2005-1 and 4256/2007-6.

[13]
[14]

References
[15]

[1] K. Andrews, W. Kienreich, V. Sabol, J. Becker, G. Droschl,
F. Kappe, M. Granitzer, P. Auer, and K. Tochtermann.
The InfoSky visual explorer: exploiting hierarchical structure and document similarities. Information Visualization,
1(3/4):166–181, 2002.
[2] N. Boukhelifa and P. Rodgers. A model and software system
for coordinated and multiple views in exploratory visualization. Information Visualization, 2(4):258–269, December
2003.
[3] C. Chen. Citespace ii: Detecting and visualizing emerging
trends and transient patterns in scientific literature. J. Am.
Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol., 57(3):359–377, 2006.
[4] A. M. Cuadros, F. V. Paulovich, R. Minghim, and G. P.
Telles. Point placement by phylogenetic trees and its application for visual analysis of document collections. In

[16]

[17]

[18]

251

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007, pages 99–106, Sacramento, CA, USA, 2007.
C. Faloutsos and K. Lin. Fastmap: A fast algorithm for indexing, datamining and visualization of traditional and multimedia databases. In ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, pages 163–174, San Jose-CA,
USA, 1995. ACM Press: New York.
A. Heijs. Requirements for coordinated multiple view visualization systems for industrial applications. In CMV ’07:
Proc. of the Fifth International Conference on Coordinated
and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization, pages 76–
79, Washington, DC, USA, 2007. IEEE Computer Society.
O. Hoeber and X. D. Yang. Exploring web search results
using coordinated views. In CMV ’06: Proc. of the Fourth
International Conference on Coordinated & Multiple Views
in Exploratory Visualization, pages 3–13, Washington, DC,
USA, 2006. IEEE Computer Society.
D. A. Keim and H. Kriege. Visualization techniques for mining large databases: A comparison. IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering, 8(6):923–938, 1996.
K. Mane and K. Borner. Mapping topics and topic bursts in
pnas. volume 101, pages 5287–5290, 2004.
C. North and B. Shneiderman. Snap-together visualization:
A user interface for coodinating visualizations via relational
schemata. In Advanced Visual Interfaces, pages 128–135,
2000.
F. V. Paulovich, L. G. Nonato, R. Minghim, and H. Levkowitz. Least square projection: a fast high precision multidimensional projection technique and its application to document mapping. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 14(3):564–575, 2008.
F. V. Paulovich, M. C. F. Oliveira, and R. Minghim. The projection explorer: A flexible tool for projection-based multidimensional visualization. In Proc. of the XX Brazilian Symposium on Computer Graphics and Image Processing - SIBGRAPI, pages 27–36, Belo Horizonte, Brazil, 2007. IEEE
CS Press.
G. Salton. Developments in automatic text retrieval. Science, 253:974–980, 1991.
C. Seeling and A. Becks. Analysing associations of textual and relational data with a multiple views system. In
Second International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization, pages 61–70. IEEE
Computer Society, 2004.
A. Spoerri. Coordinating linear and 2d displays to support
exploratory search. In CMV ’07: Proc. of the Fifth International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in
Exploratory Visualization, pages 16–26, Washington, DC,
USA, 2007. IEEE Computer Society.
E. Tejada, R. Minghim, and L. G. Nonato. On improved
projection techniques to support visual exploration of multidimensional data sets. Information Visualization, 2(4):218–
231, 2003.
C. Weaver. Building highly-coordinated visualizations in
improvise. In INFOVIS ’04: Proc. of the IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization, pages 159–166, Washington,
DC, USA, 2004. IEEE Computer Society.
J. A. Wise. The ecological approach to text visualization.
J. of the American Soc. for Inf. Sci., 50(13):1224–1233,
November 1999.

