12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Similarity-Based Visualization of Time Series Collections: An Application to
Analysis of Streamflows
A. B. Alencar, F. V. Paulovich, R. Minghim, M. G. Andrade, M. C. F. Oliveira
Instituto de Ciˆencias Matem´aticas e de Computac¸a˜ o, Universidade de S˜ao Paulo
{aretha,paulovic,rminghim,marinho,cristina}@icmc.usp.br

Abstract

by mapping data on a low-dimensional space (e.g., 1D, 2D
or 3D), while striving to lay out largely similar points close
to each other. A similarity measurement is, therefore, a required companion to projections. For time series, several
known similarity measurements may be employed.
We use multidimensional projections to create interactive visualizations of time series collections. Large collections can be handled under this framework, irrespectively
of the series size (number of observations). As a proofof-concept, we implement techniques and supporting interaction functionalities into a new tool called Temporal-PEx.
To illustrate the effectiveness of this approach a case study
is presented on data containing time series built from (real
and simulated) measurements of streamflows at hydroelectric power plants that integrate the Brazilian electrical energy distribution system, for a period of 75 years.
In the following section, we review some existing techniques for visualizing time series data, particularly those
that handle multiple series simultaneously to support comparison tasks. Section 3 describes the basics of the underlying tools for the problem addressed, namely multidimensional projections and time series (dis)similarity measures.
Section 4 introduces Temporal-PEx. In Section 5 we illustrate its application to the analysis of streamflow data.

Time series analysis poses many challenges to professionals in a wide range of domains. Several visualization
solutions have been proposed for exploratory tasks on time
series collections. For large data sets, however, current
techniques fail to provide a global view that supports a good
association between groups of similar time series. We employ fast multidimensional projection techniques to create
concise visual representations of a collection of time series.
The whole collection can be viewed in a two-dimensional
graph-based representation that provides a starting point
for further exploration and detailed analysis. The projections employ distance metrics to compare the series and
generate a layout that attempts to group those with similar behavior. We illustrate the approach on a real data set
containing streamflows describing the behavior of hydroelectric power plants in Brazil.

1. Introduction
Time series occur extensively in the real world, in application domains as diverse as epidemiology, biostatistics, engineering, and computer science. They consist of
a sequence of observations (measurable quantities) in time,
recorded usually at regular intervals. Time series may be
viewed as a high-dimensional data instance whose dimensionality equals the number of observations. Huge time series databases are widely available as computing becomes
ubiquitous, and the quest for faster and more reliable analysis tools receives increasing attention. The natural highdimensionality poses many challenges for effective analysis. Information visualization offers a range of interactive
representations that help uncovering relevant information,
even if knowledge about the data, or previous mining experience, are limited at first.
Multidimensional projections have been successfully
employed to generate global views of high-dimensional
data sets that can be embedded in metric spaces. They work

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.65

2. Related Work
Bar or line charts are standard visual representations for
time series, but they are clearly limited for handling multiple and long series. Many attempts have been made on
visualizing time series data, since pioneering work such as
the Calendar Visualizer [14] and the LifeLines [18] environment. The calendar metaphor has been revisited later [22],
aiming at identifying patterns and trends simultaneously on
multiple time scales. Nonetheless, the calendar semantics
is only meaningful for series governed by regular periodic
patterns.
Spirals are another useful representation for periodic series [4] [21]. The first solution displays data along a spiral to

280

highlight serial attributes along the spiral axis and periodic
ones along the radius. The second one introduces Spiral
Graphs to support detection and analysis of periodic behaviors, as well as comparison of data points and cycles. TimeSearcher [9] supports visual queries over a time series data
base with Timeboxes, interface widgets that can be directly
manipulated by users to specify query constraints over both
time and value intervals. Timebox queries, possibly specified over multiple time-varying attributes, are combined
with overview displays and query-by-example facilities.
The VizTree system [12] incorporates functionalities for
motif discovery, anomaly detection and query by content.
Time series are transformed into a string representation, using Symbolic Aggregate Approximation (SAX) [13]. Strings
are encoded in a modified suffix tree, and frequency and
other properties of patterns are mapped into colors and visual properties of the tree branches. The tree visualization
is a concise representation that use screen real state effectively, is independent of the series length and supports identification of interesting patterns. A difference tree that highlights pattern dissimilarities enables comparing two series.
Nonetheless, simultaneous comparison of several series is
not favored and interpreting trees requires some training.
Intelligent Icons [11] addresses the problem of allowing
users to efficiently navigate through large collections of series. The approach extracts features from a time series of
arbitrary length, and uses information about the their relative frequency to color a small informative icon in a principled way. The authors highlight the importance of arranging
the bitmaps by similarity to support effective exploration,
and employ an MDS algorithm to derive such a layout. A
distance measure computable from the bitmaps in constant
time is also defined, and is employed in several clustering
and classification tasks with good results. These icons can
be generated in linear time and constitute a concise representation for large series, allowing users to quickly compare
multiple series, identify anomalies, and perform query-bycontent searches. However, the number of series that can be
compared simultaneously is limited.
Hao et al. [7] also emphasize the importance of a meaningful layout to support exploration of large time series collections and introduce the idea of importance driven layout.
They display individual series with the familiar line and bar
charts, but multiple series are simultaneously arranged in
space filling layouts that reflect their relative importance
in the collection. Deriving an appropriate layout requires
ranking the series according to some importance measure
– whose definition is application dependent and will eventually demand a domain expert. Space filling approaches
guarantee no overlap even for large series, but still the number of series that can be inspected simultaneously is limited.
The space-filling approach is extended into a framework
for visualizing many time series that relies on time- and

data-dependent visual aggregation of the data, performed
along multiple resolution levels [8]. Distortion techniques
are applied to generate visually aggregated layouts that can
effectively represent long series, so that multiple series may
be simultaneously displayed and compared. The approach
is particularly effective to simultaneously compare a relatively small number of series from global to a detailed basis.
We address the same problem, namely visualizing large
time series data sets. Our approach is different, though, in
that it provides a global view of the whole data set – even
if it includes a few thousand series – in a 2D layout where
series are positioned based on their similarity. Thus, series with similar behavior will be placed close together in
the layout. This view acts as a global data map, providing an initial metaphor for interaction that allows users to
identify sub-groups of similar series, or outliers. They may
then focus on those smaller sub-groups, possibly resorting to metaphors such as the intelligent icons, importancedriven layouts or multi-resolution representations for detailed analysis and simultaneous comparison. Simultaneous analysis of a large collection of series requires a layout
that favors identification of similar behaviors. Though the
issue has been addressed in different ways, alternative approaches are still in need to support visualization of larger
databases. In exploratory scenarios, similarity-driven displays created with multidimensional projection techniques
provide a powerful and intuitive framework for navigating
multidimensional data, applicable to several domains [17].
In this work we investigate its application to time series.

3. Background
Multidimensional projections provide a general framework for creating interactive visual representations of highdimensional data. Several types of projection techniques
exist, but all of them share the same underlying concept:
data is projected from an m-dimensional space into a p-dimensional space with p = {1, 2, 3} and p << m, whilst
retaining, on the projected space, some information about
distance relationships among the m-dimensional data items.
Formally, let X = {x1 , . . . , xm } be an m-dimensional data
set, with δ : Rm , Rm → R a dissimilarity measure between
two m-dimensional data instances, and d : Rp , Rp → R a
distance (usually Euclidean) between two points on the projected space. Multidimensional projections seek to identify
a set of points P in Rp such that if f : X → P is a relation, then |δ(xi , xj ) − d(f (xi ), f (xj ))| is as close to zero
as possible, ∀xi , xj ∈ X.
Two projection techniques recently introduced in the literature have been applied to time series data: Interactive
Document Map (IDMAP) [15] and Least-Square Projection (LSP) [16]. IDMAP employs the FastMap [5] technique to obtain an initial projection of the points, which

281

are then repositioned using a strategy called Force Scheme
[20]. Force attempts to recover part of the information lost
in the projection process through a simplified version of a
force-based placement algorithm, that iteratively approximates points projected too far away and repels points projected closer than they should have.
If the data has inherent groupings, taking into account relationships among instances that belong to different groups
may distort the final projection. The LSP technique tries to
overcome this problem, defining a neighborhood relationship of the instances in Rm . It involves two main steps.
First, a subset of points S ⊂ X, called control points, are
projected onto Rp using a conventional projection method,
such as FastMap. Using the neighborhood relationship in
Rm and the projected Cartesian coordinates of the control
points in Rp , it is possible to build a linear system whose solutions are the projected coordinates of the data instances in
Rp . The IDMAP technique, though very precise, is O(n2 ).
LSP is both precise and fast, and enhances visual perception
of clusters, while IDMAP is more indicated if the data set is
not so large and relationships between instances belonging
to different groups are relevant to the analysis.
Most projection techniques require a measure of dissimilarity between the high-dimensional data instances, usually
expressed in the form of a distance function. Two measures
typically employed for time series are the Euclidean and
DTW distances. Given two series A = {a1 , . . . , an } and
B = {b1 , . . . , bn }, both of length n, the Euclidean distance
is computed by the following equation:

(a)

Figure 1. DTW: (a) Two time series slightly
out of phase in the time axis; (b) Warping
matrix used to align these series and find
the optimal warping path, shown with solid
squares.

the DTW distance:


T

DDTW (A, B) = min 


pt 

i=1

The optimal path may be found with dynamic programming. The major limitation of DTW is its time complexity
of O(n2 ), which can be handled by establishing a warping window (δ), defined as the subset of the matrix that the
warping path is allowed to visit. The gray area in Figure
1(b) illustrates a frequently used warping window, known as
the Sakoe-Chiba band [19]. This reduction on the warping
path speeds-up execution and avoids degenerate matchings.

n

(ai − bi )2

Deuclidean (A, B) =

(b)

i=1

4. The Exploration Tool

Though simple to compute, it produces poor results in
series that are similar in shape, but present relative distortion in the time axis. Moreover, it only applies to equallysized series. Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [3] is more
effective to handle series that have similar shape, but are locally out of phase, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). Computing
the DTW distance between two series A = {a1 , . . . , an }
and B = {b1 , . . . , bm } where n and m are not necessarily
equal requires building an n × m matrix whose (ith , j th )element stores the squared distance, (ai − bi )2 . A warping
path P is a contiguous set of matrix elements that defines
an alignment between A and B. The tth element of P is defined as pt = (i, j)t , and represents the alignment between
points ai and bj :
P = p1 , p2 , . . . , pt , . . . , pT ,

The above techniques were integrated in a tool to build
and explore similarity-based maps of time series. In the
following we describe its major functionalities for creating
data maps of temporal series.
A projection wizard guides users in creating a new projection. The first step is to define a data source. The
time series data source has an organization similar to the
Comma Separated Values (CSV) file format, with some
added header attributes. Header attributes may inform,
e.g., a previous known classification for the time series –
which may be useful, for example, to map the color of the
projected points to the class informed on these header attributes.
Some data preprocessing is typically required to improve
projection accuracy, and this is the next step handled by
the wizard. Three pre-processing procedures are available,
which may be activated by user choice: time series normalization, noise reduction, and a procedure to remove seasonal

max(n, m) ≤ T < n+m−1

Though an exponential number of warping paths exists,
the only relevant one is the path that minimizes the warping
cost, since the sum of the point distances in this path defines

282

patterns. Normalization is important to detect similar patterns in time series with different amplitude, scaling, etc.
Noise reduction is achieved by Simple Exponential Smoothing (SES) method [6], that requires choosing a smoothing
factor α, with 0 < α < 1. Seasonal patterns are removed by
subtracting from each data point the corresponding seasonal
mean, and then dividing by the seasonal standard deviation.
The third step is to choose a combination of projection
technique and time series dissimilarity measure. Our tool
implements IDMAP and LSP (see Section 3), as well as
the Euclidean and DTW dissimilarity measures. In the final
step the wizard allows setting a few general parameters and
specific parameters relative to the selected projection technique – in all cases default parameter values are offered.
The tool displays the resulting projection at its main window panel, illustrated in the screen shot shown in Figure
2, which displays an IDMAP projection of the Synthetic
Control time series data set [2]. This data set includes 600
synthetically generated control charts grouped in six different classes Normal, Cyclic, Increasing Trend, Decreasing
Trend, Upward Shift and Downward Shift. Each class is
represented by 100 time series with 60 data points each.
Conventional classification and clustering approaches
are often unable to separate the class pairs (Normal/Cyclic),
(Decreasing trend/Downward shift), and (Increasing trend/
Upward shift), which are examples of non-stationary time
series. Nonetheless, the projection generated using IDMAP
and the DTW distance achieves a good visual separation of
the classes. This example illustrates how a good projection
technique, coupled with an appropriate distance measure,
can be very effective to generate a data map that allows visual identification of groups of elements that present similar
behavior in a large data set.
The main window includes three panels: the projection
panel at the center, a time series labels panel at the top left
corner, and a details-on-demand panel at the bottom left corner. The projection panel shows the projected data points,
where each point depicts a single time series. A double click
over a particular point will display its corresponding time
line chart on a pop-up window. A right click over another
point causes its corresponding line chart to be appended to
the existing chart windows, so that multiple line charts may
be compared.
The labels panel shows descriptive labels associated to
each time series (labels must be informed in the data file).
The details-on-demand is a tabbed panel that displays information about a series: its data values, neighboring points,
i.e., its most similar series in the data set, and informative
statistics (mean, variance, minimum and maximum values).
The three panels are tightly coupled: selection of a point in
the projection panel highlights its associated time series label in the label panel (and vice versa) and displays its complementary information in the details-on-demand panel.

At the top toolbar three combo boxes allow mapping specific attributes of the series to the projection points. Two of
them allow one of the following attributes to be mapped
to point color or size, respectively: mean, variance, minimum value, maximum value or class. Classes may be informed in the data file, or they may be inferred, as long as
a training data set is supplied, by a nearest-neighbor algorithm based on a lower bounding measure of DTW [10].
The third combo box allows changing the policy adopted
to connect projected points. One option is to connect the
points following their Delaunay triangulation, other options
map neighborhood relationships, e.g., by connecting points
to their nearest neighbors either in R2 or Rm .

5

A Study on Streamflow Data

The Brazilian electric power distribution system is supplied mainly by hydroelectric power generation, which
is heavily affected by seasonal rain patterns. Analysis
of streamflows of different hydrographic basins collected
along the years plays a strategic role in operation and planning of the national electric distribution system, as the
whole system must be adjusted for operation over rainy and
dry periods.
A data set is available containing time series describing
the natural streamflow of 151 hydroelectric power plants
(installed or predicted for construction) constituting the
main hydroelectric basins of Brazil [1]. A time series
records, for each plant, its monthly average streamflow values for a period of 75 years, from 1931 to 2005 (a total of
900 data points). Data consists of real (collected) or simulated values; e.g., to fill in unknown values or periods when
plants were not yet operational. Values are estimated based
on operational information provided by power plant management concessionaires. For power plants not yet operational, estimation relies on information collected at rainfall measurement stations and on values registered at other
plants expected to present similar behavior. Figure 3 (top)
shows a graph of the time series relative to one such power
plant, named Furnas. The same series split into yearly periods is depicted in Figure 3 (bottom), which shows the yearly
streamflow behavior of this particular power plant.
We illustrate the potential role of multidimensional projections with two analyses conducted on this data using our
strategy (and tool), with the assistance of a domain specialist (one of the authors of this paper). The first analysis is
aimed at studying the behavior of a single power plant along
the years, in order to detect large variations on streamflow
volume, known to introduce risks to system operation. In
the second analysis we look at the behavior of the so-called
Paran´a hydrographic basin, an important basin that includes
several rivers and power plants.

283

Figure 2. Screenshot illustrating the main window of Temporal-PEx. Projection of the Synthetic Control
data set, created with the IDMAP technique and DTW distance measure. Each point depicts a whole
time series, and point color indicates the series class attribute. Points connected by edges to their
nearest neighbor series in Rm .

5.1. Detecting Dry and Rainy Years
Detecting severely dry years is important for the hydroelectric power system planning, since the available energy
of a power plant – known as the firm energy – is computed
according to these years. Planning is typically based on the
worst case scenario, seeking to avoid dependence of rainfall
patterns. When demand for energy exceeds the estimated
firm energy, the deficit risk increases – such a scenario can
cause an energy crisis.
The projection depicted in Figure 4 discloses streamflow
behavior at a particular power plant (Furnas), along multiple years. Input data consists of the 75 series shown in Figure 3 (bottom). No data normalization was applied, since
we are interested in comparing magnitude of streamflows to
identify, e.g., critical periods such as dry years. This particular projection was generated with IDMAP, and point color
maps the mean value of the corresponding yearly series.
One observes three major areas in the projection, one
corresponding to several very dry years (represented in red),
another one representing average years (yellowish-green), a
third one corresponding to very rainy years, represented by
the green points. In fact, the period from 1953 to 1956 is
known as the driest in recent history, and year 2001 witnessed a severe energy crisis in Brazil, as the power hydro-

Figure 3. Furnas: (top) Monthly average
streamflows at this plant, from 1931 to 2005;
(bottom) Each line graph shows monthly average streamflows relative to a single year
(75 series shown, each with 12 monthly averages).

284

Since these series do not show time axis distortion, the Euclidean distance was employed.

Figure 4. Each point depicts a series of 12
monthly streamflow averages at the Furnas
power plant, for a particular year. 75 years
(1935–2005) shown. IDMAP projection and
Euclidean distance.
Figure 5. Spatial layout of the sub-basins of
Parana´ basin.

electric supply system proved unable to meet the demand.
A single outlier appears that corresponds to year 1983 (in
blue), an unusually rainy year – mean streamflow for this
year equals 2, 253 m3 /s, which is way above the typical
overall yearly average of 927 m3 /s.

5.2. Behavior of Paran´
a Hydrographic
Basin
Streamflow behavior of power plants is highly related to
their geographic location and corresponding local climate
and rain patterns. The Paran´a basin was selected for this
analysis due to its relevance, as it owns the largest number
of power plant constructions (76) to attend the energetic demand of the Southwest region of Brazil. It shows a complex
behavior, as it covers a large geographical area and is therefore organized into several sub-basins with particular characteristics. The five main sub-basins are Grande, Iguac¸u,
Parana´ıba, Paranapanema and Tietˆe. Figure 5 shows a diagram of their geographical arrangement. The sub-basin of
the power plant was added as a class attribute in the data set.
Figure 6 depicts a projection of the power plants from
the Paran´a basin, generated from their collected streamflow
series, each series covering the period from 1931 to 2005.
Point color maps the plant sub-basin. The IDMAP projection technique was selected, because relationships between
the different sub-basins must be considered. The streamflow of the Itaipu plant, for example, is proportional to the
sum of all the others in the basin, as illustrated in Figure
5. Seasonal patterns were removed at pre-processing, as the
presence of seasonal movements conceals other important
patterns. This procedure also normalizes the series, turning
streamflow magnitudes irrelevant to the projection process.

Figure 6. Streamflow behavior of power
plants of the Parana´ basin (1931-2005). The
color of the points are mapped to which subbasin of Parana´ the power plant belongs.
IDMAP projection and Euclidean distance.
Inspecting the projection at a higher level shows that the
power plants were grouped according to their sub-basins
- which reflects the knowledge that close geographical regions will typically display similar behavior. It is also possible to observe that power plants Ilha Solteira, Jupi´a, Porto
Primavera and Itaipu (indicated by numbers 1 to 4) are
all located at the central region of the projection. This reflects the fact that the five sub-basins debouch at the river
where these plants are located (see Figure 5), therefore their
streamflow patterns are influenced by all of them.

285

6. Conclusions

[8] M. C. Hao, U. Dayal, D. A. Keim, and T. Schreck. Multiresolution techniques for visual exploration of large timeseries data. In EuroVis, pages 27–34, 2007.
[9] H. Hochheiser and B. Shneiderman. Dynamic query tools
for time series data sets: timebox widgets for interactive exploration. Information Visualization, 3(1):1–18, 2004.
[10] E. Keogh and C. A. Ratanamahatana. Exact indexing of dynamic time warping. Knowledge and Information Systems,
7:358–386, 2005.
[11] E. Keogh, L. Wei, X. Xi, S. Lonardi, J. Shieh, and S. Sirowy.
Intelligent icons: integrating lite-weight data mining and visualization into gui operating systems. In Proc. 6th IEEE
Int. Conf. on Data Mining, pages 912–916, 2006.
[12] J. Lin, E. Keogh, and S. Lonardi. Visualizing and discovering non-trivial patterns in large time series databases. Information Visualization, 4(2):61–82, 2005.
[13] J. Lin, E. Keogh, S. Lonardi, and B. Chiu. A symbolic
representation of time series, with implications for streaming algorithms. In Proc. 8th ACM SIGMOD Workshop on
Research Issues in Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery,
pages 2–11, New York, NY, USA, 2003. ACM Press.
[14] J. D. Mackinlay, G. G. Robertson, and R. DeLine. Developing calendar visualizers for the information visualizer.
In Proc. 7th annual ACM Symp. on User Interface Software and Technology, pages 109–118, New York, NY, USA,
1994. ACM Press.
[15] R. Minghim, F. V. Paulovich, and A. A. Lopes. Contentbased text mapping using multi-dimensional projections for
exploration of document collections. In Visualization and
Data Analysis 2006, Proc. SPIE-IS&T Electronic Imaging,
volume 6060, San Jose, California, 2006. SPIE.
[16] F. V. Paulovich, L. G. Nonato, R. Minghim, and H. Levkowitz. Least square projection: A fast high-precision multidimensional projection technique and its application to document mapping. IEEE Trans. on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 14(3):564–575, 2008.
[17] F. V. Paulovich, M. C. F. Oliveira, and R. Minghim. The projection explorer: A flexible tool for projection-based multidimensional visualization. In Proc. XX Brazilian Symp.
on Computer Graphics and Image Processing (SIBGRAPI
2007), pages 27–36. IEEE Computer Society, 2007.
[18] C. Plaisant, B. Milash, A. Rose, S. Widoff, and B. Shneiderman. Lifelines: visualizing personal histories. In Proc.
SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pages 221–227., New York, NY, USA, 1996. ACM Press.
[19] H. Sakoe and S. Chiba. Dynamic programming algorithm
optimization for spoken word recognition. IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 26:43–49,
1978.
[20] E. Tejada, R. Minghim, and L. G. Nonato. On improved projection techniques to support visual exploration of multidimensional data sets. Information Visualization, 2:218–231,
2003.
[21] M. Weber, M. Alexa, and W. M¨uller. Visualizing time-series
on spirals. In Proc. IEEE Symp. Information Visualization
2001, pages 7–14, 2001.
[22] J. J. V. Wijk and E. R. V. Selow. Cluster and calendar based
visualization of time series data. In Proc. 1999 IEEE Symp.
on Information Visualization, pages 4–9, Washington, DC,
USA, 1999. IEEE Computer Society.

We illustrate the usefulness of multidimensional projection techniques to identify patterns and perform comparisons in time series data collections, such as series describing river streamflows, with the assistance of a domain specialist (one of the authors of this paper). Studying the temporal behavior of streamflows is a strategic application not
only for hydroelectric energy distribution but also for other
important applications such as water regimen in environmental studies. Projections derived from similarity metrics can be effectively employed to locate patterns of related behavior between different series, provided that preprocessing procedures enhance relevant characteristics and
the distance metric can properly estimate their similarity.
As further work we would like to integrate to our framework other visual metaphors, as an alternative to line
graphs, to represent large individual series, so that detailed
comparison and analysis of multiple data elements can be
performed seamlessly. Integrating geographical information into the projection maps is also a topic under investigation.

7. Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support of
FAPESP (grants 05/52922-2, 04/09888-5 and 04/078664) and CNPq (grants 304758/2005-1, 305861/2006-9 and
470272/2004-0). Streamflow data is provided by ONS, the
National Operator for the Electrical System, Brazil.

References
[1] National operator of electric system – monthly mean streamflows of brazilian hydroeltric utilization, 1931-2005. Technical report, 2007. In Portuguese.
[2] R. J. Alcock and Y. Manolopoulos. Time-series similarity
queries employing a feature-based approach. In Proc. 7th
Hellenic Conf. on Informatics, 1999.
[3] D. J. Berndt and J. Clifford. Using dynamic time warping to
find patterns in time series. In KDD Workshop, 1994.
[4] J. V. Carlis and J. A. Konstan. Interactive visualization of
serial periodic data. In Proc. 11th ACM Symp. on User Interface Software and Technology, pages 29–38, 1998.
[5] C. Faloutsos and K. Lin. Fastmap: a fast algorithm for
indexing, data-mining and visualization of traditional and
multimedia datasets. In Proc. 1995 ACM SIGMOD Int.
Conf. on Management of data, pages 163–174, 1995.
[6] E. S. Gardner, Jr. Exponential smoothing: The state of the
art. Journal of Forecasting, 4:1–28, 1985.
[7] M. C. Hao, U. Dayal, D. A. Keim, and T. Schreck.
Importance-driven visualization layouts for large time series
data. In Proc. 2005 IEEE Symp. on Information Visualization, pages 203–210. IEEE Computer Society, 2005.

286

