12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Beyond the Tyranny of the Pixel:
Exploring the Physicality of Information Visualization
Andrew Vande Moere
Faculty of Architecture, Design and Planning, The University of Sydney
andrew@arch.usyd.edu.au
aspect of our everyday lives, one can question the
continuous push towards using the graphical power of
screens to simulate “real world” visuals for representing
inherently “abstract” information. In today’s information
society, data access has become pervasive, and many
people are already exposed to computer screens longer
than they face nature or other human beings. For all the
obvious qualities screens and projections enjoy, they still
require dedicated and large flat surfaces, brightly
illuminate their surrounding environment, are generally
task-obtrusive and attention-grabbing, and often remind
us of productivity tools rather than a calm medium that
encourages contemplation, analysis and reflection.
Therefore, the question can be asked why information
displays, especially those placed in a public context,
should mimic the discrete nature of computers by
utilizing pixel-based graphics. By considering the
inherent capabilities of many material objects to
communicate meaning and functionality by the natural
affordances they possess, visualization developers could
consider alternative presentation media by learning from
how humans experience and interpret the world around
them. In other words, we claim that what a pixel-less
display might lose in resolution and information
bandwidth, it could make up in a richer, more intriguing
and
memorable
experience
that
nonetheless
communicates complex information and insight.
This paper reviews the conceptual spectrum of
representing abstract information in a physical way,
ranging from ambient display over data sculptures to
approaches that reach beyond the stimulation of our
visual sense, in an attempt to explore the potential of
information visualization as a rich and multi-faceted
communication medium in its own right.

Abstract
This paper consists of a review of contemporary
methods that map and materialize abstract data as
physical artifacts. With computing technology and the
access of information influencing every aspect of our
everyday lives, one can question the current habit of
information displays to ‘simulate’ real world metaphors,
and whether information could instead be conveyed by
approximating the analogue and tangible characteristics
of our daily experiences. This paper introduces five
different degrees of ‘data physicality’, which differ in the
level of abstraction of how data is mapped and perceived
by human senses: ambient display, pixel sculptures,
object augmentation, data sculptures and alternative
modality. This categorization demonstrates the potential
of information visualization as a communication medium
in its own right, which proliferates beyond the ubiquitous
pixel-based, light-emitting surfaces of today.
Keywords info-aesthetics, data sculpture, pixel
sculpture, multi-modal visualization, ambient display

1. Introduction
Since its conception about 15 years ago, the field of
information visualization has mainly focused on the
representation of data on screen-based output media.
Information visualization methods are specifically
designed to augment the perception of abstract data, data
that possesses no inherent spatial layout or presence in
the physical world. Because abstract data has no natural
counterpart that can be graphically reproduced, the
visualization challenge consists of the design,
development and evaluation of novel data mapping
metaphors for presenting information in an easily
perceivable and understandable way. The use of digital
computer screens and projections for this purpose
possesses several obvious strengths, including their
quick, dynamic frame-rate, their huge and detailed
resolutions, and their capability to immerse people
within a virtual representation that almost cannot be
distinguished from that of reality. However, as we
observe the implications of computing penetrating every

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.84

2. From Insight to Experience
2.1. Traditional Information Visualization
An information visualization method is uniquely
characterized by a predefined set of data mapping rules.
Every data mapping rule determines how a single data
element, containing data attributes, data values and
reciprocal relationships to other data elements, is

469

What drives the current exploration of non-screen
presentation media? Firstly, the underlying motives of
data subjectivity, exemplified by information aesthetic
visualization and data art. Secondly, the increasing
amount of designers and artists who are becoming
educated in the latest computing technologies, and vice
versa, computing experts who have become educated in
design principles by studio-based, creativity-driven
course units. In addition, there exists a continuous drive
for originality and novelty, to explore the potential of
new materials and state-of-the-art technologies, to
combine cross-disciplinary practices, and ultimately, to
become the very “first” artist to effectively imagine,
develop and build a working installation that employs an
original material to communicate an interpretable
meaning. Lastly, the prototyping of such technological
advanced installations has been made possible by
significant developments in both hardware and software
authoring tools, which recently have become affordable,
more designer-friendly (e.g. including sketching, visual
programming), and are actively supported by large, open
communities. New hardware developments have
empowered enthusiastic designers to program microelectronics, sensors and actuators, an area previously
reserved for the expert or dedicated home hobbyist.

translated into perceivable graphical form. Generally,
each data element corresponds to a single visual element,
such as a point, line (1D), shape (2D), or object (3D),
which then becomes altered by transformation operations
(e.g. location, shading, direction, …) according to the
data values it contains. The exact nature of these rules
tends to be determined by the application developer, who
is mainly motivated to optimize the effectiveness, the
accuracy and completeness which users achieve specific
tasks, and efficiency, the resources expended in relation
to the effectiveness criterion, of specific user tasks. This
focus to measure and optimize performance solely
captures functionalistic concerns, so that in most
visualization applications of today, the role of the user
experience not necessarily is considered. As an indirect
result, most published information visualization
applications do not describe the design rationale behind
the choice of data mappings (such as the nature and
meaning of the chosen metaphor, color palette, shape
proportions, screen design, etc.). In fact, most visual
metaphors seem to be based on a genius design approach
(that is by a designer who is seemingly so talented to
know intuitively what works and what not),
complemented by integrating parts of best-of-practice
examples, or learning from published scientific insights
that model the qualitative correlations between human
cognition and visual perception, such as from visual
cognitive sciences [27], visual Gestalt Laws [28] and
visual design guidelines [24].

3. From Pixel to Human Sensation
For the purpose of maintaining the consistency and
clarity of the arguments, most of the examples in this
section will be focused on the materiality of water as an
alternative presentation ‘medium’. Water was chosen for
its ubiquity across diverse contexts, and its natural
aversion against high-tech, electronic technology.

2.1. Information Aesthetics
While traditional information visualization seems
focused to optimize the performance of finding insights
in large, multidimensional or temporal datasets, the
concept of visualization is also being pushed in a process
of democratization and mass-media popularization.
Recently coined under the term “casual” [19], “artistic”
[26] or “information aesthetic” [12] visualization, it
seems a subfield is currently emerging that is concerned
about representing information in more pleasurable
ways, turning data exploration and insight discovery in
an engaging and educational experience. Most works aim
to exploit visual and interactive aesthetics to increase
their comprehensibility, while also broadening the
definition of “data insight” towards a more artistic intent.
Data art is a more artistically inclined form of
information aesthetics, and consists of data
representation
that
deliberately
obscure
their
understandability by integrating elements of ambiguity
and subjectivity in the data mapping process [12]. Data
art tends to communicate circumstantial elements ‘about’
underlying principles of (versus patterns and trends
‘inside’) the dataset, by exaggerating or highlighting
very specific and predefined data phenomena. Such
visualizations
are
generally
self-motivated
or
commissioned by advocacy groups, non-governmental
organizations and museums, which typically aspire to
popularize a predefined message, or communicate a
subjective interpretation of the data to a wide, lay public.

3.1. Ambient Display
The exploration of alternative, non-screen
presentation media to represent information is neither
novel nor recent. The original definition of ambient
display proposed to turn everyday architectural spaces
into “interfaces” by changing the state of the physical
matter, solids, liquids and gases that they contain by
data-driven values [29]. Early research endeavors include
the Water Lamp [5], which consists of a decorative
physical fixture that projects ripple shadows reflecting
electronic network activity, and WaterCalls [17], which
represents emergency call waiting cues by the level of
water captured in glass bowls (see Figure 1). More recent
ambient display projects have since returned to the
traditional screen, which are reinterpreted as forms of
electronically enhanced artistic paintings rather than
work displays [21]. Other ambient display systems
exploit the high resolution of the screen to represent
everyday objects (like a beach or the sea), which can
change depending on temporal data streams [15].
Ambient display is a calm, non-obtrusive and
opportunistic technology that reveals meaningful
information for users who are willing to invest both time
and effort to interpret its metaphorical data mappings.

470

Figure 1. Ambient Display. Left: Information as
water ripples, Water Lamp [5]; Right: Air
bubbles as pixels, Information Percolator [10].

Figure 2. Pixel Sculpture. Left: Falling water
drops at Bitfall [20]; Right: Animated fire pixels,
Pyrotechnic Infernoptix [16].

However, ambient displays tend to be limited in the
amount of information that can be shown and updated
regularly. In addition, some evaluation studies have
revealed that although the comprehension of an ambient
display increases over time, people are not necessarily
retaining their initial interest in the display, as the display
usage decreases over a longer term period [23].

Digital Pyrotechnic Infernoptix [16] (Figure 2) is an
installation capable of controlling a 12x7 array of flamethrowing nozzles to depict text and iconic animations. At
the end of this conceptually spectrum probably lies the
Clothesline Display [1], consisting of over 250 male
boxer shorts that depict textual mobile phone messages.
These examples show how most pixel sculptures are
specifically designed to intrigue and amaze a large and
captivated audience, insofar that the pixel ‘medium’
often triumphs any (informational) message that it
attempts to communicate. The mechanical noise, size,
and spectacular visual effects that result from animating
large amounts of physical objects negate most practical
visualization application scenarios. However, these
projects also demonstrate how the use of a physical
material as a communication medium allows for the
inclusion of rich, cultural connotations that evoke user
curiosity, fascination and engagement. Some of the
issues involved in pixel displays include the fragility and
complexity of the involved technologies, its relatively
low pixel resolution and update frequency, and, in the
case of water, the inability to persist a static display state.

3.2. Pixel Sculpture
A popular solution towards increasing the
information bandwidth of an ambient display while
maintaining its physical and aesthetic qualities focuses
on substituting screen pixels with an array or matrix of
real physical objects. The term pixel, which originates
from “picture element” (with the abbreviation “pix” for
“pictures”), refers to the smallest single component of a
graphical image. A pixel can thus be understood as the
universal standard visual unit for any singular sample,
which, observed in a larger collection of equal members
from a distance, merges together to form a distinct
intelligible image. Therefore, pixels are not necessarily
understood to be screen-based. A popular example
includes the televised Olympic opening ceremonies that
often exploit the cumulative visual effect of orchestrating
large amounts of people in recognizable visual patterns.
One of the earliest examples of a mechanically-driven
and computationally-controlled physical pixel display
includes Rozin’s famous Wooden Mirror, which consists
of an array of dynamically rotating wooden blocks. The
Information Percolator [10], one of the earliest ambient
displays, is based on a similar approach by synchronizing
rising air bubbles captured in a row of water tubes to
depict icons and vertically scrolling text (Figure 1).
In the context of water as a presentation medium,
Bitfall [20] synchronizes falling water drops to display
text and symbols, while Eavesdripping [18] represents
textual network conversations by the succession of welllocated water drops falling on, and rippling, a flat water
surface. The potential realm of pixel sculptures is
immense, and currently includes matrices of ping pong
balls, rotating car side mirrors, patches of electrostatically charged hair-like strands, inflatable balloons,
and knitted textiles. The natural opposite of water, fire,
has also been tamed as pixels.

3.3. Object Augmentation
An alternative direction for presenting information
in a physical but peripheral way consists of augmenting
or superimposing everyday objects with information.
This approach shows a potential future of ubiquitous
visualization, a world with unobtrusively integrated and
intuitively understandable information “reflections”.
Recent developments in this direction are mostly driven
by user-centered interaction design research, which is
mainly interested in the use of everyday objects because
of their immediate closeness and emotional connotations
to end users. Shown in Figure 3, the HeatSink [2] faucet
illuminates a water stream according to its temperature,
while the DataFountain [25] installation maps the actual
currency rates to the relative size of three sprouting water
fountains. The potential of overlaying everyday objects
with information reaches far beyond water, and varies
between animated building facades, cooking pans that
highlight the ideal frying temperature, over plants that
change their growing direction towards the most used
garbage bin [11], and smart toasters that burn the actual
weather forecast in your morning bread.

471

Figure 3. Object Augmentation. Left: Water
color as temperature, Heatsink [2]. Right:
Fountains as exchange rate, DataFountain [25].

Figure 4. Wearable Visualization. Left: Rainsensitive Puddlejumper [4]. Right: Mobile
phone depending Fashion Victims handbag [6].

3.4. Wearable Visualization

The use of affordances, the properties of an object
that influences how it can be used, is a potentially
powerful “visual” cue to convey meaning, as it foregoes
higher-level visual abstraction and enables multi-sensory
human sensations and subjective emotions.
Often, the data mapping metaphor employed by a
data sculpture may not be immediately understandable,
but is instead meant to be discovered through reflecting
on the nature of how the data is embodied in a physical
form. It is often the act of reflecting itself that brings
forward unforeseen associations, which can then be
considered the “data insights” that are communicated by
the “visualization”. While some data sculptures embody
the underlying data by a directly related physical artifact
(e.g. water consumption represented as the amount of
water in a glass), others choose to intentionally make
non-obvious connections between the signifier (the
artifact) and what is signified (here, the data or the
meaning of the dataset). The disconnection between
these two concepts is then exploited to provide for a
thought-inducing visual impression (e.g. the world
population as a pile of rice), or to provoke a stark
contrast with the underlying meaning of the data (e.g. an
amount of death people as eatable candy). For instance,
Email Erosion [3] creates a data sculpture by spraying a
forceful and eroding jet of water unto a block of foam,
depending on the amount and content of email spam.
Similarly, PulsArt [8] shows the levels of activity of
family members by varying the amount of water running
down blocks of salt, slowly carving out material as a
physical trace of historical activity (see Figure 5).

The continuous search for new forms of
visualization media has recently started to focus on
clothing, jewelry and other wearables, and even the
human body itself. With the miniaturization of
computing technology and the human urge of pervasive,
always-on information access, researchers have
developed different hard- and software architectures that
can be easily integrated into everyday garments. As a
special form of object augmentation, wearable
visualization focuses on the use of miniature computing
devices that can be worn on the human body over long
periods of time, aiming to inform the wearer as well as
any other person in the immediate vicinity of specific
data. The technology involved differs from portable
screens on common mobile devices, in that they are
specifically designed to be unobtrusively integrated and
extensively worn. However, the practicality of wearables
is often negated by the necessity for relatively bulky
energy sources to drive the displays. Approaches in
wearable visualization tend to experiment beyond the use
of pixel-based screens, instead exploring state-of-the-art
actuators such as LED lights, electroluminescent wires,
thermo-chromatic inks, shape-changing materials such as
shape memory alloys, or even air inflatables. Shown in
Figure 4 are Puddlejumper [4], a raincoat with electroluminescent panels that light up as water lands on it, and
Fashion Victims [6], a unique handbag that emits liquid
ink depending on the mobile phone usage in its vicinity.

3.5. Data Sculptures

3.6. Alternative Modality Display

The data sculpture concept is different from other
physical visualization approaches in its focus to
“embody” the data in a perceivable presence, shape or
form. That is, the sculpture is a direct externalization of
the data, and possesses no other direct functionality than
conveying meaning to onlookers. Because of the obvious
limitations of recognizing meaning from physical form,
people are forced to interpret these data-driven objects
by the affordances they convey. Abstract information is
reinterpreted as an abstract matter that is captured and
implicitly translated in objects that can be touched,
explored, carried or even possessed, like the memories
symbolized by souvenirs, jewelry or art in general.

The field of alternative modality or non-visual
visualization targets the stimulation of our other four
human senses to communicate abstract information.
Scientific research in this area is mainly motivated out of
the wish to: (1) support visually impaired people, (2)
enhance the immersion and fidelity in Virtual Reality
(VR) and gaming applications, (3) augment existing
visualization scenarios (e.g. for alarm, monitoring or
notification applications), or (4) investigate additional
sensorial modes that support users to understand critical
information more efficiently by increasing the sensorial
bandwidth beyond the visual sense.

472

Figure 6. Alternative Modality. Left: Simulating
remote climatic conditions, Perpetual Tropical
Sunshine [7]. Right: Feeling network
constraints via pain, Constraint City [22].

Figure 5. Data Sculpture. Left: Spam email
controlled foam erosion [3], Right: Human
activity-depending water erosion, PulsArt [8].
Current issues include the stimulation of human
senses beyond a single person, and more importantly, the
question how to map information values into non-visual
sensations that somehow can be intuitively understood.
2.3.1. Sound. Data-driven sound stimulation, also
known as sonification or auditory display, uses nonspeech sound to perceptualize dynamic information to
the user. Generally, an increase or decrease in some level
of information is reflected by an increase or decrease in
sound characteristics such as pitch, amplitude or tempo.
Besides the well-known example of the Geiger counter,
many other sonification works exist, as research in this
area has grown in an independent academic community.
2.3.2. Touch, tactile or vibrohaptic display
interfaces are able to communicate information through
the use of haptic rendering methods. The most familiar
approach includes force feedback devices (e.g. SensAble
Phantom) or body-worn garments [13] that generate
spatial movements or sensations (e.g. pushing, pulling or
sliding) that can be felt, and potentially interpreted by a
user. Some of the obvious issues in haptic rendering
include resolving the level of skin sensitivity, which
typically differs on an individual level and varies over
the surface of the human body, and the relatively narrow
spectrum in vibration intensity between sensory and pain
thresholds. Interesting examples range from the Haptic
Shoes project [9], wirelessly vibrating shoe soles that
communicate stock market data, to Constraint City [22],
a mechanical corset that deliberately inflicts pain to the
wearer, depending on the signal strength of closed off,
encrypted wireless networks nearby. More artistic
approaches explore alternative sensory stimulations for
larger audiences in public settings by “transmitting” skin
actuations, such as temperature: the Perpetual Tropical
Sunshine [7] installation consists of about 300 150W
infrared light bulbs that convey the real-time climatic
conditions in faraway places to a large audience.
2.3.3. Smell visualization or olfactory display
promises the communication of meaning through the use
of odors. Odor is a potentially powerful sensorial cue for
the strong informational relationships between human
memory and olfactory stimuli it is able to provoke. Smell
has been proven to induce strong personal memories and
human emotions, as well possesses the ability to improve
accurate recall when a person was exposed to similar
odors during learning.

Three important problems for this modality to carry
information efficiently involve (1) the creation of smells,
or the choice of the fundamental basis “RGB” smells that
in combination generate any odor possible, (2) the
dissipation of smells, overcoming its relatively slow
“frame rate” to quickly dissipate and be replaced by
other smells, and (3) the sharing of smells, the
characteristic of odors to spread over spaces in so far that
separate users who share the same space cannot receive
different information channels. One remarkable solution
for these issues proposes a “smell cannon”: a custommade device that shoots small puffs of scented air
directly towards the position of the user’s nose [31].
2.3.4. Finally, taste stimulation or edible interfaces
foresee a future in which computers can reproduce
flavors by the dynamic generation of chemical
substances that can eventually be eaten. Although most
people only refer to taste by degrees of sour, sweet, salty
and bitter, taste has the potential to become a relatively
high-dimensional and sensitive human input channel for
abstract information. TasteScreen [14] is a device that
drips controlled quantities of flavoring unto a screen’s
surface that taste appropriately to the current user’s tasks
or displayed images. Infococktail [30] is a custom-made
machine that mixes tasteful and colorful cocktails
according to the home colors of sports teams and their
end score at recent competitive games.

Conclusion
In our current information society, it will take not
long for data communication to be pushed outside of the
digital screen, towards our everyday physical reality
experiences. This paper is a first step to rethink the role
of what alternative, non-screen displays can play in
conveying information in the context of miniaturized,
ubiquitous and calm computing. As information
visualization moves away from its traditional, expert, and
computer graphics background, and becomes a social
communication medium in its own right, new
opportunities open up to use novel technologies as
facilitators or carriers to communicate meaning. The
challenge is then how to translate digital information in
physical counterparts in compelling and understandable

473

ways, depending on the purpose of the representation, its
audience, spatial settings, and the underlying dataset.
Because of its opportunistic characteristics and
physical proximity to everyday human activities,
physical visualization inherently has the quality to
directly inform people when decisions are made, to allow
people to explore cause-and-effect relationships and to
provide people with enjoyable, but contextually related
experiences that could motivate and encourage.
Therefore, one of the most compelling application areas
for physical visualization includes persuasive computing,
which focuses on using modern technology to change
people’s opinions or attitudes, or encourage long-term,
persistent behavioral changes by providing real-time
information within relevant spatial contexts. This paper
proposed a sequence of categories that gradually varied
in how data is materialized or visualized in physical
form, and described how humans are able to perceive
information and understand meaning through interpreting
the resulting physical artifacts. A set of existing
visualization examples demonstrated the wide potential
range of physical abstraction and sensorial stimulation,
and described the most important issues involved in
pursuing such approaches. By becoming aware of these
considerations in the alternative information applications
of tomorrow, we could augment our data addicted
society beyond the light-emitting, rectangular surfaces of
today towards visualizations that are enjoyable,
memorable as well as practical and understandable.

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]

[20]
[21]

References
[1] acar2. (2007). Clothesline Display, URL,
http://www.acar2.org/?p=58.
[2] L. Bonanni, E. Arroyo, C.-H. Lee and T. Selker. (2005).
Waterbot: Exploring Feedback and Persuasive Techniques
at the Sink. interactions. 12(4): 25-28.
[3] A. Brissenden, E. Ham and T. Muilenburg. (2006). Email
Erosion, http://www.emailerosion.org/.
[4] E. Co. (2000). Puddle Jumper, URL,
http://www.mintymonkey.com/puddlejumper_p1.html.
[5] A. Dahley, C. Wisneski and H. Ishii. (1998). Water Lamp
and Pinwheels: Ambient Projection of Digital Information
into Architectural Space. In Conf. on Human Factors and
Computing Systems (CHI'98), ACM. pp. 269-270.
[6] A. Davide, B. Dario and D. Tal. (2004). Fashion Victims.
In Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS'04),
ACM. pp. 312-312.
[7] Fabric. (2005). Perpetual Tropical Sunshine, URL,
http://www.fabric.ch/pts/pts_index.html.
[8] J. Fritsch, M. H. Fogtmann and H. S. Poulsen. (2005).
PulsArt – IT, Salt and Water For Family Awareness. In
Nordic Design Research Conference.
[9] X. Fu and D. Li. (2005). Haptic Shoes: Representing
Information by Vibration. In Asia-Pacific symposium on
Information Visualisation, ACM. pp. 47-50.
[10] J. M. Heiner, S. E. Hudson and K. Tanaka. (1999). The
Information Percolator: Ambient Information Display in a
Decorative Object. In Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology (UIST), ACM. pp. 141-148.
[11] D. Holstius, J. Kembel, A. Hurst, P.-H. Wan and J.
Forlizzi. (2004). Infotropism: Living and Robotic Plants

[22]
[23]

[24]
[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]
[29]

[30]
[31]

474

as Interactive Displays. In Symposium on Designing
Interactive Systems (DIS'04), ACM. pp. 215-221.
A. Lau and A. Vande Moere. (2007). Towards a Model of
Information Aesthetic Visualization. In Conference on
Information Visualisation (IV'07), IEEE. pp.87-92
R. W. Lindeman, R. Page, Y. Yanagida and J. L. Sibert.
(2004). Towards Full-Body Haptic Feedback: the Design
and Deployment of a Spatialized Vibrotactile Feedback
System. In Symposium on Virtual Reality Software &
Technology, ACM. pp. 146-149.
D. Maynes-Aminzade. (2005). Edible Bits: Seamless
Interfaces between People, Data and Food. In Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI'05) Extended Abstracts, ACM. pp. 2207-2210.
T. Miller and J. Stasko. (2001). The InfoCanvas:
Information Conveyance through Personalized,
Expressive Art. In Conf. on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI'01), ACM. pp. 305-306.
NAODesign. (2006). infornoptix - Digital Pyrotechnic
Matrix, URL, http://www.infernoptix.com/.
M. Pettersson. (2004). WaterCalls: Ambient Call Queue
for Cooperation between Emergency Service Centres.
Personal & Ubiquitous Computing. 8(3-4): 192-199.
S. Pohflepp. (2006). Eavesdripping: Water as Physical
Display. In Conf. on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques (SIGGRAPH) - Sketches, ACM. pp. 109.
Z. Pousman, J. Stasko and M. Mateas. (2007). Casual
Information Visualization: Depictions of Data in
Everyday Life. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. 13(6): 1145-1152.
J. Rayner. (2007). Aquascript - Information Waterfall,
http://www.bitfall.us/
J. Redström, T. Skog and L. Hallnäs. (2000). Informative
Art: Using Amplified Artworks as Information Displays.
In Designing Augmented Reality Environments (DARE
2000), ACM. pp. 103-114.
G. Savicic. (2008). Constraint City, URL,
http://www.yugo.at/equilibre/.
X. Shen, A. Vande Moere and P. Eades. (2005). An
Intrusive Evaluation of Peripheral Display. In Conference
on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques
(GRAPHITE'05), ACM. pp. 289-292.
E. R. Tufte. (2001). The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information. Graphics Press, Cheshire.
K. van Mensvoort. (2004). DataFountain: Money
Currency Rates Displayed with a Water Fountain, URL,
http://www.koert.com/work/datafountain/.
F. B. Viégas and M. Wattenberg. (2007). Artistic Data
Visualization: Beyond Visual Analytics. Online
Communities and Social Computing.
C. Ware. (2000). Information Visualization Perception for
Design. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco.
M. Wertheimer. (1923). Untersuchungen zur Lehre von
der Gestalt. Psychologische Forschung. 4301-350.
C. Wisneski, H. Ishii, A. Dahley, M. Gorbet, S. Brave, B.
Ullmer and P. Yarin. (1998). Ambient Displays: Turning
Architectural Space into an Interface between People and
Digital Information. In International Workshop on
Cooperative Buildings (CoBuild '98), Springer. pp. 22-32.
Wuerzburg. (2006). InfoCocktail Documentation, URL,
http://gestaltung.fhwuerzburg.de/blogs/exint_ws06/?page_id=641.
Y. Yanagida, S. Kawato, H. Noma, N. Tetsutani and A.
Tomono. (2003). A Nose-Tracked, Personal Olfactory
Display. In Conference on Computer Graphics
(SIGGRAPH) - Sketches & Applications, ACM.

