12th International Conference Information Visualisation

Photographs of Artworks: Electronic formatting of Knowledge and the Internet
Marinella Pigozzi
Department of Visual Arts, Bologna University, Italy
{marinella.pigozzi@unibo.it}
The language of photography can enrich and
multiply the benefits of knowledge. Thanks to the
internet, photographs can now reach a greater number of
users and the cost of information acquisition has been
greatly reduced. Technological innovation and the
internet improve access to Cultural Heritage and while
other methods of knowledge development must not be
overlooked, these latter certainly do help us gain broader
understanding of our own identity, they allow us to
consult a wealth of cultural heritage and contribute
towards the eradication of cross-disciplinary inflexibility
which has for a long time compromised research
activities. If we gain a thorough understanding of the
heritage items which identify us as people and which
embellish our cultural landscape, we will then be in a
position to properly protect them, we will achieve a
better interplay between conservation and restoration and
finally we will be able to establish a systematic and
profitable dialogue between the worlds of culture and
tourism.

Abstract
In spite of the political discourse dominating
heritage issues, despite academic constraints and a
certain cross-disciplinary inflexibility, photographs have
now come to be considered part of our cultural heritage.
Keywords--- Cultural Heritage, Photography,
Digitising Photographs, Archiving.

1. Introduction
Photographs never present a neutral image of the
real – they are a record of subjective perception and as
such must be considered as a historically determined act
of criticism. The photograph was first recognised as an
item of cultural heritage in Italy in May 2004, and yet
since the beginning of the twentieth century the
photograph has played an important role in the
development of the individual, in the growth of
knowledge and learning, and in the construction of a
civil society.

2. Digitalisation of the Photograph
Photography has long been used in conjunction with
journalism. Right from its inception, photojournalism
was concerned with witnessing historical events and the
development of societies. Today, these photographic
chronicles are considered to be a part of our artistic
heritage and a great many artists use photos as a means
of artistic expression, proof of which is the continual
proliferation of galleries specialising in the exhibiting
and selling of photographic art. The debate surrounding
the value of photographic art in relation to these areas of
expression is very much up-to-date, and yet it would
nevertheless seem important to draw attention to the
obvious fact that photography has always been
multifaceted. As Benjamin notes, it was always destined
to sidestep the aura of elitism surrounding works of art
and their “creation”, and question the notion of a work of
art as being unique and non-replicable. The digitalisation
of photography allows for ever more faithful
reproductions. As such, we must not allow the market to
block the circulation of photographs. Indeed, art can no
longer be considered valuable on account of its nonreplicability and must now depend on its own inherent

It was only in the second half of the twentieth
century that the polyvalence of the photograph came to
be fully appreciated. In the 1950s, Bologna’s classical art
Biennale, organised by Cesare Gnudi and the heritage
supervisory board that he directed, had on display
Villani’s photographic portrait. During the Seventies,
Bologna’s historical centre, the town’s artistic works and
sites, and the surrounding countryside were the subject of
a census, which included detailed photographic evidence.
The rest of the country sporadically followed suit.
Photographic campaigns became the subject of heated
debate involving representatives of national and
international institutions. Such debate focussed on the
technical methodology of photography and on the
photo’s cultural implications and stressed the need for
photographs to respond to the exigencies of essentialism
and objectivity. As a result, certain guidelines were set
down limiting culturally based influences and
interpretative distortions coming into play before, during
and after the taking of the photo.

1550-6037/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2008.95

462

quality. The quality of an image can now be reproduced
with absolute faithfulness and the photograph can be
multiplied ad infinitum – whether it be an instance of
photojournalism or the personal expression of an artist –
and as such the photograph can never aspire to becoming
the stuff of the elite. Where present, its own quality can
never be compromised by reproductions or
multiplications. Photographic reproductions can in no
way damage our moral or cultural heritage and represent
no violation of authors’ rights or copyright. As such,
reproduction in this case should not be confused with
plagiarism.

document photos an integral instrument in the process of
identifying and describing Cultural Heritage – they
depict the work in question, describe its current state,
reveal transformations over time and shed light on its
context. Indeed, photos such as these can be considered
an archive of objects subtracted from their meaningful
context. They act as a form of normative premise for
those involved in identifying, conserving and preserving
Cultural Heritage. They bear witness to those
characteristics which identify the work of art as a process
and present an insight into the historical background of
any given work – its different sites of display and its
various moments of restoration; this of course is vital for
the purposes of research and cataloguing. Paradoxically,
as the process of recognition becomes swifter and the
information gained more pertinent, photographs will be
increasingly relied upon in the documenting of any
particular item of cultural heritage. The photograph,
therefore, does not merely identify, it provides all the
details necessary for the correct compilation of official
records (Normativa ICCD 1999), some of which may not
come to light in the descriptive phase. The photograph
must respond to the exigencies of essentiality and
objectivity and must provide all the information needed
to identify the characteristic features of an item for the
purposes of cataloguing.

Although these two uses of photography are very
much in the limelight, I intend to discuss another facet of
photography. I will not touch upon contemporary
photography. Contemporary photography is an art form
without a past, and any subsequent discussion of this
should, I believe, be carried out in the context of the
collections, galleries and private collections to which
they belong. Contemporary photography should be left to
mature in its own market.
What I intend to discuss here is photography
depicting artworks – that is, those photographs that
belong and testify to our cultural heritage, photographs
that act as a resource for teaching and research in the
fields of history and art criticism. In short, what I intend
to examine are photographs representing works of art.
The semantic content of these photographs is the work of
art itself. In terms of representation, such photographs
can be considered an alternative to drawings and
engravings and as such cannot lay claim to any form of
exclusivity. Documents such as these should never be
considered out of context – we need to consider their
spatial, or geographical, and temporal contexts in order
to relate them to the present and identify their specific
and relative value. It is only when we gain a clear insight
into these contexts that we can fully establish the identity
of a photograph; indeed, it is through the on-going
dynamic process of cataloguing and informationgathering that we can continually reconstruct over time
this identity. It is for this reason that we need to establish
a set of common guidelines for the process of
cataloguing,
overcoming
cross-disciplinary
and
institutional inflexibility and promoting interaction
between collectors’ archives, museums and local
contexts. Information technology can of course facilitate
cross-referencing and as such aids the development of a
global, inclusive understanding of the work of art in
question, of this cultural heritage item, which represents
a point of intersection between artistic expression,
identity, scientific research and teaching opportunities.

When it first appeared, the photograph was
considered the most faithful reproduction of artworks –
more faithful, that is, than engravings, watercolours or
sketches. These days, we cannot overlook just how much
the subjectivity implicit in photographs is alterable and
influential.
What we must now do is decide what prerequisites
should inform photographic documentation. Towards the
end of the 19th century, Jacob Burckhardt (1818-1897)
set about constructing a systematic and organic
framework linking cultural history and art history, where
the act of seeing was privileged, and underlined his
desire that photography should offer reliable information
concerning artworks. This desire was not immediately
satisfied. Around this time the first photographic
archives were being established in Italy – the Brera
archive opened under the direction of Corrado Ricci in
1899 – but the photograph was destined to flirt with the
same framing, colour and lighting factors as those
accompanying
painting
and
sculpture.
The
contextualised shot of a work of art with its frame, which
in itself is a historically determined act of criticism, is
less common. In Italy it was for a long time considered
as an import; indeed when photography first arrived in
Italy, the country was fragmented, indebted to and
mourning an illustrious past tradition. The photograph
was for a long time accompanied by a sense of
ambiguity, which impeded an understanding of its
specific nature, thus obscuring the fact that the
photograph might have implications that went above and
beyond its mimetic and imitative qualities. Photos were
seen as an alternative to sketches. The photo album came

The photograph as image of a work of art has for
some time been used in inventories describing Italy’s
artistic heritage, though recently, editors and public
institutions have begun cataloguing and archiving this
form of photograph in its own right. Technical advances
and a broader understanding of photographability make

463

to replace the travel-log sketchbook and its drawings,
which were to be elaborated upon in the studio1.
Tourism and the emerging market for art publishing
provided a demand for souvenirs where artworks and
photography were amalgamated. The photograph was
seen as a substitute for drawings partly because it was
able to transcribe reality, but it also came to substitute
the observation of reality itself – including artworks,
nature, costumes, the exoticism of the East and the eros
of European literature, music and painting.

research. Convinced of the value of the photograph as a
scientific instrument, he used photographs to embellish
the descriptive narrative of his journalistic articles and
teaching notes and by 1930 he had put together a
substantial photographic archive. This archive was
donated to the University by his descendents, and
subsequently grew into what is now the photographic
collection of the department of Visual Arts.
In this collection the semantic content of the photos
is a work of art, a content therefore that has implications
spanning research, publishing, markets and the teaching
activities of many of the protagonists of art criticism and
art history at the university of Bologna, the Igino
Benvenuto Supino Institute and the Department of Visual
Arts.

Here in Bologna the pioneers of photography were
headed by Emile Anriot (1868), working at the end of the
nineteenth century, and included a set of increasingly
aware players involved in the visual mapping of Italy,
such as Anderson and Brogi, but above all Pietro Poppi
(1833-1914), Felice Croci (active between 1886 and
1907), Giovanni Castelli (1864-1921), the firm
belonging to Luigi (1845-1914) and Giovanni Lanzoni
(1875-1926), Angelo (1873-1947) and Alfredo
Bolognesi (1863-1940). And yet as late as 1903,
Anacleto Guadagnino, director of Bologna’s painting
gallery, was still hoping to become the proud owner of a
decent camera. Francesco Malaguzzi Valeri, director of
Bologna’s painting gallery and head of the galleries’
supervisory board until 1923, made some important
initial contributions to the activity of archiving. In the
context of Bologna University, Igino Benvenuto Supino
(1858-1940), appointed in 1907 as the first professor of
art history in the faculty of Literature and Philosophy,
raised awareness regarding the use of the photograph
and, when financing permitted, entered the market in
order to purchase photographs for use in teaching and

We must investigate the aesthetic and historical
value of this medium, read between the lines of their
catalogue records to establish exactly what the
photographic image offers and depicts. Photos show us
what someone else has limited them to seeing.
Photography is therefore more than just a technical
method of illustrating and describing – it is in itself a
cultural sign. In the recent climate of growing
appreciation for Cultural Heritage and the attendant
obligations of understanding, conservation and
preservation, we need to begin to make inroads into
studying the numerous photographic documents
contained within these latter.
The cultural and market-driven census carried out by
the Florentines Alinari and Carlo Brogi, by Rome’s
Domenico Anderson, by Pellegrino and Umberto
Orlandini from Modena, and by Ravenna’s Luigi Ricci
differ greatly from the informative map provided by
Villani, from the historical conscience provided by Paolo
Monti, and from the attention attributed to the human
factor of Antonio Masotti. These differences become
obvious when we examine the Supino collection: Luigi
Ricci’s gelatine prints with their interior shots of
Sant’Apollinaire, of the Ursiana Basilica, of San Vitale,
Sant’Apollinaire in Classe, Alinari and Brogi’s shots of
Subiaco, the albums by Philpot & Jackson, Huguet, Van
Lint, Paolo Lombardi or those of the award-winning
Gabriele Carloforti. It’s not just a question of method or
point of view – what we find is a completely different
sensibility and cultural education.

1

L. Vitali, La fotografia e i pittori, in Scritti dedicati a
Marino Parenti, Firenze 1960, pp. 251-257;
Combattimento per un’immagine. Fotografi e pittori,
catalogo della mostra a cura di D. Palazzoli e L.
Carluccio, Torino 1973; M. Miraglia, L’immagine
tradotta dall’incisione alla fotografia, Napoli 1977;
Eadem, Note per una storia della fotografia italiana
(1839-1911), in Storia dell’arte italiana, 9, Torino 1981,
pp. 436-451; Eadem, Dalla tradizione incisoria alla
documentazione fotografica, in La Sistina riprodotta, a
cura di A. Maltedo, Roma 1991, pp. 221-231; E.
Spalletti, La documentazione figurativa dell’opera
d’arte, la critica e l’editoria nell’epoca moderna (17501930), in Storia dell’arte italiana, 2, Torino 1979; M.
Mozzo, Nota per una documentazione fotografica in
Italia nella seconda metà dell’ 800 tra tutela, restauro e
catalogazione, in Arti e storia nel Medioevo, edited by E.
Castelnuovo, V, Torino 2004, pp. 847-859; M. Ferretti,
Immagini di cose presenti, immagini di cose assenti:
aspetti storici delle riproduzioni d’arte, in Fratelli
Alinari, Firenze 2003. For Italian sources see: C. Bertelli,
La fedeltà incostante, e Appendice di testi e documenti,
in Storia d’Italia, Annali, Torino 1979, I, pp. 59-192; II,
pp. 201-302; I. Zannier, P. Costantini, Cultura
fotografica in Italia. Antologia di testi sulla fotografia
1849-1949, Milano 1985.

If we are to create an interactive network offering
users online access to cultural resources and shared
heritage we must establish organisational guidelines for
the digitalisation of collections belonging to archives,
libraries and museums. Construct, deconstruct,
reconstruct – this is the process undertaken in the
identification of Cultural Heritage, in its insertion into
the heritage system and our collective memory. The
cataloguing of photographs demands an approach based
on coherent descriptive strategies, which as far as
possible should also be interactive. We should not

464

overlook the fact that what stands behind photographs
such as these is a commissioning subject and a
photographer who have chosen particular shots, focus
points and frames. We must also take into consideration
the actual work of the photographer and factors such as
lighting, the field and depth of focus and developing
processes. What is seen before and after the image can
either be included or excluded. For example, where cities
and architecture are the object of photography, we can
either examine or refute items such as street signs,
advertising, graffiti, cars and other forms of transport, as
well as pedestrians. Each presence or absence triggers a
question mark. Moreover, images can be touched up and
altered with computer programmes or changed during the
printing process. The relative caption chosen is also
relevant. Once is has been taken, the photograph can be
handed over to the commissioning subject, it can enter
the market or can be inserted into a particular context.
The photograph can appear in the photographer’s own
archive as well as in those of Foundations or private and
public collections. Once on the printed page, the
photograph immediately belongs to a new context and
gains new arbitrary relationships. The photograph is thus
most definitely an act of criticism insofar as it registers a
particular interpretation and subjective perception; we
would do well therefore to determine its origin,
character, authorship and interconnecting relationships.

References
[1]

Il tempo dell’immagine. Fotografi e società a Bologna,
edited by A. Emiliani and I. Zannier, Torino 1993;
[2] C. Giudici, La tutela dei beni artistici come committenza,
ibidem, pp. 149-166;
[3] A. Emiliani, La fotografia come bene culturale, in
«Quaderni di Palazzo Pepoli Campogrande», 4, 1997;
[4] 1899, un progetto di fototeca pubblica per Milano: il
“ricetto” fotografico di Brera, edited by M. Miraglia, M.
Ceriana, Milano 2000;
[5] C. Giudici, Gabinetto e Archivio Fotografico di una
Soprintendenza; Esperienza di applicazione della scheda
F; La scheda per i fondi fotografici, in Lo apazio, il
tempo, le opere. Il catalogo del patrimonio culturale,
edited by A. Stanzani, O. Orsi, C. Giudici, catalogne of
the Bologna exhibition, Cinisello Balsamo 2001, pp. 6675, 192-194, 557-559;
[6] A. Mignemi, Lo sguardo e l’immagine. La fotografia
come documento storico, Torino 2003;
[7] R. Valtorta, Elementi di linguaggio fotografico. La
questione del documento e il rapporto con la realtà al
centro dell’identità della fotografia, in La catalogazione
della fotografia. La documentazione fotografica dei beni
culturali, «Quaderni di Villa Ghirlanda», 1, 2003, pp.
144-156;
[8] M. Ferretti, Immagini di cose presenti, immagini di cose
assenti: aspetti della riproduzione d’arte, in Fratelli
Alinari. Fotografi in Firenze, edited by A.C. Quintavalle
e M. Maffioli, Firenze, 2003, pp. 217-237;
[9] A.C. Quintavalle, Gli Alinari, Firenze 2003;
[10] C’era due volte. Fondi fotografici e patrimonio artistico,
edited by C. Giudici, Bologna 2004;
[11] M. Pigozzi, Igino Benvenuto Supino e l’occhio della
memoria storica, in Igino Benvenuto Supino 1858-1940.
Omaggio a un padre fondatore, a cura di P. Bassani
Pacht, Firenze 2006, pp. 59-70;
[12] M. Pigozzi, L’opera d’arte e la sua riproduzione
fotografica. Doni e acquisizioni della Fototeca del
Dipartimento delle Arti Visive. Dalla disattenzione al
preludio, in Il progetto per la Fototeca del Dipartimento
delle Arti Visive, forthcoming.

The photograph also bears witness to the subjective
reception and interpretation of a sign and it therefore
follows that the identity of the image can only be
determined once its origins have been determined.
Perception differs according to era and culture.
Historiographical subjectivity is variable. Every image
uses other images, whether real or mental, to reflect
reality2. In order to understand an image, we must
reconstruct its past function, which in turn will enable us
to gain an insight into its qualitative value. As Gisèle
Freund stated in 1976:
The importance of a photograph lies not only in the
fact that it is an instance of creative expression, but
more importantly that it represents one of the most
effective ways of shaping ideas and influencing
behaviour 3 .

3. Conclusion
To conclude we might pause for reflection on the
words of Corinna Giudici who points out that the
photograph is “an ever different and innovative form of
synthesis, real to that moment and to that historicallydetermined context.”

2
See, for example, S. Sontag, Sulla fotografia, Torino
1980, p. 132; R. Barthes, La camera chiara. Nota sulla
fotografia, Torino 1980, pp. 81-82; B. Newhall, Storia
della fotografia, Torino 1998; A. Rouché, La
photographie, Paris 2005.
3
G. Freund, Fotografia e società, Torino 1976, p. 17.

465

