DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2009.01538.x

COMPUTER GRAPHICS

forum

Volume 29 (2010), number 1 pp. 2–12

Evaluation of an Augmented Reality Supported Picking
System Under Practical Conditions
R. Reif 1 , W. A. G¨unthner1 , B. Schwerdtfeger2 and G. Klinker2
1 Department

for Materials, Handling Material, Flow Logistics, TU M¨unchen, Germany
f¨ur Augmented Reality, TU M¨unchen, Germany

2 Fachgebiet

Abstract
Order picking is one of the most important process steps in logistics. Because of their flexibility, human beings
cannot be replaced by machines. But if workers, in order, picking systems are equipped with a head-mounted
display, Augmented Reality can improve the information visualization. In this paper, the development of such a
system—called Pick-by-Vision—is presented. The system is evaluated in a user study performed in a real storage
environment. Important logistics figures as well as the subjective strain were measured. The results show that a
Pick-by-Vision system can considerably improve industrial order picking processes.
Keywords: Augmented Reality, order picking, evaluation
ACM CCS: 1.2 [User/Machine Systems]: Human factors; H.5.1 [Multimedia Information Systems]: Artificial,
augmented, and virtual realities; H.5.2. [User Interfaces]: User-centered design

product range and thus the variety of items increases while,
by contrast the size of orders is decreasing. For example,
the e-commerce company Amazon has a product range from
books over clothes to electronic devices. Normally you only
buy one or two products so that the orders in the distribution centre comprise one or two order lines. Human beings
and flexible storage environments are often the best solution
for picking in such big storages. Accordingly the aim is to
optimally support workers by technical devices during their
task fulfillment. In this paper, we focus on the provision of
information for order pickers.

1. Introduction
Over the last decade, globalization has lead to an increasing
division of labor along the value creation chain. Companies
focus on their core competences and the trend is moving towards outsourcing processes and tasks. Because of this, the
domain of logistics and most of all, order picking as one of its
core functions are becoming more and more important. Order picking is the gathering of goods out of a prepared range
of items following some customer orders [VDI94]. As such,
it is the last process step before the goods are delivered to the
customers. Mistakes arising from manually performed processes have a strong influence on the quality of delivery and
the relationship between clients and suppliers. The business
confidence will be negatively influenced, possibly leading to
financial consequences. Thus, zero defect picking is one important goal of order picking. But this will not be achieved,
no matter which technologies are used [GK07]. One way to
minimize errors is complete process automation. Due to the
high variety of goods in order picking applications, machines
usually cannot replace human being with his flexibility and
fine motor skills [GK07]. Flexibility is needed because the
c 2009 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and
Blackwell Publishing Ltd. Published by Blackwell Publishing,
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main
Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

Since 4 years, the Department for Materials Handling,
Material Flow, Logistics (fml) of Technische Universit¨at
M¨unchen (TUM) is working on a research project on visual information assistance—the Augmented Reality (AR)
supported order picking system Pick-by-Vision. The order
picker wears a head-mounted display (HMD) that visualizes
all the required data directly in his field of view. Hence, he
does not have to move his head, which leads to a decrease
in dead times caused by looking, for example at a mobile
data terminal (MDT), or a paper list used in conventional

2

R. Reif et al. / Evaluation of an Augmented Reality Supported Picking System under Practical Conditions

3

storages. In combination with a voice system for data input,
the application is hands-free and the worker can use both
hands for his real task.
First in this paper, possible order picking environments
for Pick-by-Vision are worked out. There are special requirements mainly for the hardware for the use of a mobile AR
system in real storages. After selecting the important hardware components, the test bed at the Department fml, is
presented. This configuration was used for an evaluation of
the Pick-by-Vision system. The experimental setup, the execution of the test and its results are presented in the next
chapter. This evaluation is the basis for some optimizations
and for the second system, which includes a tracking device and which is displayed next. The last chapter gives an
outlook on future fields of application of the Pick-by-Vision
technology.
2. State of the Art
Figure 1: Usual order picking technologies: scanner (1),
Pick-by-Light (2) and Pick-by-Voice (3).

2.1. Order picking
The basic conditions in the field of logistics have changed
rapidly over the last years. The market is demanding customized products. As an example, 20 years ago, automotive
manufacturers offered three-model series, while nowadays
they are offering nearly ten. According to this, the variants
within one series increase steadily. Thus, production and logistics systems as well as the workers within these systems
have to become more flexible to fulfill the customers’ needs.
A lot of different techniques exist for order picking in warehouses [GK07]. Conventionally, workers execute their orders
with paper lists, which are intuitive for human beings but laborious to handle. Modern systems go without paper work.
They include mobile data entry devices still having a high
handling effort but which are usually connected online to the
warehouse management system (WMS) processing the data
[GK07].
In modern warehouses, worker support based on a usual
paper list is often replaced by MDT with or without scanners, Pick-by-Voice (PbV) or Pick-by-Light (PbL) systems
(Figure 1). All these technologies have specific advantages
as well as disadvantages. PbV supports the worker by giving
him all instructions through the computer’s speech output.
Unfortunately, these systems face difficulties in noisy industrial environments. Furthermore, it is questionable whether
the warehouseman, as the user of such a system, likes it when
he is bossed by a monotone voice the whole day. Compared
to voice support systems, PbL offers the worker visual aid
by installing small lamps on each storage compartment. PbL
systems have the problem that the displays and lamps have to
be elaborately integrated into the shelf construction and are
thus very expensive and inflexible towards rebuilding. Besides, continuous functional tests of the lamps are needed, so
that maintenance costs rise. PbL is suitable for order picking
stations with a high throughput because the display addresses

the human optical sense, the favored sense for the provision
of information. This is the premise for quick reaction. Another common system is a MDT, but there is a lot of handling
time for this device. Normally, it is attached to the waist belt
of the worker. On the one hand, he has to move it into his
field of view for information reception and on the other hand,
he has to move it for scanning barcodes on the goods or the
storing compartment.
2.2. Augmented Reality
Augmented Reality is a technology that can support the human visual sense. Following the definition of Azuma we
define AR as a combination of the real and virtual world
with 3D registration and which is interactive in real time
[AZU97]. This definition requires a tracking system for positioning virtual objects. For order picking, the support with
static data-like pictures, or text information via an HMD
could be enough.
AR has many possible fields of application in industrial
environments. In the ARVIKA research project, AR applications for development, production and service were implemented. One example was AR supported order picking
[FRI04]. Assembly, maintenance and production planning
are also often mentioned. The first industrial application was
the wire bundle assembly project carried out by Boeing in
the 1990s [MIZ01]. The use of AR, for maintenance of a
printer, was introduced by Feiner et al. [FMS93]. Production
planning is another field where AR is used productively in industrial applications. AR allows comparing virtually planned
facilities to the realities of manufacturing layouts, for example to identify interfering edges [DSAP03]. In this paper, we

c 2009 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

4

R. Reif et al. / Evaluation of an Augmented Reality Supported Picking System under Practical Conditions

focus on supporting the operative staff. One productive application is an intelligent welding gun for experimental vehicle
construction [ESK∗ 04]. With AR the workers found the welding points four times faster than with the common technology
because the process steps searching the point with a measurement equipment and welding can be done in one go with AR.
Tang et al. [TOBM04] showed in a user study that AR can
improve manual assembly tasks. The subjects were faster
and made fewer errors using a HMD and a tracking system
for dynamic data visualization instead of static information
on a paper list, monitor or HMD. One example for assembly, maintenance or service applications is the mobile service application for machine tools developed by Weck et al.
[WHH∗ 04]. Training of the operative staff is another field
[WAL07; ZLGB03]. AR has advantages because the information is displayed directly in the user’s field of view thus
speeding up the information provision and the training curve.
The biggest potential of AR is the parallelization of information gathering with secondary employment. Hence, dead
times can be minimized and the time for information search
can be reduced when the data are displayed in the user’s field
of view. This is an interesting factor for order picking. Some
other work on AR picking was done besides ARVIKA. In
the research project ForLog (Bavarian Research Cooperation
Supra-Adaptive Logistics Systems), an evaluation for information visualization in storage environments was performed
[KFPS06]. Besides a PDA and spatial displays mounted at
the entrance of every aisle, an AR system with an optical
see-through (OST) HMD was tested. The small field of view
and the bad depth perception of this non-stereoscopic HMD
caused problems. Most of the subjects could not clearly identify the real spatial position of the 3D arrows pointing on the
storage compartment. Therefore, they often grasped into the
storage compartment above or below the right one. This was
the main reason for the worse performance when compared
to the other display technologies especially the PDA. The
Department fml also evaluated a first prototype of a Pick-byVision system [RW07]. The results and the consequences are
mentioned later in this paper in Section 5. Unfortunately, all
the very first experiments did not include the integration into
practical logistics processes.

AR visualization instead of the HMD. But this is no topic in
the research project.
The first step was selecting the data that can be displayed
in each picking scenario. The following four kinds of information were identified:
• static data: picking information (article, stock location,
amount, etc.), pictures, description of the articles;
• optical marking of the stock location or the picking container using 2D maps or spatial 3D geometries;
• wayfinding to the stock location; and
• optical marking of the storage area (if several orders are
picked in parallel).
Compared to real industrial order picking applications,
these scenarios were specified regarding the storage setup,
the loading aids, the range of items, the order structure or the
order picking strategies. A general order picking process was
worked out and the AR process was compared to different
processes using usual picking technologies like PbV or using
a MDT to identify differences in the general process flow.
AR showed no serious differences, but some process steps
are not necessary in an AR system while other steps can be
parallelized. After a final rating, the use of Pick-by-Vision
has its biggest potentials in three order picking scenarios
(Figure 2):
• A classical man-to-goods system where the order picker
moves through some aisles of a compartment shelving
system.
• A gravity-storage warehouse where each order picker
works along one shelf; this is a system for fast-moving
goods and normally supported by a PbL system.
• A goods-to-man system where the order picker is seated
at a fixed workstation; conveyors transport the goods to
him and his task is distributing the goods to the different
orders.
4. Important Hardware Components
for a Pick-by-Vision System

3. Selection of Possible Picking Environments
for Pick-by-Vision
Before beginning to develop a novel order picking system
based on the AR technology, it must be checked which applications offer the biggest savings potential. Basic order
picking scenarios were worked out depending on the VDI
guideline 3590 [VDI94]. Systems with automatic grasp processes and the use of industrial trucks were not regarded. The
use of HMDs on fork lifts is problematic due to reasons of
labor safety. Most of the purchasable HMDs limit the field
of view increasing the risk of accidents. Furthermore, the
fixed displays available in the fork lift can be used for the

An AR system consists of some typical hardware devices:
the visualization, the interaction and the tracking system. In
this paper, only mobile systems with HMDs as visualization
medium are considered. Other components like mobile computers, servers or data transfer technologies are not presented
in the following chapter.
4.1. Head-mounted display
The HMD is the most important hardware for Pick-by-Vision
because it is the interface between the human and the technical system. Its task is to display the necessary information

c 2009 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

R. Reif et al. / Evaluation of an Augmented Reality Supported Picking System under Practical Conditions

5

Figure 3: An adjusting knob from Griffin technologies
[GRI08] (left) and an infrared camera from metaio called
ARLiveCam (right).
project. The feedback was predominantly positive. But the
workers did not wear the HMD for more than 15 min. So, the
time dependent effects did not have any influence on their
opinion. Most of them can imagine working with an HMD
for 1 day or even longer for further evaluation. But there
are also workers who generally dislike the HMD. Thus, it is
essential to involve the workers from the beginning in order
to attain a high user acceptance of new technologies.
4.2. Interaction device

Figure 2: Possible order picking scenarios for Pick-byVision: (1) a classical man-to-goods system, (2) picking
along one shelf, (3) goods-to-man system.

to the order picker. The visualization of the necessary data is
one aspect; the other aspect is ergonomics and the physiologic
harmlessness of the device. Furthermore, aspects concerning
the use in industrial environments should be considered. The
most significant requirement is that the worker has to wear
the HMD over a shift of 8 h. Because of that, the HMD
should be light and ergonomically designed, but also rugged
and with an 8-h battery operation. Another critical point for
the operational use is that the field of view must not be limited
due to reasons of labor safety.
In this project, more than 40 HMDs were considered and
evaluated in terms of suitability but only ten have the potential
to be used in storages. VST was a knock-out criterion because
a power failure leaves the worker completely blind. Other
problems were a too small field of view, the weight or the
costs. Virtual Retinal Displays (VRD) like the Nomad from
Microvision suit best for order picking applications [MIC08;
TJMF95]. They do not limit the field of view because of their
construction based on a semi-permeable mirror. The mirror
is used to project the image with a laser beam directly into the
eye. The HMD is the decisive factor towards user acceptance
of Pick-by-Vision. The Nomad HMD was presented to some
order pickers employed by some industrial partners, in this

The second important piece of hardware is the interaction
device. Order picking processes vary slightly from one company to the next. But the acknowledgement of the pick, the
input of the zero crossing (if there are not enough items in
the storage compartment) or the input of errors are necessary for every order picking system. These interactions are
implemented in the fml Pick-by-Vision system. Different input devices were evaluated in terms of their suitability. The
interaction device should be robust and should not limit the
worker’s freedom of movement. For example, arm keyboards
do not suit order-picking applications. They are too heavy because the order picker has to move his arms the whole day
long. Besides, they are too dangerous because they can catch
the shelf construction during picking and hurt the worker.
Two devices were chosen for Pick-by-Vision. An adjusting
knob (Figure 3) and speech input can be used best for this
application. The degrees of freedom of the adjusting knob
(turning left and right and pushing) can be transfused easily
to the user interface, and it is rugged enough for use in storages. Speech input is the most intuitive form of interaction
for humans and it is the only technology that allows handsfree interaction. These advantages shame the problem of the
operability in noisy environments.
4.3. Tracking system
Another important hardware component is the tracking system. Besides the HMD the tracking system is the most problematic hardware component of a mobile AR application,
especially in industrial environments. A lot of different factors like degrees of freedom, accuracy, resolution, update rate
and range characterize tracking systems [RDB01]. If these
technical issues are suitable for an industrial application,

c 2009 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

6

R. Reif et al. / Evaluation of an Augmented Reality Supported Picking System under Practical Conditions

there is still another important factor: the price. On the one
hand, an AR system must work robust and safe in practical
operation. On the other hand, it must have a better performance than the system used before so that a short return on
investments can be achieved.
There are many different functional principles for tracking systems like electromagnetic, inertial, mechanical, optical, radio-based or ultrasonic systems [RDB01]. They all
have their specific advantages and disadvantages. Electromagnetic, ultrasonic or radio-based systems have problems
in storages because of the high proportion of metallic structures like shelves. Magic Map is a WLAN-based technology that is used in storages to locate devices and loading
aids [ISLW05]. The position can be measured well but this
system gives no orientation. Ubisense developed a tracking
system based on the ultra wideband technology that works
in metallic environments [UBI08]. In most publications, optical tracking systems are seen as the best choice for use in
industrial environments. After an evaluation optical tracking
systems were also chosen for Pick-by-Vision. Three different
variants are possible:
• An inside-out system with a video camera and paper
markers mounted in the storage, for example on the
shelves or selected points in the environment.
• An inside-out system with infrared sensors and active
LEDs on the ceiling like the Hi-Ball system [WBV∗ 01].
• Markers on the HMD and infrared cameras in the environment like the ARTtrack from A.R.T. [ART08] or the
ARLiveCam from metaio [MET08] (Figure 3).
Paper markers are always crucial if they are used in industrial applications because they can become dirty and perform
more poorly. In our application it was not possible to implement LED on the ceiling. Hence, we decided to use the
outside-in system with infrared cameras with spherical reflective markers mounted on the HMD.
It is questionable if a tracking system is needed for a Pickby-Vision system. In the evaluation of Tang et al. [TOBM04]
the tracking system leads to a better performance especially
to less error. But is the performance in order picking systems with tracking as much better than without so that the
additional costs amortize in an acceptable time? This is one
question that should be answered in this project. Therefore,
the first Pick-by-Vision system was installed without a tracking system. This system will be explained and evaluated in
the next chapters. The system with tracking is introduced in
chapter 7.
5. Setup of Pick-by-Vision without Using
a Tracking System
The first Pick-by-Vision system was implemented in close
collaboration with our industrial partner CIM GmbH, which

Figure 4: Used system in this setup: a Microvision Nomad
HMD, a head-set for the speech input and a possible visualization (little picture).
is the developer of Prolag WorldTM , the WMS used in this
application. The information of the WMS, which is normally
shown on a fork lift terminal is displayed on the Microvision
Nomad VRD (Figure 4).
One of the most important things about this system is
the Graphical User Interface (GUI), because the virtual information must be displayed at the right time and at the
right position. A GUI was implemented following special
AR guidelines [BKlV∗ 05] [FRI04]. For his daily work the
order picker needs essential text information about the orders, for example stock locations, article number, goods description or required quantities. The data input, for example
the acknowledgement, is done by the order picker with a
rudimentary speech input system based on the speaKINGTM
software from MediaInterface Dresden GmbH. Only a small
vocabulary is needed for order picking. In this case, the system can be operated with ca. 20 words. The system must
function properly independently of the speaker. This is very
important for an industrial application with changing workers (especially temporary workers) or for an evaluation with
several test persons. Only then, every user can work with the
system without a special familiarization.
The workflow of this Pick-by-Vision system includes all
important tasks found in the general order picking process.
In real order picking applications there are more company
specific tasks but for our system the following workflow is
sufficient. First, there is a short login dialog (user name,
password). After choosing the next order the user has to
take a picking trolley where he sets down the picking container. Then, the system shows him the next stock location.
During his way to this stock location, he can already read
the picking information (article number and amount). After acknowledging the pick, the next order line is displayed.
When the last order line is completed, he is told to go to
the delivery station to finish the order by putting the picking
container on a conveyor. Every command is confirmed with
the same simple speech input—except for the case where

c 2009 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

R. Reif et al. / Evaluation of an Augmented Reality Supported Picking System under Practical Conditions

7

in the same sequence with each technique. This means that
each subject started with order 1 and finished with order 14.
For every order, the WMS optimized the route through the
storage.

Figure 5: The experimental setup with the compartment shelving system and the starting point (left) in the
K¨uhne + Nagel distribution centre.

the picking amount also has to be acknowledged by repeating the amount. Because of the small number of speech
commands, the user becomes familiar with the system in
a little while.

6. Evaluation of the Pick-by-Vision System
A first simple Pick-by-Vision system was evaluated in 2007
[RW07]. The users’ acceptance was high but the measured
logistics operating figures were worse when compared to
the paper list. Several factors were responsible for this. The
speech input system was of a worse implementation, the
GUI could use improvement and the test storage at the Department fml was too small. After improving the system, a
new evaluation was carried out in a bigger storage.

6.1. Experimental setup
In this experimental series, the Pick-by-Vision system was
compared to a usual paper list in a compartment shelving
system in a distribution centre hosted by our industrial partner
K¨uhne + Nagel (AG & Co.) KG. The storage consists of eight
shelves with four aisles with more than 600 stock locations
(Figure 5). Over 75% of the stock locations were filled with
goods.
Each subject had to finish 14 orders using both techniques.
The orders had between two and six order lines with one to
six items each. Altogether there were 52 order lines with
119 items (average 2.3 items per order line). The items were
boxes in different sizes and with different weight. Normally,
the boxes could be handled with one hand but some were so
big or heavy that two hands were needed. Other items were
booklets or sweets, which were also the reward for the test
persons. Most of the items were stored in loading aids. Some
were lying in the shelves without one. The orders were picked

Sixteen subjects took part in this test series. Most of them
were male (13); the average age was 27.6 years (between 20
and 52 years, standard deviation 8.13). Among them were
students or researchers, but also non-academic people like
skilled workers. Six had experience with 3D visualization,
for example from computer games, less than from Virtual
Reality applications. Five were familiar with order picking
processes. The data for this analysis was collected in personal
questionnaires. The subjects had also to fill out a special questionnaire for each technique after picking with it to measure
the subjective strain.
6.2. Null hypotheses
During the test series, two very important logistics operating
figures were measured: order picking time and errors.
• Order picking time is important for the throughput time
of the orders in the storage. It is a part of the reaction
time between the order of the costumer and the delivery
to him. This time is getting shorter and shorter and it
is an essential factor of success for a company. Besides,
the order picking time can be used to calculate the order
picking performance. The performance is the average
number of picked order lines per hour.
• Picking errors can have a big effect when they are not
recognized before shipping. They can result in high contract penalties, for example when the costumer has to
stop his production. The picking errors are translated in
an error rate. That represents the amount of errors within
all picked order lines.
The order picking time for the whole trail was measured
with a common stop watch. The times for the separate orders
were read off in between. The errors were counted after
the delivery of the picking container with the corresponding
order.
Normally, both technologies should not equally perform.
For the statistical proof it is hypothesized that the tested
figures for both are equal. This null hypothesis is proofed
and accepted or if necessary discarded. For these figures
some null hypotheses can be introduced comparing Pick-byVision to a paper list based system. The first null hypothesis
is that the picking time t for both techniques is equal:
H0,1 : tPick-by-Vision = tpaper list
For Pick-by-Vision little training is needed. So the order
picking times for Pick-by-Vision can be different between the
subjects who started with Pick-by-Vision and who started the

c 2009 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

8

R. Reif et al. / Evaluation of an Augmented Reality Supported Picking System under Practical Conditions

Figure 6: Mean values, maximum and minimum of the order
picking times with paper list and Pick-by-Vision over all 16
subjects.
paper list. Thus, the second null hypothesis is that the times
tStart are equal and do not depend on the starting technology:
H0,2 : tPick-by-Vision, Start Pick-by-Vision = tPick-by-Vision, Start paper list
The same effect is checked for the paper list. This is the
third null hypothesis:
H0,3 : tpaper list, Start Pick-by-Vision = tpaper list, Start paper list
For the error rates f between both techniques it is expected
that they are equal. This is the forth null hypothesis:
H0,4 : fPick-by-Vision = fpaper list

6.3. Analysis of the test series
The measurement of the logistics operating figures, is one
side, their interpretation is another. Identifying a difference
between Pick-by-Vision and the paper list for only one certain value in this test series does not necessarily imply a
universal validity of this result. First, descriptive values like
the mean value, maximum, minimum or standard derivation
are calculated. Based on these results the null hypotheses
are proven. For a specific level of significance, the difference is significant. For all analysis in this paper, the level of
significance α is 5%.
6.3.1. Picking time
There is only a small difference between the mean values
of the order picking times. With Pick-by-Vision the subjects were about 1 min (4%) faster than with the paper list
(Figure 6). In both tests the Grubbs’ Test for outliers shows
no outliers with a confidence level of 99%. The confidence

Figure 7: Boxplot with median, maximum and minimum of
the order picking time with Pick-by-Vision: left subjects starting with the paper list, right subjects starting with Pick-byVision.

interval for the mean value for Pick-by-Vision is 25.81 to
31.11 min, and for the paper list 27.90–31.18 min. So, both
samples are very homogenous and are normally distributed
(Kolmogorov–Smirnov-test because the amount is smaller
than 30). This is the condition for the significance test. A
t-test for paired dependent samples is used because the number of values for both samples is equal but the variance is
different (Pick-by-Vision: 4.97, paper list 3.08). The difference between the order picking times is not significant and
the null hypothesis H0,1 cannot be discarded. Remarkable
is that the statistical spread is bigger with Pick-by-Vision.
The difference between the slowest and the fastest subject is
18 min (ca. 47%) whereas, it is only 12 min (35%) with the
paper list. So, the variance is different. With a special test
the significance can be proven [BOR05]. The difference is
significant. Thus, the null hypothesis H0,1 can be discarded.
There is a difference between the order picking times due to
the variance. Expectedly, with Pick-by-Vision some subjects
performed very fast and some needed a lot of time before
they were familiar with the new system.

6.3.2. Learning effects
There are always some learning effects, for example concerning the layout of the storage, the workflow or the look of the
articles. To minimize these effects the technique with which
the subjects had to start was randomized. Hence, eight subjects started with Pick-by-Vision and eight with the paper list.
We can notice an interesting effect. When the picking times
with Pick-by-Vision are compared, there is a difference of
6 min (ca. 19%). So, the subjects were noticeably faster with
Pick-by-Vision when they had picked with the paper list before (Figure 7). This effect is checked for significance. Both
samples are normally distributed (Kolmogorov–Smirnovtest). A t-test for paired dependent samples is used again
because the number of values for both samples is equal but

c 2009 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

R. Reif et al. / Evaluation of an Augmented Reality Supported Picking System under Practical Conditions

9

Figure 8: Boxplot with median, maximum and minimum of
the order picking time with the paper list: left subjects starting with the paper list, right subjects starting with Pick-byVision.
the variance is different (start Pick-by-Vision: 3.90, start paper list 2.23). The test shows a significant difference between
the order picking times. Therefore, H0,2 is discarded. The
explanation for this effect is that the subjects work more
confidently with Pick-by-Vision if they know the storage
and the workflow. So, they can concentrate on the new AR
technology.
With the paper list there was nearly no difference in the
mean values of the order picking times (Figure 8). It did not
matter if the paper list was the subject’s first or second test
series and H0,3 cannot be discarded. The paper list is very
intuitive to handle for human beings because they are familiar
with it in everyday life. The subjects had no problems when
starting with the paper list. One interesting effect is that the
statistical spread is wider when the subjects picked with the
AR system before (35% to 23% when starting with the paper
list). Normally, the spread should be wider in the first trial. If
this is proven with a test for variances [BOR05 ], there is even
a high significance (α = 1%) and H0,3 must be discarded. But
this is the contrary effect to Pick-by-Vision where the spread
within the subjects, who started with the paper list, was wider.
Faster subjects in the second trail are normal because they
knew the workflow and the storage. The slower subjects are
more difficult to explain. Perhaps they were tired or they were
bored to do the same task with a simple paper list.

6.3.3. Picking errors
Among other things, the error rate depends on the order
picking technology. For a paper list it is normally 0.35%, for
Pick-by-Light 0.40% or Pick-by-Voice 0.08% [tHS04]. This
means, for example for an error rate of 0.40% that four order
items within 1,000 are faulty. There are different types of
errors, for example a wrong item was picked, the amount is
incorrect or all articles of an order line are missing. Even one
error within 1,000 is usually not acceptable to the customers,

Figure 9: Mean values, maximum and minimum of the order
picking times with paper list and Pick-by-Vision over all 16
subjects.

because in extreme case each mistake can lead to halting the
production line.
In this test series the error rate for the paper list is seven
times higher than for Pick-by-Vision (Figure 9). With Pickby-Vision only one error was made for each 1,904 picked
items. Significance is questionable because of such a small
number of errors in the whole evaluation. The confidence
interval for the mean value for Pick-by-Vision is 0.03–
3.69 errors and for the paper lists 2.77–13.05 errors. Both
samples are not normally distributed. Error rates are subject to the Poisson distribution because the error count can
only take integer; non-negative values and picking errors are
a rare event. Thus, the significance test was made with the
Mann–Whitney U-test. The test shows no significant difference although the difference seems to be big enough. The
null hypothesis H0,4 cannot be discarded. The reasons are that
there were only 16 subjects and they made too few errors for
a statistical conclusion.

6.3.4. Questionnaires
Besides the logistics operating figures the psychological
factors motivation, usability, impression and the cognitive
load were measured with questionnaires. The subjects accepted the system very well and the subjective strain is
lower than with the paper list. The distinct usability and
the low cognitive load lead to a very high motivation to work
with Pick-by-Vision. The motivation is the major difference
(Figure 10) when compared to the paper list whereas the
other examined factors showed no clear differences. There
were also free questions where the subjects could state their
opinion in their own words. On the one hand, some had
problems with the HMD because they could read worse due to

c 2009 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

10

R. Reif et al. / Evaluation of an Augmented Reality Supported Picking System under Practical Conditions

Figure 10: The motivation of the subjects to work with the
paper list and Pick-by-Vision.

changing brightness or the shift of the Nomad VRD mounted
on a usual baseball cap. Most disliked the monotone speech
input and that they had no overview of the size of an order
(foremost the amount of order lines). On the other hand, the
subjects liked that they could work hands-free and that the
information was displayed clear and in their field of view.
Another advantage is the acknowledgment of the pick with
the right amount. This is the main reason for the low error
rate. Altogether, the results are very positive but the subjects
wore the HMD only between 30 and 45 min. Therefore, it is
hard to make predictions concerning full-time use.

7. Current Work: Pick-by-Vision Including
a Tracking System
The second functional model is developed independently
from the first one together with the Fachgebiet Augmented
Reality (FAR) of the TUM. With the tracking system, it is
possible to display 3D information in correct spatial position. For this approach, the same HMD is used but the GUI is
different. Besides text information, pictures of the articles or
3D geometries can also be visualized. These geometries are
used for wayfinding and for marking the stock location. One
important point is to find the right amount of displayed information because it should not occlude too much of the real
environment. Labor safety would be influenced negatively if
the worker’s field of view is occluded with too much with
virtual information.
Several evaluations were made at the FARs AR Lab to
find the best visualization [SK08]. 2D maps performed worse
because they occlude too much of the real environment and
the users counted time-consuming the stock location from the
beginning of the aisle to the stock location of the current order
line. Arrows are usual symbols for navigation tasks. But there
is one problem. With the monocular HMD the subjects had
problems with the depth perception of the arrows. Often they
picked items from the stock location above or below the right
one. Hence, we need visualization with a good spatial effect

Figure 11: Tunnel becoming transparent if the right storage
compartment is recognized and a frame around the right
stock location.

using only one eye. The combination of a tunnel with a frame
seems to be the best solution. This is a further development
of the attention funnel [BTOX06]. The tunnel consisting of
some cycles begins at the eye of the user and ends following
a special curve at the stock location. It shows the user in
which direction he should look. If his view is towards the
right shelf, the tunnel becomes transparent and at its end, the
user can see a frame around the marker of the stock location
(Figure 11). In the evaluation, the subjects made no errors
with the tunnel. It is intuitive to follow and it gives a good
spatial effect even with the monocular HMD.
The next step was the transfer of the system to the storage
at the Department fml. For the small storage with two aisles
of four meters in length more of the A.R.T. infrared cameras
were needed than in the FARs AR Lab. Thus, two cameras
are hanging above the shelves to cover the whole area. At the
end of each aisle, there are a couple of cameras. One at 2.5 m
height points diagonally and one at 1.5 m height horizontally
into the aisle. With this configuration, the six cameras cover
the whole operating area very well (Figure 12). The passive
target for the tracking system consists of five self-reflecting
balls mounted on the HMD. We also changed the interaction
device for this functional model. An adjusting knob is used
for interaction because the speech recognition in the other
functional model does not work satisfactorily.
With this setup we made some evaluations that will be
published soon. One interesting question is the real advantage of using a tracking system. Thus, we made one experiment comparing a Pick-by-Vision system with tracking to
the same system without using tracking. We analyzed the
logistics operating figures, the different occlusion of the real
environment and the objective strain. All our present evaluations were short-term experiments of 15 to 45 min. Therefore,

c 2009 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

R. Reif et al. / Evaluation of an Augmented Reality Supported Picking System under Practical Conditions

11

Acknowledgments
The Department fml would like to thank their industry partners for their support with the development and the evaluation of the above-mentioned demonstrators; especially CIM
GmbH, metaio GmbH and K¨uhne + Nagel (AG & Co) KG.
Many students were involved in the project. Three should
be mentioned here: Xueming Pan, Thomas Schmidt and
Michael Stather. Finally, the Department thanks all participants who took part in the different kinds of experiments
and gave us feedback for optimizing the demonstrators and
the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology,
which supports this project.

References
[ART08] A.R.T.: http://www.ar-tracking.de (2008).
[AZU97] AZUMA R. T.: A survey of Augmented Reality. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments,
8 (1997), 355–385.
[BTOX06] BIOCCA F., TANG A., OWEN C., XIAO F.: Attention
funnel: Omnidirectional 3D cursor for mobile Augmented
Reality platforms. In CHI’06: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human Factors in Computing System (New
York, NY, USA, 2006), ACM Press, pp. 1115–1122.
[BOR05] BORTZ J.: Statistik f¨ur Human- und Sozialwissenschaftler. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 2005.
Figure 12: Pick-by-Vision including an infrared tracking
system with targets fixed on the HMD.
we made another middle-term experiment of about two hours
comparing Pick-by-Vision with tracking to a common paperbased system. The focus was on the different subjective and
objective strain of the subjects.
8. Conclusion
Our results underline the potentials of Pick-by-Vision. We
worked out in which order picking scenarios in such a system makes sense and which information must be displayed.
Our evaluations show that the users are faster and make fewer
errors. We considered more than just logistics operating figures. The user acceptance is high, resulting in a steep training
curve. But there are still some problems. The biggest obstacle
for porting such systems from the research stage into practical applications is the hardware components, especially the
HMD and the tracking system, if required. But there is a continuous further development of these components because the
gaming industry slowly discovers AR and HMDs will soon
be a part of the everyday life within mobile multimedia applications. Therefore, HMDs will also be used in industrial
applications within the next 5 years.

[BK1V*05] BOWMAN D. A., KRUIJFF E., LAVIOLA J. JR.,
POUPYREV I.: 3D User Interfaces. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 2005.
[DSAP03] DOIL F., SCHREIBER W., ALT T., PATRON C.: Augmented Reality for manufacturing planning. In Proceedings of the 7th International Immersive Projection Technologies Workshop (Zurich, Swiss, 2003), ETH Zurich.
[ESK*04] ECHTLER F., STURM F., KINDERMANN K., KLINKER
G., STILLA J., TRILK J., NAJAFI H.: The intelligent welding
gun: Augmented Reality for experimental vehicle construction. In Virtual and Augmented Reality Applications
in Manufacturing. S. K. Ong and A. Y. C. Nee (Eds.).
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany (2004), pp. 333–360.
[FMS93] FEINER S., MACINTYRE B., SELIGMANN D.:
Knowledge-based Augmented Reality. Communications
of the ACM, 36 (1993), 52–62.
[FRI04] FRIEDRICH W.: ARVIKA—Augmented Reality For
Development, Production and Service. Publicis Corporate
Publishing, Erlangen, Germany, 2004.
[GRI08] GRIFFIN:
(2008).

http://www.griffintechnology.com

c 2009 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

12

R. Reif et al. / Evaluation of an Augmented Reality Supported Picking System under Practical Conditions

[GK07] GUDEHUS T., KOTZAB H.: Logistics. A Handbook: Principles, Strategies, Operations. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Germany, 2007.
[ISLW05] IBACH P., STANTCHEV V., LEDERER F., WEIß A.:
WLAN-based asset tracking for warehouse management.
In Proceedings of the IADIS International Conference eCommerce (Porto, Portugal, 2005).

[TOBM04] TANG A., OWAN C., BIOCCA F., MOU W.: Performance evaluation of Augmented Reality for directed
assembly. In Virtual and Augmented Reality Applications
in Manufacturing. S. K. Ong and A. Y. C. Nee (Eds.).
Springer-Verlag (2004), pp. 311–331.
[tHS04] TEN HOMPEL M., SCHMIDT T.: Warehouse Management. Springer-Verlag, 2004.

[KFPS06] KLINKER G., FRIMOR T., PUSTKA D.,
SCHWERDTFEGER B.: Mobile information presentation
schemes for supra-adaptive logistics applications. In
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on
Artificial Reality and Telexistence (Hangzhou, China,
2006).

[TJMF95] TIDWELL M., JOHNSTON R. S., MELVILLE D.,
FURNESS T. A.: The virtual retinal display—A retinal scanning imaging system. In Proceedings of Virtual Reality
World ’95 (1995), pp. 325–333.

[MET08] Metaio: http://www.metaio.com (2008).

[VDI94] VDI: VDI Guideline 3590: Order Picking Systems.
Beuth Vertrieb, Berlin, Germany, 1994.

[UBI08] UBISENSE: http://www.ubisense.com (2008).

[MIC08] Microvision: http://www.microvision.com (2008).
[MIZ01] MIZELL D.: Boeing’s Wire Bundle Assembly
Project. In Fundamentals of Wearable Computers and
Augmented Reality. W. Barfield and T. Caudell (Eds.).
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates (2001), pp. 447–467.
[RW07] REIF R., WALCH D.: Augmented & virtual reality
applications in the field of logistics. In Proceedings of
the 4th Intuition International Conference and Workshop
(Athens, Greece, 2007), pp. 61–69.

[WAL07] WALCH D.: Augmented and virtual reality based
training in the field of logistics. In Proceedings of the
10th IAESTED International Conference and Advanced
Technology in Education, CATE 2007 (Beijing, China,
2007).
[WHH*04] WECK M., HAMADOU M., HOYMANN H., JAHN
D., LESCHER M.: Mobile service applications for machine
tools. In Virtual and Augmented Reality Applications in
Manufacturing. S. K. Ong and A. Y. C. Nee (Eds.).
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany (2004), pp. 237–255.

[RDB01] ROLLAND J. P., DAVIS L. D., BAILLOT Y.: A survey of
tracking technology for virtual environments. In Fundamentals of Wearable Computers and Augmented Reality.
W. Barfield and T. Caudell (Eds.). Lawrence Erlbaum Associates (2001), pp. 67–112.

[WBV*01] WELCH G., BISHOP G., VICCI L., BRUMBACK S.,
KELLER K., COLLUCI D.: High-performance wide-area optical tracking—The HiBall Tracking System. Presence:
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 1 (2001), 1–21.

[SK08] SCHWERDTFEGER B., KLINKER G.: Supporting order
picking with augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 7th
IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality (Cambridge, UK, 2008), pp. 91–94.

[ZLGB03] ZHONG X., LIU P., GEORGANAS N. D., BOULANGER
P.: Designing a vision-based collaborative Augmented Reality application for industrial training. Information Technology, 1 (2003), 7–19.

c 2009 The Authors
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

