Conveying Shape with Texture: an experimental investigation of the impact
of texture type on shape categorization judgments
Sunghee Kim, Haleh Hagh-Shenas and Victoria Interrante
University of Minnesota
4-192 EECS Bldg, 200 Union St. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455
{skim, haleh, interran}@cs.umn.edu

Abstract
As visualization researchers, we are interested in gaining a better
understanding of how to effectively use texture to facilitate shape
perception. If we could design the ideal texture pattern to apply to
an arbitrary smoothly curving surface in order to enable its 3D
shape to be most accurately and effectively perceived, what would
the characteristics of that texture pattern be? In this paper we
describe the results of a comprehensive controlled observer
experiment intended to yield insight into that question.
In previous studies, using a surface attitude probe adjustment task,
we had found that judgments of shape under conditions of
anisotropic texturing were most accurate when the directions(s) of
anisotropy were aligned with one or both of the principal
directions of curvature over the surface, as opposed to being
aligned with an arbitrary constant direction over the surface, or
with a direction that varied over the surface in a manner unrelated
to the surface geometry. However, many open questions
remained.
Here we report the results of a new study comparing the relative
accuracy of observers' judgments of shape type (elliptical,
cylindrical, hyperbolic or flat) and shape orientation (convex,
concave, both, or neither) for local views of boundary masked
quadric surface patches under six different principal direction
texture pattern conditions plus two control texture conditions (an
isotropic pattern and a non-principal direction oriented anisotropic
pattern), under both perspective and orthographic projection
conditions and from both head-on and oblique viewpoints.
Our results confirm the hypothesis that accurate shape perception
is facilitated to a statistically significantly greater extent by some
principal direction texture patterns than by others. Specifically,
we found that, for both views, under conditions of perspective
projection, participants more often correctly identified the shape
category and the shape orientation when the surface was textured
with the pattern that contained oriented energy along both the first
and second principal directions only than in the case of any other
texture condition. Patterns containing markings following only
one of the principal directions, or markings oriented obliquely to
the principal directions, or containing information along other
directions in addition to the principal directions yielded poorer
performance overall.

In examining the effects of projection type and view direction, we
found that observers retained the ability to make correct shape
category judgments under conditions of orthographic viewing
under many texture conditions, as long as the surface patches
were viewed from an oblique vantage point rather than head-on.
However, our observers were unable to reliably disambiguate
convex from concave surface orientations in the absence of
perspective projection, regardless of texture type.
CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: I.3.7, I.2.10, J.4, H.5.2.
Additional Keywords: shape perception, texture, principal
directions

1. Introduction
As visualization designers, our goal is to determine how to most
effectively portray a set of data such that its essential features can
be easily and accurately understood. When we use computer
graphics techniques to display computed or acquired surfaces, we
have wide discretion over the choice of the surface material
properties. If we desire to portray a surface in a way that best
facilitates the accurate, intuitive understanding of its 3D shape,
what rendering characteristics should we choose to most
effectively accomplish this task? The answer to this question has
significant potential relevance to a wide range of visualization
applications in which scientists need to attain an accurate,
intuitive understanding of the shapes of complicated, smoothly
curving surfaces in their data. The most common practice in
rendering objects is to use a simple Phong shading model without
any surface texture. Phong shading is frequently used because it
is easy to implement and is the default on most systems.
However, smooth shading is not optimal for all purposes and in
particular is not optimal for shape representation — research in
shape perception has shown that shape understanding can be
facilitated by the presence of the right kinds of surface texture.
Unfortunately, existing theories do not provide sufficient guidance
to definitively answer the question of how best to define a surface
texture pattern to meet this goal. Over the past several years, we
have conducted a series of experiments [Interrante and Kim 2001,
Interrante et al. 2002, Kim et al. 2003] investigating the impacts
of various characteristics of surface texture patterns on shape
perception. In this paper we present the findings of our most
ambitious and successful experiment to date. But first we provide
a brief overview of previous work in shape perception from
shading and texture.

2. Previous Work
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003,
October 19-21, 2003, Seattle, Washington, USA
0-7803-8154-8/03/$17.00 ©2003 IEEE

Observation tells us that shading clearly plays an important role in
conveying information about the shape structure of a surface.
However, psychophysical experiments have indicated striking
limitations in observers’ ability to accurately infer some types of
shape information solely from the pattern of diffuse shading over
a local, smoothly curving surface patch due to illumination by a

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 1: A close-up view of the top portion of a tooth dataset, depicted, from left to right, with: no texture, an orthogonal texture pattern
following smoothed principal directions, and an orthogonal texture pattern following constant uniform directions in object space.
single light source. In a study on the perception of local surface
orientation from shading, Mamassian and Kersten [1996]
presented observers with images of simple smooth objects under
four illumination conditions plus a silhouette control condition
(uniform ambient shading) and asked them to make judgments
about the local surface orientation at selected points. Analyzing
the results using an ideal observer analysis, they concluded that
the human observers appeared not to be using the shading
information at all, but rather relying on the occluding contours of
the objects as the overriding basis for their judgments. In an
experiment conducted by Erens et al. [1993], in which participants
were shown boundary-masked, computer-generated images of
quadric surface patches under a variety of lighting conditions,
observers were unable to correctly infer the direction of
illumination, or to accurately categorize the shape of the patch as
either elliptic or hyperbolic. When, in a follow-up study, the
direction of illumination was explicitly indicated, observers
gained the ability to disambiguate convex from concave surface
orientations, in the elliptic case, but were still unable to reliably
differentiate the shape type. Thus Erens et al. concluded that local
shading structure, by itself, is only a weak cue to surface shape.
In this research, we set out to answer the questions: Is it possible
that observers will be able to reliably discriminate between
elliptic, hyperbolic, and cylindrical patches under conditions
where surface texture – in the form of a pattern of luminance
variations - is present in addition to shading? Will it be the case
that shape category identification is enabled under some texture
conditions but not others? If this were to be the case, it would
provide us with a useful method for differentiating texture
patterns that have a greater potential to be helpful in facilitating
shape perception from texture patterns that do not.
Despite decades of research, investigations into the effects of
texture on shape perception continue to be of interest and
importance in the vision research community to this day. Because
reliable computer graphic techniques for applying an arbitrary
given texture pattern to an arbitrary doubly curved surface have
only recently been developed, e.g. [Gorla et al. 2003], research on
shape perception from texture has generally been somewhat
restricted, either to developable surfaces [Knill 2001; Li and Zaidi
2000] (surfaces which can be rolled out to lie flat on a plane), to
patterns projected onto surfaces from a particular direction [Todd
and Reichel 1990], or to solid textures [Todd et al. 1997] (whose
particular characteristics are generally independent of the shape of
surface carved out of them). There are many open questions that
still exist about the impact of surface texture on shape perception.
However, many important insights have also been achieved.

Numerous studies have found evidence that the accuracy of
observers’ judgments of surface orientation and curvature can be
significantly affected (either positively or negatively) by the
presence of a surface texture pattern, e.g. [Interrante et al. 1997,
Todd et al. 1997]. Recent findings support the idea that the
facilitating effects of the presence of texture depend not only upon
the intrinsic characteristics of the texture pattern itself, e.g.
[Rosenholtz and Malik 1997] but also upon how the pattern is laid
down over the surface [Interrante and Kim 2001, Li and Zaidi
2000, Li and Zaidi 2001].
Several researchers have suggested that observers may be biased
toward interpreting lines on surfaces as if they were following the
principal directions [Stevens 1981, Mamassian and Landy 1998].
Li and Zaidi [2000; 2001] have argued that two conditions are
necessary for the perception of 3D shape from texture: 1) the
texture pattern must have a considerable amount of energy along
the direction of maximum curvature and 2) the surfaces must be
viewed with noticeable perspective. However the task that they
used to judge shape perception, discriminating which of two
adjacent points is more distant, actually only provides coarse
information about the perceived direction of surface slant, which
is useful for determining whether observers can differentiate
convexities from concavities, but does not capture all of the
information that we would like to know about shape perception.
Other researchers downplay the importance to shape
understanding of specific texture pattern characteristics such as
alignment with the principal directions, arguing that these
conditions are not always the necessary factors in conveying
information to observers and demonstrating that surface shape can
be reliably inferred from a very wide range of texture patterns.
Appearing to contradict Li and Zaidi [2001], Todd and Oomes
[2002] show that there is some shape information available under
orthographic projection. They also describe examples in which
texture elements appear able to reveal the underlying shape of an
object even though the texture itself lacks significant energy in
any particular direction. They argue that surfaces which do not
have gradual orientation changes relative to the viewing direction
are degenerate for providing information about 3D shape from
gradients of texture compression.
A complicating factor in this debate is the lack of standard reliable
universally accepted metrics for evaluating shape perception.
Various tasks that have been used in the past are: manipulation of
a surface attitude probe, indicating an estimate of the direction in
which the surface normal is pointing, individually measured at a
single location on the surface [Koenderink et al. 1992],

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

determination of which of two points is farthest away,
qualitatively indicating whether a surface appears to be tipping
forward or backward in the direction between the two points [Li
and Zaidi 2000], identification of the quadrant in which two
surfaces differ in shape [Interrante et al. 2002], and identification
of the shape category of a surface patch [Erens et al. 1993].
In our own previous work we have found indications that surface
attitude judgments are significantly more accurate [Interrante and
Kim 2001] and surface shape discrimination thresholds
significantly reduced [Interrante et al. 2002] under conditions of
principal direction texturing, as compared to conditions of
texturing with an anisotropic pattern whose orientation is either
uniform in object space or follows a non-geodesic path within the
surface; in this study we sought to compare alternative principal
direction oriented patterns. In particular, we sought to determine
whether a pattern containing oriented elements aligned with both
the first and second principal directions would show shape more
effectively than a singly-oriented anisotropic pattern aligned only
with the first or the second principal direction. In a previous
study [Kim et al. 2003] we had found indications that this might
be the case, but our results were below significance at the 95%
level. In the current experiment we also sought to investigate the
impact on texture perception of employing patterns containing
elements systematically oriented at an oblique angle (45 degrees)
to the principal direction(s). Such textures would contain
information that implicitly encodes the principal directions with as
great a reliability as ‘unrotated’ principal direction textures, but
the eye would be drawn by these texture to follow lines over the
surface that were oriented in a direction not equal to the principal
directions, and the possibility would exist that observers might
interpret the oblique lines as if they were oriented in the principal
directions even though they were not. Of secondary importance
but also of some interest to us was determining whether it was in
fact true that accurate shape perception could not be achieved
except under conditions of perspective projection, as claimed by
Li and Zaidi. Like Todd, we had accumulated some anecdotal
evidence that shape perception might be still possible even under
conditions of orthographic viewing, and we were interested to
pursue this question a little further.

3. Experiment
3.1 Method
3.1.1 Stimuli Preparation
We used eight patterns to texture our surfaces using the texture
synthesis method developed by Gorla et al. [2003]. The eight
patterns used were as follows: 1-directional, (which shows the
first principal direction), 1-directional rotated clock-wise 45
degrees (diagonal to the first principal direction), 1-directional
rotated clock-wise 90 degrees (which shows the second principal
direction), 2-directional (which shows both first and second
principal directions), 2-directional rotated clock-wise 45 degrees,
3-directional (showing the first and second principal directions
plus a diagonal direction), swirly and noise. Figure 2 shows
example swatches of each of these patterns.
Our surface stimuli were simple height fields that we built by
applying the parametric equations of each surface category to an
equilateral mesh. These parametric equations represented the
following surface types: ellipsoid, elliptical cylinder, saddle, and
flat. The principal directions at each point of these meshes were
calculated using the u and v parameters that were used in the
parametric formulas, and both sides of the surfaces were textured.

Figure 2: The sample texture patterns used in the study. Top row,
from left to right: 1dir45, 1dir, 1dir90, 2dir. Bottom row, from
left to right: 2dir45, swirly, 3dir, noise.

3.1.2 Experimental Setup and Task Description
The study consisted of 592 trials. Observers classified each image
as belonging to one of the four shape categories: ellipsoid,
cylinder, saddle, or flat, and one of four shape orientations:
convex, concave, both (as in the saddle), or neither (as in the flat
case). We used two viewing conditions: straight-on and oblique,
and two projection conditions: perspective and orthographic. To
avoid the potential of uncovering orientation dependent effects we
also rotated our pictures in the image plane over repeated trials,
using two rotations – 0 and 90 degrees – in the case of the
symmetric straight-view images, and four rotations – 0, 90, 180
and 270 degrees – in the case of the oblique views. Figures 3-11
show examples of the surface stimuli. Note that the oblique
viewing direction used in the convex cases is not the direct
inverse of the oblique viewing direction used in the concave
cases. Although this arrangement is less than ideal, making this
allowance gave us greater flexibility to satisfy the concurrent
constraints that the contour of the surface patch not be visible in
the image, and that the total amount of surface curvature across
the visible portion of the patch be as large as possible.
The experiment was conducted in a laboratory located on the
campus of University of Minnesota. During the experiment the
images were shown on a 21-inch CRT monitor, one at a time.
The pixel resolution of the monitor was 1600x1200. Image
resolution was 1000x1000. Observers freely viewed the images
under standard room lighting conditions. There was no time limit
associated with the trials.
A total of 8 observers – 5 males and 3 females, ranging in age
from 17-50, – participated in the study. Five were naive to the
purposes of the experiment, and were compensated for their
conscientious efforts. Among this group was a high school
student and a professional graphic artist. The other three were
members of our research team. (In analysis we found no
significant differences in p a t t e r n s of performance between
observers.) Five of the observers completed the full set of trials,
which included images from all conditions presented in random
order. The three other observers completed a reduced version of
the experiment, which involved only the perspective projection
condition. All observers had normal or corrected-to-normal visual
acuity and had no known visual abnormalities. They were given a
short training session in order to gain familiarity with the
categorization. To avoid introducing biases, we relied on written
instructions, which the subjects had to read before they began.
Because of the simple nature of the task, that strategy worked well
for this situation.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 3: Convex ellipsoids in perspective projection viewed
head-on, with each texture type applied.

Figure 7: Concave cylinders in perspective projection viewed
obliquely, with each texture type applied.

Figure 4: Convex cylinders in perspective projection viewed headon, with each texture type applied.

Figure 8: Saddle surfaces in perspective projection viewed
obliquely, with each texture type applied.

Figure 5: Saddle surfaces in perspective projection viewed headon, with each texture type applied.

Figure 9: Convex ellipsoids in orthographic projection viewed
obliquely.

Figure 6: Concave ellipsoids in perspective projection viewed
obliquely, with each texture type applied.

Figure 10: Convex cylinders in orthographic projection viewed
obliquely. (The concave set of images was nearly identical in
appearance, except for differences that could be eliminated by
image rotation.)

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

3.2 Findings

Figure 11: Saddle surfaces in orthographic projection viewed
obliquely.

3.1.3 Training

The charts in figures 13-18 summarize the findings of our
experiment. The error bars reflect the boundaries of the 95%
confidence interval. Our main findings were: 1) confirmation of
the hypothesis that texture type has a significant effect on shape
perception, with indications that shape categorization accuracy is
generally highest under the principal direction grid texture
condition; 2) confirmation of the hypothesis that shape perception
is facilitated under conditions of perspective, as opposed to
orthographic, projection, overall, but with indications that shape
classification rates remain decent, for many textures, in
orthographic images when the view direction is oblique (a more
generic condition than straight-on viewing); 3) confirmation that
convex orientations cannot be distinguished from concave
orientations under conditions of orthographic projection,
regardless of viewing direction or texture type.

Prior to the experiment, participants were asked to visually and
haptically inspect a set of actual 3D hand-sculpted clay objects
representing all possible combinations of shape category and
orientation. The shape information was labeled on the surfaces in
pencil, to avoid the necessity of any verbal explanation that might
inadvertently bias the observers to give special attention to the
principal directions. Participants were allowed as much time as
they felt needed to become familiar with the objects. Figure 12
shows a snapshot of the training surfaces.

Figure 13: Summary chart showing overall rates of shape
classification accuracy, averaged over the three surface shape
conditions: ellipsoid, cylinder and saddle, broken down by texture
type, projection type (perspective or orthographic), and viewpoint
(straight-on or oblique). Results are best in the 2dir texture
condition, where accuracy is reliably above 70% under
perspective projection for both oblique and straight views.

Figure 12: The training surfaces.

3.1.4 Task
The participants were asked to perform two 4AFC (FourAlternative-Forced-Choice) tasks per trial. One task was to
categorize the shape of the surface shown in the trial image as
ellipsoid, cylinder, saddle, or flat. The other task was to identify
the surface orientation as convex, concave, both, or neither. To
conserve participants’ effort, we set up the interface to
automatically select the shape type ‘neither’ if the observer chose
the shape class ‘flat’. The observers recorded their choices by
pressing a button on the screen using the mouse. The buttons for
the shape category were located vertically above the buttons for
the surface orientation. Only after participants had selected
options in each grouping could they move on to the next trial. No
feedback was given during the experiment. Subjects were shown
a white noise image between trials.

Figure 14: Rates of correct shape classification of ellipsoids (with
results pooled over the convex and concave orientations) broken
down by texture type, projection type (perspective or
orthographic), and viewpoint (straight-on or oblique). Again,
performance is best in the 2dir texture condition, with accuracy
reliably above 80% under perspective oblique viewing, and
reliably above 75% under perspective straight viewing.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 15: Rates of correct shape classification of saddle surfaces,
broken down by texture type, projection type (perspective or
orthographic), and viewpoint (straight-on or oblique). Accuracy
is a perfect 100% for the 2dir texture in the perspective/oblique
viewing condition, and reliably above 75% under
perspective/oblique viewing for all textures except swirly, noise,
and 1dir90. Accuracy falls dramatically under the other viewing
conditions except in the case of the 2dir pattern, where it remains
reliably above 70% across both the perspective/straight and
orthographic/oblique conditions.

Figure 16: Rates of correct shape classification of cylinders (with
results pooled over the convex and concave orientations) broken
down by texture type, projection type (perspective or
orthographic), and viewpoint (straight-on or oblique). Accuracy
rates are lower, overall, than in the cases of the doubly curved
surface patches. Results are reliably above 50% only for the first
principal direction and 2dir textures. However, further analysis
turned up a particularly high rate of false positives for the cylinder
classification in the case of the 1dir textures (observers guessing
‘cylinder’ when the surfaces were actually flat).

Figure 17: Rates of correct classification of ellipsoid orientation, using results pooled over all texture types. The charts are arranged
horizontally by projection type (perspective then orthographic), and vertically by viewpoint (oblique then straight-on). The columns within
each chart specify the response frequency in each orientation category (convex, concave, both, neither) for surfaces whose actual
orientation is either convex (top row) or concave (bottom row). Results are excellent in the perspective cases but abysmal under
orthographic projection, where not only is there confusion between convex and concave but also a greater tendency to perceive the shapes
as flat. The asymmetry in the chart on the upper right between the convex and concave conditions is most likely an artifact due to the
inconsistency of the oblique view directions used in these two cases.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 18: Rates of correct classification of cylinder orientation (convex/concave/both/neither), using results pooled over all texture types.
Results basically follow the same pattern as with the ellipsoids.

4. Discussion
Looking more closely at the details of all of the results, we
observed several things. 1) The noise and swirly textures
permitted reliable correct discrimination only in the case of the
ellipsoid shape. 2) The diagonal textures caused particular
problems for the cylinder recognition, but not for the recognition
of saddle and flat surfaces. Results for ellipsoids was mixed: the
45-degree rotated 2dir texture worked well, but 1dir45 did not. 3)
The textures that followed just one of the principal directions
caused ellipsoids and saddles to be perceived as cylinders often
enough that discrimination was unreliable. They did not appear to
interfere with the recognition of cylinders as cylinders, but at the
same time there were also a high number of cylinder responses
when the surfaces were actually flat (possibly indicative of a
response bias towards indicating a perception of curvature even
when no curvature was in fact present.) 4) The three-directional
texture worked well for the flat and saddle surfaces, but not as
well for the ellipsoid or cylinder. It is possible that the presence
of the diagonal component in the 3dir texture interfered with
shape perception in the cylinder case in the same way that it did in
the 1dir45 case, which didn’t include the pdir components. The
reason for the relatively poorer performance with the 3dir texture
in the ellipsoid case is not immediately clear. One potentially
complicating factor is that this texture, being drawn from a
photograph, was slightly less rigidly regular as the other
directional patterns, which were created artificially. It could be
that people were using a slightly different strategy in this case
than in the others.
The conservative conclusion is that adding information along
more directions in addition to the principal direction is not 100%
safe - it does not seem to help, and it may in fact hurt.
The main results from this experiment are:
1) Shape classification accuracy rates were highest, overall, under
the condition of the principal direction grid texturing (2dir).

Using an ANOVA analysis and looking at pairwise comparisons
using Tukey’s HSD test we found that there was no case in which
shape classification was significantly worse with the 2dir texture
than with any other texture. In many, but not all, cases,
classification accuracy was significantly better with the 2dir
texture than with the other patterns. The 2dir texture was the only
texture that gave consistently reliable performance, under
conditions where accuracy was possible.
2) High rates of shape classification accuracy were achieved
under some texture conditions despite the use of orthographic
projection, as long as the surface was viewed from an oblique
vantage point. In particular, shape classification accuracy was as
good with the oblique/orthographic viewing as with the
perspective/straight viewing, for many texture types. Shape
classification accuracy was abysmal under orthographic projection
when the view direction was directly head-on to the surface, due
to the loss of critical surface orientation cues in the stimuli
because of the non-generic viewing condition.
Other observations we can make are:
1) In an ANOVA analysis considering results across all texture
types, projection conditions and viewing configurations, we found
that shape classification accuracy was significantly higher under
perspective projection than under orthographic projection, and in
an oblique view than in a head-on view.
2) With the orthographic projection, elliptical patches were
equally likely (in the oblique view) or more likely (in the straight
view) to be perceived as cylindrical, while hyperbolic patches
were equally likely to be perceived as cylindrical, and, in the
straight view, more likely to be misperceived as flat.
3) Cylindrical patches were reliably more likely to be recognized
as cylindrical than as some other shape only under conditions of
perspective projection and an oblique view direction. In all other
conditions they were equally likely (perspective/straight and

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

orthographic/oblique) or more likely (orthographic/straight) to be
misidentified as flat.
Considering recognition rates for each texture and each shape
separately, we find that correct recognition rates for elliptic
patches are reliably above 80% only for the principal direction
grid texture, and even then, only under perspective projection and
an oblique view. Correct recognition rates are reliably above 60%
for elliptical patches with the principal direction grid texture, the
45-degree rotated principal direction grid texture, and the noise
texture, under perspective projection for both straight and oblique
viewing conditions, and for the swirly texture and the threedirectional texture under perspective projection and an oblique
view. They are not reliably above 50% for any of the onedirectional textures, regardless of projection type or view.
Recognition rates for hyperbolic patches are reliably above 75%,
under perspective projection and with an oblique view, for the
principal direction grid texture, the 45-degree rotated principal
direction grid texture, the three-directional texture (following both
principal directions and a also a third direction, diagonal to the
principal directions), the first principal direction texture, and the
45 degree rotated first principal direction texture. Recognition
rates are also reliably above 75% for the principal direction grid
texture under conditions of orthographic projection but with an
oblique view. Correct recognition rates are reliably above 50%
for hyperbolic patches for the principal direction grid texture, the
three-directional texture, and the 45 degree rotated first principal
direction texture under perspective projection for a straight-on
view, and for the three-directional texture under conditions of
orthographic projection but with an oblique view. They are not
reliably above 50% for any texture under orthographic projection
and head-on viewing, nor for the second principal direction
texture under any condition of projection and viewing.
In an ANOVA analysis of the perspective data alone, we found
that the oblique viewpoint was significantly better (p<0.05) than
the straight viewpoint, for both shape classification and surface
orientation judgments, overall (pooled over texture type and
surface type). This was true individually, also, for saddles (shape
and orientation), ellipsoids (shape only), and cylinders (shape and
orientation).
Finally, we noticed that the textures containing diagonal elements
were especially effective at reliably indicating flat surfaces, in
perspective projection, pooling over straight and oblique views.

5. Conclusions
These are some of the first studies that have systematically
investigated the effects on shape perception, measured by shape
classification accuracy, of using a principal direction vs. nonprincipal direction texture pattern, in the case of doubly curved
surfaces. In this study, we have found that shape classification is
never significantly worse with the principal direction grid texture
(2dir) than with any other texture pattern, according to pairwise
comparisons. Likewise, we have found that rates of correct
surface orientation judgments (convex/concave) are never
significantly lower under the 2dir texture condition than with any
other pattern. These results are important because they indicate
that in general, practical situations, when you can’t be sure what
shape your surfaces will have at any particular point, you won’t
go wrong by choosing a principal direction texture.

6. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by an NSF Presidential Early Career
Award for Scientists and Engineers (ACI-9875368). We are
grateful to the Statistical Consulting Clinic, which is supported by
funding from the Minnesota Agricultural Experiment Station, for
assistance with the experimental analysis. The texture synthesis
and image rendering software was written by Gabriele Gorla, with
support from a University of Minnesota Grant-in-Aid of Research,
Scholarship and Artistry, who was co-advised by Guillermo
Sapiro. We are also indebted to our observers AJ, TU, JM, II and
TF for their dedicated and conscientious efforts.

References
E RENS , R.G.F., KAPPERS , A. AND KOENDERINK, J. 1993. Perception of
local shape from shading, In Perception & Psychophysics, 54(2), 145156.
GORLA, G., INTERRANTE, V. AND SAPIRO, G. 2003. Texture Synthesis for
3D Shape Representation, In IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 9(4), Oct-Dec 2003, to appear.
INTERRANTE , V., FUCHS , H., AND PIZER, S. 1997. Conveying the 3D
Shape of Smoothly Curving Transparent Surfaces via Texture, In IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, 3(2), 98–117.
INTERRANTE, V. AND KIM, S. 2001. Investigating the Effect of Texture
Orientation on Shape Perception, In Human Vision and Electronic
Imaging VI, SPIE 4299,. 330-339.
INTERRANTE, V., KIM, S., AND HAGH-SHENAS, H. 2002. Conveying 3D
Shape with Texture: Recent Advances and Experimental Findings, In
Human Vision and Electronic Imaging VII, SPIE 4662, 197-206.
KIM. S., HAGH-SHENAS, S. AND INTERRANTE, V. 2003. Showing Shape
with Texture: Two Directions Seem Better than One, In Human Vision
and Electronic Imaging VIII, SPIE 5007, 332-339.
KNILL, D. 2001. Contour into Texture: Information Content of Surface
Contours and Texture Flow, In Journal of the Optical Society of
America, A, (1), January 2001, 12-35.
KOENDERINK, J.J., DOORN, A. AND KAPPERS, A. 1992. Surface Perception
in Pictures, In Perception, 52, 487–496.
LI, A. AND ZAIDI, Q. 2000. Perception of three-dimensional shape from
texture is based on patterns of oriented energy. In Vision Research,
40(2), 217-242.
LI, A. AND ZAIDI, Q. 2001. Information limitations in the perception of
shape from texture. In Vision Research, 41(22), 2927-2942.
M AMASSIAN , P. AND KERSTEN , D. 1996. Illumination, shading and
perception of local orientation. In Vision Research, 36(15), 2351-2367.
M AMASSIAN , P. AND LANDY, M. 1998. Observer Biases in the 3D
Interpretation of Line Drawings, In Vision Research, 38(18),
2817–2832.
ROSENHOLTZ, R., AND MALIK, J. 1997. Surface orientation from texture:
Isotropy or homogeneity (or both)? In Vision Research, 37(16), 22832293.
S TEVENS , K. 1981. The Information Content of Texture Gradients, In
Biological Cybernetics, 42, 95–105.
TODD, J.T. AND OOMES, A.H.J. 2002. Generic and non-generic conditions
for the perception of the surface shape from texture. In Vision
Research, 42(7), 837–850.
TODD, J., NORMAN, F., KOENDERINK, J. AND KAPPERS, A. 1997. Effects
of texture, illumination, and surface reflectance on stereoscopic shape
perception. In Perception, 26, 807-822.
T ODD , J.T. AND REICHEL, F.D. 1990. Visual Perception of Smoothly
Curved Surfaces from Double-Projected Contour Patterns, In Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
16(3), 665–674.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

