2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Investigation on Diseases of Tibet Murals Using 3D Laser Scanning Technology
1st Aiwu Zhang, 2nd Shaoxing Hu, 3rd Feng Gao
1st Key Laboratory of 3D Information Acquisition and Application, Ministry of Education,
Capital Normal University, Beijing, China
nd
2 School of Mechanical Engineering & Automation,
Beijing University of Aeronautics & Astronautics, China
3rd National Institute of Cultural Property, Beijing, China
{zhangaw163@163.com, husx@buaa.edu.cn}
The earlier methods of disease investigation, due
to technical conditions at that time, only used text
and simple graphics to recode the contents of murals, the
methods are too easy to describe the details of diseases.
Now somebody uses digital camera to record the murals.
We know that it is difficult to determine the disease size.
Somebody directly use the ruler to measure the size of
disease. Maybe, this method can ensure the accuracy of
points not the whole accuracy. We need a fast 3D
scanning technology which guarantees can ensure the
accuracy of the whole measurement.
3D laser scanner can record the geometric details of
the murals through getting a dense 3D point cloud, and
then digital camera can capture the texture details of
mural. It is a good idea using laser range data and image
data to inspect the mural diseases. In fact, 3D laser
scanning technology has been applied into heritage
conservation in the recent years. A team of 30 faculty,
staff, and students from Stanford University and the
University of Washington spent the two years in Italy
digitized sculptures by Michelangelo[1]. The National
Research Council of Canada (NRC) has done a lot of
research work in heritage preservation [2]. However,
there are few reports about the application of 3D laser
scanning technology in investigation of mural diseases.
The goal of this paper is to propose a new
method of investigation on mural diseases by 3D laser
scanning to determine mural disease location, size,
length, etc.. We collected a lot of laser range images
from and digital images of the murals of Jokhang Temple
and Zhatang Temple.
Generally, every mural is about 50m2, including
about 4GB range data, so there is a challenge of
processing the huge range data. Meanwhile, there is also
a difficulty of processing the huge images. Thence in the
remaining sections, we describe a parallel computing
method to process the huge range data (section2), align
the images into a big image based on SIFT(section3),

Abstract

Murals are the important components of culture and
arts of Tibet. Tibet's murals are mainly painted on the
walls of temples, palaces and homes. Unhappily, these
murals have been ruined or are being ruined by some
diseases such as cracking, hollowing, falling off, fluid
erosion, dirt, and so on. It is necessary to use new
technologies to protect murals. June 2007, we, from
Capital Normal University and National Institute of
Cultural Property collected a lot of laser range images
and digital images of Tibet’s murals. We proposed that
integrating range data and image data to investigate
mural diseases and give the location, length and area of
mural diseases. Moreover, we also presented a parallel
computing method to process the huge range data, and
discussed to align the images into a big image based on
SIFT.
Keywords---3D laser scanning, Range images,
SIFT, Mural survey.

1. Introduction
Tibet’s murals are treasures of Buddha culture in
China, even in the world. They are very significant for
the study of Tibet. However, due to many reasons, the
murals are suffering from different kinds of disease, such
as cracking, hollowing, falling off, fluid erosion, dirt, and
so on. The murals need to be repaired, but how to repair
is a big problem. Before restoring, we need to know the
types of diseases, the distribution of diseases, and the
size of diseases.

This work is funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC
40601081), Beijing Science and Technology Nova project (2006B57) and National
Science and Technology Support Program (2006BAJ15B01-02).

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.109

574
568

Main process
Assign rang images into Sub-process

Registration
of group

Registration
of group

Registration
of group

Registration
of group

Figure1. The pipeline of the parallel algorithm
and discuss some of the strategies about the disease
investigation (section4).

Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT
features), which are geometrically
invariant under similarity transforms
and invariant under affine changes in
intensity.
Panoramic
Stitching
Algorithm[4,8] :
Input: N images with 30%
overlap from a hand-handle camera,
which we keep the camera is parallel
with murals and capture images from
the different viewpoints.
1) Find SIFT features in all
images
2) For adjacent images:
• Match features to get
correct correspondences
• Solve for homography
3) Project images on common
“image plane”
4) Blend overlapping images to
obtain panorama
We created a panorama from 22
images using the above method
(Figure4).

2. Huge range data processing
The data which close to or exceed capacity of
computer memory can not be processed by the traditional
methods. So we employ the parallel computing to deal
with the huge range data on a high performance
computer with 32 CPUs and 64GB RAM.
In fact, the step of registration of multiple range
images needs more CPUs and computer memory. So we
design a parallel algorithm to align the range images into
a common coordinate system. Figure1 shows the pipeline
of the method, and then Figure2 is a result of registration.
The main process assigns the range images into different
sub-processes, and all range images are registered
together in sub-processes synchronously, finally, return
the result to the main process.

Figure2. The registration of 194 range images

Moreover, the range data of each mural with about
4GB is too much, so we need to remove some data points
before modeling. We use a resample method based on
curvature. Figure3 is the result of resample which keep
geometric details.
Finally, we still use the parallel computing idea to
create 3D model. The range data of each mural is divided
into different groups and sent into the different subprocess. Next, in the main process, all sub-models are
zippered into the whole model.

Figure3. The result of resample

4. Disease analysis
All of the above works serve as mural disease
analysis. While scanning the object using 3D laser
scanner, we can obtain two complete registered images
with the same resolution: range image and reflectance
image. Range images describe the geometric changes,
and reflectance images show some material changes.
They both play the two important roles during diseases
investigation. We can recognize cracking, hollowing,
falling, and so on from 3D model without reflectance.

3. Creating panoramic image
The almost entire walls were painted over the murals
in temples in Tibet, very beautiful. We captured some
sequences of overlapping images for murals. We want to
make a big panoramic image which is necessary to
analyze the mural diseases. We use Lowe’s [5] Scale
569
575

Figure4. Panoramic image

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure5. 3D model
(a) 3D model with reflectance; (b) 3D model without reflectance;
(c) Edge extraction from 3D model; (d) Error map
The above experiments show 3D laser scanning is a
good method to inspect the mural disease, and we can
see the disease changes.
Of course, it is of great importance for mural disease
investigation to generate the measurable 3D texture
model through mapping the images from different angles,
different times, and different focal length onto 3D model.
We process this question in three steps:
(1) Create a basic 3D model from images according
to multiview geometry.

We can see fluid erosion from the 3D model with
reflectance. For example, we could see the fluid erosions
and the detailed mural features from figure 5(a), see the
cracking and the hollowing from figure 5(b), and we can
distinguish the traces of drawing the mural from figure
5(c). Moreover, when computing the distance errors
between 3D model and plane, the hollowing is distinct in
the error map, just like 5(d).

570
576

Figure 6. Mapping the images processed by the
professionals onto the corresponding 3D models
(2) Build a fine detailed 3D model from highaccuracy laser scanning data.
(3) Merge the models from (1) and (2) and generate
3D texture model.
(4) Correct color between different images.
We can find the more types of diseases from 3D
models with reflectance and without reflectance, and 3D
texture model. But we do not know what the diseases are.
So we pleased some professionals to distinguish the
more types of diseases from the panoramic of the
mural firstly, and then we marked the diseases using
3D models and 3D texture and determine position and
size of diseases. For example, figure 6 and figure 7, the
professionals help us points out that how many diseases
there are in the murals and what they are, we mapped the
images processed by the professionals onto the
corresponding 3D models, and then determined size and
position of the diseases. Table1 is one example of
disease in investigation records

2. Conclusions
Mural survey is a complex task, and we proposed an
approach to investigate on mural diseases by integrating
3D laser data and image data. Experiments show it is
good to use 3D laser scanning to inspect mural diseases.
One of the tangible results of our project is that we used
a new technology to mural diseases analysis and
succeeded.

References
[1] M. Levoy, K.Pulli, B.Curless, etc, “The Digital
michelangelo Project: 3D Scanning of Large
Statues”. Proc. SIGGRAPH, pp. 131-144, 2000.
[2] NRC-IIT, 2007. Visual Information Technology
(VIT) Group, http://iit-iti.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/.
[3] R. Song, J.Szymanski, “Fast Mosaic of Highesolution Multiple-View Images of Surfaces from
Architectural and Heritage Structures”,Proc. of the
IEEE International Conference on Automation and
Logistics, August 18 - 21, 2007, Jinan, China.
[4] M. Brown and D. Lowe, “Recognising panoramas”,
Proc. Of 9th IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, IEEE Computer Society
[5] D. Lowe. “Distinctive image features from scaleinvariant keypoints”, International Journal of
Computer Vision, 60(2), pp. 91-110, 2004.
[6] P.S.Blaer, P.K.Allen, “Data Acquisition and View
Planning for 3-D Modeling Tasks”. IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, 417-422, 2007.
[7] W.Zhao, D.Nister, S Hsu, “Alignment of
Continuous Video onto 3D Point Clouds”. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 27(8), pp. 1305–1318.
[8] http://robots.stanford.edu/cs223b07/notes/CS223BL11-Panoramas.ppt

Figure7. Cracking marks
Table1. Disease investigation records
Number
LX-05L-02
LX-05R-03

Distance

Distance

to bottom

to right

(m)

(m)

2.065

1.741

2.715

4.392

0.797

0.241

Area

Distance

(m2)

to left(m)

crack

0.530

crack

1.200

Type

571
577

