2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Spatial Visualisation of Conceptual Data
Michel Soto1, Bénédicte Le Grand1, Marie-Aude Aufaure2
1
Laboratoire d’Informatique de Paris 6 – 104, av du Pdt Kennedy – F-75016 Paris
{Benedicte.Le-Grand, Michel.Soto}@lip6.fr
2
Ecole Centrale Paris – Laboratoire MAS – Grande Voie des Vignes - F-92295 Châtenay-Malabry
Marie-Aude.Aufaure@ecp.fr
Abstract

2. Context

Numerous data mining methods have been designed
to help extract relevant and significant information from
large datasets. Computing concept lattices allows
clustering data according to their common features and
making all relationships between them explicit. However,
the size of such lattices increases exponentially with the
volume of data and its number of dimensions. This paper
proposes to use spatial pixel-oriented and tree-basedvisualisations of these conceptual structures in order to
optimally exploit their expressivity.

This methodology is generic and may be applied to
any type of data. In this paper its use is illustrated on a
dataset called tourism, consisting of 126 Web pages
about tourism, described by their most significant terms
(among 60 possible words from the World Tourism
Organisation Thesaurus).

2.1. Formal Concept Analysis and Galois
Lattices
Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) is a mathematical
approach to data analysis which provides information
with structure. FCA may be used for conceptual
clustering as shown in [3] and [4].

1. Introduction
Information retrieval and navigation have become
very difficult in current information systems because of
data’s volume and lack of structure. Galois lattices
structure data by clustering it into concepts linked by
generalization or specialization relationships. The
interest of such concept lattices was studied in previous
work [1], [2]. The conceptual navigation layer created by
Galois lattices provides users with an additional –
structured- abstraction level for their navigation.
However, the number of concepts increases
exponentially with the size of data and its number of
dimensions and graphical representations such as Hasse
diagrams become useless. This article proposes a spatial
representation of large Galois lattices through pixeloriented and tree-based visualisations.

The notion of Galois lattice to describe a
relationship between two sets is the basis of a set of
conceptual classification methods. This notion was
introduced by [5] and [6]. Galois lattices group objects
into classes which materialize concepts of the domain
under study. Individual objects are discriminated
according to the properties they have in common.
Galois lattices basic concepts
Consider two finite sets D (a set of objects) and M
(the set of these objects’ properties), and a binary
relation R ⊆ D x M between these two sets.
Let o be an object of D and p a property of M. We
have o R p if the object o has the property p.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents the context of this work, in particular Formal
Concept Analysis and Galois lattices upon which this
methodology relies. Section 3 proposes a pixel-oriented
representation of large concept lattices whereas Section 4
focuses on a tree-based visualisation intended for
navigation. Section 5 finally concludes and presents
perspectives of this work for the future.

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.10

According to Wille’s terminology [7]:
Fc = (D, M, R)

(1)

is a formal context which corresponds to a unique
Galois lattice, representing natural groupings of D and M
elements.
57

number of significant terms used to characterize these
pages is 60. The lattice contains 2214 concepts, linked by
7758 edges; as illustrated by Figure 1, its interpretation
from the visualisation as a Hasse diagram is impossible.

Let P(D) be the powerset of D and P(M) the
powerset of M. Each element of the lattice is a couple,
also called concept, noted (O, A). A concept is composed
of two sets O ∈ P (D) and A ∈ P(M) which satisfy the
two following properties (2):

The approach proposed in this paper aims at
enhancing Galois lattices interpretation by proposing
large lattices visualisations through two different
techniques: a pixel-oriented and a tree-based
visualisation.

A = f(O), where f(O) = {a∈M│for all o∈O, oRa}
O = f’(A), where f’(A) = {o∈D│for all a∈A, oRa}
O is called the extent of the concept and A its intent.
The extent represents a subset of objects and the intent is
made of these objects’ common properties.

2.3. Related Work
The goal of the work presented here is to provide a
visual representation of large Galois lattices, allowing
users to interpret them at a glance. We aim at creating a
kind of visual footprint of the lattice. Among the state of
the art, some works generate a map resulting from a
query and may represent several hundreds or thousands
of documents [9], [10]. In the context of visualisation, it
seems natural to limit the data space to three dimensions.

A partial order on concepts is defined as follows (3):
Let C1=(O1, A1) and C2=(O2, A2),
C1<C2 ⇔ A1⊆ A2 ⇔ O2 ⊆ O1.
In the context of the tourism dataset, each page (url)
is an object and its properties are the most frequent terms
it contains. In this case, the Galois lattice then consists of
concepts comprising sets of Web pages (objects) –in the
extents- described by their common terms (common
properties) –in the intents. For example, pages about
restaurants, gastronomy and France will be gathered in
the extent of a concept with these three common
properties in the intent.

In order to cope with the dimension issue, three
techniques exist: similarity measures (e.g. the vector
model), dimension reduction (multidimensional scaling,
Principal
Components
Analysis)
and
spatial
configuration (triangulation, treemaps). Visualisation is
the most important part as it provides users with an
intuitive vision which can be understood and used
immediately. Some reduction techniques propose their
own visualisation; although their interpretation is not
always easy, their results may be used as bases for other
visualisation techniques such as the pixelization [11]
presented in the following section.

2.1. Galois Lattices’ Interpretation
Galois lattices are very well fitted to showing the
various types of connections among the Web pages in the
tourism dataset (comprised of 126 urls about tourism) as
they cluster these pages according to the terms they have
in common. However their complexity in size due to the
very high number of concepts they contain makes them
extremely difficult to interpret with traditional Hasse
diagrams.

3. Galois lattice’s pixel-oriented visualisation
The methodology used in this section to generate 2D
spatial visualisations of Galois lattices is the same as in
[12]. The approach consists in representing data as
coloured pixels placed in the 2D space along to a PeanoHilbert curve.

The authors of [8] have defined interest measures to
reduce the size of large concept lattices ; they applied
their method to healthcare social communities.

In this case, this method was not applied to data
itself but to the Galois lattice generated from it. Each
concept thus corresponds to a pixel to which a colour
must be assigned.
Each concept is made of an extent (the list of objects
contained in the concept) and of an intent (the list of
properties shared by the extension’s objects). Each
intent’s property is a dimension of the concept. A
Principal Component Analysis is performed to reduce
this number to three (for the Red, Green and Blue colour
components). The values of the obtained (X, Y, Z) triples
are usually low. In order to get more satisfying values,
the inverse Ohta’s transform is used as in [12] to

Figure 1. Large Lattice’s Hasse Diagram
The lattice represented on Figure 1 was computed
from the set of 126 Web pages about tourism. The total
58

approximate the three components of PCA for a natural
colour image. This inverse transform is applied to each
concept and the values are normalized to be well
distributed between 0 and 255. Finally, concepts are
ordered according to their RGB vector in order to cluster
concepts with similar colours on a straight line –i.e. a 1D
space.

Given CZ the set of concepts corresponding to the
pixels of the studied zone, we define:
Cp-ext = {parent (ci) / parent (ci) ∉ Cz and ci ∈ Cz}
and
Cf-ext = {child (ci) / child (ci) ∉ Cz and ci ∈ Cz},
with i varying from 1 to card (Cz).

Each pixel’s coordinates are assigned in the 2D
space along a Peano-Hilbert curve. This curve places the
points of a straight line on a plane by minimizing the
Euclidian distance of points which are close on the
straight line.

Finally, C’p_ext is defined as the Cp-ext set minus all
the parents which have only one child in Cz and C’f-ext the
Cf-ext set minus all children which have a single parent in
Cz.

Figure 2 represents the pixelization obtained from
the methodology described in section 3 and applied to
the Galois lattice of Figure 1.

Figure 4 represents the part of the lattice built from
C’p-ext ∪ Cz ∪ C’p-ext. On this figure the red nodes belong
to Cz and the blue nodes belong to C’p-ext ∪ C’p-ext. The
obtained graph is connected and we may thus conclude
that there is a real semantic proximity among Cz’s
concepts and that this proximity is correctly represented
by the cluster of pixels comprised within the studied
zone.

Figure 2. Pixel-Oriented Visualisation
From a first visual analysis of this pixelization, some
clusters of pixels may be identified as shown on Figure 3.
Figure 4. Portion of Galois Lattice
This
representation
provides
an
overall
understanding of the dataset’s implicit structure. Figure 3
shows that the tourism dataset is structured in six main
clusters out of a total of eleven. Nevertheless, this
representation neither allows to explore the dataset nor to
understand the content of the information contained in
the dataset. In the next section, a representation
providing these two capabilities is proposed.

Figure 3. Clusters Identification
Each cluster of pixels reflects a cluster of concepts
of the lattice. Pixels’ Euclidian and colorimetric
proximity symbolizes the semantic proximity of the
corresponding concepts in the lattice. These clusters
show how the lattice’s concepts are organized, which
was impossible from the Hasse diagram of Figure 1.

4. Galois lattice’s tree-oriented visualisation
One of the goals stated above is to enhance
navigation in large Galois lattices. Exploring concepts in
a Hasse diagram is inappropriate when the number of
concepts is very high. In this section, a tree of concepts is
extracted from the Hasse diagram in order to reduce the
total number of concepts and provide a hierarchical
representation for an intuitive navigation.

This cartography thus allows to consider one or
several exploration strategies for the lattice and
consequently for the data from which it was computed.
In order to check the validity of this interpretation,
the portion of the lattice which corresponds to the pixels
of the yellow zone (pointed by an arrow on Figure 3) was
re-built. This zone contains 16 pixels and corresponds to
16 concepts of Figure 1.

59

The construction of the clusters’ tree starts from the
finest level of detail, i.e. the upper bound of the lattice:
the leaf clusters of the tree are thus the most specific
concepts of the lattice i.e. the parent concepts of the
upper bound.

4.1. Tree extraction algorithm
The tree extracted from the Hasse diagram provides
a hierarchical representation of the complex system with
different levels of detail (or scales). The result is
therefore a hierarchical clustering where clusters may be
overlapping (as they are selected concepts from the
lattice). The root of the tree contains all objects; the next
level groups some objects together in possibly
overlapping clusters, the next level is a finer grouping of
objects, etc. The number of levels of detail is given by
the depth of the tree.

For each leaf, one unique parent concept is selected
which is a generalisation of the leaf concept. This
selection is done according to a hierarchy of criteria in
case a concept has several parent concepts in the lattice.
A unique parent is then selected for each selected
concept, and so on until the lower bound of the lattice is
reached. At the end of this process, a tree is created.
Each level of the tree contains clusters which correspond
to a specific level of detail. Figure 5 describes the detail
of the tree extraction process.

As the clustering algorithm presented here is based
on Galois conceptual classification, the generated
clusters are conceptually and semantically relevant. This
algorithm also exploits the generalization and
specialisation relationships inherent to the Galois lattice.
The lowest bound of the lattice is noted Inf and the
upper bound is noted Sup.
A = allFathers (Sup);
While A ≠{Inf} do
D = ∅; // set of fathers of A with minimal
distance to Inf
A’ = ∅; // set of selected fathers from A

4.2. Clusters Analysis
Once the tree of clusters is generated, different
measures may be computed, e.g. the proportion of
concepts of the initial lattice which were not selected to
be clusters. An example representation of the tree
computed from the tourism dataset is shown on Figure 6
and the corresponding statistics appear in Table 1.

/** selecting of fathers of A with minimal distance to
Inf **/
For each concept a ∈ A and a ≠ Inf do
F = allFathers (a);
Da = ∅; // set of fathers of a with
minimal distance to Inf
For each father f ∈ F do
If distance (f, Inf) = minDistance
(F, Inf) then
Da = Da ∪{f};
End if
End for
If card (Da) = 1 then // Only 1 father
of a has the minimal distance to Inf
Tree = Tree + (a, Da); //
adding a and its father in the tree
A = A - {a};
A’ = A’ ∪ Da;
else
D = D ∪ Da;
End if
End for
/** selecting concepts having an already selected
father in A’ **/
For each concept a ∈ A and a ≠ Inf do
For each father f ∈ A’ do
If isFather (f, a) then // f has
a father already selected in A’
Tree = Tree + (a, {f}); // adding a
and its father in the tree
A = A - {a};
End if
End for
End for
/** selecting random fathers in D **/
For each concept a ∈ A and a ≠ Inf do
// randomly select a father of a within D
f = randomFather (a, allFathers (a), D)
Tree = Tree + (a, {f}); // adding a and
its father in the tree
A’ = A’ ∪ {f};
End for
A = A’;
End While

Figure 6. Clusters Visualisation
The depth of the tree is interesting because it
indicates the number of navigation levels which may be
provided to the user. The distribution of clusters at each
abstraction level is also studied. If a cluster has no
parent, it means that it cannot be generalized. On the
other hand, a cluster with no children corresponds to the
most specific level.

Figure 5. Tree Extraction Algorithm

60

[3]

Carpineto, C. and Romano, G., “Galois: An ordertheoretic approach to conceptual clustering”, Proc. Of the
10th Conference on Machine Learning, Amherst, MA,
Kaufmann, pp. 33-40, 1993.
[4] Wille, R., “Line diagrams of hierarchical concept
systems”, Int. Classif. 11, pp. 77-86, 1984.
[5] Barbut, M. and Monjardet, B., Ordre et classification,
Algebre et combinatoire, Tome 2, Hachette, 1970.
[6] Birkhoff, G., Lattice Theory, First Edition, Amer. Math.
Soc. Pub. 25, Providence, R. I., 1940.
[7] Wille, R., “Concept lattices and conceptual knowledge
systems”, Computers & Mathematics Applications, 23,
n° 6-9, pp. 493-515, 1992.
[8] Jay, N., Kohler, F. and Napoli, A., “Analysis of Social
Communities with Iceberg and Stability-Based Concept
Lattices”. ICFCA 2008: 258-272, 2008.
[9] Börner, K., Chen, C. and Boyak K. W., “Visualizing
Knowledge Domains”, Annual review of information
science and technology, vol. 37, pp. 179-255, S. Preuss,
A. Demchuk Jr., M. Stuke, Appl. Phys. A 61, 2003.
[10] Skupin, A. S. and Fabrikant, I., “Spatialization methods:
a cartographic research agenda for non-geographic
information visualization”, Cartography and Geographic
Information Sciences, vol. 30 (2), pp. 95-115, 2003.
[11] Keim, D. A., Schneidewing, J. and Sips, M., “Scalable
pixel based visual data exploration”, Pixelization
Paradigm, First Visual Information Expert Workshop,
Springer, vol. 4370, pp. 12-24, 2007.
[12] Blanchard,
F.,
Herbin,
M.,
Rousseaux,
F.,
« Compendium de données multidimensionnelles par une
image couleur », Atelier Visualisation des connaissances
des journées Extraction et Gestion des Connaissances
EGC 2005, Paris, France, 2005.

Table 1. Conceptual Clustering Statistics

This representation provides a global understanding
of the nature of the information contained in the explored
dataset. From the above example we learn that this
tourism dataset is mainly related to France, gastronomy,
camping and to a region of France named Loire. Then
users may explore specific clusters by clicking on them.

Conclusions
This paper described a methodology to provide a
conceptual help for navigation in large and poorly
structured datasets, based on the use of Galois lattices.
The interpretation of large lattices is impossible with
traditional graphical representation based on Hasse
diagrams. In this article, a pixel-oriented and a tree-based
visualizations were proposed which are complementary
as the former gives an overview of the data structure and
the latter provides a) a semantic understanding of the
data thanks to labels associated to the clusters and b) the
capability to navigate within the hierarchy of clusters for
information retrieval purposes.
In the future, experimentations will be conducted
with real end users in order to validate the interpretations
obtained with these visualisations and study to what
extent these interpretations might be automated.

References
[1]

[2]

Le Grand, B., Aufaure, M.-A. and Soto, M., “Semantic
and Conceptual Context-Aware Information Retrieval”,
the IEEE/ACM International Conference on SignalImage Technology & Internet-Based Systems
(SITIS'2006), pp. 322-332, Hammamet, Tunisia, 2006.
Polaillon, G., Aufaure, M.-A., Le Grand, B. and Soto
M., “FCA for contextual semantic navigation and
information retrieval in heterogeneous information
systems”, workshop on Advances in Conceptual
Knowledge Engineering, in conjunction with DEXA
2007, IEEE Computer Society, Regensburg, Germany,
pp. 534-539, 2007.
61

