2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Interactive Exploration of Ingredient Mixtures Using
Multiple Coordinated Views
Sara Johansson∗ , Kristina Knaving∗ , Amanda Lane† ,
Mikael Jern∗ and Jimmy Johansson∗
∗ Link¨oping University, Dept of Science and Technology, Sweden
† Unilever R&D, Port Sunlight, United Kingdom
sara.johansson@itn.liu.se, krikn195@student.itn.liu.se, amanda.lane@unilever.com
mikael.jern@itn.liu.se, jimmy.johansson@itn.liu.se
Abstract

is to find mixing proportions that yield a desirable performance and at the same time generate minimum variability
due to the influence of uncontrollable variables, referred to
here as process variables.
To be able to investigate the trade-offs needed to find
suitable ingredient mixtures, taking all aspects into consideration, specialists are needed who are aware of the restrictions in specific situations. With large amounts of numerical data this is not easily done, however. Interactive
visualization tools can facilitate the analysis considerably
by:

The complex nature of multivariate data sets calls for
high interactive performance and intuitive metaphors. A
specific type of multivariate data is where the variables
sum up to a constant, here defined as multicomponent data.
This application paper presents an interactive application
for analysis of modelled multicomponent data. The aim is
to find high performance variable combinations that fulfil some requested properties. The application is based
on coordinated views that include parallel coordinates, a
ternary diagram, a 2D scatter plot and a line plot. It supports numerous interaction techniques enabling fast analysis of complex patterns in multicomponent data sets. The
application is developed in collaboration with researchers
within the fields of statistics and chemistry. An informal
usability evaluation indicates that the interactive nature of
the application clearly facilitates the analysis process.

• Providing an overview of large amounts of data;
• Taking advantage of the specialists’ knowledge to investigate trade-offs and determine optimum solutions;
• Speeding up investigation, decision making and product development by supplying interaction possibilities.

Keywords— Information visualization, multicomponent
data, ternary diagram, interactivity, modelled data.

1

This paper describes an interactive visualization tool for
multicomponent data called VIME (Visual Ingredient Mixture Exploration). VIME incorporates traditional information visualization techniques, ternary diagrams and a number of interaction techniques to discover optimal mixtures
of ingredients. Ternary diagrams are extensively used in
disciplines such as chemistry [16] and mineralogy [14] to
analyse mixtures of ingredients or mineral compositions,
but are less common in information visualization. The
ternary diagram in VIME is extended with several interaction techniques to further enhance the ability to analyse
mixtures.
The application development has taken place in close
collaboration with domain experts in the areas of statistics
and chemistry. VIME has been developed using the GeoAnalytics Visualization (GAV) framework [10].
The outline of the paper is as follows. In section 2 the
background of this paper and previous research related to

Introduction

Over the past decades multivariate data sets have become increasingly common in a variety of domains. Major
challenges are to extract meaning, discover structure and
find patterns. Improvements of existing visualization and
interaction methods hold great potential to provide valuable and previously unknown information that can advance
our understanding of complex phenomena and systems.
This application paper presents a tool for analysis of
multicomponent data, which is here defined as a specific
type of multivariate data where the variables sum up to a
constant. This type of data is common in areas such as
chemistry, statistics, mineralogy and biology. The focus
of this paper is on ingredient mixture data which is multicomponent data that includes ingredient variables and performance variables. For this data the goal of the analysis
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.44

210

100%

proportion of variable A at the point in figure 1 a line, LA ,
which is parallel to the triangle side opposite to A’s corner,
is drawn through the point. The proportion of variable A
at that point is given by the shortest distance, PA , between
LA and the triangle side opposite to the variable corner [3].
In the same way the proportion of variable C at the point
in figure 1 is read using the line LC and distance PC . In
this example the point contains approximately 50 percent
of A and 15 percent of C, hence the amount of variable B
is approximately 35 percent.
The use of equilateral triangles to represent mixtures
can be traced back to post-Newtonian work on mixing
colours [14], and in 1897 Bancroft [3] suggested several
ways to use the characteristic of an equilateral triangle to
calculate the proportions of a point inside it.
Ternary diagrams are commonly used in several research areas, for example in mineralogy, which includes
studies of economic minerals, petrology, classification and
phase relationships [14], in chemistry [16, 6] and in computer science [5]. An example of ternary diagrams being
used for visualization of mixtures is given in [13] where
properties of glass produced from waste streams, which
depend upon waste stream composition, are visualized.
Using static representations, such as ternary diagrams, makes the analysis process both difficult and timeconsuming since the number of mixtures which need to be
analysed is large and often contains many ingredient variables. Having the ability to interactively construct visual
representations of ingredient variables will significantly
speed up the analysis process since the user can freely manipulate the visual representations to suit their needs. Using multiple linked views, which display different aspects
of the data simultaneously, is a well established concept
[12] that would further enhance the analysis process.
To the best of our knowledge no application exists that
provides this interactivity and, at the same time, can be
easily adapted to the specific structure of ingredient mixture data in a way that makes use of the knowledge and
previous experiences of domain experts. What does exist,
however, are numerous applications and toolkits that can
be used for interactive analysis of multivariate data sets,
some examples are Spotfire [1], InfoVis Toolkit [7], GAV
[10] and XmdvTool [19]. These are all built on the principle of coordinated and linked views [2, 4]. Coordinated
and linked views have been successfully used to overcome
the difficulty of presenting large amounts of data in one
display and concurrently make it possible to find detailed
structures. Some statistical tools, such as [8], provide traditionally used visual representations for multicomponent
data, but lack the possibility of coordination of multiple
views.
The work presented in this paper uses interactive ternary

A

LC
PC

LA
PA

100% B

C 100%

Figure 1: A ternary diagram plotting ingredients A, B and
C. The ingredient proportions of a point are read using
straight lines that are parallel to the triangle sides. As an
example, looking at variables A and C the red point shown
contains 50 percent of ingredient A (as shown by the line
LA and distance PA ) and 15 percent of ingredient C (as
shown by the line LC and distance PC ).
it is presented. Section 3 describes the data presented in
the application and in section 4 the application is described
in more detail. In section 5 an example scenario of multicomponent data analysis using VIME is described and in
section 6 the result of an informal usability evaluation is
discussed. Finally, in section 7, the paper is summarised
and some suggestions for future work are presented.

2

Background and Related Work

Exploration of ingredient mixture data differs from exploration of common multivariate data sets due to the internal relationship between component variables and the specific goal of the analysis. The data visualized in VIME contains ingredient variables as well as performance attributes.
The performance of different mixtures can vary due to ingredient proportions and process variables, such as consumer habits and environmental conditions. The goal of
the analysis is to find compositions that yield a desirable
result and, at the same time, generate minimum variability
due to the influence of process variables.
Traditionally, multicomponent data has been visually
analysed by using static diagrams such as ternary diagrams. A ternary diagram is a plot of three variables in
the shape of an equilateral triangle, where each corner of
the triangle represents 100 percent of one of the variables.
Every point in the triangle represents a unique composition of the three variables which sums up to 100 percent.
Figure 1 shows an example of how to interpret the variable
composition of a point in a ternary diagram. To read the

211

diagrams together with more common information visualization techniques such as parallel coordinates [9, 20],
scatter plots and line plots in a coordinated and customised
environment to enable interactive exploration of multicomponent data.

3

Table 1: All ingredient mixtures with 80 percent of Ing1
and 10 percent of Ing2 in a data set sampled at every ten
percent. Each row corresponds to a specific ingredient
mixture.
Ing1 Ing2 Ing3 Ing4 Ing5 M ean V ariance
0.8
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
13.26
3.02
0.8
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
11.87
1.04
0.8
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
17.75
1.86

Data Modelling

The multicomponent data used in this work is calculated using a regression model; a full second-order model
(Scheff´e [15]). This type of regression model is commonly
used in robust formulation optimisation [17, 11]. The data
used in this paper, having five ingredients and two process
variables, is structured as follows:
5

5

γi0 xi

η(x, z) =
2

+
k=1



0
γi,j
xi xj
i=1 j>i

5

k
γi,j
xi xj  zk

i=1

5

5

i=1

Table 3: The last step in creating subsets is to average the
performance variables (M ean and V ariance) in table 2.
The result is a single mixture containing ingredient components Ing1 , Ing2 and Ing3+4+5 together with their average performance values.

(1)

i<j
5

γi1,2 xi +

+



5

γik xi +



Ing1 Ing2 Ing3+4+5 M ean V ariance
0.8
0.1
0.1
13.26
3.02
0.8
0.1
0.1
11.87
1.04
0.8
0.1
0.1
17.75
1.86

5

+

i=1



Table 2: The result of combining Ing3 , Ing4 and Ing5 in
table 1 into a new variable Ing3+4+5 .


1,2
γi,j
xi xj  z1 z2

i=1 j>i

Ing1 Ing2 Ing3+4+5 M ean V ariance
0.8
0.1
0.2
14.29
1.97

where xi and xj are the proportions of ingredients i and
j respectively, z1 and z2 are process variables and γ is a
parameter estimate. Varying the sampling level of the ingredients results in data sets of different resolutions.
In this paper data sampled at either 10 or 5 percent is
used. Based on equation 1 two models were extracted providing values for the mean and variance. The mean value is
a measure of how effective a specific combination of ingredients are, and the variance a measure of the variation due
to the uncontrollable variables. Sampling with a resolution
of 10 percent provides 1001 valid mixtures that need to be
analysed. Changing the sampling resolution to 5 results in
10626 valid mixtures, more than ten times as many.

4

remaining ingredients. For every combination of two ingredients, there is a number of items with varying values
for the remaining ones, as shown in table 1 where all mixtures containing 80 percent of Ing1 and 10 percent of Ing2
are shown.
The first step in creating subsets is to combine Ing3 ,
Ing4 and Ing5 and create a new ingredient variable
(Ing3+4+5 ) by taking the sum of the individual values, see
table 2. The result is three ingredient mixtures with identical combinations of ingredients Ing1 , Ing2 and Ing3+4+5 ,
but with different values of the performance variables
(M ean and V ariance). The second step is to take the average value of the performance variables to create a single
mixture, see table 3. The resulting subset is thus a mixture with ingredient components that can be displayed in a
ternary diagram. However, since Ing3 , Ing4 and Ing5 are
combined into one ingredient variable only the proportions
of Ing1 and Ing2 can be read individually when analysing
this subset.

Application

VIME is a tool for exploration of the performance of
ingredient mixtures. The graphical user interface of VIME
is displayed in figure 2 and the following sections describe
its features in further detail.

4.1

Pre-processing

The ternary diagram is used to display variables summing up to a specific constant, typically 100 percent, and,
hence, is well suited for representation of multicomponent
data. However, it is only able to display three ingredients (components) at a time if the proportions of all are
to be read individually. For representation of data containing more than three ingredients in the ternary diagram in
VIME, the data is reduced to subsets containing two ingredient variables and a variable representing the sum of the

4.2

Visual Representations

VIME is made up of four views; a robustness plot, a
ternary diagram, a performance plot and a parallel coordinates representation, as shown in figure 2. The parallel coordinates representation (bottom view in figure 2) provides
an overview of the whole modelled data set, containing all
ingredient variables as well as performance variables. A

212

Figure 2: The layout and visual representations of VIME. The top left view contains a robustness plot, displaying M ean
against V ariance. In the top centre view is a ternary diagram representing Ing1 and Ing5 . This diagram is coloured using
bi-variate colouring as described in detail in section 4.3. To the top right is a performance plot representing the average
performance of different proportions of Ing1 and Ing5 together. In the bottom half of the application the whole modelled
data set is displayed using parallel coordinates.
ter plot displaying M ean against V ariance for all ingredient mixtures that are selected in the parallel coordinates
representation or in the ternary diagram. If a point is selected in the ternary diagram then each ingredient mixture
that this point is made up of is represented as a glyph in the
robustness plot. In figure 2, three points close to the right
corner in the ternary diagram, representing Others, have
been selected. As described in section 4.1 these points are
made up from a number of unique ingredient mixtures. All
ingredient mixtures from which the three selected points
are made, are displayed as individual glyphs in the robustness plot in figure 2. Through this the robustness plot provides a focused view of the performance distribution of selected ingredient combinations.

ten percent sampling resolution (1001 items) is used to prevent visual clutter. The parallel coordinates representation
also serves as a visual interface to control what is displayed
in the other views.
The ternary diagram (top, centre view in figure 2) effectively displays compositions of ingredients, and since
every point in the diagram represents a possible ingredient mixture, high resolution data can be visualized without
generating clutter. Although a ternary diagram can display
data with very high resolution, the data used in this application is sampled using a 5 percent resolution. To still make
use of the full trianglular area and to facilitate discovery
of trends, all pixels are coloured according to the M ean
and V ariance of the sample points closest to them, calculated using Euclidean distances between pixels and sample
points. The colouring of the ternary diagram is shown in
figure 3 and described in detail in section 4.3.
The robustness plot (top, left view in figure 2) is a scat-

In the performance plot (top, right view in figure 2) the
analyst can focus on the performance of certain ingredients
or combinations of ingredients. In the figure the combination of Ing1 and Ing5 is displayed. The performance plot

213

Figure 3: Colour is used to display both M ean and V ariance in the ternary diagram. The left view displays M ean using
a colour scheme where the hue ranges from blue to red with green and yellow in between. In the centre view M ean
and V ariance is displayed simultaneously, where opacity ranging from fully opaque to completely transparent is used
to represent V ariance. In the right view V ariance is displayed using grey scale. The left colour legend, representing
V ariance, is always mapped to the grey scale colour scheme. To make use of the full triangle area of the ternary diagram
all pixels are coloured according to the colour of the sample point closest to the pixel.
is a line plot that displays the average performance (M ean)
at different summed proportions of the selected ingredients. The proportions are represented along the x-axis. An
average performance, represented by the dark blue line, is
computed from all ingredient mixtures where the selected
ingredients together make up the given proportion. The
individual mixtures that the average is computed from are
represented by small red dots in the plot. As an example,
the points positioned along the vertical grid line which correspond to the proportion 0.5, represent the performance of
ingredient mixtures where Ing1 and Ing5 together make
up 50 percent of the mixture. The position of the blue
line at the 0.5 proportion corresponds to the average performance value of the ingredient mixtures.

4.3

completely transparent to represent the V ariance. As can
be seen from the centre diagram, the top corner of the diagram (representing mixtures with high amounts of Ing3 )
is more transparent than the other parts of the diagram,
and so indicates a high variance for ingredient mixtures
containing mostly Ing3 . Since there might be some difficulty assessing two colour spans at once, opacity can be
displayed separately in the ternary diagram using a grey
scale, as shown in the right-hand diagram in figure 3.

4.4

Interactivity and Coordination of Views

The views of VIME are coordinated by colour, selection and thresholding. Any action performed in one view
is immediately reflected in all of the others. All views display different aspects and samplings of the modelled data.
The parallel coordinates display all ingredients and performance variables, the ternary diagram displays subsets
of two ingredients, the robustness plot displays the mean
and variance of selected ingredient mixtures and the performance plot shows average performance against proportions of selected ingredients. Due to this diversity the linking between the different subsets and views is complex.
Thresholding, for example based on unwanted performance properties or restrictions on certain ingredients, can
be performed by using the threshold sliders of the parallel
coordinates axes. The thresholding is reflected in the robustness plot and, if performed on performance variables
or ingredients of the current subset, the thresholding is also
reflected in the ternary diagram. In the performance plot
the thresholding is reflected by a re-computation of average performance for selected variables, displaying only the
performance of data items that are within the thresholds in
the parallel coordinates representation.
The data subsets displayed in the ternary diagram have

Colouring

The aim of the colouring in VIME is to be able to represent both performance variables (M ean and V ariance)
simultaneously. This is achieved using bi-variate colouring, based on the principles presented in [18]. According
to these the selected colours should be perceived to maintain order and to be different when pointing out data differences. Furthermore the two colours should never obscure
each other.
In VIME, hue is used to describe the M ean variable
and opacity to describe the V ariance variable. Both hue
and opacity preserve the order of the variables, and clearly
point out differences between high and low values. Figure
3 displays the different colouring available for the ternary
diagram in VIME. The left-hand diagram is coloured according to the M ean variable, with hue ranging from blue
to red with green and yellow in between. The centre diagram is coloured according to the M ean and V ariance
simultaneously using opacity ranging from fully opaque to

214

Figure 4: An illustration of the one-to-many linking between the ternary diagram and parallel coordinates. The selected
point in the ternary diagram corresponds to a mixture having 10 percent of Ing1 , 70 percent of Ing2 and 20 percent of
Others. The data set contains 5 ingredients meaning that Others consists of different combinations of Ing3 , Ing4 and
Ing5 , as seen in the parallel coordinates representation. In this particular example there are 6 different mixtures.
a one-to-many connection to the original data set since
one mixture in a subset can represent multiple mixtures in
the original data (as previously discussed in section 4.1).
Hence, if a single mixture is selected in the ternary diagram
showing a subset of the data, all mixtures in the original
data are highlighted in the parallel coordinates representation. This is illustrated in figure 4 where the selected point
in the ternary diagram corresponds to a mixture containing 10 percent of Ing1 , 70 percent of Ing2 and 20 percent
of Others. Since the data contains 5 ingredients, Others
consists of more than one combination of Ing3 , Ing4 and
Ing5 , as seen in the parallel coordinates representation.
As described in section 4.2, the robustness plot displays
mixtures selected in either the ternary diagram or in the
parallel coordinates. Due to the relationship between the
data sets, selection of one point in the ternary diagram results in several glyphs being displayed in the robustness
plot, whereas the selection of a line in the parallel coordinates only results in one glyph being displayed in the
robustness plot.
As mentioned in section 4.2, the parallel coordinates are
used as a visual interface to control the other views. By selecting ingredient headers in the parallel coordinates the
user controls which data subset to display in the ternary
diagram, as well as which ingredients to present in the performance plot.
The ternary diagram view contains two legends where
thresholding based on performance variables can be accomplished, as well as interaction with the colours. By
interacting with these sliders the analyst can expand or
contract the span where a specific colour sequence is used,
which is then reflected in the other views. Expanding the
colour span for areas of interest may enhance the understanding of variable variation and can be used to quickly
find all areas above or below a certain value.
In addition to thresholding and selection, the ternary
diagram offers some additional information retrieval aids.

Figure 5: Parallel coordinates when only ingredient mixtures with high M ean values remain. As visible, Ing1 and
Ing5 have the greatest impact on performance.
When hovering over the triangle, guidelines linking from
the position of the mouse pointer to the specific ingredient
proportions at the triangle sides simplifies the interpretation of the diagram. Simultaneously, text information on
proportions and performance is displayed beside the diagram. The legends and some of the interactive aids are
shown in figure 2.

5

Example Scenario

This section provides a description of how an analyst
can work with VIME to find an optimum multicomponent
mixture, based on the analyst’s knowledge on performance
efficiency and data constraints. For the data set that is to
be analysed in this example, the desired performance is a
high mean value and a stable result with low variance. In
addition to demands on performance there are restrictions
on two of the ingredients. Due to high cost, ingredient
one should not make up more than 50 percent of the final
mixture, and due to environmental issues, the maximum
amount allowed of ingredient five is 20 percent.
When the data has been loaded into the application, the

215

Figure 6: Performance plot displaying, from left to right, results for Ing2 , Ing3 and Ing4 . Highest M ean values are
obtained from high amounts of ingredient two and low amounts of ingredients three and four.
analyst gets a quick understanding of which ingredients
have the most influence on the result by removing all ingredient mixtures with low mean value, using the axis sliders
in the parallel coordinates. As shown in figure 5, it is easily perceived that large amounts of ingredient one or five
would give the desired performance result, however there
are restrictions on both of these ingredients.
The next step the analyst takes is to remove all combinations not fulfilling the restrictions of ingredient one and
five, again using the axis sliders of the parallel coordinates
to perform the thresholding. To gain an understanding of
the performance of each ingredient based on given restrictions, the ingredients are examined individually in the performance plot (see figure 6). It is found that high amounts
of ingredient two and low amounts of ingredients three and
four yield the best performance (highest M ean).
Based on this initial view the analyst decides to continue by examining the combinations of ingredients two
and four more closely in the ternary diagram. Using the
variance legend in the ternary view the ingredient mixtures
mostly affected by uncontrollable variables are removed.
By modifying the colour regions using the mean legend,
the regions representing ingredient mixtures resulting in
best performance are identified as yellow regions. The result of the interaction is displayed in figure 7.
The high performance ingredient mixtures are then selected in the ternary diagram, highlighted by black points
in figure 7, and the corresponding combinations that these
are made up of in the original data set are displayed in the
robustness plot. As seen in figure 8 it is clearly visible
that the performance varies between the selected combinations, and by examining them in the robustness plot the
analyst can identify the combinations with the highest performance that also have the lowest variance and hence are
least affected by uncontrollable variables. These combinations are selected within the robustness plot and their indi-

Figure 7: Combinations of Ing2 and Ing4 displayed in the
ternary diagram. High variance combinations have been
removed and the colour spans have been modified to simplify identification of interesting ingredient mixtures.
vidual profiles can be examined in the parallel coordinates
plot, as shown in figure 9.
The selected ingredient mixtures are suggestions of
combinations that both fulfil the given constraints and have
a high and stable performance. From here on the analysis
can continue, for instance by examining other combinations of ingredients more closely in the ternary diagram
and robustness plot.

6

Usability

The usability of VIME has been established and examined through an informal qualitative study halfway through
the application development, as well as through discussions and feedback from potential users throughout the de-

216

comments on the general usability were:
“It’s very useful for getting a feel for your data and understanding the relationships between the variables”
“Very good, intuitive controls, easy to pick up”
“Good, use of colour and hue make it easy to distinguish lines on parallel plot and spot patterns”
“Good. I had a problem highlighting some of the
points/lines - it didn’t do what I thought it would do”
The results and comments of the usability evaluation were
used to guide further development and to improve and
adapt VIME to the needs and preferences of potential future users. For instance, the original layout contained a 3D
scatter plot and a second parallel coordinates plot displaying the same data subset as the ternary diagram, these were
both removed since several users found them redundant,
and since the 3D scatter plot “looks pretty but is difficult to
interpret and doesn’t add much”.
Figure 8: The robustness plot for ingredient mixtures selected in the ternary diagram (figure 7). Two stable high
performance ingredient mixtures are selected.

7

Conclusions and Future Work

This paper presents VIME (Visual Ingredient Mixture
Exploration), an interactive tool for visualization and exploration of ingredient mixture data. The data that is analysed in VIME is calculated using a mathematical model
where performance results and variance, due to process
variables, are extracted. VIME provides an interactive
environment for exploration of data extracted from these
models and efficiently incorporates specialist knowledge to
investigate and determine optimum solutions of ingredient
mixtures.
To test the usability of the application, an informal qualitative evaluation with domain experts within the areas of
statistics and chemistry has been performed. The results
of the preliminary study were promising and indicated that
the visual representations and interactivity of VIME clearly
facilitate the analysis process compared to existing methods used.
Future work includes a thorough evaluation of the application and further generalizations, such as making it possible to use data models resulting in more than two performance variables. Furthermore the usability and generality
could be further established by adapting the application to
experimental data and multicomponent data from other research areas such as, for instance, environmental or energy
data.

Figure 9: The profiles of the high performance ingredient
mixtures selected in figure 8.
velopment process. The application has hence been developed and adapted based on preferences, needs and requests
of potential future users and domain experts.
The usability evaluation was carried out with seven potential future users, using an early layout of VIME. The
participants became familiar with the application by being
presented with three simple tasks to perform using VIME.
Afterwards they were asked to answer a short questionnaire.
All except two, who graded themselves as novices regarding mixture data sets, thought this kind of application
could be useful to them in their work. The participants
were asked to specify what they considered the application
could be used for, and suggestions for use were hypothesis forming, result demonstration and as a tool for understanding the decision making process. The usability of the
application was graded high by all participants and some

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Cristina Vozian for her extensive work on upgrading and implementing parts of the application. We would also like to thank Johan Franz´en for
his indispensable support during the early implementation
phase. Finally, we would like to thank the scientists at
Unilever R&D, Port Sunlight, for their comments, ideas
and feedback during the project.

217

References

International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization, CMV ’07,
pages 61–71. IEEE Computer Society, July 2007.

[1] Chrisopher Ahlberg. Spotfire: an information exploration environment. ACM SIGMOD Record,
25(4):25–29, 1996.

[13] R.J. Robertus, P.R. Hrma, and R. Lambert. Tweat ternary waste envelope assessment tool. Presented at
the Waste Management ’93 Symposia, 1993.

[2] Michelle Q. Wang Baldonado, Allison Woodruff, and
Allan Kuchinsky. Guidelines for using multiple views
in information visualization. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Advanced Visual Interfaces, pages 110–
119, 2000.

[14] P.A. Sabine and R.J. Howarth. The role of ternary
projections in colour displays for geochemical maps
and in economic mineralogy and petrology. Journal
of Geochemical Exploration, 63(2):123–144, 1998.

[3] Wilder D. Bancroft. A triangular diagram. The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 1(7):403–410, 1897.

[15] Henry Scheff´e. Experiments with mixtures. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological), 20(2):344–360, 1958.

[4] Andreas Buja, John Alan McDonald, John Michalak,
and Werner Stuetzle. Interactive data visualization
using focusing and linking. In Proc. IEEE Visualiza´ San Diego, CA, pages 156–153, 1991.
tion 91,

[16] R. Takahashi, H. Kubota, M. Murakami, Y. Yamamoto, Y. Matsumoto, and H. Koinuma. Design
of combinatorial shadow masks for complete ternaryphase diagramming of solid state materials. Journal
of Combinatorial Chemistry, 6(1):50–53, 2004.

[5] Jozo Dujmovi´c and Carl Herder. Visualization of java
workloads using ternary diagrams. In Proceedings of
the Fourth International Workshop on Software and
Performance, WOSP’04, pages 261–265, 2004.

[17] L.C. Tang and K. Xu. A unified approach for dual response surface optimization. Journal of quality technology, 34(4):437–447, 2002.

[6] Fadwa T. Eljacka and Mario R. Edena. A systematic visual approach to molecular design via property
clusters and group contribution methods. Computers and Chemical Engineering, 32(12):3002–3010,
2008.

[18] Bruce E. Trumbo. A theory for coloring bivariate statistical maps. The American Statistician, 35(4):220–
226, 1981.

[7] Jean-Daniel Fekete. The infovis toolkit. In Proceedings of the 10th IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (InfoVis’04), pages 167–174. IEEE Press,
October 2004.

[19] Matthew O. Ward. Xmdvtool: Integrating multiple
methods for visualizing multivariate data. In Proceedings of the Conference on Visualization 1994,
pages 326–333, October 1994.

[8] SAS Institute Inc. JMP 8 Statistics and Graphics
Guide, Volumes 1 and 2. SAS Institute Inc., Cary,
NC, USA, 2008.

[20] Edward J. Wegman. Hyperdimensional data analysis using parallel coordinates. Journal of American
Statistics Association, 85(411):664–675, 1990.

[9] Alfred Inselberg. The plane with parallel coordinates.
The Visual Computer, 1(4):69–91, 1985.
[10] Mikael Jern, Sara Johansson, Jimmy Johansson, and
Johan Franz´en. The gav toolkit for multiple linked
views. In Fifth International Conference on Coordinated and Multiple Views in Exploratory Visualization, CMV ’07, pages 85–97. IEEE Computer Society, July 2007.
[11] Youngjo Lee and John A. Nelder. A unified approach
for dual response surface optimization. Robust design
via generalized linear models, 35(1):2–12, 2003.
[12] Jonathan C. Roberts. State of the art: Coordinated &
multiple views in exploratory visualization. In Fifth

218

