2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Measuring Aesthetics for Information Visualization
Daniel Filonik, Dominikus Baur
Media Informatics Group, University of Munich
daniel.filonik@stud.ifi.lmu.de, dominikus.baur@ifi.lmu.de
Abstract

thetics have a positive effect on usability [3, 22]. This is
a critical issue, since the user plays a central role in the
visualization process. The interactive nature of visualizations poses high demands in terms of usability. Aesthetics
should not be reduced to pleasing visual design, aesthetic
qualities in interaction design also have to be considered
when evaluating visualizations [4, 6].
With robust aesthetic measurements in place it might
even be possible to solve the lack of intrinsic quality measures. Measures for aesthetics could work as benchmarks
to compare different visualizations [4].
Consequently, aesthetics is not only an unsolved problem in the field of visualization, but it can be related to
other unsolved problems. Further research into this topic
could prove very beneficial for the visualization community. This paper aims to give an overview over relevant
work and different approaches to this topic. The following
chapter takes a closer look at the central terms. Afterwards, the focus lies on different theoretical approaches
to measure aesthetics. Existing techniques for generating
aesthetic images are examined and examples are presented.
The final chapter is concerned with the effect of aesthetic
visualizations on the user.

Aesthetics is an unsolved problem of information visualization, because there is no satisfactory understanding of
what constitutes aesthetic effect. This survey paper gives
an overview of approaches to model aesthetics, starting
with Birkhoff’s aesthetic measure and continuing to recent
ones based on mathematical and information theoretical
concepts. Common concepts in the different models are
highlighted, such as the effects of order and complexity.
Further, practical techniques for generating aesthetic visualizations are shown together with examples of recent
work in this field. Finally, the paper discusses some of the
key issues regarding aesthetics and the human factor in the
visualization process. Empirical studies have shown a correlation between perceived aesthetics and usability, meaning that a better understanding of aesthetics could improve
the usability of visualizations.
Keywords—Aesthetics, Visualization, Measures, Usability

1

Introduction

Since its formal definition in the late 1980s the field of
interactive computer-aided visualization has experienced
rapid development. However, despite the notable progress,
there are still numerous open questions. Some of the most
pressing ones are listed in Chaomei Chen’s article “Top 10
Unsolved Information Visualization Problems” [4].
In the context of this paper, the mentioning of aesthetics
as one of the unsolved problems is certainly worth highlighting. As Chen points out “there is a lack of holistic empirical studies to characterize what visual properties make
users think a graph is pretty or visually appealing” [4].
Therefore, it is important to look at approaches for measuring aesthetics, which are not based on a specific kind
of visualization. The connections between aesthetics and
insight need to be explored in order to make visualizations
that are attractive and effective. Further, when investigating the role of aesthetics it is necessary to consider its implications for methodologies aiming to evaluate visualizations.
Besides aesthetics, Chen also considers the issue of usability. Empirical studies have shown that perceived aes978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.94

2

Defining Aesthetics

In its modern use “aesthetics” usually refers to the
philosophical study of art and beauty. The word is originally derived from the Greek “aisthesis”. In its original use
it covered the meaning of the English terms sensation, perception, appearance, mind and knowledge [12]. In search
for a good definition for aesthetics, Cawthon and Moere
turn to its antonym.
”An anesthetic is used to dull or deaden, causing sleepiness and numbness. In contrast, aesthetic is seen as something that enlivens or invigorates both body and mind, awakening the
senses.” [2]
There are various academical approaches to aesthetics.
Analytical aesthetics, which is represented in this paper
through aesthetic measures, is based on the logical and
585
579

mathematical nature of aesthetics. In art, psychology or
industrial product design the approaches are very different [3]. The user has a subjective view of aesthetics as
a result of his personal, social and cultural background.
Therefore, there is no single theory of aesthetics.
In software development, aesthetics is most frequently
considered in regard to interface design. However, it is
often seen as an added bonus that requires additional programming time and resources. There may even be negative connotations, as an attractive interface is suspected to
cover up deficiencies in functionality [2]. Such allegations
lose ground as there are empirically measurable benefits
of aesthetics [3, 22]. In the wake of such findings it is
apparent that the subject deserves greater attention then it
has previously received [15].

3

a higher amount of order results in a more satisfying experience, signaled by a higher aesthetic measure. Later
studies with groups of observers suggested that the perceived aesthetic value “is curvilinearly related to M , peaking when M is moderate” [21].
The intuitive interpretation and frequent reoccurrence
in other works shows that Birkhoff’s measure is very appealing. However, trying to apply it to information visualization poses a new question: how is complexity and order
measured? New approaches try to answer this question,
based upon work in information theory and mathematical
concepts.

3.2

Aesthetic Measures

While it may be true that “no one knows how to measure aesthetic value” [15], several analytical approaches
have been developed to quantify certain aspects of aesthetic appearance. This section first examines the original
work “Aesthetic Measure” [1] by George D. Birkhoff,
which suggested a formalization of aesthetics. Since then,
different approaches have been made building up on the
fundamental insights of Birkhoff’s work.

3.1

Birkhoff’s Aesthetic Measure

The goal of Birkhoff’s measure was to determine the
aesthetic effect of objects such as polygons, tiles and vases.
Birkhoff applied his model only to a limited range of objects, because he came to the conclusion that objects of different classes could not be compared. He also realized that
aesthetic effect was dependent on the observer and proposed a restricted group of observers [18, 21].
The early mathematical model of beauty proposed by
Birkhoff was based on three phases in the perception of
aesthetics. The first phase is the preliminary effort of focusing one’s attention on the object. This phase is proportional to the object’s complexity (C). The reward of this
effort is a feeling of value, which is called the aesthetic
measure (M ). However, this aesthetic measure is influenced by the degree of harmony, symmetry or order (O).
The verification of order in the object seems necessary for
the aesthetic effect [18]. From these observations, Birkhoff
deduced the following relationship.
M=

A Pattern Measure

Klinger and Salingaros’ measure [11] holds some close
similarities to Birkhoff’s measure. The class of objects
covered by Klinger and Salingaros are rectangular square
arrays of elements, also referred to as patterns. Evidently,
such a measure is particularly interesting if visualizations
are made up of elements placed in a grid. Moreover, it can
be applied to any raster of pixels.
The cognitive process is again the underlying principle
for formulating a model of aesthetics. During perception
the viewer subliminally identifies coherent units and notices how often identical units appear. These factors contribute to the viewers impression of the object. Mathematically simple patterns are easily recognized as opposed to
random ones.
The pattern measure combines hierarchy with information measures to estimate the complexity and order of a
pattern. The result are two descriptors: T represents traditional measures of information and H represents symmetries. This means that T can be regarded as a measure
for complexity and H as a measure of order. A measure
for disorder can then be derived by subtracting H from
the maximum possible symmetry Hmax . From these descriptors Klinger and Salingaros derive the following two
composite measures.
L = TH
C = T (Hmax − H)
The composite measure L corresponds with the degree
of structure, whereas C represents randomness. Klinger
and Salingaros suggest that the mathematical quantities T
and H are not perceived directly, while L and C are. Both
composite values have to be considered as separate dimensions when estimating the aesthetic effect.
The calculation of the pattern measure in the simple
case of a 2 × 2 array is relatively easy. The value of T
is the number of different elements in the array minus one.
There are six possible symmetries in such a simple array
- four reflectional symmetries along different axis and two

O
C

This formula can be interpreted quite intuitively. A rising degree of complexity and disorder creates an unpleasant reaction from the viewer. In the model this is represented by a lower value of the aesthetic measure. Inversely,

580
586

rotational symmetries. The value for H can easily be obtained by checking each of the possible symmetries.
In order to be able to apply the measure to larger arrays,
Klinger and Salingaros decompose them into sub blocks.
This subdivision is applied recursively until the case of the
2 × 2 array is reached. When moving up in the recursion
the values calculated in the sub blocks are accumulated. In
addition to the six symmetries of the simple 2 × 2 case,
three translational symmetries have to be considered: relation through translation and reflection, relation through
translation and rotation and similarity to another element.

3.3

These measures are used to quantify the creative process. The value of MB represents the selection of colors
from the initial repertoire and MK the order in the distribution of colors. The last measure MZ “expresses the
transition from the palette to the artistic object”.
The paper goes on to devise a partitioning algorithm
that aims at maximizing the extraction of information at
each step. The goal is to model the process of an observer
trying to decompose the image. The more steps are necessary to achieve a certain level of information, the higher
the complexity of the image.

Informational Aesthetics Measures

3.4

The work of Rigau et al. [18] devises a set of measures
that build on Birkhoff’s with information theoretical concepts. The area of application in the paper are digital images, which means that it could be applied to the output of
visualization algorithms.
Different concepts in the creative process form the basis for the proposed model. On the one hand, the initial
repertoire is a finite and discrete palette of colors available
for the creation of an image. On the other hand, the selected repertoire is the range of colors that were used with
a certain probability distribution. The final distribution of
colors on the canvas that makes up the image.
The initial repertoire is given by the standard RGB
palette, which has N rgb = 2563 values. The maximum entropy can therefore be calculated as Hmax =
log2 (N rgb ) = 24. The selected repertoire is referred to
as X rgb . The intensity histogram represents the probability distribution of colors in the image. With this probability
distribution it is possible to calculate the Shannon entropy
H(X rgb ) of the image. This information can be used to
calculate the following measure.
MB =

Combinatorial entropy is proposed by Neˇsetˇril [14] for
measuring harmony in an image. It is invariant in regard
to scaling and rotation and very robust. Using digital image processing tools it can be applied to a wide range of
images, some of which may have to be preprocessed for
contours.
The measure is based on the image represented as a finite set of curves in two-dimensional Euclidean space. For
a set of curves D and an infinite straight line L, the number of intersections is denoted by i(L, D). This leads to the
definition of the combinatorial entropy as follows.
Hc (D) = Ex(i(L, D))
That means that combinatorial entropy denotes the expected value of intersections related to a random selection
of a line L. The mathematical definition of this expected
value is difficult. However, Hc (D) can be easily evaluated
by a sufficiently large number randomly generated of lines.
When applied to the simple case of a n × n grid, the value
of Hc (D) is n.
An interpretation of combinatorial entropy is that it represents the information content of an image. When comparing images of the same object or theme, a “smaller
Hc (D) indicates the relative elegance and simplicity of the
output”.
Introducing a hierarchical structure to the process,
hereditary combinatorial entropy (HCE) is defined based
on Hc (D). It “can be visualized as a matrix that has a
hereditary structure, where each field has a corresponding
combinatorial entropy”. The goal of HCE is to take features such as clustering or equidistribution of lengths and
points into account, which cannot be computed easily.
Neˇsetˇril concludes that “a harmonious or aesthetically
pleasing drawing or design has a combinatorial entropy in
each of its (meaningful) parts proportional to the global
combinatorial entropy”.

Hmax −H(X rgb )
Hmax

The next measure introduces the concept of Kolmogorov complexity. Essentially, Kolmogorov complexity
of a string is the length of its ultimate compressed version.
This value cannot be computed, but it can be estimated by
using standard real world compression algorithms. The
number of pixels in the image (N ) is required for calculating the size an uncompressed version (N Hmax ). This
size is put in relation to the Kolmogorov complexity (K)
approximated with the use of JPEG compression.
MK =

N Hmax −K
N Hmax

Finally, a measure is defined based on physical entropy,
that relates the images initial information content to the
Kolmogorov complexity.
MZ =

Hereditary Combinatorial Entropy

N H(X rgb )−K
N H(X rgb )

581
587

4

Aesthetic Visualization Approaches

This section is concerned with the generation of aesthetic appearance based on the formalization of aesthetics
and particular qualities of different algorithms. Sometimes, this is also referred to as algorithmic or generative
art. Work in this area is characterized by experimentation
with different creative approaches and often has an essential component of visual interaction. Several technologies
for displaying advanced and highly interactive graphics in
a browser have made the Internet a popular platform for
presenting such work [10].

4.1

Exact Aesthetics

The field of exact aesthetics deals with the reconstruction of methods of design and criticism on algorithmic basis. The aesthetic measures are one important starting point
for the development of such algorithms. The goal is to integrate a computer into processes of artistic creation and
aesthetic evaluation.
Staudek and Machala [20] developed an exact aesthetics application named Arthur that designs abstract images
based on a set of rules. The output is defined by a grammar
and a repertoire of symbols, each of which can be modified
by the user. The generation of the image is controlled by
criteria such as symbols arrangement, coloring, contrast or
appearance preferences.
A key component of the program is the implementation
of Klinger and Salingaros’ pattern measure for evaluating
the aesthetic effect of the generated pattern. The program
repeats algorithmic creation and evaluation until a certain
aesthetic level is reached. The same approach could be applied to the generation of information visualizations.
The pattern shown in figure 1 is evaluated by the application as being “complex, low-ordered yet considerably
attractive”.
Staudek and Machala are planning to enrich the original program “with additional aesthetic functions for evaluating proportions, cohesion, homogeneity, or rhythm of
patterns”. Continued research and new approaches to aesthetic measures play a major role in further improving the
quality images produced by exact aesthetics.

4.2

Figure 1: Pattern generated by the Arthur application [20].

In a genetic algorithm, the computer simulates the process of evolution on a group of random individuals, also
referred to as chromosomes. Each chromosome represents
a candidate solution to the problem at hand. The selection
of chromosomes that pass their genetic material to the next
generation is performed with a fitness function. Recombination and mutation are simulated by exchange of genetic
material and random modification. One of the benefits of
a genetic algorithm is the ability to adapt to a changing
environment [13].
This process can be applied to a population of images
that evolve from one generation to the next. The key aspect
in using genetic algorithms to create aesthetic images is
to choose an appropriate fitness function. However, when
choosing a fitness function one has to be careful to maintain enough creativity within the system [7]. For creating
aesthetic imagery, aesthetic measures suggest themselves
as a possible way of measuring fitness.
Coevolutionary algorithms maintain two or more populations that influence each other. The artist Steven Rooke
used an algorithm that maintained populations of images
and critics to produce images such as figure 2 [10].
The capability of such algorithms to produce sophisticated natural forms makes them an interesting candidate
for research. The premise of using such systems to encode
and represent complex data for the purpose of information
visualization should be further explored [10]. However,
due to their dynamic nature, genetic algorithms are not
easy to work with. When researching into the topic, Greenfield was surprised to find that “very few of our ideas for
articulating aesthetic criteria via fitness functions actually
produced aesthetic imagery with this system” [7].

Genetic Algorithms

Genetic algorithms are inspired by evolutionary processes in nature. Such algorithms have a large variety of
applications, ranging from simulation of living ecosystems to computer vision research. In particular, genetic
algorithms have been picked up by modern artists for generating imagery or even music [10].

582
588

students were presented with various ATM systems. The
aesthetics of the systems were determined by different interface layouts. Their usability was influenced by several
factors such as latency or irresponsive interface elements.
The students were asked to rate the systems by appearance
and ease of use. The gathered data showed a strong correlation between the perceived interface aesthetics and the
perceived usability of the system.
Another study investigating the connection between
aesthetics and usability was carried out by Cawthon and
Moere [3]. An online survey was used to collect data about
eleven different visualizations. All visualizations were representing the same hierarchical data. The participants were
asked to rank the visualizations on a scale from “ugly” to
“beautiful”. Additionally, the users were given tasks in the
form of questions about the underlying dataset. In order
to accurately capture the effect of aesthetics, Cawthon and
Moere introduced the metrics of task abandonment and erroneous response. These metrics were found to be correlated to aesthetic preference, suggesting that users approach aesthetic visualizations more thoroughly and with
greater patience.
The preliminary results of experiments by Healey and
Enns show varying aesthetic preferences. Covering a range
of artistic styles, the study used impressionist, abstract and
non-photorealistic images. The majority of viewers participating in this study preferred realistic images over abstract
ones. Nonetheless, these viewers attributed artistic merit to
the abstract images. A smaller number of viewers showed
a preference for abstract imagery [8]. From the response
to their ambient visualizations Skog et al. came to the conclusion that basing a visualization on an artistic style does
not necessarily hinder - but might even support - the readability and comprehension of the visualization [19].
Information visualization is an interdisciplinary field
and its users come from a variety of backgrounds [23].
This can make the design of visualizations very challenging. However, if visualization succeeds at creating aesthetic appeal, resulting in a more involved and patient user,
it could be an important tool for bridging interdisciplinary
gaps.
In order to realize the potential of aesthetics in information visualization a user-centered design approach needs to
be adopted. Different user models have to be taken into
account when evaluating aesthetic effect. The testing process needs to become a central part of the development of
visualizations [2].
One of the central aspects of visualization is that it offers new perspectives on the underlying data. Fishwick
notes that “this desire for alternate perspectives is consistent with art theory and practice” [5]. From this standpoint,
research into aesthetic visualizations holds great value,

Figure 2: Artwork “Skaters” by Steven Rooke [10].

5

Aesthetics and User Experience

The value that aesthetics can have for information visualization is most apparent in its effect on the user. This section deals with approaches for the evaluation of aesthetic
visualizations, observed results and their implications.
Tateosian et al. state that an effective visualization
should attract and hold a viewers attention [21]. Since aesthetics generate attraction and capture the viewer’s attention, positive effects on visualizations should be measurable.
Working on a model for the evaluation of visualizations
Cawthon and Moere recognized that “there are complexities to understanding affect within the user experience of
information visualization” [2]. The conventional metrics
of participant task timing and the quantified fulfillment of
goals do not seem to capture all the aspects of user experience. Instead of measuring how fast requested data can be
retrieved, visualizations should be evaluated by the gain in
experience and peripheral knowledge.
“It is only through our emotions do we unravel
problems, as the human emotional system is
intertwined with our cognitive abilities.” [16]
This insight by Norman reflects the view that a user,
who is attracted towards an object, will be more likely to
think creatively in order to solve the problems presented
by it [2]. Positive affect is likely to improve decision making and creativity, which is an important prerequisite for
generating new insights [9].
It could be suggested that aesthetics in information visualization can facilitate a greater mental immersion into
the underlying data. Studies in the area of virtual reality
have shown that a higher level of immersion leads to better
performance [17].
Research on the topics of aesthetics and usability has already lead to notable results in the field of human computer
interaction. In a study conducted by Tractinsky et al. [22]

583
589

since it explores new ways of presenting the underlying
data to the user.

[4]

Conclusions

[5]

Recognizing that aesthetics is an unsolved problem of
information visualization, this paper set out to explore existing approaches. At first, the problem was examined from
an analytical perspective, focusing on the development of
models to measure aesthetics. Thereupon, a selection of
practical approaches for creating aesthetic visualizations
was introduced. Finally, the paper identified positive effects of aesthetic visualizations on the user. This overview
could be used as a starting point for further research.
Future work could include a more detailed look at aesthetic measures. The different measures should be tested
with a common set of visualizations. This would give an
opportunity to observe how the different measures behave
on the same input. Ideally, this would lead to approximately equivalent results. However, it could be that some
measures are better suited for assessing certain visualizations than others. The pattern measure proposed by Klinger
and Salingaros might be better at capturing the subtle patterns in impressionist brush strokes. Then again, hereditary combinatorial entropy might turn out to be better when
working with the compositions of geometric shapes inspired by abstract art. Evidently, this would pose a problem if aesthetic measures are to be used as intrinsic quality
measures for visualizations.
In any case, it is likely that the presented measures can
only offer a starting point in the search for an adequate
aesthetic measure. Improved results might be achieved
through the combination of several different approaches
into one metric. It is also possible that a better aesthetic
measure for information visualization can be found by taking the complexity of the underlying data into account
rather than focusing solely on the generated image. Ultimately, a refined measure would have to be verified with
a survey of a representative group of users.

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

[18]
[19]

[20]

References
[1] G. D. Birkhoff. Aesthetic Measure. Harvard University
Press, 1933.
[2] N. Cawthon and A.V. Moere. A conceptual model for evaluating aesthetic effect within the user experience of information visualization. In IV ’06: Proceedings of the conference
on Information Visualization, pages 374–382, Washington,
DC, USA, 2006. IEEE Computer Society.
[3] N. Cawthon and A.V. Moere. The Effect of Aesthetic on the
Usability of Data Visualization. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference Information Visualization, pages

[21]

[22]
[23]

584
590

637–648. IEEE Computer Society Washington, DC, USA,
2007.
C. Chen. Top 10 unsolved information visualization problems. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl., 25(4):12–16, 2005.
P. A. Fishwick. Exploring multiple visualization perspectives with aesthetic computing, September 2003.
P. A. Fishwick, S. Diehl, J. Prophet, and J. L¨owgren. Perspectives on aesthetic computing, April 2005.
G.R. Greenfield. Computational aesthetics as a tool for creativity. In Proceedings of the 5th conference on Creativity
& cognition, pages 232–235. ACM New York, NY, USA,
2005.
C.G. Healey and J.T. Enns. Perception and Painting:
A Search for Effective, Engaging Visualizations. IEEE
COMPUTER GRAPHICS AND APPLICATIONS, 22:10–
15, 2002.
A.M. Isen. The influence of positive and negative affect
on cognitive organization: Some implications for development. Psychological and biological approaches to emotion,
pages 75–94, 1990.
G. Judelman. Aesthetics and inspiration for visualization
design: bridging the gap between art and science. In Information Visualisation, 2004. IV 2004. Proceedings. Eighth
International Conference on, pages 245–250, 2004.
A. Klinger and N.A. Salingaros. A pattern measure. ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING B, 27(4):537–548, 2000.
H.G. Liddell, R. Scott, H.S. Jones, R. McKenzie, and E.A.
Barber. A Greek-English lexicon. Clarendon Press Oxford,
1940.
M. Mitchell. An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms. Bradford Books, 1996.
J. Neˇsetˇril. Aesthetics for Computers, or How to Measure
Harmony. The Visual Mind II, 1:35–58, 2005.
D.C.L. Ngo, A. Samsudin, and R. Abdullah. Aesthetic
measures for assessing graphic screens. J. INF. SCI. ENG,
16(1):97–116, 2000.
D.A. Norman. Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate)
Everyday Things. Basic Books, 2004.
D. Raja, D. Bowman, J. Lucas, and C. North. Exploring the
Benefits of Immersion in Abstract Information Visualization. In Proc. Immersive Projection Technology Workshop,
2004.
J. Rigau, M. Feixas, and M. Sbert. Informational aesthetics
measures. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl., 28(2):24–34, 2008.
T. Skog, S. Ljungblad, and LE Holmquist. Between aesthetics and utility: designing ambient information visualizations. In Information Visualization, 2003. INFOVIS 2003.
IEEE Symposium on, pages 233–240, 2003.
T. Staudek and P. Machala. Recent exact aesthetics applications. In International Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, pages 241–241. ACM Press
New York, NY, USA, 2002.
L.G. Tateosian, C.G. Healey, and J.T. Enns. Engaging viewers through nonphotorealistic visualizations. In
Proceedings of the 5th international symposium on Nonphotorealistic animation and rendering, pages 93–102.
ACM Press New York, NY, USA, 2007.
N. Tractinsky, AS Katz, and D. Ikar. What is beautiful is
usable. Interacting with Computers, 13(2):127–145, 2000.
J. J. van Wijk. Bridging the gaps. IEEE Comput. Graph.
Appl., 26(6):6–9, 2006.

