2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

GAIA Map: A Tool for Visual Ranking Analysis in Spatial Multicriteria
Problems
Karim Lidouh, Yves De Smet, Esteban Zim´anyi
Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles
Department of Computer and Decision Engineering (CoDE)
1050 Brussels, Belgium
klidouh@ulb.ac.be, yves.de.smet@ulb.ac.be, ezimanyi@ulb.ac.be

Abstract

flicting criteria. MCDA proposes models to solve different
problem types such as choice, ranking or sorting of a set
of alternatives (also called alternatives) within a finite set
according to multiple criteria.
The solving of spatial multicriteria decision problems
(i.e. decision problems involving the evaluation of spatial features according to multiple criteria) requires abilities from both GIS and MCDA. In most cases, one proceeds by applying the methods of each of the previously
mentioned tools separately (i.e. using GIS to generate necessary information or display results and MCDA to tackle
the multicriteria aspect of the problems once all the data is
available). Yet there are cases where a deeper approach is
necessary. The integration of multicriteria aspects in spatial analysis methods is therefore gaining interest from the
scientific community [9, 8, 13, 17, 18, 21].
In this paper, among all the problem types encountered
in the field of spatial multicriteria decision aid [7], we will
consider the ranking of alternatives. The aim is to generate a valued ranking of a set of alternatives. Numerous MCDA methods to solve this problem were proposed
[3, 10, 23]. We will focus on a particular methodology: the
PROMETHEE methods [6, 4].
An appealing aspect of the PROMETHEE methodology
is its ease of use. Another one is the existence of GAIA
[4], a method supporting the PROMETHEE methodology
that allows visual analysis of the results obtained by it. This
paper will be devoted to the visualization aspect of ranking problems in a spatial context. We will propose a new
visualization tool called “GAIA Map”, based on the GAIA
method, and that can be used to describe alternatives.

Spatial multicriteria decision problems are decision
problems where one needs to take multiple conflicting criteria as well as geographical knowledge into account. In such
a context, exploratory spatial analysis is known to provide
tools to visualize as much data as possible on maps but does
not integrate multicriteria aspects. Also, none of the tools
provided by multicriteria analysis were initially destined to
be used in a geographical context.
In this paper, we propose an application of the
PROMETHEE and GAIA ranking methods to Geographical Information Systems (GIS). The aim is to help decision
makers obtain rankings of geographical entities and understand why such rankings have been obtained. To do that,
we make use of the visual approach of the GAIA method
and adapt it to display the results on geographical maps.
This approach is then extended to cover several weaknesses
of the adaptation. Finally, it is applied to a study of the
region of Brussels as well as an evaluation of the Human
Development Index (HDI) in Europe.

1. Introduction
Geographical Information Systems [24], or GIS, are
computer based tools that are able to store, analyse and visualize spatial information. They are generally used to collect
and manipulate data. Their ability to display geographic
maps makes data analysis possible through the use of interactive visualization [2, 16]. However they lack support for
the analysis of multicriteria information. In this paper, we
will consider as GIS any software that has the previously
mentioned functionalities.
Multicriteria Decision Aid [3, 22, 23], or MCDA, can be
viewed as a set of mathematical tools and methods used to
solve decision problems that involve contradictory or con978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.59

2. Related work
This work pursues the same goal as others before it: the
integration of MCDA and GIS [7, 8, 13, 17, 18]. Many
researchers have already tried to make this integration eas393

ier either by developing new methods such as the works of
Pereira et al. [21] and Joerin et al. [12] or by developing
tools and approaches that improve the interactivity between
the user and the system such as the works of Lotov et al.
[14, 15], Jankowski et al. [11], Andrienko et al. [1], and
Chakhar et al. [9].
An interesting concept is the one introduced by Chakhar
(2008): the decision map. This approach allows us to visually identify a classification of alternatives which makes
the application of outranking methods such as ELECTRE or
PROMETHEE possible even in the presence of raster data
(i.e. data where each pixel of a map contains information
and can be considered as an alternative). This particular
case of data has for long been a hindrance to the application of outranking methods because of the high amounts of
comparisons that they need to compute before producing a
ranking. In the rest of this work we will suppose that the
problems we adress have limited numbers of alternatives.
We will also be using an approach that has drawn very little
interest from researchers up till now: the visual aspect of
this integration.

when compared to an alternative b. For that purpose we will
use increasing preference functions that define how differences between alternatives must be evaluated:
Pj (a, b) = Pj [dj (a, b)].

The value of this preference function will be included
between 0 and 1, with:
Pj (a, b) ≈ 0
Pj (a, b) ≈ 1

if alternative a is not preferred to alternative b
if alternative a is preferred to alternative b.
(3)
The PROMETHEE method provides us with 6 types of preference functions to use for different cases [3, 23].
These preferences can be aggregated into an ingoing flow
φ+ and an outgoing flow φ− for each alternative by using
the weights wj defined by the decision maker:
φ+ (a) =

φ− (a) =

3. The PROMETHEE II method
PROMETHEE II is a ranking method that produces a
complete ranking of a set of alternatives. The aim of such a
problem type is to rank the alternatives from best to worse
according to a set of criteria. Let us assume without loss
of generality that all the criteria have to be maximised. For
example, in a case of m alternatives (ai ) and k criteria (fj ),
an evaluation table such as the following can be written:

a1
a2
..
.
ai
..
.
am

f1
f1 (a1 )
f1 (a2 )

f2
f2 (a1 )
f2 (a2 )

. . . fj . . .
. . . fj (a1 ) . . .
. . . fj (a2 ) . . .

(2)

1
n−1
1
n−1

k

wj Pj (a, x)

(4)

wj Pj (x, a)

(5)

x∈A j=1
k

x∈A j=1

where A is the set of all alternatives. These two flows give
us respectively, the global preference of alternative a when
compared to all the others and the global preference of all
the other alternatives when compared to a.
The difference between these two flows is called the single net flow and is used to rank all the alternatives:
φ(a) = φ+ (a) − φ− (a).

(6)

It can be considered as a global score of alternative a in the
defined problem.
It can also be written as:

fk
fk (a1 )
fk (a2 )

k

f1 (ai )

f2 (ai )

. . . fj (ai ) . . .

fk (ai )

f1 (am )

f2 (am )

. . . fj (am ) . . .

fk (am )

φ(a) =

(7)

where
(Pj (a, x) − Pj (x, a))

φj (a) =

(8)

x∈A

Table 1. Evaluation table of a multicriteria
problem [4]
The PROMETHEE II method does pair-wise comparisons of the alternatives by using these evaluations. Let:
dj (a, b) = fj (a) − fj (b)

1
wj φj (a),
n − 1 j=1

(1)

be the difference between an alternative a and an alternative
b according to criterion j.
The amplitude of this difference will be used to evaluate
the appreciation of the decision maker for an alternative a

is the single criterion net flow of criterion j. This second
net flow has the same interpretation yet considers only one
criterion. Mareschal et al. [19] also proposed different interpretations for this measure.

4. The GAIA plane
The GAIA method by Brans et al. [4] uses the single criterion net flows obtained by the PROMETHEE method. A
matrix Φ containing these flows can be written as in Equation 9. This matrix contains intra-criteria information for

394

all the n alternatives according to the k criteria. The alternatives can thus be represented by points αi , whose coordinates are the values in each line of matrix Φ in a kdimentional space representing the criteria’s variations.

This final projection gives us a vector called the decision
stick and referred to as π. The decision stick can be interpreted as the aggregated objective of the decision maker.
k



φ1 (a1 ) φ2 (a1 ) . . . φj (a1 ) . . .
 φ1 (a2 ) φ2 (a2 ) . . . φj (a2 ) . . .

 ..
 .
Φ=
 φ1 (ai ) φ2 (ai ) . . . φj (ai ) . . .

 .
 ..
φ1 (an ) φ2 (an ) . . . φj (an ) . . .

φk (a1 )
φk (a2 ) 



 (9)
φk (ai ) 



φk (an )

where wj is the normalised vector corresponding to w (i.e.
w/|w|):
w : (w1 , w2 , . . . , wj , . . . , wk ).

(10)

λ1 + λ2

a4

a3

c3

c2

a2

λj

a1

j=1

Both the alternatives and criteria can be represented in
this plane by calculating the scalar product of their coordinates with the two eigenvectors u and v. The coordinates of
the alternatives will be the lines of Φ matrix and will generate Ai points on the plane. As for the criteria, we will
use the unitary vectors ej of the k dimensions of the criteria
space which will give ci vectors.
ej : (0, 0, . . . , 1, 0, . . . , 0)

c1

π

(11)

k

(15)

The result is a representation such as the one in Figure 1.
In this plane, it appears that alternatives a3 and a4 are considered good since they are located in the direction pointed
by the decision stick π. Alternatives a1 and a5 which are in
the opposite direction can be considered bad alternatives.
The GAIA method allows us to make comparisons of
alternatives since alternatives that are close on the GAIA
plane will often have very similar rows in the variancecovariance matrix Φ. We can thus easily identify pairs of
alternatives that have a similar performance or that are opposed as all the information needed is concentrated in the
GAIA plane. Another advantage is the ability to compare
criteria between each other, the same way as for alternatives. Finally, the possibility to compare alternatives to criteria by their positioning is by far the most important asset.
It allows us to make a classification of the alternatives and
to have a better understanding of the results obtained.

The method goes on by searching for u and v, the two
eigenvectors corresponding to the two greatest eigenvalues
λ1 and λ2 . These two eigenvectors are orthogonal (u ⊥ v)
and define the best plane to use for the projection of the
αi points while minimising the loss of information. That
plane will be called the GAIA plane. By definition, it will
be the one that maximizes the total of explained variance
using two dimensions.
Intuitively, the amount of information preserved in percents can be calculated with:
δ=

(14)

j=1

The purpose of the GAIA method will be to graphically
represent the information contained into this matrix. To do
that, it uses a principal components analysis (PCA) to find
a plane that will allow us to visualize the data in only two
dimensions.
The first step consists in calculating the variancecovariance matrix C of our problem. This matrix can be
obtained by using the following relation:
nC = Φ Φ

cj · w j ,

π=



j = 1, 2, . . . , k.

c4

Figure 1. GAIA plane [5]
The only inconveniency is the loss of information due to
the projection. However, this loss can be quantified and as
long as it doesn’t exceed 30%, the decision support process
will not be hindered, particularly if an exact PROMETHEE
analysis is realised too. That is why all the programs that
implement the GAIA method (e.g. PROMCALC, Decision
Lab, or D-sight) also compute the complete PROMETHEE
ranking.

(12)

Finally, the inter-criteria preferences of the decision
maker can be represented by projecting the weights wj he
has assigned to the criteria on the GAIA plane:
w : (w1 , w2 , . . . , wj , . . . , wk ).

a5

(13)

395

5. The GAIA map
-1

The GAIA map tool is based on the GAIA method. Its
purpose is to take the information obtained from the GAIA
plane and to disperse it on a geographical map. To do so,
some simplifications need to be made and result in a loss of
information. A symbol called “Decision Clock” is used to
display the information on the alternatives.

5.1

0

Figure 3. Colormap for
PROMETHEE II net flow

1

displaying

the

geographical maps. Their recent works have been oriented
on the extension of representations to 3 dimensions or to interactive approches to compensate for the higher amount of
information to display. Xiaofang et al. [25] even proposed
the usage of dynamic symbols to respond to this same problem.
A more convenient way to display the GAIA information
would be to use a symbol that links all the parts selected.
We propose a symbol called ”decision clock” (see Figure 4)
where the two previously defined vectors would appear as
arrows and the color indicating the net flow would be displayed on the backgroud. To achieve such a transformation,
the vectors will have to be modified to fit inside a symbol of
radius r. The alternative vectors ai we defined earlier thus
become:
r
ai =
(Ai + gi ).
(18)
|Ai |

Application of the GAIA method

Since it is not possible to display the entire information
of the GAIA plane on a geographical map, this concept will
choose selected parts of it and copy their information on
each alternative to its location. The aim is to benefit from
the GAIA method while keeping track of the alternatives’
geographical positions and the consequences thereof.
The information that will be represented is the following:
• The net flow of the alternatives: Instead of displaying
a numerical value a color could be used to display this
information. We propose the use of a colormap going
from red to green, a net flow of -1 being red, of 0 being white, and of +1 being green. Figure 3 shows the
colormap.

As for the decision vectors πi , we have:
• The positionning of the alternatives: A first possibility would be to represent the GAIA positionning of
each alternative by a vector starting on its geographical location. The coordinates ai of this vector can be
obtained by adding the geographical position gi to the
coordinates of the projection Ai :
ai = Ai + gi .

k

πi =

r
( cj · wj + gi ).
|π| j=1

(19)

The radius r of the symbols will depend on the size and location of the alternatives to avoid any overlapping between
symbols.

(16)

• The decision stick: To complete the information displayed, the decision stick should also appear on each
alternative. Its coordinates will be obtained just like
the alternative vectors:
k

cj · wj + gi .

πi =

Figure 4. Decision clocks

(17)

j=1

This gives us a very intuitive tool to understand the positioning of the considered alternative. The closer the two
arrows are, the better the alternative is. And the farther the
arrows are, the worse the alternative is.
The use of decision clocks to analyze rankings obtained
by the PROMETHEE method will rarely give as much information as the GAIA method. The reason for that is because information is inevitably lost when the vectors are
trimmed to fit inside the decision clocks. The correct positioning of the alternatives is lost and only the directions
in which they are found is kept. It is therefore important to
keep in mind that the GAIA Map tool, just like the GAIA

• The criteria axes: This information should also be displayed but doesn’t have to appear on the alternatives.
Instead, a referential displayed on the border of the
map just like the map legend would be sufficient.
However, representing the information without any link
between its components is not effective. The maps could
already present some data, making some of these representations unclear or even impossible to use. Andrienko et al.
[2] have proposed the usage of symbols and charts to represent simultaneously different types of statistical data on

396

a4

c1

π
c3

a3

a3

a1
c2

a2
a1

c1

c3
c4

a4

a2

c2

a5

a5

c4

Figure 2. Comparison between the GAIA plane and the GAIA map
method, is only an approximate representation of the criteria referential with the alternatives of the studied problem in
it. In the next section we propose adaptations to compensate
for this loss of information.

The vector would have a limited number of possible sizes
(e.g. short, medium, and long) which would be a function
of the positioning of the alternative. The information added
by this type of modification is rather limited compared to
the previous one but could be useful for classification purposes.

5.2. Adaptation to different situations
This section proposes some adaptations to compensate
for the loss of information due to the usage of decision
clocks or simply to complete the tool by adding more features to it.
5.2.1

a3

a1

Changing sizes

The first adaptation is one that will allow to compensate for
the loss of information by keeping only the direction of the
alternatives instead of their exact positionning on the GAIA
plane. A first solution proposed consists in changing the
size of the decision clocks between two boudaries to give
an idea of the amplitude that the alternative vector should
really have.
This results in a set of symbols whose size varies (see
Figure 5) such as the pie charts proposed by Andrienko et al.
[2]. The interpretation of these symbols is quite interesting
too:

c1

c3

a4

a2

c2

a5

c4

Figure 5. Decision clocks with different sizes
giving the amplitude of the GAIA projections

• When the symbols are big, it means that the projection
is highly likely to be reliable. The reason for this is
because a big projection is likely to come from alternatives that are very close to the GAIA plane.

5.2.2

Pair-wise comparisons

Comparing the positioning of any pair of alternatives on the
GAIA plane is fairly easy and gives most of the time a good
idea of the real-life situation. Two points that are close to
each other on the GAIA plane represent alternatives that are
very similar, whereas two remote points represent alternatives that are very different. In the GAIA map tool however,
this information is lost since two alternatives can hardly be
compared when they have distant locations.
For those cases, a measure of the similarity (or difference) between two alternatives can be calculated and added
to the tool. This difference will be obtained using the single

• When the symbols are small, it either means that the
projection is small and is thus unreliable or simply that
the alternative has very poor evaluations for some criteria and ends up close to the origin. An appreciation
of the clock’s background color then usually helps to
identify the case.
Another solution consists in changing the size of the alternative vectors if the size of the decision clocks permits it.

397

criterion net flows and will take the weights of the criteria
into account.
|φj (a) − φj (b)|wj

Γ(a, b) =

π

∀a, b ∈ A, (20)
c3

j=1

c4

An alternatives consists in using intervals for some parameters (e.g. the weights) instead of crisp values:
wj− ≤ wj ≤ wj+

c2

(21)

j = 1, 2, . . . , k.

(22)

In that way, the decision maker can enter the intervals
that contain his solution in a single utilization. By using
these intervals, we can identify a k-dimensional hypercube
that holds the different positions of the decision stick.The
projection of this hypercube on the GAIA plane is referred
to as the decision maker’s brain [4] (see Figure 7), and allows us to classify multicriteria problems into two classes:

a5

c4

Figure 6. GAIA Map with some Γ edges

5.2.3

j = 1, 2, . . . , k.

These intervals can also be defined by using a crisp value wj
for the weights and allowing a certain percentage of variation θj around it:

a4

a2

a5

Figure 7. Decision maker’s brain [5]

wj ± θj wj
c1

a3

a1

a3

a1

c1

c2

a2

where a and b are two alternatives from the studied problem.
This difference Γ(a, b) will have values close to 0 for
similar alternatives and close to 2 for opposed alternatives.
It can be represented on a geographical map by adding
edges between the alternatives that the user wishes to compare. Once again the colour of these edges will indicate the
approximate value of Γ. We will use the same colour variation as the net flow: green meaning that the alternatives are
very similar, and red meaning that they are very different.
These colors are solely subjective and should be modifiable by the user. Also, only the edges selected by the
user should appear on the map to avoid confusion. Figure 6
shows an example of utilization of this extension.

c3

∆

a4

k

• Easy multicriteria problems: When the decision
maker’s brain does not include the origin, it means that
the problem is easy. In this case, the alternatives can
be separated in two groups or classes: the good alternatives that lie beyond the decision maker’s brain and
the bad alternatives that lie at the opposite side from
the decision maker’s brain.

Sensitivity analysis

In most, if not all, multicriteria decision problems, the decision maker’s preferences will often lead to a choice, ranking, or classification that depends on the parameters used.
That is because these parameters (e.g. the weight of each
criterion) will generate different results when modified. The
results obtained are thus also linked to the decision maker
that makes the choices [5].
In many cases, the decision maker cannot determine the
weights that are to be used. In such situations, an interactive
interface would be a good solution, since they would be able
to change the parameters and directly appreciate the effects
on the results. Using these results as a reference, the decision maker is then able understand, in a certain measure,
how a method works and better use it.
However, such interfaces are often difficult to implement
and require high amounts of calculations in complex cases.

• Difficult multicriteria problems: When the decision
maker’s brain includes the origin, the problem is considered difficult as the decision stick can point in any
direction possible on the GAIA plane.
This method gives us a good understanding of the difficulty of a given problem. It can be applied to the decision
clocks by adding a colored stroke to its boundary (as seen
in Figure 8). Indeed since only the direction of the decision stick is important, there is no loss of information in
this case.

398

be a good candidate for such an adaptation, but the
interpretation of the decision clock’s elements would
change.
a3

a1

c1

c3

c2

6. Application to the city of Brussels
a4

a2

An application was developed to illustrate this method.
We decided to tackle a simple ranking problem allowing us
to easily demonstrate the advantages of the GAIA Map tool:
a reduced cognitive effort of the user and support to better
appreciate the outputs of multicriteria methods in GIS.
The city of Brussels is separated in 19 different municipalities. The aim of this application will be to obtain a
ranking of these municipalities by measuring the quality of
life. We will use different criteria that the PROMETHEE II
method will aggregate into a ranking. The results will then
be displayed using GAIA Map. With such an objective, the
criteria will need to be chosen very carefully to guarantee
objective and coherent results.

a5

c4

Figure 8. Decision maker’s brain on the decision clocks

5.3. Limitations
This section describes the limitations that could hinder
the application of this tool in different contexts.

6.1. The data used

• Number of alternatives: The number of alternatives
should be low enough to allow all the symbols to be
displayed without any overlapping. Note that adjustments can be made by changing the size of the symbols. In the case of raster data, a preliminary analysis
should be made to identify groups of pixels that would
represent the alternatives of our study. Different classification methods could be used, such as the decision
map by Chakhar [9].

The data we used in this study covers different aspects:
demography, security, wealth, mobility, ... Statbel is a Belgian institution that offers different types of data. Statistical
data on the municipalities of Brussels was available on their
website (http://www.statbel.fgov.be/). For our
example, we will select only the following criteria:
• Realty price: the mean buying price of a house in 2005
in euros.

• Types of alternatives: The types of alternatives can be
polygonal or punctual. Polygonal entities are preferred
since they often offer a surface on which to display the
decision clock, whereas punctual entities could sometimes be located very close to each other and not allow
us to display the symbols clearly.

• Mean income: interval containing the mean income of
the inhabitants for the year 2003 in euros.

6.2. The implementation
The application we developed is based on the Web GIS
Mapserver. Its basic architecture is the following:

• Number of criteria: The number of criteria doesn’t represent a limitation as many real problems have a limited number of them. Most additional criteria are often
concordant with some already considered or end up being linear combinations of those.

• On the server, we installed Mapserver with different
shape files. Shape files are digital documents that hold
geographical data (e.g. the outlines of all the municipalities of the city). The Mapserver application listens
to requests and answers them by sending a map view
that it builds from the different shape files it has, using
the coordinates included in the requests received.

• Problem types: The approach could be adapted to other
problem formulation types such as choice or classification only if the methods used work by obtaining a
ranking first or calculating flows such as in FlowSort
by Nemery et al. [20].

• On the client side (i.e. the web navigator), a web page
is opened and requests a view of the city of Brussels.
The server responds to it by sending an image representing the city. The web page then draws the decision clocks dynamically above the map after reading
the different parameter values from a file on the server.

• Other methods: To adapt the approach to other methods would require that they use flows or similar concepts, and that a principal components analysis (PCA)
be used. The ELECTRE method for example would

399

whether or not to consider all the alternatives in our evaluation.

7. Human Development Index in european
countries
In this section, we will be using the previously described
implementation to measure the Human Development Index
(HDI) in the member states of the European Union (EU). To
do so, we will use data for the year 2008 from the UNDP
website (http://hdr.undp.org). The criteria we will
use are the following:
• Life expectancy at birth (in years).
• Adult literacy rate (in %).
• Combined gross enrolment ratio in education (in %).
• GDP per capita (in purchasing power parity US$).
Figure 9. Evaluation of the municipalities of
Brussels using two criteria

The human development index calculated by the UNDP
is the mean value of three indices calculated using these four
criteria: a life expectancy index, an education index, and a
GDP index.
We, instead, will apply preference functions directly to
the four criteria as there is no need in normalising them
when using the PROMETHEE II method. The alternatives
considered will be the 27 member states as of January 2007.
As one could expect, the ranking obtained using
PROMETHEE II is slightly different from the one calculated by the UNDP. This is of course due to the difference in
methodologies applied. However, we could notice that the
two rankings were not entirely different as most countries
kept nearly the same position. The highest differences in
ranking positions only occured in cases where the HDI values where similar, leading to small differences in net flows.
Table 2 indicates the rank of some countries for both the
HDI value and the net flow obtained by PROMETHEE II.

The decision clocks were drawn using the Javascript language. Figure 9 is a screen capture of the map with all the
data displayed on it. It shows us that the municipalities are
separated in two groups. In this example, to simplify, we
tried to focus only on two criteria that need to be maximized: the realty price and the mean income. By doing so,
we focus on trying to find the richest municipalities. The result indicates that most of them are located in the Southern
part of the city. Also it becomes now possible to compare
profiles of neighbouring municipalities and understand that
even though some have a similar ranking, it doesn’t mean
that they have the same profile.
The example given above is voluntarily quite simple and
doesn’t have any strong purpose. However, it shows how intuitive the interpretation of results becomes using this tool.
Thanks to the visual aspect of this method, we can easily
detect alternatives that are incomparable even though their
ranking is similar, or alternatives that are similar because of
their location.
Since the values used were mean values, this does not
necessarily reflect the reality of the situation in every neighbourhood of each municipality. Extending the study to the
neighbourhoods of the city would give us a more realistic
view of the problem but would also involve other problems
such as aggregation problems or identifiing the alternatives
to be considered. The first problem would arise when some
of the neighbourhoods are part of multiple municipalities.
Then the second one would appear when focussing on a
single municipality: a choice would have to be made on

Country
Austria
Estonia
Finland
Greece
Latvia
Slovenia
Spain

Life
exp.
79.6
71.3
79.1
79.1
72.3
77.7
80.7

Adult
liter.
99.0
99.8
99.0
97.0
99.8
99.7
97.4

Gross
enrol.
90.5
91.2
101.4
101.6
90.2
92.8
96.5

...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

HDI
rank
8
22
5
10
24
15
9

Flow
rank
5
19
6
15
16
14
7

Table 2. Evaluations for selected countries
By applying the GAIA methodology however, we are
able to extract more information than just the ranking. On
Figure 10 we can see the GAIA map obtained where the

400

Figure 10. Human Development Index in the member states of the EU using four criteria
• Finally, when comparing Greece and Slovenia, we notice that Slovenia has a higher life expectancy while
Greece shows a high adult literacy rate and gross enrolment ratio. This information is once again visible
on their respective symbols.

countries’ strong points and weak points are shown in the
decision clocks. We can hereby identify the efforts accomplished by countries to improve their situation.
Table 2 gives us part of the evaluations for selected countries:
• Consequently, we can see that Spain which has the
highest life expectancy clearly shows that on its decision clock.

8. Conclusions
In this paper we studied an adaptation of the GAIA
method in a geographical context. We tried to provide a
tool to help solve spatial decision problems and proposed
GAIA Map, a new tool for the visualization of rankings and
the information associated to them. The paper describes the
methods used as well as the modifications that make them
useable on geographical maps. This work focusses on displaying a maximum of information in a way that will help
decision makers have a better understanding of the problem’s nature. The approach is also adapted to meet some

• Estonia and Latvia which both possess the highest literacy rate also show that positioning on their symbols.
• Austria and Finland have really similar net flows and
HDI values. The biggest difference between their evaluations lies in their gross enrolment ratio.
• Finland’s positioning arrow points towards gross enrolment, indicating that the corresponding evaluation
is higher.

401

particular situations common to the usage of a GIS.
We illustrated this tool by applying it to measure the
quality of life in the municipalities of the city of Brussels.
We saw that the visual component adds information that we
would not have obtained otherwise, as some relations between neighbouring municipalities can be noticed. We also
applied the tool to the case of the Human Development Index where we could display additional information helping
us understand the ranking obtained.
Further work might involve the application of this
method in a project with the Chamber of Brussels Enterprise
Commerce and Industry (BECI). The aim of this project
would be to make a study of all the neighbourhoods in
the city of Brussels instead of just its municipalities. This
project would make some new problems arise. Finally, a
new application is currently under development. The aim
of this project is to attain a full integration between all the
tools and the GIS part.

[11] P. Jankowski, N. Andrienko, and G. Andrienko. Mapcentered exploratory approach to multiple criteria spatial decision making. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 15(2):101–148, 2001.
[12] F. Joerin, M. Theriault, and A. Musy. Using GIS and outranking multicriteria analysis for land-use suitability assessment. International Journal of Geographical Information
Science, 15:153–174, 2001.
[13] A. Laaribi. SIG et analyse multicrit`ere. Herm`es Science
Publications, 2000.
[14] A. Lotov, V. Bushenkov, A. Chernov, D. Gusev, and
G. Kamenev. Internet, GIS and interactive decision maps.
Journal of Geographical Information and Decision Analysis, 1(2):118–149, 1997.
[15] A. Lotov, V. Bushenkov, and G. Kamenev. Interactive Decision Maps, volume 89 of Applied Optimization. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 2004.
[16] A. MacEachren, M. Gahegan, W. Pike, I. Brewer, G. Cai,
and E. Lengerich. Geovisualization for knowledge construction and decision support. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, 24(1):13–17, 2004.
[17] J. Malczewski. GIS and Multicriteria Decision Analysis.
Wiley, New York, 1999.
[18] J. Malczewski. GIS-based multicriteria decision analysis: A
survey of the literature. International Journal of Environmental Technology and Management, 7:703–726, 2006.
[19] B. Mareschal, Y. De Smet, and P. Nemery. Rank reversal
in the PROMETHEE II method: Some new results. In Proceedings of the IEEE 2008 International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management, 2008.
[20] P. Nemery and C. Lamboray. FlowSort: a sorting method
based on flows. In Proceedings of the ORP3 Conference,
pages 45–60, 2007.
[21] F. Pereira, J. Figueira, V. Mousseau, and B. Roy. Multiple criteria districting problems: The public transportation
network pricing system of the paris region. Annals of Operations Research, 154(1):69–92, 2007.
[22] B. Roy. Multicriteria Methodology for Decision Aiding.
Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1996.
[23] P. Vincke. Multicriteria Decision-Aid. J. Wiley, 1992.
[24] M. Worboys and M. Duckham. GIS: A computing perspective. CRC Press, 2004.
[25] W. Xiaofang, D. Qingyun, X. Zhiyong, and L. Na. Research
and design of dynamic symbol in GIS. In Proceedings of
the International Symposium on Spatio-temporal Modeling,
Spatial Reasoning, Analysis, Data Mining and Data fusion,
2005.

References
[1] G. Andrienko and N. Andrienko. Interactive maps for visual
data exploration. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 13(4):355–374, 1999.
[2] N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko. Exploratory Analysis
of Spatial and Temporal Data, A systematic approach.
Springer, 2006.
[3] D. Bouyssou, T. Marchant, M. Pirlot, A. Tsoukis, and
P. Vincke. Evaluation and decision models with multiple criteria: Stepping stones for the analyst. International Series
in Operations Research and Management Science, Volume
86. Boston, 2006.
[4] J. Brans and B. Mareschal. The PROMCALC and GAIA
decision support system for multicriteria decision aid. Decision Support Systems, 12:297–310, 1994.
[5] J. Brans and B. Mareschal. PROMETHEE-GAIA. Une
M´ethodologie d’Aide a` la D´ecision en Pr´esence de Crit`eres
Multiples. Ellipses, Paris, France, 2002.
[6] J. Brans, B. Mareschal, and P. Vincke. PROMETHEE: a
new family of outranking methods in multicriteria analysis.
In Operational Research, IFORS 84, pages 477–490. North
Holland, Amsterdam, 1984.
[7] S. Chakhar and V. Mousseau. Towards a typology of spatial
decision problems. In Annales du Lamsade, volume 2, pages
125–154. Lamsade, Universit Paris Dauphine, 2004.
[8] S. Chakhar and V. Mousseau. Spatial multicriteria decision
making. In S. Shekhar and H. Xiong, editors, Encyclopedia
of Geographical Information Science. Springer, 2007.
[9] S. Chakhar and V. Mousseau. GIS-based multicriteria spatial modeling generic framework. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 22(11–12):1159–1196,
2008.
[10] A. Guitouni and J. Martel. Tentative guidelines to help
choosing an appropriate MCDA method. European Journal
of Operational Research, 109(2):501–521, 1998.

402

