2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Linking and Organising Information in Law Enforcement Investigations
Claus Atzenbeck∗, Fatih Ozgul†‡, and David L. Hicks∗
∗

Aalborg University
Esbjerg Institute of Technology
Niels Bohrs Vej 8, 6700 Esbjerg, Denmark
{atzenbeck, hicks}@cs.aaue.dk

Abstract

Another important issue in law enforcement investigations goes beyond databases toward computer-supported
cooperative work (CSCW). Referring to [24], Zhao et al.
argue that “[i]t is estimated that police officers spend up to
40 % of their time handling information, making it one of
the most extensive police activities” [37]. This makes the
importance of collaboration support obvious. We further
discussed facets of this issue in previous work [6, 5].
In this paper we focus mostly on a related issue as
pointed out in the second and third challenge outlined
above: how to associate and organise information in teams
that evolve or change over time? (What are the requirements for law enforcement investigations?) A natural
choice for this task is hypertext. Seen as a tool for thinking and communicating for decades [13], the term hypertext was coined in the mid 1960s [27]. Early hypertext
researchers, such as Doug Engelbart and Ted Nelson, further developed the idea of associating pieces of information originally issued by Vannevar Bush in 1945 [11]. The
primary structure abstractions were and still are nodes and
links, and were used by Tim Berners-Lee as the underlying
paradigm for the World Wide Web [8].

Keywords— law enforcement, crime scene analysis, hypertext, emergent structure, spatially represented knowledge,
collaboration, data sources, analysis, awareness

Introduction

There is no doubt that law enforcement officers require
a variety of skills, including key competences, such as
the ability to work in teams. For example, the German
BKA (“Bundeskriminalamt”, i. e., “German Federal Criminal Office”) conducts crime scene analysis exclusively in
teams [9]. There are three challenges that need to be addressed in this context: (1) data must be shared not only
among officers, but also with external experts involved
(e. g., forensic medicine or inland revenue offices); (2) information from various sources must be associated and
organised according to the experts’ findings; (3) officers
must be able to chose the most appropriate structure type
depending on the task at hand (e. g., taxonomy, node and
links, or less limited free form structures).
Data collection approaches in law enforcement are often based on databases that are often stand-alone systems
in local law enforcement agencies [19]. The issue of data
‡ F.

University of Sunderland
Dept. of Computing & Technology
SR6 0DD Sunderland, United Kingdom
fatih.ozgul@sunderland.ac.uk

sharing is a frequently addressed topic in this area [12, 31].
In most cases, however, it has been done for specialised
databases that permit distributed access [5]. Examples
include ViCLAS (“Violent Crime Linkage Analysis System”) and VICAP (“Violent Criminal Apprehension Program”) among others [20].

Law enforcement officers deal with various challenges
regarding the management of information during an investigation. New information comes in frequently, some of it
is uncertain, incorrect, or incomplete. Officers should be
supported in developing interpretations of the provided information. Furthermore, it is beneficial (and demanded by
some investigation methodologies) to record the progression of the analysis. In order to fulfil these requirements,
we propose a spatial hypertext-based application, as part
of an open framework. This enhances collaborative work
on uncertain, incomplete, and frequently changing information structures and provides access to other applications used in investigations.

1

†

Since the late 1980s other types of structures have been
studied by hypertext researchers including taxonomies
[30], spatial hypertext [22, 23], and argumentation support
[14]. They were treated as alternatives to the dominant
node–link paradigm to fit more naturally the structuring
needs of certain tasks. Notably, Conklin even demanded in
his 1991 Hypertext Conference keynote address “Ending
the Tyranny of the Link” [18], proposing so-called “supra-

Ozgul is Police Director at the Turkish National Police, Anti-terrorism Department, Head of Technical Surveillance Division, Diyarbakir, Turkey.

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.107

449
443

network hypertexts”, that are hypertexts other than those
based on networks.
Even though we can look back on a long tradition
of hypertext research, there have been certain inadequacies noted in the past [17, 25] that remain unresolved today. Moreover, from a hypertext research point of view,
the WWW can be considered a step backwards due to
its strong focus on data delivery and less structure, or as
Wendy Hall argues, “the Web does not really provide support for hypertext design or maintenance” [1].
There is a strong tendency toward massive data collection nowadays, including person and communication related data by intelligence, law enforcement agencies, or
companies, and “Web 2.0” applications [29] that are used
by a large crowd of people to store and share texts, pictures, films, or personal data. Thus, the dominance and importance of databases and content delivery related issues
is not surprising. The Web 2.0 appears more like a content storage and delivery platform than a tool to associate
(i. e., link) snippets of information. This pushes the original hypertext ideas upon which the WWW was built into
the background.
We do not deny the importance of data collection, however, in this paper we emphasise the benefits for individual
officers and teams to have tools for representing associations of different kinds. In the remainder of the paper
we will first discuss aspects of law enforcement investigations (especially related to crime scene analysis). Based
on this analysis we identify potential improvements to the
process in Section 3. Section 4 provides a brief overview
of our prototypic application, Socs, that addresses most of
the issues discussed. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 5.

2

There is a tendency toward professionalisation in law
enforcement. Experts of various areas collaborate on cases
and contribute their competences. This includes criminologists, forensic scientists (e. g., in the fields of computer,
medicine, etc.), social scientists, psychologists, among
others [7]. By nature they produce piles of interdependent
information snippets that must be organised, evaluated, and
communicated among team members. The team approach
multiplies the amount of information that is collected during an investigation.

2.2

During a police investigation a large amount of information comes in over time and has to be evaluated and
organised. This includes various kinds of data, such as images, video footage, sound files, texts (from quick notes
to various kinds of reports), and output from specialised
programs (analysis applications, etc.). It is important to
consider all traces at the crime scene and evaluate their interplay [7]. The goal is to create a detailed reconstruction
of the crime that reflects the progression of the events objectively [15].
Different countries use different approaches in law enforcement. However, documents are essential to record
collected data and communicate information to others. The
German BKA further introduced written records as a general principle for the OFA methodology [15]. The principle
of writing is a quality standard of the German approach to
crime scene analysis [10]. This contributes to better transparency and understandability of the case, but also causes
data redundancy and adds to the number of documents related to the investigation.

2.3

Redundancy

Much of data redundancy can be attributed to a lack of
application interoperability. For example, consider the typical information snippets that occur in meeting notes, interim reports, or various analyses. In most cases, reusing
such information means copying snippets and pasting them
into other documents. There is no association (“link”)
left between the copy and its original context. This leads
to drawbacks, for example, valuable information found in
previous contexts may not be accessible any more, because
there is no link that would remind investigators of those
earlier occurrences. Furthermore, redundancy may lead to
unwanted inconsistencies if only some copies get modified,
but others become outdated.

Analysis

The analysis and discussion in this Section is based
mainly on the investigative approaches of the German
BKA (“Bundeskriminalamt”, i. e., “German Federal Criminal Office”). In places is also incorporates information and
discussion concerning Turkish law enforcement practices.

2.1

Frequently new information

Information sharing

The German BKA introduced team work as a fundamental principle in crime scene analysis (“Operative Fallanalyse”, abbr.: OFA). This differs to approaches predominantly used in other countries, such as the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation [15] or the Turkish National Police.
For instance, the latter appoints a single principal investigator who evaluates the information coming from various
experts. The German team approach is a means for quality
insurance and increased transparency. The team acts as a
corrective to officers’ subjective misleading suspicions and
thus reduces the danger of “cognitive distortion” [15].

2.4

Ambiguity and uncertainty

An investigation may not always lead to a unique result.
Sometimes ambiguous interpretations of the same underlying data may occur and has to be represented in reports
[10]. Ambiguity can be an advantage, because it can accommodate a larger variety of different hypotheses (and
thus prevents officers from becoming narrow minded) and

444
450

3.1

decreases the number of misleading hypotheses [15]. This
effect becomes even stronger in teams. Recognizing and
analysing ambiguous structures or compiling multiple hypotheses is a creative process [7]. Thus, the medium used
to represent and communicate information during this process must support creativity and provide the ability to express ambiguous information.
The German OFA identifies different layers of an investigation that have increasing degrees of certainty. Those
are data collection (very objective), analysis of the circumstances of the offence, identifying the case characteristics,
and finally composing an offender profile (most speculative) [15]. Results of the investigation and interpretation
must be strictly divided [10]. Thus, the medium used to
represent information must provide the ability to distinguish between facts and (possibly contradicting) interpretations. Furthermore, the data quality may vary, such that
there are missing parts, important data that appears of no
use in the beginning, or unimportant data that initially appears to be useful [7]. Thus, the medium used must provide
support for expressing uncertain, incomplete, and unorganised information fragments of varying importance and
quality.

2.5

It is conspicuous that law enforcement officers deal with
a large number of information fragments during an investigation. Those drop in over time and may be uncertain, wrong, or incomplete (statement I). Organising them
may lead to unclear or ambiguous interpretations (statement II). Ambiguity is even more likely to occur in collaborative environments, as they exist in law enforcement
(statement VI), because a team is likely to express more
alternate opinions than an individual.
The organisation of information fragments (i. e., the
structure they are forming) emerges over time. Newly arrived information may change large portions of the overall
structure, for example, if new evidence shows that previously assumed circumstances must be wrong, and many
issues must be reconsidered and reorganised.
In order for a tool to meet the requirements and demands of this process, it must handle emergent structures
of initially unconnected information snippets and provide
collaboration support. Furthermore, it must provide the
ability to author and represent ambiguous and contradicting interpretations.
Hypertext, as mentioned in Sect. 1, is a natural technology for these tasks, since it provides the means to associate
informational units. However, traditional hypertext (i. e.,
node–link structures) has a downside when used to support
unorganised, incomplete, uncertain, and emerging structures. Shipman et al. [33] argue that “[u]sing node and link
hypertext to express an emerging or evolving understanding means structuring and restructuring the material over
time. This overhead makes traditional hypertexts ill-suited
to many types of analysis and design tasks – particularly,
situations where a lot of information must be interpreted
rapidly or where a group shares and restructures information in order to coordinate or reach consensus” [32].
Spatial hypertext [22, 23], a special kind of hypertext
application, is more appropriate for this task. It is based
on a card metaphor. As with cards on a table, nodes (i. e.,
informational units) can be moved on a space. Associations between nodes are expressed with visual cues, such
as colour, shape, size, alignment, or spatial proximity. For
instance, nodes can be placed below each other as a list;
this “list association” exists implicitly and appears instantaneously.
By its nature, spatial hypertext supports intuitive interactions. It appeals to the user’s visual intelligence, reduces
the cognitive overhead for communication, and thus is an
appropriate medium for collaborative tasks.

Various data sources and tools

Analogous to the number of experts from different fields
associated with the investigation process, there are multiple applications and other media that are used for specific
tasks. There are specialised applications, such as i2 Analyst’s Notebook [21], COPLINK [12], ViCLAS, or VICAP
[20], that help law enforcement officers to query or analyse
large sets of data and extract useful information that would
not be recognised otherwise.
The information received from those has to be further processed, related, and analysed. In practise, nonspecialised applications or media are used, such as notice boards on which important information from various
sources are placed as text notes or pictures, or chart or
presentation applications (e. g., MS Visio or PowerPoint)
to depict and communicate interim findings. Furthermore
word processing applications are used to produce reports
and e-mail clients are used to communicate with others.
Most applications currently used in investigations are
islands with respect to the further processing of their output. They force officers to copy and paste results into other
applications. The information becomes replicated and the
copies exist independently of each other, with the disadvantages that were discussed in Sect. 2.3.

3

Organising information

Improvements

3.2

This section discusses some improvements to the issues
identified in the previous analysis. Table 1 provides an
overview. Statements mentioned in the text of this Section
refer to the corresponding statement in the table.

Foster creativity

It is desirable during an investigation to create as many
correct hypotheses as possible that provide explanations
about the execution of the crime. As explained above,

445
451

Table 1: Summary of the analysis and suggested improvements
No.
I

II

III
IV
V

VI

Analysis (discussed in Sect. 2)

→ Improvements (discussed in Sects. 3 and 4)

Information comes in frequently, is unorganised,
varies in quality, and is often uncertain or incomplete.
(Sect. 2.2)
The organisation process often leads to ambiguous interpretations. Information varies from facts to speculation. (Sect. 2.4)
Multiple hypotheses are beneficial. Finding them is a
creative and collaborative process. (Sect. 2.4)
Some approaches require to keep track of the analysis
process in writing. (Sect. 2.2)
There is a redundancy of information snippets distributed among various applications and media without linking between them. (Sects. 2.3 and 2.5)
Team work is essential in law enforcement, in some
cases even mandatory. (Sect. 2.1)

→ Tool that supports organising unstructured and incomplete information and provides support for easy
and frequent restructuring. (Sect. 3.1)
→ Tool that can handle ambiguity, help finding multiple
interpretations, and make a clear distinction between
facts and speculation. (Sect. 3.1)
→ Tool that provides collaboration support and stimulates creative processes. (Sect. 3.2)
→ Tool that provides a means to represent knowledge
development over time. (Sect. 3.3)
→ Framework that transcends application boundaries
and permits linking and transclusion between them.
(Sect. 4)
→ Tool that supports collaboration and eases information exchange. (Sects. 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and 4)

these different interpretations should be supported by the
tools used by investigators. Furthermore, finding hypotheses is a creative process [7] and is better achieved by teams
(statements III and VI). Thus, the proposed medium should
stimulate teams to creatively build hypotheses.
The need for creativity places requirements onto the
medium that is used: “If creativity is to be supported, the
medium must afford tentative interactions. The lack of precision in quick, loose sketches actually allows for multiple
interpretations. The fact that a line can be interpreted in
many different ways [. . . ] can be a distinct benefit in enabling a diagram to support multiple tentative hypotheses”
[34]. Spatial hypertext serves “like sketch representations
[16] for hypertext authoring” [36] and contributes to reflections in early design phases [26]. A similar though less extensible way of working is already used in law enforcement
by organising text snippets or photos on notice boards.
Awareness of “what is going on” (especially workspace
awareness) is another important aspect to be considered.
Increased awareness advances communication and leads to
more input. In previous work we have argued how spatial
hypertext contributes to awareness [2, 6] which shows positive effects on creativity.

3.3

sion. Hidden information may get revealed, previous conditions reconsidered, or previously removed information
put back. Preserving the evolution of an investigation is
especially important in a team environment (statement VI)
[3].
A tool should record the evolution automatically instead
of requiring officers to pen protocols outside and in addition to the actual reasoning process. Time representation
and versioning permits officers to browse back in time and
reconsider previous issues that no longer exist in the latest knowledge state. Currently, there is no tool that supports this adequately. In our recent publication [3] we discuss the need and requirements of a fine-grained recording
of actions and its corresponding visualisation that can be
browsed easily.

4

Prototype: Socs

We are working on a research application prototype,
Socs, that provides the improvements mentioned in Tab. 1.
Our recent publications focus on various aspects of this research [5, 6, 3, 2, 4]. Socs is a spatial hypertext application, currently in a very early implementation phase. It
features a space for organising information, time representation (i. e., fine-grained “versioning”), and awareness
and notification services. It has direct access to a systemwide address book (for representing social relationships)
and Web resources. It acts as a central access point for
those resources and uses them for its notification services.
Currently, Socs exists in two experimental versions, labelled vA and vB. A more detailed overview of their main
features can be found in [6]. Both versions have been
implemented in the Mac OS X environment. We plan to
merge features from both versions into a single and more

Representing time

Finally, in many cases it is important to keep track of
the history of the analysis process during an investigation.
As mentioned in Sect. 2.2, this is demanded by some law
enforcement methodologies and usually accomplished by
written protocols (statement IV). Recording the knowledge
evolution during an investigation provides a better understanding of the case and permits users to analyse previous
knowledge states and its development up to the current ver-

446
452

sophisticated application in the future. The original implementation, Socs vA, has been described in the context
of intelligence analysis in [4]. At that time, Socs focused
exclusively on representing social relationships. It featured a so-called “social space” on which representations
of people can be arranged to express their relationships
and “drop groups”, which are marked regions in the background used to represent groupings of people. Socs maps
all person representations and drop groups to their corresponding records in the system-wide address book framework. Thus, all applications that make use of the systemwide service get updated when changes occur on the social
space. The nature of spatially represented knowledge supports users in dealing with emergent or uncertain relationships and recognising connections that may not be explicitly represented. It supports the human ability of spatial
perception and intelligence.

Socs vB also provides the ability to keep track of viewport locations over time, that is the area of the space
currently being displayed on the screen. The viewport
background gets increasingly darker on active periods and
slowly fades out otherwise. This provides information
about recent spots of interest and becomes especially useful in overview mode (i. e., when zoomed out). When collaboratively used, marked spots of interest indicate colleagues’ working areas and thus may help to coordinate
their actions or foster communication among them. A similar feature is the tracking of movement paths that capture
and indicate how objects have been moved on the space.
Similar to viewport locations, they fade out over time.
Viewport locations and movement paths are an important means to increase the users’ awareness of the changing location of interest and how the structure evolved over
time, and both are especially beneficial for team work, as
we argue in greater detail in [3]. We further discuss in the
aforementioned paper vB’s support for “forgetting” (i. e.,
fading out) and “remembering” (i. e., fading in) information, a unique feature planned for Socs that addresses the
problem of an overloaded information space that otherwise
may occur over time.
Even though Socs does not yet meet productivity requirements, its underlying paradigm matches most of the
identified requirements for law enforcement investigations
and the proposed solutions. Two important aspects still
need to be addressed: Firstly, Socs must become a multiuser system to meet improvement VI. Secondly, Socs
needs to become part of a distributed framework to meet
improvement V.
Socs should be able to connect to other applications
(e. g., analysis tools) and permit users to associate information across application boundaries or reuse data without instantiating multiple copies. (The latter is known as
“transclusion” [28].) Then information snippets could be
put into multiple contexts with associations between them.
This eases information organisation and browsing.
Cross application link creation has long been a topic of
research in hypermedia [25]. Currently component based
open hypermedia systems provide this capability within
their hypermedia environments [35]. In addition, most
component based open hypermedia systems support a variety of structure types such as taxonomies, node–link associations, and spatial structures. Specialised tools can be integrated into such an environment either by native modules
that run inside the framework or by wrappers and plugins that enable communication between the applications
and the framework services. As an example of the usefulness of interapplication linking capabilities, they would
enable officers to associate parts of a money transfer analysis (computed with Analyst’s Notebook) to important as-

Furthermore, Socs vA integrates a Web browser in order to fetch and extract information that is related to objects
on the social space. For demonstration purposes, vA integrates with Wikipedia such that Socs retrieves author information and marks the corresponding objects on the social
space whenever the internal browser displays Wikipedia articles. Thus, “Socs provides awareness about the authors of
a wiki page and which of them are part of the user’s structure on the social space, those that are of special interest
to the user. This creates implicitly recommendations about
wiki pages (because users get notified when wiki pages are
authored by known people), provides the basis of interpreting the authors’ intentions (because users become aware
of who wrote the articles), and foster communication (because users may want to discuss those article with whom
they know).” [2].
Socs vB is an experimental implementation that deals
with time representation. It extends the notion of persononly relationships to creating structures of arbitrary documents and information. It’s main focus is on representing
time and navigating through multiple versions. Keeping
track of various versions and the emergence of knowledge
is especially important in collaborative environments. As
we discussed in [3], Socs vB is planned to support moving
backwards or forwards in time instantly via the so-called
“session view window”, that is a graphical representation
of a previous session, including marks for any modification
made on objects on the space. The user can zoom in and
out to increase or decrease the granularity of changes and
ease navigation through time. This increases the awareness
of how the knowledge evolved over time and may provide
future useful input for investigations. Furthermore, it is the
foundation for a parser that is able to detect hidden links
among various versions of knowledge structures in order
to notify the user about similarities.

447
453

pects of a forensics report (available as PDF) directly and
persistently.

5

[5] Claus Atzenbeck, David L. Hicks, and Nasrullah
Memon. Supporting emergent knowledge and team
communication in police investigations. In Proceedings of the Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference (ISI). IEEE Computer Society, 2009. In press.

Conclusion

Officers in law enforcement deal with a variety of information management problems. They must consider large
amounts of information during investigations. Some of the
information is uncertain, incorrect, or incomplete. Organising and relating information fragments is mostly done
in teams. Furthermore, the evolution of the investigation
analysis should be recorded in order to increase the transparency of the process. In order to fulfil these requirements, we proposed a spatial hypertext-based application
as a medium for collaboratively managing uncertain, incomplete, and frequently changing information structures,
stimulating the creative process of forming alternate hypotheses and interpretations about crime based on the gathered information.
We developed a prototype, Socs, that provides most of
the suggested improvements rudimentarily. To increase the
benefit of such an application, we further proposed its implementation within an open framework that permits users
to unite arbitrary applications used for the investigation
process and link information across application boundaries. The goal is to unite multiple data sources to create a
common knowledge space.

[6] Claus Atzenbeck, David L. Hicks, and Nasrullah
Memon. Supporting reasoning and communication
for intelligence officers. International Journal of Networking and Virtual Organisations (IJNVO), Special
Issue on Open Source Intelligence and Web Mining
(OSINT-WM), 2009. In press.
[7] Michael C. Baurmann. Die Operative Fallanalyse
des Bundeskriminalamtes. In Clemens Lorei, editor, Polizei & Psychologie, pages 7–53. Verlag f¨ur
Polizeiwissenschaft, 2003.
[8] Tim Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau. World-Wide
Web. In Computing in High Energy Physics, 9 1992.
[9] Bundeskriminalamt. Operative Fallanalyse (OFA).
WWW, 2008. Visited on 2008-04-05.
[10] Thomas P. Busch and Heiner Kleihege. Qualit¨atsstandards und praktischer Nutzen von psychologischen
T¨aterprofilen. In Clemens Lorei, editor, Polizei &
Psychologie, pages 175–186. Verlag f¨ur Polizeiwissenschaft, 2003.

References
[1] Claus Atzenbeck. Interview with Wendy Hall. SIGWEB Newsletter, 2007(Spring):1–4, 2008.

[11] Vannevar Bush. As we may think. The Atlantic
Monthly, 176(1):101–108, 7 1945.

[2] Claus Atzenbeck and David L. Hicks. Socs: Increasing social and group awareness for wikis by example
of Wikipedia. In Procceedings of the International
Symposium on Wikis (WikiSym). ACM Press, 2008.

[12] Hsinchun Chen, Daniel Zeng, Homa Atabakhsh, Wojciech Wyzga, and Jenny Schroeder. COPLINK:
managing law enforcement data and knowledge.
Communications of the ACM, 46(1):28–34, 2003.

[3] Claus Atzenbeck and David L. Hicks. Integrating
time into spatially represented knowledge structures.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
(eKNOW), pages 34–42. IEEE Computer Society,
2009.

[13] Jeff Conklin. Hypertext: an introduction and survey.
Computer, 20(9):17–41, 1987.
[14] Jeff Conklin and Michael L. Begeman. gIBIS: a hypertext tool for team design deliberation. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Hypertext, pages
247–251. ACM Press, 1987.

[4] Claus Atzenbeck, David L. Hicks, and Nasrullah
Memon. Emergent structure and awareness support
for intelligence analysis. In Ebad Banissi, Liz Stuart,
Mikael Jern, Gennady Andrienko, Francis T. Marchese, Nasrullah Memon, Reda Alhajj, Theodor G.
Wyeld, Remo Aslak Burkhard, Georges Grinstein,
Dennis Groth, Anna Ursyn, Carsten Maple, Anthony
Faiola, and Brock Craft, editors, Proceedings of the
12th International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’08), pages 326–332. IEEE Computer Society, 2008.

[15] Harald Dern. Qualit¨atsstandards der Fallanalyse
bei der deutschen Polizei. In Clemens Lorei, editor, Polizei & Psychologie, pages 55–75. Verlag f¨ur
Polizeiwissenschaft, 2003.
[16] Mark D. Gross and Ellen Yi-Luen Do. Ambiguous intentions: a paper-like interface for creative design. In
UIST ’96: Proceedings of the 9th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology,
pages 183–192. ACM Press, 1996.

448
454

[17] Frank G. Halasz. Reflections on NoteCards: Seven
issues for the next generation of hypermedia systems.
In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Hypertext,
pages 345–365. ACM Press, 1987.

[28] Theodor Holm Nelson. Xanalogical structure, needed
now more than ever: parallel documents, deep links
to content, deep versioning, and deep re-use. ACM
Computing Surveys, 31(4):article 33/pp. 1–32, 1999.

[18] Frank G. Halasz. “Seven Issues” revisited. Keynote
address, Hypertext ’91 conference, San Antonio,
Texas. WWW, 12 1991.

[29] Tim O’Reilly. What is Web 2.0? Design patterns and
business models for the next generation of software.
WWW, 9 2005.

[19] Roslin V. Hauck, Michael Chau, and Hsinchun Chen.
COPLINK. In Advances in Digital Government,
pages 163–179. Springer, 2002.

[30] H. Van Dyke Parunak. Don’t link me in: Set based
hypermedia for taxonomic reasoning. In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual ACM Conference on Hypertext, pages 233–242. ACM Press, 1991.

[20] Jens Hoffmann and Cornelia Musolff. Fallanalyse
und T¨aterprofil. Geschichte, Methoden und Erkenntnisse einer jungen Disziplin, volume 52 of BKA –
Forschungsreihe. Bundeskriminalamt, 2000.

[31] Anne Puonti.
Tools for collaboration: Using
and designing tools in interorganizational economiccrime investigation. Mind, Culture, and Activity,
11(2):133–152, 5 2004.

[21] i2. i2 Analyst’s Notebook. WWW, 2009. Visited on
2009-01-22.

[32] Frank M. Shipman, Haowei Hsieh, Preetam Maloor, and J. Michael Moore. The Visual Knowledge
Builder: a second generation spatial hypertext. In
Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia, pages 113–122. ACM Press,
2001.

[22] Catherine C. Marshall, Frank G. Halasz, Russell A.
Rogers, and William C. Janssen. Aquanet: a hypertext tool to hold your knowledge in place. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM Conference on Hypertext,
pages 261–275. ACM Press, 1991.

[33] Frank M. Shipman and Catherine C. Marshall. Formality considered harmful: Experiences, emerging
themes, and directions on the use of formal representations in interactive systems. Computer Supported
Cooperative Work (CSCW), 8(4):333–352, 1999.

[23] Catherine C. Marshall, Frank M. Shipman, and
James H. Coombs. VIKI: Spatial hypertext supporting emergent structure. In Proceedings of the 1994
ACM European Conference on Hypermedia Technology, pages 13–23. ACM Press, 1994.

[34] Colin Ware. Information Visualization.
Kaufmann, 2 edition, 2004.

[24] M. McKay-Smith and A. C. Gustin. Forms control and design in a small police department. ARMA
Records Management Quaterly, 16(1):7–8, 1982.

Morgan

[35] Uffe K. Wiil, David L. Hicks, and Peter J. N¨urnberg.
Multiple open services: a new approach to service
provision in open hypermedia systems. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Hypertext and
Hypermedia, pages 83–92. ACM Press, 2001.

[25] Norman Meyrowitz. The missing link: why we’re all
doing hypertext wrong. In The society of text: hypertext, hypermedia, and the social construction of
information, pages 107–114. MIT Press, 1989.

[36] Yasuhiro Yamamoto, Kumiyo Nakakoji, and Atsushi
Aoki. Spatial hypertext for linear-information authoring: Interaction design and system development
based on the art design principle. In Proceedings of
the 13th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia, pages 35–44. ACM Press, 2002.

[26] Kumiyo Nakakoji, Yasuhiro Yamamoto, Shingo
Takada, and Brent N. Reeves. Two-dimensional spatial positioning as a means for reflection in design.
In DIS ’00: Proceedings of the 3rd conference on
Designing interactive systems, pages 145–154. ACM
Press, 2000.

[37] J. Leon Zhao, Henry H. Bi, Hsinchun Chen,
Daniel D. Zeng, Chienting Lin, and Michael
Chau. Process-driven collaboration support for intraagency crime analysis. Decision Support Systems,
41(3):616–633, 2006.

[27] T. H. Nelson. Complex information processing: a
file structure for the complex, the changing and the
indeterminate. In Proceedings of the 20th National
Conference, pages 84–100. ACM Press, 1965.

449
455

