2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Guiding the Viewer’s Imagination: How Visual Rhetorical Figures
Create Meaning in Animated Infographics
Ralph Lengler {rlen4186@usyd.edu.au}
Andrew Vande Moere {andrew@arch.usyd.edu.au}
The Roman orator Quintilianus [26] is credited with
developing the first manual and categorization system on
how to make speeches more effective. He further developed
oratorical techniques from Aristotle like the metaphor [1]
and called them rhetorical figures. The power of rhetorical
figures stems from their potential in creating meaning in the
recipient. Rhetorical figures exist in all modalities of communication but have not received much scholarly attention
outside of speech.
Al Gore’s (both documentary and book) An Inconvenient Truth [17] is probably the prime example of how effective the truth (here: global warming) can become when
information visualization techniques are combined with
visual rhetorical figures (mainly visual antithesis). A visual
antithesis juxtaposes two similar pictures for differences,
stimulating the viewer to imagine a third picture. In Al
Gore’s case, photos of a glacier 70 years ago and the
present are compared, stimulating the viewer to imagine the
same glacier in 70 years (cf. Figure 4).
The term information aesthetics has recently been used
to refer to visualization techniques, which exhibit at the
same time informational as well as emotional value and
deeper meaning beyond the dataset [32]. Further, Aesthetics
has been cited by Chaomei Chen [6] as one of the top ten
problems to be solved in information visualization, and
acknowledged by some researchers as a means of augmenting information visualization [2, 3]. We propose that the
problem of aesthetics is linked to another problem of
Chen’s list, causality, visual inference, and predictions [6].
Here, the core challenge is to design visualizations that ask
questions in order to find causality in data, to form hypotheses, and to assess evidence for decision making.
We argue that the problem of aesthetics is intrinsically
tied to the problem of visual inference and cannot be solved
by technology alone, i.e. by programming a data mapping.
A designer is needed in order to select the most adequate
data mapping (rhetorical figure) and lastly to customize the
rhetorical figure to a specific audience.
In the area of visualizations-over-time like animated
infographics (short, popular, YouTube-like movies , aesthetics in infographical style), visual inference and storytelling techniques are important factors to make the videos
compelling. An explication of visual persuasion / meaning

Abstract
Some visualizations need not only adequately represent
information; their presentation needs also to be effective,
leading to a behavior change in the viewer. Rhetorical figures, like metaphors, are said to increase the effectiveness
of a message. This position paper first reviews the literature on why metaphors are more persuasive. Second, it
presents four distinct meaning creation operations as one
dimension of a future classification system. Third, it explains the properties of the meaning creation operations on
four state-of-the-art works from infographics. Fourth, it
presents an analysis of published empirical studies from the
field of advertising, and provides advice on how to best use
them in practice.

1. Introduction
Information visualization is a research field which aims
to amplify cognition of patterns and trends in abstract datasets by developing effective mapping techniques for
representing values in visual forms [4]. As the ability to
collect, store, and manage data is increasing quickly and
our ability to understand it remains relatively constant [13],
the field of information visualization has been incorporating
concepts from computer science, data mining and graphic
design, each solving an isolated part of the specific problem
to more adequately representing the truth [13, 20]. But by
augmenting the cognitive processing efforts information
visualization is failing in a broader sense: capturing the
heart. Neuroscientific evidence [5, 7, 8, 24] points out that
whereas cognitive thinking leads to conclusions, emotions
are the base for action (as in behavior). But of what use is a
more adequate or prettier representation of information if
behavior is unaffected? Therefore the truth needs not only
be adequately represented it also needs to be effective. The
aim of the fields of rhetoric [20] and persuasion [33, 39] is
behavior modification, or to make the truth more effective
[20]. We use the laden term truth in allusion to the dispute
between rhetoricians and dialecticians stemming from antiquity. For rhetoricians like lawyers the truth in itself has
no value unless it is presented effectively in order to prevent their clients from the death sentence.
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.102

591
585

The promise of rhetoric is that figures are templates for
meaning generation and that they can be generated from a
small number of underlying operations and structures [18].
McGuire [34], the nestor of persuasion theory, suggests that
a better understanding of visual rhetorical figures (in combination with a classification system) is most likely to provide new insights into persuasion processes. Although there
is a proliferation of visual rhetoric categorizations in the
literature [e.g. 12, 9, 35, 36, 18, 11], these frameworks focus almost exclusively on the use of metaphors, to the neglect of the hundreds of other rhetorical figures known from
verbal rhetoric [34]. Metaphors (as the best known rhetorical figure) are credited with the capacity to structure, transform, and create new knowledge, as well as evoke emotions, and influence evaluations [1, 2, 25, 14, 15, 34]. According to the associative network models of memory [14,
15], metaphors exist in different modalities either in monomodal (verbal or visual) or multimodal (verbal plus visual)
form as they represent a mode of meaning creation [12]. As
rhetorical figures are linked to meaning creation operations
in our brain, the phenomenology of a verbal metaphor is
different to a pictorial or an audio-visual metaphor; hence
they must be discovered anew for each communication medium as soon as the characteristic features of a mode of
expression emerge [18].

and interpreted, and to invoke personal reflection [3]. Good
visualizations with external data focus are designed to be
appreciated by interpretation, with the intention of invoking
persuasion. Animated infographics with intent of persuasion provide only one possibility of interpretation. The
main argument is in the ‘Gap’, the part which has to be
imagined or interpreted. This is why visualizations with
extrinsic data focus or visual rhetorical figures stimulate the
viewer into a mental collaboration during the meaning creation process. Braun-Latour & Zaltman [21] argue that when
the memory trace of such a co-created or imagined picture
is laid down; it is tagged as created ‘by us’. As this new
memory is interlinked and interacting with those contained
in the rest of the message, viewers take up ownership for
the whole belief structure and mistakenly attribute the
learned information to having been our own personal consistent beliefs or attitudes all along, thus persuading us from
within.
Past empirical studies have shown that arguments presented using metaphors have a persuasive advantage over
similar ones presented in prose [31]. But this advantage is
not limited to metaphors and the advantage is especially
strong when they are presented visually [e.g. 9, 12, 22, 35,
36, 16]. According to an explanation by Whaley [8, cf. 31],
the persuasive advantage of metaphors stems from a stimulated elaboration of thinking, which is due to a focusing on
a similar relational structure (rather than simple features)
and hence evoking richer sets of associations in semantic
memory as compared to literal language. The greater number of semantic connections produces greater elaboration of
message content, which in turn leads to increased persuasion given suitable processing conditions. Whaley proposes
that certain types of metaphors (i.e. explanatory analogies)
function as high-quality arguments, whose processing results in more elaboration than that of literal messages.
Therefore, if both motivation and ability are high and the
message is compelling, the outcome is a greater number of
thoughts agreeing with message advocacy and thereby
greater persuasion, which is in concordance with dual
process persuasion theories [33, 39]. This rhetorical-figure
as theme or leitmotiv effect is one of the reasons why they
are more effective as we will see in section 3.3.

2.1 Data Focus

3. Basic Meaning Operations

In this section we investigate how the meaning operation of rhetorical figures corresponds to the info-aesthetic
dimension of data focus [3] or a visualization’s ability to
facilitate the communication of deeper meaning of emotional factors that surround data. Intrinsic focus can be seen
as traditional data visualization, which mostly acts like
tools, which aim to support user tasks and disseminate information. These techniques allow users to discover useful
patterns in data, such as outliers, trends, and clusters. Extrinsically focused visualization techniques are aimed towards data representations, which are able to be appreciated

There are two basic meaning operations: connection
and comparison. The operation of comparison is further
subdivided to distinguish comparison aimed at identifying
similarities versus comparison aimed at identifying opposition (or differences). The meaning operation of connection
is further subdivided to distinguish directional (one-way)
and non-directional (two-way) connections.
We will illustrate those four meaning operations on examples from state-of-the-art works of animated infographics (Figure 1 & 2), theatrical movies (Figure 3 & 4) and
visual facilitation (Figure 5). What connects all three forms

creation principles as part of a classification system could
therefore provide information visualization developers with
a broader range of expressivity and consciousness leading
to more effective visualizations.
In the next section, we will investigate the theoretical
foundations how visual rhetorical figures persuade by creating meaning. In the third section, we will present one dimension of a rhetorical classification system [18]: meaning
operation. The dimension of meaning operation is based on
how brain cell clusters process information and refers henceforth to the focus of the cognitive processing required to
comprehend the presented information [18, 15]. We will
also demonstrate how the basic meaning making operations
are used (best) in animated infographics.

2. The Promise of Visual Rhetoric

586
592

to denote a connection of the form A → B. If A has a connection to B but in addition also to C, then systems diagrams and arrows are used to denote one-way links.
In cinema studies, Soviet filmmakers Eisenstein [40]
and Kuleshov [41] wrote extensively about this form of
meaning generation by calling it Kuleshov-Effect and the
meaning making process montage. They discovered that
two shots presented one after the other are processed in our
brains as belonging together, even if the shots are totally
unrelated.

of expression is that they are visualizations over time with
the aim of narrating a data-driven story.
The inclusion of visual facilitation could be beneficial
for three reasons: First, visual facilitators cover meetings
and speeches with visual means, such as illustrations and
idea maps. Second, their messages are as long as animated
infographics. Third, visual facilitators are often graphic
novelists combining design with narration. Therefore they
may unconsciously utilize those meaning-creating metalanguage principles in their work. Fourth, their work shows
the use and combination of those principles in a more timerestricted setting.

3.1 Figures of Connection
In figures of connection, viewer inferences are directed
toward how the depicted elements can be associated to
create a link between them. The basic meaning operation
for connection figures can be stated as, ‘A is associated
with B because … ‘
The key property that distinguishes figures of connection is that the elements are intended to be linked rather
than compared. The purpose of the connection operation is
to increase the salience of some aspect of element A – the
aspect that provides the link to B [18]. One-way connections indicate cause and effect links of the form A → B and
are used extensively in systems diagrams. Two way connections state A is associated with B and B is associated
with A, like in entity-relation diagrams of databases.
In the storyboard of the infographical video, The Crisis
of Credit Visualized [cf. Figure 1; 28], the designer Jonathan Jarvis used the simplest form of connections – systems
diagrams of white one-way and black two-way arrows – in
order to make connections between the different concepts
and actors of the financial crisis understandable for himself.
In the actual video he uses cinematic techniques (cf. Figure
2).

Fig. 2: In the video Crisis of Credit Visualized [28],
concepts are juxtaposed (instead of arrows)
As you can see in Figure 2, simple two-way links are
best represented by juxtapose, where Jarvis juxtaposed
homeowners and investors to indicate a connection or a two
way link. The two objects of association do not necessarily
need to share the same frame as you can see in the adjoining excerpt (Figure 3) of the title sequence from the movie
The Kingdom [38], where Saudi oil production is juxtaposed with U.S. oil consumption, highlighting the codependence of Saudi-Arabia and the U.S. on a meta-level
(cf. 3.2 & 3.4). The Kuleshov-Effect becomes most salient
when looking at the two bottom most pictures of Figure 3:
The juxtapose of an airplane flying into the bar-graph with
a map of Manhattan emanating black smoke makes us infer
that the airplane crashed into the bar-graph.

3.2 Comparison for Similarity: Metaphor
Metaphors are comparisons of the form A is B whereas
attributes of concept B are mapped onto concept A. The
metaphor in Figure 3, Bar-graph is Skyscraper consists of
two parts, A (bar-graph) and B (skyscraper). A is called the
Target and B the Base [14].
Nominal metaphors are comparisons of A is B. Relational metaphors are defined as A is to C like B is to D.
Figure 3 is a nominal metaphor, whereas the metaphorical
part of Figure 5 is a relational metaphor. An extended metaphor uses one base to construct a number of different submetaphors with the same target. In Advertising this is
usually achieved by producing different motives for the
same message / campaign.
A figure of similarity (e.g. visual metaphor) suggests
that two images are the same in some way (‘A is like B
because …’) and invites the viewer to draw an analogy be-

Figure 1: Within the storyboard of Crisis of Credit
Visualized [28], the arrows of system diagrams
visualize the conceptual links for the designer.
Even though a one-way connection is best represented
in film by a cut, in animated infographics cuts are only used

587
593

pory & Dillard [31] investigated which features of a metaphor maximize the persuasive impact in oral speeches and
written texts. Based on their analysis they conclude that the
persuasive impact of metaphor is maximized when:

tween the two images to understand how they relate to one
another. According to Holoyak & Hummel [29], the cognitive process of analogous thinking can be separated into the
following four steps:

• The audience is familiar with the metaphor target, in
figure 3 the audience is familiar with the concept of a
bar-graph.
• The metaphor is novel, i.e. the metaphorical mapping
creates new knowledge.
• The base is extended. By presenting the same target
(bar graph) and the same mapping operation (shape,
color) with a different base (different object than skyscraper), the metaphorical learning is reinforced. The
reverse attribute mapping of the metaphor in figure 3
could be likened to a special,
albeit highly effective form of
extended metaphor.
• Is single [only one], i.e. it has
only one rhetorical theme.
The rhetorical theme in figure
3 is the juxtapose (or the
comparison for similarity and
opposition) Saudi Arabia with
the United States (cf. 3.1 &
3.4).
• Used at the start of the message. In a sense Figure 3 is at
the start of the message: the
3-minute infographical sequence introduces the 90minute fiction film. Using the
metaphor at the start of the
message implies using it as
overarching theme. In our example it is the juxtapose U.S.
vs. Saudi Arabia.

a)

the relevant terms [bar-graph, skyscraper] are accessed
from long-term memory;
b) attributes of the source [skyscraper] are mapped onto
the target [bar-graph] to identify correspondences;
c) analogical inferences are made about the target, creating new knowledge [bar-graph and skyscraper correspond in shape];
d) learning occurs when new links in memory are created
Often the two images to be compared are intrinsically
similar at a surface level, such as form (Figure 3) or appearance (Figure 4). That is, the two
images share direct physical similarity
and inferences can be drawn based on
object matching (Figure 4). When two
images share structural similarities,
inferences can be drawn based on relational matching (Figure 5) [15].
In Figure 3, the mapping of Bargraph is Skyscraper is facilitated by the
similarity of their shapes and the reinforcement of the camera flying through
the 3D bar graphs (extended metaphor).
The appearance of the airplane marks a
turning point of the story. The function
of a turning point is to make us reinterpret everything by shifting the point
of view: the airplane situates the skyscraper as the world trade center. Its
subsequent crash also reverses the first
metaphorical mapping to World-TradeCenter is Bar-graph. While the metaphorical learning from Bar-graph is
Skyscraper in itself is unremarkable, it
is a necessary rhetorical prerequisite for
the following reverse mapping of
attributes. This learning is on a metalevel, implying that the terrorists targeted the world trade center as symbol
of that bar graph, i.e. imperialist world
trade.

3.3 Results of Empirical Studies
on Metaphors
The main focus of empirical research has been on metaphors. We will
present the results of empirical research
in order to facilitate comprehension in
connection with the illustrative examples. In a meta-analysis on the persuasive effects of verbal metaphors, So-

Fig. 3: Use of metaphor and antithesis in the infographical title sequence of The Kingdom [38]
588
594

They also suggest that persuasion occurs due to the organization
potential of metaphor-as-theme,
which facilitates selection and integration of information from the
message and prior knowledge.
Based on their findings they endorse the superior organization
view, which is derived from Gentner’s structure mapping theory [14,
15], and proposes that a metaphor
helps to structure and organize the
arguments of a message. This implies that more coherent organization and resulting highlighting of
the arguments improves comprehension. Then, as McGuire [33]
has suggested, enhanced comprehension should increase persuasion.

Eisenstein's montage theories [cf. 40] are based on the
idea that montage originates in the collision between different shots in an illustration of the idea of thesis and antithesis. In Eisenstein's view 'montage is an idea that arises from
the collision of independent shots’ wherein ‘each sequential
element is perceived not next to the other, but on top of the
other’. He also believed that montage expresses how
everyday thought processes happen. Through juxtapose and
associative mapping, the montage forms thoughts in the
minds of the viewer, and is therefore a powerful tool in
persuasion.
In Figure 4 both photos, were shot from the same
viewpoint in order to facilitate comparisons of the two pictures for similarity and differences. Our predisposition for
extrapolating trends stimulates us to imagine a third picture
in the future (the glacier in 2080).

Empirical visual studies [e.g. 9, 12, 16, 22, 35, 36]
from the field of advertising research confirm that advertisements containing metaphors have a positive impact on
the important consumer responses of elaboration and ad
liking. In addition they have been shown to be especially
effective under incidental exposure conditions, where the
viewer can decide where he wants to look [36], like in
magazine ads.
However, visual rhetorical figures require more cognitive effort in meaning creation [16, 22]. Ketelaar & Van
Gisbergen [22] manipulated in five experiments the pictorial part of existing ads containing visual metaphors, effectively varying the guidance towards a certain interpretation.
They found that ads, which are difficult to understand, are
appreciated less than ads that are easy to understand. In the
eyes of their subjects, the reward, the pleasure in solving
the riddle, did not compensate for the cognitive effort to
decipher it, even when an ad was understood. And worse,
not being able to create an interpretation is strongly negatively correlated with ad liking [16, 22].

3.5 Figures of Combination: Simile / Match Cut
Figures 3 and 5 are a combination of metaphor and antithesis which is called pictorial simile [12, 10] or match cut
in film terminology. Forceville [10] defines a pictorial simile as when ‘a unified object is juxtaposed with a unified
object belonging to a different category in such a manner
that the first is understood in terms of the second’.

3.4 Comparison for Opposition: Antithesis
In the operation of comparison aimed at opposition,
Antithesis, the visual figure suggests that two images are
different in some way (‘A is not like B because …’) and
invites the viewer to compare the two images to generate
one or more inferences regarding their differences. Antithesis often relies on basic similarities between two images to
highlight areas of difference [9], perhaps because differences between similar images tend to be more salient than differences between dissimilar images [29].

Fig. 5: TED BigViz live sketchbook, Al Gore [37]
Figure 5 shows an excerpt of a presentation by Al Gore
during the 2008 TED conference [37], where the graphic
facilitator skillfully transported Al Gore’s oratorical use of
metaphor and antithesis to the visual domain. In Figure 5,
the object (line graph) in the left picture and the object in
the right picture (road) are skillfully juxtaposed, in such a
manner that the line graph (left) is understood in terms of a
road ahead (right), thereby achieving a metaphorical remapping. This slide shows also clearly Al Gore’s personal
preference of using evocative rhetorical figures to communicate his message.
Figure 3 is maybe the best example of such a combination of figures of similarity and opposition. Applying
Forceville’s definition [10], a skyscraper (1st object) is jux-

Fig. 4: Visual Antithesis from An Inconvenient
Truth [17] (3rd picture added by the authors)
589
595

taposed with a bar-graph (2nd object belonging to different
category) by flying the camera through the 3D bar graphs
The appearance and the subsequent crash of the airplane
marks a turning point of the story. The function of a turning
point is to make us reinterpret everything from a different
point of view. As we have seen in Section 3.2, the turning
point forces people to make a reverse metaphorical mapping. As Forceville [10] has observed, reverse mappings are
very rare and require a considerable amount of skill from
the designer. However, it can be hypothesized that reverse
mapping metaphors are probably the most persuasive/effective.
The infographical title sequence of The Kingdom [38]
is an excellent example beyond rhetorical figures and animated infographics because its source material was taken
from the PBS documentary House of Saud. The infographical remake uses 3D animation selectively to highlight central arguments like the U.S.-Saudi codependency shown in
Figure 3. It hints at the potential of using 3D animation as a
tool for constructing rhetorical figures and to enhance
meaning creation. However, it also shows why (animated)
infographics should integrate more documentary source
material. Documentary source material adds statements and
live audio as an alternative source of narration beyond the
voice-over. It should overcome its tendency to stick with
the systems diagrams of their storyboards. There is no
doubt that constructing systems diagrams are and always
will be the bread and butter of infographical endeavors.
There is however a potential and a need for more sophisticated expression as the success of An Inconvenient Truth
[17] has shown.

8.

9.

4. Conclusions & Further Research
We propose that most visualizations over time, like
presentations, visual facilitation and animated infographics,
are areas of visualization science, which can profit little by
technology alone. They require a skilled designer, as they
are highly specific to a particular knowledge domain. In
order to solve the problems of aesthetics and visual inference, designers should be educated in principles of rhetorics, as those fields inherently have rhetorical aims. The
prime rhetorical aim is effectiveness in communication,
which should potentially lead to a behavior change in the
viewer. This aim is achieved by presenting information in a
way that it enhances the meaning creation process in the
viewer. The visual part of rhetorics is still a largely underresearched area. This position paper highlighted some areas
for further investigation:
1.

3.6 Recommendations for Most Effective Use of
Metaphors and other Rhetorical Figures

2.

Applying these results to predominantly visual environments, the following recommendations for the most effective use and placement of metaphors are proposed:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

dience is familiar with the metaphor-target, but it
should not be familiar with the metaphor-base [31].
Avoid common metaphors, e.g. ‘Television is poison’, but use/construct new ones (novel). Metaphors
are most effective in transferring knowledge; the
viewer should not be familiar with the metaphorbase or the metaphor mapping operation [31].
If possible, extend this single, one metaphor
throughout the message by varying it, use the metaphor as theme or leitmotiv [31].

The key message is in the ‘Gap’, the part that has to
be imagined. Rhetorical figures guide viewers in decoding and imagining processes of the ‘Gap’,
The key argument is presented as in the dominant or
first decoded modality, which means for most cases,
the rhetorical figure is visual.
The key function of the ‘Gap’ is to elicit a second
vivid contrasting image in time or space [30].
Before and after the ‘Gap’, be as clear (understandable) as possible (ease of interpretation) [22].
As there is only one key message, use only one single figure, e.g. one metaphor [31].
It is used at the start of the message as rhetoricalfigure-as-overarching-theme, thereby profiting from
its organizing and structuring potential [31]
To increase comprehension, embed the metaphor into an environment the viewer is familiar, i.e. the au-

3.

Meaning creation with visual language principles.
What are the constituents of those operations and
how can they be used? In order to solve this problem, a closer examination of state-of-the-art works
of those fields is needed.
Classification system for visualizations over time
that contain all the stylistic options available, very
alike the system of verbal rhetorical figures. Locating a particular stylistic figure within such a
system should allow reading off the key properties
of that figure.
Such stylistic options should be tested empirically
on the key indicators of consumer research, such
as: a) persuasion (liking/attitude change), b) involvement with the message, c) recognition and
recall of the message. Without that link to user response, a typology is vulnerable to dismissal as
‘mere categorization’ – ‘the bane of rhetoric
through the ages’ [18]. Given such a link, rhetorical theory becomes testable – the hallmark of
modern scientific endeavor.

This paper presented one dimension of a potential classification system of visual language/rhetorics, namely
meaning operation. It also presented the key properties of
each meaning operation and applied to state-of-the-art examples in order to enhance understanding for the reader.
590
596

[19] Du Plessis, E. C. (2001) The Advertised Mind, London and
Philadelphia: Kogan Page.
[20] Jacobs, S. (2000) ‘Rhetoric and Dialectic from the Standpoint of Normative Pragmatics’, Argumentation 14, 261–286.
[21] Braun-Latour, K. A. & Zaltman, G. (2006) 'Memory Change:
An Intimate Measure of Persuasion', Journal of Advertising
Research 46(1), 57-72.
[22] Ketelaar, P.E., & Van Gisbergen, M.S. (2006) Openness in
Advertising. Occurrence and effects of open advertisements
in magazines. PhD Thesis, Radboud University, Nijmegen.
URL: webdoc.ubn.ru.nl/mono/k/ketelaar_p/openinad.pdf
[23] PBS Frontline (2005), House of Saud.
URL:
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/saud/
[24] LeDoux, J. E. (1996) The Emotional Brain. New York: Simon and Schuster.
[25] Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980) Metaphors we live by,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[26] Quintilianus, M. F. (1886) De institutione oratoria, Freytag.
[27] Meyers-Levy, J. & Malaviya, P. (1999) ‘Consumer’s
Processing of Persuasive Advertisements: An Integrative
Framework of Persuasion Theories’, Journal of Marketing
63(Special Issue), 45-60.
[28] Jarvis, J. (2008), The Crisis of Credit Visualized, URL
(25.03.2009): http://www.crisisofcredit.com
[29] Holyoak, K. & Hummel, J. (2001), ‘Toward an Understanding of Analogy within a Biological Symbol System’, in
Gentner, Holyoak & Kokinov, the Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 161–95.
[30] MacInnis, D.J. & Price L.L. (1987) ‘The role of imagery in
information processing: Review and extensions’, Journal of
Consumer Research 13(3), 473–491.
[31] Sopory, P., & Dillard, J. P. (2002) 'The Persuasive Effects of
Metaphor: A Meta-Analysis', Human Communication Research 28(3), 382-419.
[32] Manovich, L. (2000), Info-Aesthetics. URL (25.12.2007):
http://www.manovich.net/IA/.
[33] McGuire, W. J. (1985) ‘Attitudes and attitude change’, In G.
Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), Handbook of social psychology (3rd ed.), NY: Random House, 234-326.
[34] McGuire, W. J. (2000), ‘Standing on the Shoulders of Ancients: Consumer Research, Persuasion, and Figurative Language’, Journal of Consumer Research 27(6), 109-114.
[35] McQuarrie, E. F. & Mick, D. G. (1996) 'Figures of Rhetoric
in Advertising Language', Journal of Consumer Research
22(3), 424-437.
[36] McQuarrie, E. F. & Mick, D. G. (1999) 'Visual Rhetoric in
Advertising: Text-Interpretive, Experimental, and ReaderResponse Analyses', J. of Consumer Research 26 (6), 37-54.
[37] Sibbet, D. & Richards, K. (2008) ‘Visualizing TED2008 with
BigViz’. URL: blog.ted.com/2008/03/visualizing_ted.php
[38] Burle, S. (2007). The Kingdom, Universal Pictures. (Title
Sequence) URL (25.3.09): http://www.vimeo.com/3337561.
[39] Petty, R. E. & Cacioppo J. T. (1986) Communication and
Persuasion: Central and Peripheral Routes to Attitude
Change, N.Y: Springer.
[40] Eisenstein, S. (1949) Film Form. Harcourt Brace Publishers.
[41] Kuleshov, L. (1974) Kuleshov on Film, with an introduction
by Ronald Levaco. Berkeley: U. of California Press.

Based on empirical results from literature in related fields,
we formulated guidelines for most effective use in practice.
Based on our findings, we postulate that rhetorical figures
should be used strategically, because it requires substantial
effort by the designer to construct them. However the empirical confirmation of such claims is up to future research.

References
[1] Aristotle (1952). ‘Poetics’, in W. D. Ross (Ed.), The works of
Aristotle: Rhetorica, de rhetorica ad Alexandrum, poetica.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[2] Vande Moere, A, (2005) 'Form Follows Data: The Symbiosis
between Design & Information Visualization', in CAAD Futures 2005, Vienna, Austria, IRIS-ISIS Publ., 167-176.
[3] Lau A. and Vande Moere A. (2007), ‘Towards a Model of
Information Aesthetic Visualization’, IEEE International
Conference on Information Visualization (IV'07), IEEE,
Zürich, Switzerland, 87-92.
[4] Card, S, Mackinlay, J.D. & Shneiderman, B. (1999) Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think,
Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos.
[5] Calne, D. (2000) Within Reason: Rationality and Human
Behavior, New York: Vintage Books.
[6] Chen, C. (2005) Top 10 Unsolved Information Visualization
Problems, Computer Graphics & Applications 25(4), 12-16.
[7] Damasio, A. R. (1994) Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason,
and the Human Brain, New York: Putnam’s Son.
[8] Whaley, B. (1991) Toward a comprehensive model of analogy in persuasion: A test of the persuasive roles of analogy,
doctoral dissertation, Purdue University.
[9] Durand, J. (1987) ‘Rhetorical Figures in the Advertising
Image’, in Umiker-Sebeok Marketing and Semiotics: New
Directions in the Study of Signs for Sale, New York: Mouton
De Gruyter, 295–318.
[10] Forceville, C. (2006) ‘Non-verbal and multimodal metaphor
in a cognitivist framework: Agendas for research.’ In: Kristiansen, Achard, et al. (eds.), Cognitive Linguistics: Current
Applications and Future Perspectives. Berlin/New York:
Mouton de Gruyter, 379-402.
[11] Groupe Mu (1992). Traité du signe visuel. Pour une rhétorique de l'image. Paris: Seuil.
[12] Forceville, C., (1996) Pictorial Metaphor in Advertising,
London: Routledge.
[13] Fry, B. (2004) Computational Information Design, PhD Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology: MA.
[14] Gentner, D. (1983). ‘Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy’. Cognitive Science 7, 155–170.
[15] Gentner, D. & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure Mapping in
Analogy and Similarity, Am. Psychologist 52(1), 45-56.
[16] Van Enschot, R., Hoeken, H. & Van Mulken, M. (2005). ‘Is
more complex better? Verbo-pictoral rhetorical figures in
magazine advertisements’, in: Proceedings of the ICORIA,
Saarbrücken, DE, Vol.4 (2005), 82-89.
[17] Gore, A. A. (2006). An Inconvenient Truth. New York: Rodale. URL (25.12.2008): http://www.climatecrisis.net/
[18] Phillips, B. J. & McQuarrie, E. F. (2004). ‘Beyond visual
metaphor: A new typology of visual rhetoric in advertising’,
Marketing Theory 4(1/2), 113-136.
591
597

