2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Virtual reconstruction and real-time interactive visualization of the
Monumental area between Thien Mu Pagoda and Van Thanh Temple
in Hue City (UNESCO site), Vietnam
Issini G., Polverini D., Pugnaloni F.
Università Politecnica delle Marche – Dardus, 60131 Brecce Bianche St., Ancona (Italy)
{g.issini@univpm.it, dariopolverini@wp.pl, f.pugnaloni@univpm.it}
keeping, due to the quality and quantity of architectural
and landscape They testify the historic tradition of the
Vietnamese culture.
The different steps of the carried out research, were
composed by several activities: an accurate and
meticulous philological survey based on the collection of
documents from Vietnam and France, the registration of
oral testimonies such as those from old people of Hue
City, the study of satellite maps and historic papers in
order to understand how the area changed in the years,
the archaeological research through non invasive or
semi-invasive surveys, which helped following
archaeological excavations done in Hue Monuments
Conservation Centre, the survey of the original or
reconstructed emerging parts, the survey of the area, of
the landscape and of the botanic species; the formulation
of reconstruction hypothesis of the temples, totally or
partially destroyed and of the original appearance of the
whole historic urban landscape. The studied
archaeological area plays a key role for the urban
development of Hue City, because it is located next to
the dense city and it represents an integral historic
landscape. Consequentially the archaeological area
between T
hien Mu and Van Thanh area is one of the most
visited site in Hue City and the local administrators aim
to define an exploitation plan including new buildings
for tourist services (museum, shops, restaurants, etc.).
Moreover, the local authorities want to enhance the
knowledge of this sites, creating a dedicated section in
the local museum.
In this context the Italy-Vietnam joint staff studied
the original characters of the whole area. Moreover it
created a database of documentations and knowledge that
is the historic base to keep the visual and physical
integrity of the historic landscape integrated to new
contemporary architecture to be built in the future.

Abstract
This paper describes the work carried out from 2007
to 2008 by the research group of Dardus about the
virtual reconstruction and the communication of the
Temple area between Thien Mu and Van Thanh in Hue
City, Vietnam. This site is located in the West side of Hue
City, that is Unesco World Heritage site since 1993.
The first aim of this work was to realize a Virtual
Reconstruction of the temple area, including all the
historical building and the surrounding environment,
starting from different fonts and data.
The second aim was to define a system of friendly
and real-time application of the Virtual Environment, in
order to join it with other documents made by the
research activities, and to allow an organic
understanding of the historical architectures features.
The final product will be used in the city museum and it
will be published on the research website.

1. Introduction
Dardus Department of the Polytechnic University of
Marche in Ancona city, Italy, works on research
activities in Hue City, Vietnam on the field of study and
documenting historical architectural sites and
environment.
The research carried out by Dardus, together with
the Hue Monuments Conservation Centre and the
Department of Architecture of the Hue College of
Sciences, is finalized to document the architectural
quality of the cultural heritage of Hue City, through low
cost and quickly methods for survey, modeling and
visualization. The research activity here presented is
focused on the Temples area along river Huong of the
Hue City between Thien Mu Pagoda and Van Thanh
Temple.
This system is formed by three historical complexes:
the first is Thien Mu , the second is Vo Thanh and the
third is Van Thanh. Near this area there are two others
minor buildings: Cong Thanh temple and Khai Thanh
Temple. The three complexes of temples where we
worked are very important for the Vietnamese identity
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.101

567
561

was restored in recent times and preserve only few wood
elements in the inner space.

Figure 1 The research area
Figure 2 Plan of the Thien Mu Complex

3. Features of the Monumental Complexes

The second temple of the system is the Military
Shrine of Vo Thanh. It was constructed in the Minh
Mang year of 16(1835). Now it is completely destroyed.
According with the filological analysis made by the
research staff, it is possible to affirm that the surrounding
wall was made of bricks.
The main gate in the south side was quite similar to
the gate of temple of Literature (Van Mieu Mon). The
Chancel was the main house which was made by three
compartments and two wings and the forecourt was
made in five compartments. In front of the main house
two apartments were built, on the right and on the left
with five compartments each. All the compartments were
used to worship the renowned Chinese and Vietnamese
generals.
In the center of the temple were erected three big
monuments, in Vietnamese called “Bia”. These
monuments were put up in Minh Mang year of 17 (1836)
and Tu Duc year of 2 (1849). They were put on
rectangular stones meticulously carved. There were
stones to write about the brilliant feat of arms of the
generals of Nguyen Dynasty. After the Nguyen Dynasty
became extinct, the temple was left unused and damage
occurred.
Now only the stones and a short part of the wall
remain. Due to the importance of the temple, it was put
in the UNESCO list of International Heritage in Hue,
also it was acknowledged as National Heritage by
Vietnam Ministry of Culture and Information.

Hue City is a unique model of a monumental city
where the landscape, the architecture and the human
activities are strictly connected in an harmonious system.
It was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in
1993. The Thien Mu, Vo Thanh and Van Thanh
complexes of temples were oriented along the main axis
of the historic town and they were faced to the Huong
River side. The fusion of architecture, landscape, natural
elements and social and religious traditions is the added
value of the these monumental sites, according to the
Vietnamese feng-shui rules.
The chronology of all temples go back to XIX
century, with the exception of Thien Mu Pagoda that is
older. The monumental identity of Hue must be
attributed to Nguyen Dynasty. These Emperors reigned
from 1802 with Gia Long (the first Nguyen Emperor) to
1945, with the last Emperor Bao Dai, and erected almost
the totality of temples system of Hue. Their reign was
characterized by an important influence of Chinese
culture on Vietnam that is evident on architectural style
of the three complexes.
Thien Mu was dedicated to Buddhist worship. By
historical sources, we know that the original structure of
the temple was erected in 1601. All the monument,
during the centuries, was submitted to restoration
activities and adding new architectural elements.
The whole area of pagoda is bordered by a wall and
includes buildings harmonized with gardens within.
Along the main axis, passing the access gate we find the
Phuoc Duyen Tower, erected in 1844 by King Thieu Tri
and recently restored. It’s octagonal shaped base, 21
meters in height divided in seven floors. It is surrounded
by four stele-houses dedicated to King Thieu Tri and his
wife on base of historic sources and inscriptions in
Chinese characters.
Ahead there is the Dai Mon gate. This gate is the
principal one within the bordering wall of Thien Mu
area. It’s characterized by a triple entrance joined with a
minor building at right and another on the left. Also in
this case there are decorative dragons on the corners of
roof. After the gate there is a large open area surrounded
by a wooded garden. In this zone the floor show a walk
brick-made joined with garden-made zones. In axis with
the gate there are the three main temples. All of them

Figure 3 View of Vo Mieu Archaeological site

562
568

2. Research objectives
The overall objectives that the present work intends to
achieve:
•

•
•

The implementation of a instrument aimed to
help the local policies of urban planning and
management of cultural sites.
To promote the worldwide knowledge of the
Temples sites, through the use of the web;
To rebuild the original image of the sites, in
order to keep the Vietnamese cultural identity
and its transmission to the next generations.

The specific objectives are the followings:
•

Figure 4 Plan of the Vo Mieu Complex
The third examined Temple complex is Van Thanh.
Built by Nguyen Dynasty in XIX century, was dedicated
to important people of Confucian philosophy. Also this
temple rise on the right side of the road and was linked
with the river by a staircase partially exposed by
archaeological excavations of HMCC. The general state
of preservation is quiet good, even if the original wood
structures are lost and substituted with restorations in
piling. The templar area was bordered by a wall that is
preserved in some traits. A staircase bring to the first
gate, after that there is an open space with another
staircase to the second gate. Both gates are monumental
with decorative dragons on the roof and a triple access.
After second gate we find a large garden passed through
by a brick made walk starting from the gate. This walk is
crossed by another brick made walk starting from two
secondary gates in each long side of border wall, forming
a typical T-shaped walk. The most interesting element of
this temple is the presence, side by side T-shaped walk
and behind stele houses, of basements not yet excavated
but partially visible on the ground. Two basements are
visible on each side of stele rows, and another bigger one
behind stele houses near the short side of border wall.

•

•

To realize the 3D reconstruction of the whole
area. This work has to be based on the direct
survey for the existing parts and on the
hypothesis of visual reconstruction, made by the
historian of the research staff, for the destroyed
or damaged parts. The reconstruction hypothesis
have to study the architectural shapes, the
structural and non-structural materials, the
relationship
between
architecture
and
surrounding environment, the vegetation and the
urban ways. The final products has to enhance
the contents of the Hue Museum, and it has to
be also used by web based systems.
Allow the visual preview of the new
interventions’ impact on the architectures and
signs of the territory in order to verify the
compatibility with the consolidated image of the
monumental complex and the surrounding
context. To acquire through the interventions’
simulation, a feedback from the city inhabitants,
from the historians, from landscape architects
and therefore share with them the planning and
valorization intervention on the area;
To define and to experiment a web-based and
friendly visualization system to use the virtual
environment of the Temples area as instruments
for a better understanding of other contents,
made by other research field. This system of
assisted visit will be also used in the Hue
Musuem.

3. Modeling process
The work started with the implementation of the
Virtual Environment as it should have been in the past
and as it appears now. To the models, data and
information collected in the previous survey analysis
were added, such as geographic information,
morphology of the land, the relationship between the
water system and the temples, Huong River and
obviously the temples in the actual state of conservation,

Figure 5 Dai Thanh Gate, Van Mieu Complex
563
569

and the signs useful to determine the presence of temples
partially or totally destroyed such as Vo Thanh and Van
Thanh temples. The modeling, even integrating different
data typologies, was developed in limited dimensions,
because of the interventions to be carried out in the next
phases. For this reason OpenSource software as Blender
were used because particularly adapt to implement
flexible works for the 3D modeling based on Linux, a pre
rendering of the texture was carried out in order to allow
a likely visual perception, and in the same time in order
to make the model not so heavy and the rendering in real
time of the lights and shadows processing. This decision
was considered proper to the visualization territorial
scale of the Thien Mu Historic Urban Landscape. To
model the historical building and the boundary walls of
the three Temple complexes we used two different kind
of fonts: the first consists in the direct survey of the
existing buildings or part of them. We included in this
group just the original or congruent with the original
ones. The surveys have been realized using different
methods: The first is the prompt photogrammetry. The
system of prompt photogrammetry has proved itself
specially useful as it is based on some certain measures
and on digital photographs taken in the appropriate way.
We applied this method for the survey of the monument
complex of Thien Mu Pagoda, composed by the Main
Pagoda, the Stele houses, the Buddist Temples along the
main axis and the service buildings in the sides of the
monumental area, and in the existing part of Van Than
Temple (main and secondary gates). Moreover we
obtained a quite good two-dimensional survey of
buildings, complete with the representation of crack
status and local damage status of masonries. The
research team used also more detailed survey methods.
The scanner laser 3d was used for the buildings part
where we found particular richness and irregularity of
shapes. But we used also more classic instruments as the
total station or the gps receivers to acquire general
measurements of the area. The second kind of fonts
consisted on historical and archive documents and notinvasive investigations. These documents are composed
by drawing, historic pictures, texts, ancient and new
cartographies, etc. The patient work of combining of
different
documents and the philological analysis
allowed to propose an hypothesis on the original status of
the lost Temples. The hypothesis concerned the shape
and proportion of the buildings, the materials adopted,
the Temple complexes location in the natural
environment and landscape and the geographic
directions. During this work the data obtained by geo
radar and datafusion system were very useful. They
shown the size and position of the underground basement
s and the walls of the lost temples, avoiding the
archeological excavations.
The data fusion investigations technique has been
mainly used on the Van Than sites, because the ground
hasn’t been transformed by the river floods. It is based
on high resolution satellite view (VHR, Very High
Resolution) as Ikonos and Quick Bird, that provide the
aerial covering of all the world. The satellite pictures are

characterized by a resolution ables to allow the visibility
of all the territory. Through the optimization of the
visible and panchromatic infrared bands, it’s possible to
join the advantages of the thermic band and visible band.
In this way we supposed some hypothesis and then we
verified them through local inspections on the site. It has
been possible to locate ruins of totally superficial lost
architectures. Through this method we found the traces
of the central temple (Literature temple) and of the
secondary buildings. Moreover we obtained data about
the wooden structure grids of the temples and the
constructive system, thanks to the knowledge of the
frame model and dimension. The Ground Penetrating
Radar investigation (G.P.R.): The georadar investigation
has been realized on the Vo Thanh site. In fact this site
undergoes each year many flooding events, due to the
nearness with the Huong River and the low level of land,
compared to the river. The investigation has been
realized to survey the buried part of the temples
foundations and basement. The research staff realized
many prospecting, in according to orthogonal acquisition
grids, one meter long wheelbase, to survey hypothetical
linear target, but with small dimensions. By the
elaborated radargrams many meaningful reflections were
visible. They allowed to suppose the originally position
and dimensional hypothesis of the building objects into
the monumental complex.To define the geometry of the
volumes that compose the templar area, we used the .obj
file type. Each .obj file is linked to a .mtl library that
gives information about illumination, color and
texture.The mapping process is done using “bake render”
system: every mesh that compose the model is rendered
alone with Blender internal rendering engine. At the
same time the mesh is unwrapped and placed ideally in a
2d plane. The render result is, in this particular situation,
a 2D image where we can recognize every face of the
mesh. This image is attribuited to the mesh using the
coordinate of every vertex obtained in the unwrapping
process.In this way, we can obtain a good photorealism
for the entire scene due to the shadow and the Ambient
Occlusion. So we decided to deactivate all the
illumination feature in the .mtl file: every texture has in
itself the result of raytracing process from the same
illumination system. Obviously we lose the real -time
shadowing features, but they aren't fundamental in the
architectural exploration

Figure 6 Bake render of a Vo Mieu mesh
564
570

Figure 9 Overview of virtual environment

5. Visualization system
The aim of the Virtual Reality (VR) is to create,
through computer, worlds and objects which represent
the digital transposition of real or imaginary
environments. Moreover, it studies the methods of
interaction between the user and the real world such as
navigation systems, instruments of the 3D vision, tool for
the virtual object manipulation etc.
The simulation is completely perceived by our
senses, in particular sight, then sense of hearing and
touch. One of the main problem with the immersion in
the virtual reality is the interaction with the navigation
system: an interface with a keyboard, joystick or mouse
is always needed. The virtual reality exploration uses
manual devices which transforms the actions: for
example typing on a keyboard the user will go forward,
or a mouse rotation makes the user rotating. These
actions even if are easy to make and to learn, represent
an obstacle for a beginner user who is at his/her first
experience with virtual reality.
In case of immersive virtual reality, this problem is
overcome because user’s movements in the real world
are similar to those in the virtual one: for example with
the use of HMD (Helmet Mounted Display) each head
movement changes the point of view of the user both in
the real and virtual world. A particular case of
immersive virtual reality is the Augmented Reality (AR)
which deals with the combination of real-world and
computer-generated data. The perception of the
environment is "augmented" by the addition of
computer-generated graphics which gives further
information on the real environment. The virtual reality
simulates 3D environments where the user can move and
act. With the AR the problem is different: the real
environment is integrated with computer-generated
images which are mixed and overlapped to real-world
elements. Augmented Reality is a natural way to explore
3D objects because it brings the virtual object in the real
environment instead of teaching the user how to navigate
in a computer. Using a computer and simple tools for
video acquisition, it is possible to see in the same time
the real world and the virtual world elements. It is
possible to move inside the environment, see the model,
the animation from different point of view and it creates
automatically the alignment between real and virtual
world.

Figure 7 Van Mieu mapping using Blender
A specific work has been carried out to model the
landscape around the templar sites and to define the
original vegetation. First of all the earth has been
modeled starting from the Quickbird satellite view of the
area. It provides 3D points in the knots of a 90x90 meters
grid. After this preliminary row model, we deepened the
model through the overlapping of a landscape survey
made by gps receiver and a survey made by the local
geographic institute in 1997. The interesting aspect of the
landscape model is that it is extremely changeable, due
the action of Huong River floods. During the rain season
the Huong River moulds the land each year. Thanks to
the excavation carried out in 2007, we discovered the
level of the earth in the age of Temples building was
160 centimeters lower then now, due the continuous
overlaying of mud layers. So, the earth 3D model
considered this phenomenon in order to propose a likely
land shape. Concerning the vegetation, we gathered data
about the local vegetables species, provided by the Hue
College of Agriculture. Particularly, we knew which is
the species who raise along the river embankments and
in the hill close to the river.

Figure 8 Vo Mieu Virtual Reconstruction

565
571

In the case of the Temple complex of Thien Mu,
Van Thanh and Vo Thanh, our idea is to use the
augmented reality methods to link the visualization of
the Virtual Environment with the visualization of real
things (object or places), creating a mutual aid in the
contents understanding. Together they allow an organic
understanding of the architecture contents. The AR
systems aid to increase the quality and quantity of
information we can obtain from traditional documents,
like drawing, pictures etc.
The application we realized starts from the
researches carried out by the Human Interface
Technology Laboratory New Zealand (HIT Lab NZ),
hosted at the University of Canterbury, New Zealand.
It can be applied to the object and panel of a
Museum, but also for the distance use by internet. In this
case the guest can simply print some papers and, through
the on-line use of the AR system, the real drawing are
improved with virtual interactive information.

In this way the user perceive a map enriched with
information of the 3D volumetry of the buildings’
architecture.

Figure 10 Example of AR architecture
exploration

Figure 12 The marker in the real world and the
Temple in the virtual world

The idea is to create a prototype of a flexible,
interactive system which could allow users from all over
the world to explore the volumes and spatial qualities of
the area. For this reason it was decided to use
technologies easy to be found: AR systems normally
requires sophisticated video devices but in this case a
simple computer and a webcam or a mobile phone
camera were used. In particular mobile phones are very
useful because thanks to Bluetooth technology, the
images are transferred without cables: the AR tracking is
very sensitive to shadows therefore it is important to
move freely and without objects creating other shadows
(for example cables). Fiduciary markers for example, a
simple paper with b/w patterns, are necessary in each
building because appearing in the image produced,
represent a point of reference or a measure. The object
will be put on the fiduciary marker which, for better
visualization of the archaeological park, are positioned in
a scale 1:1000 on the aerophotogrammetric of the area.

The technology allows to have the necessary
fiduciary markers and in the same map it is possible to
visualize the whole project of the archaeological park.
The limit is given by the hardware ram in fact a correct
visualization needs high memory to store the data. The
markers are simply leaned on specific positions above
the drawings; in this way they can be substituted and it is
easy to move from the historical reconstruction to the
actual state. Moreover each single fiduciary marker can
be withdrawn in order to study the architecture in a
closer and detailed way. Therefore in order to explore the
area, it is sufficient to move the tool of video acquisition
over the map or move the fiduciary marker in front of it.
In both cases the fluidity of the exploration depends on
the video acquisition quality: a major number of frame
for second of video acquisition, assures a better
navigation. The system quality depends also on the
quality of lighting: a good lighting without light points
allows a optimal focus even with common webcam

Figure 11 Sample of fiduciary marker

566
572

which are very flexible in terms of exposure. The
software used in the implementation of the Virtual
Reality are open-source:
• software: Debian, GNU/Linux
• modeling software: Blender and engine
• Image processing software: The GIMP
• Tracking software: ARToolkit
• 3D real-time software: OpenSceneGraph.

capacities
for the architecture representation and
communication.

References
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

Figure 13 Vo Mieu and Van Mieu complexes
on AR

7. Conclusions
The work we carried out can be considered the
appropriate conclusion of a long research process started
four years ago on the Templar area along Huong River,
between Thien Mu and Van Thanh. In fact, the 3D
Virtual Environment is able to collect many results of the
research activities. These results were developed on
different scientific fields who need a common way of
communication. The more interesting outlook of this
work will be the possibility to overlapping of different
information layers in the same Virtual Environment and
and between reality and Virtual Environment, and in the
same time it has to be interactively on line visited.
Moreover, the VR has to allow different levels of detail,
according to the user interests and skills. The most
famous product on this field is Google Earth, but for the
study and communication of cultural heritage
documentations this instrument doesn’t allow yet to
communicate in real-time the large quantity and quality
of information available. So, it’s important to experiment
new instruments and methods in order to exploit the web
567
573

GALLUZZI P., VALENTINO P.A.. I formati della
memoria. Beni culturali e nuove tecnologie alle soglie
del terzo Millennio. Giunti, Firenze 1997.
MIGLIARI R., Frontiere del Rilievo: dalla matita allo
scanner 3D. Gangemi, Roma 2001.
GAIANI M.. Metodi di prototipazione digitale e
visualizzazione per il disegno industriale, l’architettura
degli interni e i beni culturali. Polidesign, Milano 2003.
VELTMAN K.H. Hypermedia: New Approaches to
Cultural Heritage and Knowledge, The Global Village
Conference. GIVE, Vienna 1997.
BRAIL R., KLOSTERMAN R., Planning support
systems: integrating geographic systems, models and
visualization tools. Esri press, Redlands 2001.
AA.VV. E-arcom. Sistemi Informativi per l’Architettura.
Atti del convegno. Alinea Editrice, Firenze 2007.
HAUBER, J. Ph.D. thesis, Computer Science and
Software Engineering, University of Canterbury.
Supervised by Dr Andy Cockburn, Dr Mark Billinghurst,
Dr Holger Regenbrecht and Dr Dean Owen.
LEE, M., GREEN, R., BILLINGHURST, M. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference Image
and Vision Computing New Zealand, Lincoln,
Christchurch, New Zealand. November 26-28 2008.

