2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Using Ellimaps to Visualize Business Data in a Local Administration
Benoît Otjacques, Maël Cornil, Fernand Feltz
Centre de Recherche Public – Gabriel Lippmann, Luxembourg
{otjacque, cornil, feltz}@lippmann.lu
Abstract

2. Problem Statement

While software tools for visual analysis of data are
nowadays commonly used in private companies or large
public administration, they are much less present in
small cities. The paper describes an innovative system to
visualize data in a mid-sized city aiming to support the
optimization of the human resources management. On
the basis of recent findings in information visualization,
an innovative way to represent hierarchical data has
been implemented into this tool. This technique called
ellimap use nested ellipses of various sizes to build
graphics.

This paper relates to a real project that we have
undertaken with a mid-sized city of about 40,000
inhabitants. At the time of the project the city employed
around 700 people. The political and administrative
decision makers of the city have started a process for
improving the management of Human Resources (HR).
They were looking at a new information system to
monitor critical HR data and help them in their decision
process. For instance, a recurrent high volume of
overtime was observed in the last years and the managers
wanted complementary information to determine the
origin of this situation and then take the appropriate
measures (e.g. hiring new people, reorganizing the
services or modifying some political decisions).
The data to be handled were heterogeneous and
concerned various HR-related aspects like the
assignment of employees to the organizational entities,
the gender issue or the overtime level. The basic issue to
be solved was to propose a software solution that can
help to rapidly identify some specific items in a dataset
considering some general management rules. For
instance, it should easily support the identification of the
overtime level in each department or service of the city.
Another question concerned the demographic profile of
each service (i.e. gender, nationality, age of the
employees). Among others, the solution was also asked
to make clear the distribution of the various contractual
statuses in the city administration.
Considering the power of visual representation to
explore data, the use of interactive graphics appeared to
be an appropriate solution to deal with this issue. The
information systems department of the city was open to
an innovative solution provided that the visualizations
remain simple, informative and intuitive. In addition,
they asked us to propose a homogeneous presentation of
data whatever the semantics in order to ease the learning
process for the users.
In the information visualization discipline, it is often
claimed that analyzing the data is one of the first steps of
the design process of a new system. Therefore, we
explored the data we have to display. After examination
it appeared that the hierarchical structure of the city
administration was a preeminent property of most of the
datasets. Moreover, when the organizational structure

Keywords--- Information Visualization, Ellimaps,
Business Data, Local Administration

1. Introduction
In public administration a trend towards more
efficient management is under way for several years. The
requirements in terms of reducing cognitive load are
similar to those encountered in private sector. Even at
local level the politicians and the administration
executives need some tools to better understand their
business and the current state of decisive variables. From
this perspective using the most powerful perceptual
channels of the human being appears to be a reasonable
strategy. Research in cognitive psychology has shown
that vision is by far the most important input channel for
the human brain. It is therefore justified to investigate
how to use advanced and interactive graphics to get
knowledge from administrative data. This paper
discusses such an undertaking.
It is structured as follows. After the introduction our
business case is described and the underlying problem is
identified (section 2). Next we examine the state of the
art about business data visualization and hierarchy
visualization (section 3). In the fourth section, we
describe a relatively new visualization technique that we
refined to be used in our case. Next the software
application implementing those theoretical concepts is
presented (section 5). Finally some conclusions are
drawn and some perspectives for further works are
pointed out.

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.92

235

Business data is an important field of investigation
for researchers in information visualization. In this
domain financial data has probably been the most
thoroughly studied. For instance, Chuah [5] designed
some visualization techniques for Venture Capitalists to
monitor the startups market. Senator et al. [20] proposed
to visualize in three dimensions (3D) some information
about the stock market activity in order to support the
regulatory analysts in discovering anomalies on the
NASDAQ market. Schreck et al. [19] proposed to
represent the evolution of financial data as trajectories in
the 2D space (risk, return). Nevertheless, other types of
business data have also been under study, which is
illustrated by the following examples. Turetken and
Schuff [22] investigated the influence of using fisheye
views on the understanding of data flow diagrams
modelling business processes. Woo et al. [26] built 2D
and 3D views of customers’ properties in order to define
a retention strategy. Parush et al. [17] studied the
influence of the visualization type on the performance of
users of Enterprise Resource Planning systems.
To the limit of our knowledge, visualizing human
resources data in the case of the public sector has been
less studied in the literature. However, it is a critical
factor for optimizing the operations of an organization
like a city administration.

was not present in the data, it was still possible and
meaningful to structure them as a hierarchy. For
instance, one of the datasets concerned the people
employed in the city successively broken down
according to the job status (e.g. civil servant, private
employee or worker), the age bracket, the nationality and
the gender. In addition to the hierarchical structure, it
was also important to visualize some quantitative and
qualitative properties of the items (i.e. the nodes of the
hierarchy). For instance, it was important not only to
show the organizational structure of the city
administration but also the number of people allocated to
each service. As another example, the overtime graphics
should highlight if the extra work was carried out during
a week-end, a public holiday or a normal workday.

3. State of Art
3.1. Visualization and Business Data
Tufte [21] reports that the first known time-series
representing economic data was published in Playfair’s
remarkable book: The Commercial and Political Atlas
(1786). However, before the apparition of computers the
design of non trivial graphics was often low, difficult and
costly especially because they were manually drawn. In
addition, as they were printed on paper they did not offer
advanced interactivity. Nowadays graphics have become
an intrinsic part of any professional software for business
data analysis.
From a global viewpoint the fundamental purpose of
graphics is to support the discovery of knowledge from a
dataset. Keim et al. [7] refine this global objective in
three major goals: presentation of data, confirmatory
analysis and exploratory analysis. Presentation and
confirmatory analysis have been the motivation of
graphics design for decades. Using visualization for
interactive exploratory analysis is more recent. The
growing interest it has aroused in the last years has been
notably permitted by the advances in computer science
(e.g. increasing power of processors, advanced display
technologies, theoretical advances in Human-Computer
Interaction).
This new trend relies on the basic idea that instead
of combining the computer and human processing of the
data in a fixed sequential process, it is more efficient to
use their specific strengths in an interactive process.
Merino et al. [11] explain that for data exploration to be
more effective, it is important to include the human
being in the data exploration process and combine their
flexibility, creativity, and general knowledge to enable a
better interpretation and evaluation of the probably
plentiful results, and hence, take the most out of them.
Keim [6] points out that visual data exploration can more
easily deal with highly non-homogeneous and noisy data
than automatic data mining techniques. He also adds that
‘visual data exploration is intuitive and requires no
understanding of complex mathematical or statistical
algorithms or parameters’.

2.2. Visualization of Hierarchies
The dataset structure is an important parameter in
information visualization when the choice of graphics
has to be made. For instance, representing time series
requires making appear the temporality of the dataset
whereas designing a graph often demands to highlight
clusters of elements or significant flows among them. As
previously discussed we have realized that a single
generic model could be used in our case: a hierarchical
structure. Indeed, the organization of the services in the
city was hierarchical and all other data (e.g. overtime
data) could simply be modelled as hierarchies.
Focusing on hierarchies presents another advantage.
Hierarchies are a very common way of modelling other
types of business data. For instance, many companies are
structured as a hierarchy on geographical basis,
according to business functions or to product lines. Our
research work as well as our software tool has then a
larger potential than the specific case under study.
Considering their importance hierarchical datasets
have been largely studied by the researchers in
information visualization. Surprisingly most of the
techniques can be classified in only two groups
according to the fundamental cognitive laws they rely on.
The most common approach to visualize hierarchies
is based on the nodes-links paradigm in which the
elements (nodes) are represented by punctual objects
(points, icons…) and the relationships by links (straights,
curves…). In the Gestalt theory of perception it relies on
the ‘connectivity law’ (also referred to as
‘connectedness’) saying that drawing lines among the
items of a set is a powerful mean to show that some
236

been specifically investigated so far and should at this
stage be considered as a design choice based on the
Gestalt principles.

relationships exist among them [16] . This paradigm can
be illustrated by the numerous versions of trees. This
class of techniques highlights well the structure of the
dataset and makes it very easy to understand.
Unfortunately, their scalability is relatively poor. Indeed,
they inefficiently use the display space and this feature
becomes increasingly critical as the dataset grows (cf. [4]
p. 149). Their readability rapidly declines with the
number of elements to be displayed. Various original
strategies have been proposed to overcome these
weaknesses such as using hyperbolic geometry [8] or
using patterns based on circles [10] .
The second set of hierarchy visualization techniques
relies on the ‘common region law’ which also has some
relationships with the ‘closure law’. We retain from these
results of cognitive psychology that ‘wherever a closed
contour is seen, there is a very strong perceptual
tendency to divide regions of space into “inside” and
“outside” the contour’. These laws explain the success
of Venn and Euler diagrams to represent a set of
elements (cf. [25] pp. 194-196). Shneiderman’s treemaps
[18] are a well-known example of this paradigm for
visualizing hierarchies. Treemaps offer the advantage to
map the weight of the nodes to the area of some
recursively included rectangles, which allows the user to
rapidly identify the most weighted ones. In addition, in
this space-filling method the display space remains
constant whatever the size of the dataset. Unfortunately,
treemaps must also acknowledge some limitations. Lee
et al. [9] argue that ‘treemaps are appropriate when
showing the attribute value distributions is more
important than showing the graph structure’. In order to
tackle the issues associated to the initial treemap
algorithm, several researchers have proposed new
strategies to dimension and position the nested rectangles
(e.g. [2] , [27] ). The closure-based strategy has also been
used with other geometrical shapes than rectangles. The
bubblemaps rely on shapes approximating common ones
like rectangles or circles [1] ; the bubble trees use circles
[3] and the ellimaps use ellipses (cf. [12] , [13] ). As an
example of another strategy, Vliegen et al. [24] applied
geometrical distortions to generate treemap-based
graphics that are similar to common business graphics
(e.g. pie chart).

Figure 1: Initial algo. ellimap (2700 nodes)
Unfortunately, the initial ellimap algorithm suffers
from a major drawback concerning the occupation of the
display space. From this perspective, the ellimaps are
less efficient than real space filling methods like
treemaps. However, a recent algorithm called Combined
Geometrical Distortions – CDG [14] has lowered this
inconvenience. For illustrative purposes, the comparison
of Figure 1 and Figure 2 where the same dataset of 2700
nodes is displayed clearly shows that CGD better
occupies the display space than the initial algorithm and
therefore better supports scalability.

Figure 2: CGD Algo. ellimap (2700 nodes)
The ellimaps have been significantly less studied
(and progessively improved) than treemaps. However,
we think that they are worth being further investigated,
developed and applied to real use cases. Studying
whether and how ellimaps can be used to visualize
business data for the decision makers of a local
administration makes sense in this context.

4. Ellimaps
Considering their advantages in terms of space
occupation we have chosen to explore how to use a
visualization technique based on enclosure to represent
HR data.
Among the various techniques proposed in the
literature, we selected the ellimaps. This choice was
justified by some experimental findings [13] showing
that ellimaps are efficient to support the perception of the
dataset structure while still having satisfying results
concerning the evaluation of the relative weight of the
nodes. It is hypothesized that the ellimaps performance
in terms of structure perception might be linked to its use
of curves instead of straights but this element has not

5. VISCOM software
The global architecture of the new system (called
VISCOM) is illustrated by the Figure 3. A specific
database (called Statistics database) is used to store the
normalized data used to generate the views. This
database is automatically alimented by data coming from
the databases storing information for the various
information systems of the city. For instance, at the end
237

highest values placed in the centre. The last option is
quite original. When the largest values are placed in the
middle (like in Figure 4 and Figure 5), they are in the
central zone of attention of the user. Symmetrically the
lowest values are put in the periphery and do not disturb
the user exploration of the dataset. This option is useful
for the users concerned about the most important items
(which is often the case of decision makers). However, it
is less appropriate if the user is equally interested in any
node whatever its size.
VISCOM limits the selection of the dataset to be
displayed to the validated data stored in the Statistics
database. In fact, we simply disabled the ‘open XML file’
feature. This decision has been taken to prevent the users
to display unofficial data. Indeed, the VISCOM generic
design allows building graphics from any XML
document. Nevertheless, this feature also means that
biased datasets can potentially be visualized, which must
be avoided in our context.

of each month the related volume of overtime is known
for each service and is inserted into the Statistics
database.

Figure 3: VISCOM Architecture
The Statistics database is queried by VISCOM
which request XML documents. The XML format has
been chosen because it is a well known standard in
current information systems and because it perfectly fits
the hierarchical structure of the datasets to be visualized.
The numerical and categorical properties of the nodes are
stored in XML attributes and the visualization software
allows mapping the value of those properties to the value
of a visual variable. For instance, the ellipse size can be
mapped to the node weight (e.g. number of employees)
and the grow rate of this value since a given reference
period can be mapped to a colors scale.

Figure 5: Distribution of city workforce
In the example of Figure 5, the dataset concerns the
distribution of the city workforce broken down by
contractual status, then by services and sub-services. The
ellimap view shows how the people are organized. For
instance the Landscape service is one of the most
important employers of workers but is small in terms of
civil servants. As another example it is easy to see that
the Conservatoire of music mainly occupies private
employees and civil servants. The most important
services for each category of employees clearly appear
on the graphics as well as the global structure of the city
administration.
Color is acknowledged as an important visual
variable. VISCOM obviously integrates several coloring
strategies. In the example of Figure 6, the color of the
deepest ellipses (the level of depth can be dynamically
modified and the coloring adapts itself accordingly) is
mapped to the growth of the node weight. In this case it
represents the number of employees. The ellimap view
shows that, for instance, the theatre service is large and
has decreased since last year (-14%), that the water pipes
service is smaller and has reasonably increased (+16%)

Figure 4: VISCOM main user interface
The main user interface of VISCOM is presented in
the Figure 4. It is composed of three main parts: the
upper panel contains the controls, the bottom left panel
shows a tree view of the dataset and the bottom right
panel visualizes the dataset with an ellimap. Both views
are synchronized which means that the user can navigate
in the hierarchy with his preferred one at any moment.
We can also mention that a slider allows the user to
dynamically modify the depth level to which the
hierarchy is displayed. He can then progressively
discover the dataset for identifying the points of interest
and navigate to the critical sub-hierarchies from his
personal viewpoint.
According to his preferences, the user can also
activate a sorting option: no sort, descending order,
238

allocated to an organizational level is mentioned for the
smallest sub-services. VISCOM aggregate those data for
computing the value for the upper levels of the hierarchy.
According to the semantics of the data several mode of
aggregation can make sense: sum, mean, maximum,
minimum. The Statistics database provides the
information about the aggregation modes allowed for
each dataset. For instance, if the user wants to analyze
the evolution of the workforce, a mean value is
appropriate. If he/she explores the cost of overtime for
the city budget the sum should rather be applied. When
several aggregation modes are allowed, the control panel
automatically displays them as radio buttons (behavior
similar to Figure 7).

and that the swimming pool service is small and has
significantly increased (+60%).

Theatre:
grow = -14 %

Swimming pool:
grow = +60 %

Water pipes service:
grow = +16 %

Figure 6: VISCOM coloring feature
Colors can also be used to convey semantics about
the value of a categorical property of the nodes (e.g. blue
for workers, yellow for civil servants, red for private
employees).

Figure 8: Abnormal values
In some cases, abnormal values are observed in the
datasets. For instance, the historical values are not
known for some nodes and this prevents to compute the
growth value. In this case, the nodes are painted with a
special color (e.g. yellow in Figure 8) that does not
belong to the color scale (e.g. red – green). Another case
is possible. Some data serving as input in the aggregation
process are missing for a given node. Nevertheless the
aggregation process can be carried out and its result can
be used to draw the corresponding ellipse. For instance,
the mean on a six months period was computed only
with the four available values. In this case, the border of
the ellipse is displayed as a dotted line (cf. Figure 8).
Both features aim to draw the user attention to the
presence of abnormal data in the displayed view.
Finally the VISCOM application also provides
reporting features. Any view can be used to generate a
report in PDF or HMTL format including both the
graphics and the underlying table of numbers. Moreover
any graphics can be exported as a file in an image format
(e.g. GIF) to be imported in a presentation or a report.

Figure 7: Automatic detection of attributes
VISCOM also automatically adapts the control panel
according to the dataset to be displayed. It is especially
notable for some specific attributes of the nodes as
illustrated by Figure 7. The number of employees in the
city administration can be expressed in four different
units: number of individuals, full-time workforce, parttime workforce and full-time equivalent workforce.
Similarly the overtime data can be expressed in hours or
in monetary units. Those properties are node attributes in
the XML data file. Depending on the available attributes
and on the configuration settings of the application,
VISCOM can adapt the control panel in order to allow
the user to immediately switch among the various
options.
VISCOM also permit to choose the computation
mode of attribute values for the intermediate levels of the
hierarchy. In fact, the XML documents contain the
values of the attributes at the deepest level where they
are available. For instance, the number of people

6. Conclusions
Efficient management is equally important in the
public sector and in the private business. However, while
the monitoring of activities and critical decision variables
has become very common in the latter, much effort is
still needed to diffuse this attitude in the former. If the
239

[12] Otjacques B., Noirhomme M., Gobert X., Collin P. and
Feltz F. Visualizing the activity of a web-based
collaborative platform, 11th International Conference on
Information Visualization (IV 2007), 4-6 July 2007,
Zurich, Switzerland, IEEE.
[13] Otjacques, B., Collin, P., Feltz, F. and Noirhomme, M.
Ellimaps : une technique basée sur la loi d’inclusion pour
représenter des hiérarchies avec nœuds pondérés. Revue
d’Intelligence Artificielle, Hermes – Lavoisier, 22(3-4),
2008, 303-330.
[14] Otjacques, B., Cornil, M., Noirhomme, M. and Feltz, F.
CGD – A new Algorithm to Optimize Space Occupation
in Ellimaps, 12th IFIP TC13 Conference in HumanComputer Interaction (Interact 2009), 24-28 August
2009, Uppsala, Sweden, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer.
[15] Palmer S.E. (1992). Common Region: A new principle
of perceptual grouping. Cognitive Psychology. 24, 1992,
436-447.
[16] Palmer S.E. and Rock I. Rethinking perceptual
organization: The role of uniform connectedness.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 1(1), 1994, 29-55.
[17] Parush A., Hod A. and Shtub A. Impact of visualization
type and contextual factors on performance with
enterprise resource planning systems. Computers &
Industrial Engineering 52, 2007, 133-142.
[18] Shneiderman, B. Tree Visualization with Tree-Maps: 2-d
Space-Filling Approach. ACM Transactions on
Graphics, 11(1), 1992, 92-99.
[19] Schreck T., Tekusova T., Kohlhammer J. and Fellner D.
Trajectory-Based Visual Analysis of Large Financial
Time Series Data. SIGKDD Explorations, Vol. 9(2),
December 2007, 30-37.
[20] Senator T. E., Goldberg H.G., Shyr P., Bennett s.,
Donoho S. and Lovell C. The NASD Regulation
Advanced Detection System: Integrating Data Mining
and Visualization for Break Detection in the NASDAQ
Stock Market. In Fayyad U., Grinstein G., Wierse A.
(Eds): Information Visualization in Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, Morgan Kaufmann, 2002, 363371.
[21] Tufte E. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information,
2nd Edition. Graphics Press, Cheshire, Connecticut, 2001.
[22] Turetken O. and Schuff D. The impact of context-aware
fisheye models on understanding business processes: an
empirical study of data flow diagrams. Information &
Management, 44, 2007, 40-52.
[23] Unwin A., Theus M. and Härdle W.K. Exploratory
Graphics of a Financial Dataset. In Chen, C., Härdle W.,
Unwin (Eds): Handbook of Data Visualization, Springer,
2008, 831–852.
[24] Vliegen, R, van Wijk, J.J. and van der Linden, E.
Visualizing Business Data with Generalized Treemaps.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 12(5), 2006, 789-796.
[25] Ware C. Information Visualization, Perception for
Design, 2nd Edition. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco,
California, 2004.
[26] Woo J.Y., Bae S.M. and Park S.C. Visualization method
for customer targeting using customer map. Expert
Systems with Applications 28, 2005 763-772.
[27] Wood J. and Dykes J. Spatially Ordered Treemaps. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
14(6), 2008, 1348-1355.

data analytics tools have started to be used at the state
level or in large cities, they are significantly less frequent
in local administration. This paper relates an initiative
taken by a relatively small city to improve human
resources management. To help the decision makers
facing this issue an innovative application called
VISCOM has been implemented. Despite the fact that it
is currently used for some types of administrative data,
the generic nature of VISCOM offers the potential to
build interactive graphics from any XML document
(providing that the mapping between data variables and
visual variables is configured). For instance, some
financial data of the city could quite easily been
visualized by VISCOM. In the future we will tackle
some remaining challenges such as positioning the labels
for large datasets and completing the VISCOM
application with some additional views (e.g. timelines).

References
[1]

Bederson, B. PhotoMesa: A Zoomable Image Browser
Using Quantum Treemaps and Bubblemaps. Proceedings
of ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology (UIST 2001), ACM Press, 71-80.
[2] Bederson, B. and Shneiderman, B. Ordered and Quantum
Treemaps: Making Effective Use of 2D Space to Display
Hierarchies. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 21 (4),
2002, 833-854.
[3] Boardman, R. Bubble Trees. The Visualization of
Hierarchical Information Structures. In Proceedings of
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI 2000), ACM Press, 315-316.
[4] Card, S., Mackinlay, J. and Shneiderman, B. Readings in
Information Visualization, Using Vision to Think.
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, California, 1999.
[5] Chuah M. Demystifying venture Capital Investing.
Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, 2002, 161-164.
[6] Keim D. Information Visualization and Visual Data
Mining. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. Vol. 8(1). Jan.-March 2002.
[7] Keim D., Mansmann F., Schneidewind J., Thomas J. and
Ziegler H. Visual Analytics: Scope and Challenges. In
Visual Data Mining: Theory, Techniques and Tools for
Visual Analytics, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Springer, Berlin, 2008.
[8] Lamping, L. and Rao, R. Laying out and Visualizing
Large Trees Using a Hyperbolic Space. Proceedings of
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology (UIST 1994), ACM Press, 13-14.
[9] Lee, B., Parr, C., Plaisant, C., Bederson, B., Veksler, V.,
Gray, W. and Kotfila, C. TreePlus: Interactive
Exploration of Networks with Enhanced Tree Layouts.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 12(6), 2006, 1414-1426.
[10] Lin, C. and Yen, H. (2005). On Balloon Drawing of
Rooted Trees. Proceedings of Graph Drawing, 2005,
285–296, Springer, Berlin.
[11] Merino C., Sips M., Keim D., Panse C. and Spence
R.Task-At-Hand Interface for Change Detection in Stock
Market Data. Proceedings of International Conference
on Advanced Visual Interfaces (AVI 2006). Venice,
Italy, 23-26 May, 2006.

240

