2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

Visualizing Fuzzy Clusters Using RadViz
John Sharko, Georges Grinstein
University of Massachusetts/Lowell
jsharko@cs.uml.edu, grinstein@cs.uml.edu
making it impossible to analyze relationships at that
level.
Heatmaps have been used to display the extent to
which each record falls into the same cluster as all of
the others [3][4]. This is done by calculating a
measure for the level of association between each pair
of records. In the case of cluster ensembles, this
measure typically is the fraction of the cluster sets that
the two records fall into the same cluster. The
resulting heatmap is a square matrix with each cell
colored to represents the level of association. Such
heatmaps can be used to make a general assessment of
the nature and quality of the datasets the cluster
ensemble was derived from [5]. A variant of the
heatmap approach applied to fuzzy cluster sets is the
Visual Cluster Validity (VCV) technique [6]. When
VCV is applied to a fuzzy cluster set, each record is
assigned to the cluster it has the highest association
with. However, information is lost in not considering
any cluster with lower association values
Another approach to the visualization of fuzzy
clusters is to plot the maximum membership degrees as
a function of the distance from the cluster centers [7].
This has been used to evaluate the effectiveness of a
range of possible numbers of clusters. However this
technique again uses only the clusters with the
maximum levels of association as a measure and
ignores those lower values.
Dimensional reduction, that is mapping a high
dimensional space into a lower dimensional one, has
also been a means for visualizing fuzzy cluster datasets
[8], with PCA and Sammon Mapping prime examples
[9].
This paper describes visualization methods for
fuzzy clustering and cluster ensembles, compares the
two, and provides examples of their utility.
In section 2 we briefly review RadViz, a radial
visualization technique for high dimensional data sets,
and its direct application to the problem. In section 3
we describe one of its extensions, Vectorized RadViz,
applied to multiple clustering. In section 4 we visually
compare fuzzy clustering and cluster ensembles using
RadViz. This comparison is then used to provide

Abstract
Clustering techniques are heuristic processes that
typically do not yield one optimal solution. Therefore
it is common practice to generate multiple cluster sets
and investigate the consistency of the record
groupings. Fuzzy clustering essentially achieves the
same objective by providing a measure of the extent to
which each record belongs to each cluster i.e. the
strength of association of each record to each cluster.
This paper develops a visualization of fuzzy clustering
using RadViz, compares it to a Vectorized RadViz
visualization of the results of multiple cluster
ensembles and then applies it to a microarray dataset.

1. Introduction
Clustering algorithms do not guarantee the
generation of optimal groupings of data elements or
records. Therefore, it is common practice to run
multiple clustering algorithms to assess the extent to
which records consistently fall into the same clusters
with other records.
Fuzzy clustering is a means for achieving the same
objective as running multiple clusterings. In hard
clustering a record is assigned to one and only one
cluster whereas in fuzzy clustering a record can fall
into multiple clusters. This provides a more natural
approach to dealing with ambiguities in cluster
assignment due for example, to records positioned in
overlapping cluster structures [1]. The strength of the
association of each record with each cluster is reflected
in a percentage associated with each cluster. Since the
sum of the percentages for each record in a fuzzy
clustering algorithm is 1, the value for each record in
each cluster can be interpreted as a probability of that
record belonging to that cluster.
Visualization of multiple cluster sets has been a
challenge. Various methods have been developed to
compare multiple sets of clustering results. One
approach is the use of silhouette plots [2]. These plots,
however, do not make comparisons at a record level

978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.74

307

Summarizing, points very close to the boundary of
the circle have high coordinate values for the DAs they
are near (points B and C in Figure 1). Points near the
center could have a great deal of information (points A
and D) but tools are needed to figure that out. Various
layout algorithms have been developed which
reposition the DAs so as to move the points toward the
circumference of the circle, thereby increasing the
information content of the visualization [11].

insight into the characteristics of the clusters. Section 5
summarizes the results of our approach applied to the
Iris dataset for simplicity. Finally in section 6 we show
an application to microarray data.

2. RadViz
RadViz is a radial visualization shown to be an
effective tool for visually analyzing multidimensional
datasets [10]. For completeness we briefly review
RadViz (see reference [11] for more details).
Figure 1 provides a simple example of a RadViz
visualization. The labels on the circumference of the
circle (X1, X2, X3, and X4) represent dimensions in
the dataset. The associated hash marks on the
circumference of the circle are called dimension
anchors (DAs). Each point in the interior of the circle
represents a record, or multiple records. The location
of each point is determined by its coordinate values.
The larger the value of a coordinate the closer the point
is to its corresponding DA. The point can be thought
of as being attached to each DA by a spring, the
strength of which is proportional to the value of the
associated coordinate.
This can be represented
mathematically as:

Figure 1 RadViz example.
The coordinates
represent the values of dimensions X1, X2, X3, and
X4 for the indicated records. Note that points A
and D fall in the same location even though their
coordinates are different. Points C and D both
have coordinates with two 1’s and two zeros but
since the DAs for X1 and X2 are close to each
other C falls near the circumference whereas D is
at the center of the circle.

where xi and yi are the resulting transformed
coordinates for record i, θj is the angular position on
the circle corresponding to dimension j, ai,j is the value
of dimension j for record i, d is the number of
dimensions and n the number of records. The
computation is linear in the number of points and
dimensions.
This RadViz visualization in figure 1 exhibits
several important characteristics of RadViz. Record B
has a value of 1 for X1 and 0 for the other dimensions.
Since only X1 exerts a force on the point, it lies on the
circumference at the X1 DA. Record A, on the other
hand, has the same value for all of the dimensions.
Thus, the forces exerted by each dimension are all
equal and the point falls at the center of the circle.
Record C illustrates the value of having dimensions
with high values near each other. Since X1 and X2
have a value of 1 and X3 and X4 have a value of 0, the
point is midway between the X1 and X2. If X1 and X2
were on opposite sides of the circle, the record would
fall at the center.
It would therefore be
indistinguishable from Point A.

3. Vectorized RadViz
Vectorized RadViz (VRV) represents a variation
of RadViz and can be used to visualize cluster
ensembles [12]. The vectorization process flattens the
cluster dimensions by creating a new dimension for
each cluster in each cluster set.
The RadViz
visualization then has a separate DA for each cluster in
each cluster set. A cluster ensemble of N cluster sets
each with C clusters yields a VRV visualization with N
x C dimensions. A traditional RadViz visualization of
the clusters as records would only have N dimensions
corresponding to each cluster set. This is particularly
inappropriate for a RadViz visualization because
clusters are unordered categorical data i.e. a cluster
label has no significance with respect to the other
labels in the cluster set.
A classification layout algorithm is used to
reposition the DAs thereby repositioning each of the
clusters in each cluster set [11]. Since the purpose of
the classification layout algorithm is to place similar

308

DAs close to each other, it also places similar clusters
close to each other resulting in a visualization with
clusters that tend to contain the same records thus
reflecting record stability. This effect is illustrated in
Figure 2 (no layout) and Figure 3 (with layout) for a
typical cluster ensemble dataset. After the class layout
algorithm, the points are spread out towards the
circumference providing more meaningful information.

4. Visualizing fuzzy clustering and cluster
ensembles
We now compare visualizations of fuzzy
clustering and cluster ensembles using RadViz and
then use comparisons to provide insight into the
characteristics of the clusters.
The steps leading to a visualization that facilitates
exploring the relationship between fuzzy clustering and
cluster ensembles are:
1. Generate a set of fuzzy clusters
2. Create a RadViz visualization of the fuzzy
clusters with each cluster in the fuzzy
clustering dataset being a dimensional anchor
3. Generate multiple sets of deterministic (hard)
clusters
4. Generate a Vectorized RadViz visualization
which includes the processes of vectorization,
class discrimination [11], and discrimination
class repositioning as described in [12]
5. Link the fuzzy cluster and cluster ensemble
visualizations together so records selected in
one visualization are highlighted in the other

Figure 2 A typical VRV visualization before
application of a layout algorithm. The points
are clustered toward the center not providing
any useful information. Compare to Figure 3

By exploring the various records groups we can
assess the manner in which the characteristics of the
dataset are reflected in both the fuzzy clustering and
the cluster ensembles.

5. Visualizations
For simplicity we use the Iris dataset [13] to
illustrate the relationship between fuzzy clustering and
cluster ensembles using the method described in
Section 4. The Iris dataset consists of 150 records, 50
each of the following types: Setosa, Virginica, and
Versicolor. They are distinguished by the lengths and
widths of their petals and sepals.

Figure 3 A typical VRV visualization after
application of a layout algorithm. Note that
points
are
spread
out
nearer
the
circumference
providing
more
useful
information as compared to Figure 2.
The fuzzy C-Means clustering algorithm as
implemented in R [14] was used to generate a fuzzy
cluster dataset with four clusters. Again for simplicity
the cluster ensemble was generated using three

309

records are overlapping.
evident as well.

applications of the K-means clustering algorithm in R.
The two visualizations were linked together using the
Universal Visualization Platform [15].

Even the one outlier is

5.1 Display Fuzzy Clusters in RadViz
A RadViz visualization of fuzzy clusters applied
to the Iris dataset [13] is illustrated in Figure 4. Each
dimensional anchor represents one of the four clusters
generated by the fuzzy cluster algorithm applied to the
Iris dataset.

Figure 5 A scatterplot of Iris petal length vs.
sepal length. Note again the clear clusters as
well as the overlap. The record labeled
“outlier” is a Virginica record displaced from
the other Virginica records. Compare the
position of this outlier to the position in the
RV (Figure 4) and VRV (Figure 6)
visualizations
Figure 4 RadViz visualization of fuzzy clusters
applied to the Iris dataset. Note the well
defined clusters for Versicolor and Virginica
with their overlap circled in red. The record
labeled as “outlier” is a Virginica record
displaced from the other Virginica records.
Compare the position of this outlier to its
position in the scatterplot (Figure 5) and VRV
(Figure 6) visualizations

5.2 Display Cluster Ensembles with Vectorized
RadViz
A cluster ensemble generated from multiple
applications of the K-means clustering algorithm to the
Iris dataset is illustrated in Figure 6. The points on the
circumference represent data records that are stable
across all of the clusters. The points toward the
interior represent records not in stable clusters. The
closer the points are to the center of the circle, the
more dissimilar are the clusters that the points belong
to. These therefore represent points difficult to
categorize. They warrant further investigation (as they
may be interesting points). For example in studying
gene expression, these are often genes mapping to
multiple functions.

This visualization contains a great deal of
information about the fuzzy clustering dataset. The
points, which represent records, are colored
corresponding to their classification. The blue points
are Setosa irises, the red Virginica, and the green
Versicolor.
The Setosa records can easily be
distinguished from the Virginica and Versicolor irises.
The Virginica and Versicolor record groups overlap
with one red point toward the center of the circle
labeled as an outlier.
These characteristics are
supported by inspection of the source data. A plot of
sepal length vs. sepal width (Figure 5) shows that the
Setosa records are in fact separable from the Versicolor
and Virginica records and the Versicolor and Virginica

The Setosa records (blue, upper right in Figure 6)
all essentially lie on the circumference indicating that
those records are strongly clustered together. The
Versicolor (green) points are not as well categorized
whereas the Virginica (red) points lie on the
circumference. The one Virginica outlier record is still
a curious point because it is grouped with other

310

Versicolor points in the KM-6 classification sector far
from the other Virginica points.

Figure 7
Setosa records in the RadViz
visualization of the Iris fuzzy clusters. This
separation is comparable to the separation of
the Setosa points in the VRV visualization of
the cluster ensemble (Figure 8)

Figure 6 VRV Visualization of the Iris cluster
ensemble. The record labeled “outlier” is a
Virginica record displaced from the other
Virginica records.
This is similar to the
position of this outlier in the RV (Figure 4) and
scatterplot (Figure 5).

5.3 Link the Fuzzy Clusters and Cluster
Ensembles
We now show that the traditional RadViz
visualization of fuzzy clusters (Figure 4) and the VRV
visualization of cluster ensembles (Figure 6) reflect the
same cluster characteristics, namely stability of
records.
The Setosa points are highlighted in both the
traditional RadViz representation of the fuzzy
clustering (Figure 7) and the Vectorized RadViz
representation of the cluster ensemble (Figure 8).
Figure 8 Setosa records highlighted in the
VRV visualization of the K-means cluster
ensemble based on the Iris dataset. This
separation is comparable to the separation of
the Setosa points in the RV visualization of the
fuzzy clusters.

The Setosa points are near the circumference for
both visualizations revealing the same underlying
characteristics of the Setosa records, namely clear
differentiation from the Virginica and Versicolor
records.

The Setosa records in Figure 7 are at varying
distances from the center of the circle. The records
near the circumference of the circle are more stable
than the points toward the center because the values for
cluster 4 of the fuzzy cluster set are lower for points
toward the center. This is reflected in the VRV

311

visualization by the fact that the most stable Setosa
records are on the circumference and the less stable
Setosa records in the interior of the circle.
Even though the Versicolor and Virginica records
are not as clearly separable as the Setosa records, they
do exhibit the same characteristic, namely that those
records closer to the center of the visualization are the
more unstable records and those further from the center
are more stable. Comparing the distances from the
circumference of records in the RadViz visualization of
the fuzzy cluster sets and the VRV visualization of the
cluster ensemble would indicate whether the two
visualizations are consistent. Figure 9 and Figure 10
show the results for the stable Versicolor records. In
Figure 9 the Versicolor records nearest cluster 3 are
selected in a rectangle. These records have the highest
values for cluster 3 and are clearly distinguishable
from the Virginica records. The corresponding records
in the VRV visualization of the K-Means cluster
ensemble (Figure 10) fall on the circumference. The
Versicolor records in the vicinity are farther away from
the circumference so therefore less stable and fall
towards the interior of the RadViz visualization in
Figure 9.

Figure 10 The stable Versicolor records from
Figure 9 are highlighted in the VRV
visualization of the K-Means cluster ensemble.
These records are shown to be more stable in
both visualizations
Similar results can be shown for the stable
Virginica records near cluster 1 of the fuzzy cluster set.
There are a few records of special interest in
making the comparison between the RadViz fuzzy
cluster visualization and the VRV cluster ensemble
visualization. First, there is the one Virginica record
separated from the other Virginica records identified in
Figure 4 as the outlier. This record is denoted as
“Virginica Outlier” in both the RadViz fuzzy cluster
visualization (Figure 11) and the VRV cluster
ensemble visualization (Figure 12). This point is away
from the circumference in the VRV visualization
indicating that is not clearly categorizable. This is
consistent with the RadViz fuzzy cluster visualization
since that record is not only separate from the other
Virginica records but it is also near the center of the
visualization. Points near the center indicate that there
is no one fuzzy cluster that the record is decisively
drawn to.
The next interesting group of records is the
overlapping Virginica and Versicolor record group in
the RadViz fuzzy cluster. These records are denoted
with the label “Overlap” in Figure 11 and Figure 12.
The representation in the VRV cluster ensemble
visualization is once again consistent with the
representation in the RadViz fuzzy cluster
visualization.

Figure 9 Stable Versicolor records based on
fuzzy cluster dataset lying close to the DA for
cluster 3. These records are also on the
circumference of the RV visualization of
cluster ensembles (Figure 10)

312

This is also reflected in the VRV cluster ensemble
visualization as all the points are close to each other on
the circumference. This is especially significant
because the points fall into two different classification
sectors. The reorientation algorithm applied to the
classification sectors recognized the similarity of the
two classification sectors and placed them next to each
other.
The last records to look at, those, denoted as
“Central” in Figure 11 and Figure 12, are records
closest to the center of the RadViz fuzzy cluster
visualization. Again the points in the VRV cluster
ensemble visualization are all located away from the
circumference and are fairly close to each other.

6 Microarray Application

Figure 11
RadViz visualizations of fuzzy
clusters highlighting interesting records. The
corresponding locations of these points in the
VRV visualization of the cluster ensemble are
displayed in Figure 12.

The visualizations of fuzzy clusters and cluster
ensembles were applied to gene expression levels of
newts (N. viridescens) [16]. The changes in expression
levels represent the response of individual genes in
tissue at the point of amputation of the forelimb in a
newt [5].
Four clustering algorithms were applied to the
microarray expression dataset: (1) K-means, (2)
expectation maximization, (3) extended K-means, and
(4) density based clustering built on K-means. Eleven
clusters were generated using each of the algorithms.
Two sets of fuzzy clusters were generated, one with
four indices and the other with ten.
The correspondence between the RV of fuzzy
clusters and the VRV visualization of the cluster
ensemble is illustrated in Figure 13 and Figure 14.
Clusters 2 and 4 in Figure 13 were placed together
based on the results of the application of the class
discrimination layout algorithm [11]. Groups A and B
represent points that are clearly separable and therefore
lie nearer the circumference of the circle for both
visualization. There are also points (Group C) that are
not clearly clustered that fall in the interior of both
visualizations.

Figure 12 VRV visualization of Iris cluster
ensemble highlighting interesting records.
The corresponding locations of these points
in the RV visualization of the fuzzy clusters
are displayed in Figure 13.

A fuzzy cluster of the newt microarray data with
ten indexes was visualized using RadViz (Figure 15).
The class discrimination layout algorithm used the
index with the maximum value to classify the records.
A comparison with the four-index example (Figure 13)
shows that the points are not spread out as much. This
is an indication that the clusterings in the ten index
fuzzy cluster set is not as well defined as the four index
fuzzy cluster set. This suggests a fuzzy cluster set with

The first indication of consistency is that the
Virginica records are mixed in with the Versicolor
records. This is a reflection of how the records in this
subset are not distinguishable. Next, all of the points
are on the circumference, showing that in the RadViz
fuzzy cluster visualization the points are close to
cluster 2. This means that although the records are not
readily distinguishable between Versicolor and
Virginica, they fall fairly strongly into one cluster.

313

fewer indices is likely to be more effective in clearly
distinguishing the records.

Figure 15 RV visualization of newt microarray
data with ten clusters. Records in groups A
and B correspond to groups A and B in Figure
13.

Figure 13 RV visualization of fuzzy clusters of
newt microarray dataset. Groups A and B are
records clearly assigned to clusters. These
records are also nearer the circumference of
the VRV visualization of cluster ensembles
(Figure 14). The points not clearly assigned
(Group C) are in the interior of this
visualization as in the VRV visualization of the
cluster ensemble (Figure 14)

It is also possible to view cluster instability in
terms of the actual expression levels. Figure 16
highlights the records in cluster 9 of the K-means
cluster dataset. One of the records, NVG 00111, is
separated from the three other genes in that cluster
(NVG 00226, NVG 00155, and NVG 00091).
Looking at the expression levels of these four genes in
cluster 9 (Figure 17) explains why this has occurred.
NVG 00111 is distinctly different from the other genes
in this cluster. There is a distinct delay in its
expression compared to the other genes.
But
apparently NVG 00111 does not easily belong to any
other cluster. This would suggest that NVG 00111 is a
particularly interesting gene and it is. NVG 00111 is
considered to be a key gene in the newt limb
regeneration process. It is a chemokine, which is a
soluble protein expressed during the initial phase of a
body’s response to injury. It was not possible to
discern any distinguishing characteristics of NVG
00111 from the RadViz visualization of the fuzzy
clusters of the newt limb regeneration process.

7 Conclusions
We described RadViz for visualizing the strength
of the association of records to clusters using fuzzy
clustering and cluster ensembles using the simple Iris
data set for explanation and a gene expression data set
as an application example. The records clustered
consistently tend to be located near the circumference
of the circle. The points towards the center tend to not
be easily categorizable so may be of special interest.

Figure 14 VRV visualization of a cluster
ensemble of the newt microarray dataset.
Groups A and B refer clearly defined records.
Group C are records not clearly assigned.
(Compare to Figure 13 for similar behaviors of
Groups A, B and C.)

314

other than if only the maximum association is used for
each record.
Cluster ensembles are used to reflect the same
strength of association as in fuzzy clustering. By
generating multiple cluster sets it is possible to group
clusters together based on the proportion of the cluster
sets those records are in the same cluster. By applying
Vectorized RadViz to a cluster ensemble, the strength
of association can be assessed by the distance from the
center of the circle for each point.
We showed that RadViz applied to fuzzy
clustering and Vectorized RadViz applied to cluster
ensembles yield similar results. This was true not only
for stable records lying near the circumference of the
circle but also those points lying towards the interior of
the circle.

Figure 16 VRV visualization of a cluster
ensemble of the newt microarray dataset with
the key gene distinguished from the other
genes in cluster 9.

Although we used the simple Iris data set for
explanation, we have applied this technique
successfully to drug discovery and to gene expression
classification.

REFERENCES
[1] Kruse, R, Doring, Christian and Lesot, Marie-Jeannne.
Fundamentals of Fuzzy Clustering. [book auth.] Jose Valente
de Oliveira and Witold Pedrycz. Advances in Fuzzy
Clustering and its Applications. West Sussex, England : John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2007.
[2] Rousseeuw, P. J. “Combining Multiple Clusterings Using
Evidence Accumulation”, Journal of Computational and
Applied Mathematics, November, 1987, pp. 53-65.

Figure 17 Expression levels for cluster 9 of the
newt microarray dataset. The gene NVG00111
is shown to be different from the other genes
in this cluster in both this display and in the
VRV visualization of the cluster data (Figure
16).

[3] Cvek, Urska. “Visual and Analytical Tools for Record
Level Cluster Analysis”, University of Massachusetts
Lowell, Lowell, MA, 2004.
[4] Fred, A. L. N., Jain, A. K., “Combining Multiple
Clusterings Using Evidence Accumulation”. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence.
June 2005.

The results of fuzzy clustering can be displayed
using traditional RadViz where each dimensional
anchor represents one of the clusters. The extent to
which a data element is stable is then interpreted by its
distance from the circumference. Whereas other
visualizations of fuzzy clusters tend to display only the
maximum association for each record, all of the
associations for each partition are included in RadViz.
This generates a continuum that provides more
information on the relationships of records to each

[5] Sharko, J, et al. “Heat Map Visualizations Allow
Comparisons of Multiple Clustering Results and Evaluation
of Dataset Quality: Application to Microarray Data”, IEEE
Proceedings of the 11th Internation Conference on
Information Visualization, July 4-6, 2007, pp. 521-526.
[6] Hathaway, Richard J and Bezdek, James C. “Visual
cluster validity for prototype generator clustering models”,
Pattern Recognition Letters, published by the International
Association for Pattern Recognition (IAPR), Volume 24,
Issues 9-10, June 2003, Pages 1563-1569.

315

[7] Klawonn, Frank, Chekhtman, Vera and Janz, Edgar.
“Visual Inspection of Fuzzy Clustering Results”, [book auth.]
Jose Benitez, et al. Advances in Soft Computing, Springer,
2003.
[8] Xu, Rui and Wunshch II, Donald, “Survey of Clustering
Algorithms”, IEEE Transactions on Neural Netowrks. May
2005, Vol. 16.
[9] Abonyi, Janos and Feil, Balazs, “Aggregation and
Visualization of Fuzzy Clusters Based on Fuzzy Similarity
Measures”, [book auth.] Jose Valente de Oliveira and Witold
Pedrycs. Advances in Fuzzy Clustering and its Applications.
West Sussex, England : John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2007.
[10] Grinstein, G, et al. “High-Dimensional Visualization
Support for Data Mning Gene Expression Data”, [book auth.]
Elena V Grigorenko. DNA Array, Technologies and
Experimental Strategies, CRC Press, 2002.
[11] McCarthy, J F, et al. “Applications of Machine Learning
and High-Dimensional Visualization in Cancer Detection,
Diagnosis, and Management”, Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, Vol. 1020, May, 2004.
[12] Sharko, J. and Grinstein, G. “Vectorized Radviz and Its
Application to Multiople Cluster Datasets”, IEEE
Transactions, 2008, pp. 1444-51.
[13] Asuncion, A. and Newman, D.J.,. UCI Machine
Learning Repository. University of California Irvine, School
of Information and Computer Science. [Online] 2007.
http://www.ics.uci.edu/~mlearn/MLRepository.html.
[14] R Project. www.r-project.org. [Online] 2008.
[15] Gee, A., Li, H., Yu, M., Smrtic, M. B., Cvek, U.,
Goodell, H., Gupta, V., Lawrence, C., Zhou, J., Chiang, C.,
Grinstein, G., “Universal Visualization Platform”,
Proceedings of SPIE-IS&T Electronic Imaging, 2005, pp.
274-283.
[16] Marx, K, et al. “Evidence for Proximal to Distal Limb
Amputation Site Effects from Global Gene Expression
Correlations found in Newt Microarrays”, IEEE
BioInformatics and BioiEngineering Conferecnce. Oct 14-17,
2007.

316

