2009 13th International Conference Information Visualisation

A Visualization Approach for Frauds Detection in Financial Market
Mao Lin Huang1, Jie Liang1, Quang Vinh Nguyen2
1
Faculty of Engineering & Information Technology, University of Technology, Sydney, Sydney,
Australia
2
School of Computing and Mathematics, University of Western, Sydney, Australia
{maolin@it.uts.edu.au, jiliang@it.uts.edu.au, vinh@scm.uws.edu.au}

behavior [4]. The main problem is that these practical
detection systems often produce far too many false alarms
which are costly if acted upon or ignorant from many
undetected frauds which even cause more costly damages.
While it may be theoretically possible to remove all
security vulnerabilities through formal methods and better
engineering practices, it is practically infeasible. Thus,
financial frauds detection will remain a crucial security
practice for years to come.
Although some existing fraud detection systems help
by automatically identify potential frauds (or attacks) from
financial trading activity and produce alerts describing the
details of these intrusions. They’re often just a starting and
useful first step in uncovering security compromises. The
complex task of analyzing and determining the accuracy
and severity of security events uncovered during
monitoring is still with the human analyst.
Current support for frauds detection often focuses on
increasing automation. While automation allows for
increased scalability, humans provide the ability to handle
exceptional events. There has been little research into
understanding how fraud detection systems can be
designed to assist the cognitive process of the human
analyst. Information visualization shows great potential in
supporting the monitoring task of frauds detection.
However, studying the available visualization-based
systems, we found that most current solutions are more
focusing on real-time and interactive visualization of large
volume of data with data mining algorithms. They either
lack techniques for visualizing appropriate abstractions of
a large volume of financial data, or can only deal with low
level raw-data.
They haven’t considered the analysis of related social
networks, which could be based on a behavior driven
visual pattern analysis, as part of the frauds detection
process. However, it is very common that a suspected
attacker, who intend to make a large number of further
frauds or attacks in his plan and these attack plans are hard
to be discovered by using the traditional approaches.
This paper proposes a new visualization approach
that is specifically designed to solve the fraud detection
problems in financial markets. In the new visualization
framework, we use: 1) a 3D Treemap to perform visual
surveillance of stock market by extracting and displaying
the most recognizable analytical features of a large volume

Abstract
The traditional solutions to the stock market security
are not sufficient in identifying attackers and further
attack plans from the analysis of existing events.
Therefore, it is difficult for analysts to prevent future
unexpected events or frauds by only monitoring the realtime trading information. The event-driven fraud detection
in financial market could not help analysts to find attack
plans and the further intention of attackers. This paper
proposed a new framework of visual analytics for stock
market security. The proposed solution consists of two
stages: 1) Visual Surveillance of Market Performance, and
2) Behavior-Driven Visual Analysis of Trading Networks.
In the first stage, we use a 3D treemap to monitor the realtime stock market performance and to identify a particular
stock that produced an unusual trading pattern. We then
move to the next stage: social network visualization to
conduct behavior-driven visual analysis of suspected
pattern. Through the visual analysis of social (or trading)
network, analysts may finally identify the attackers (the
sources of the fraud), and further attack plans.
Keywords--- Information visualization, visual
analytics, finance security, stock market surveillance.

1. Introduction
To ensure the security of financial markets, the
surveillance of stock trading becomes more and more
important, as it saves customers a large amount of money
in trading activities every day around the world. Up to
date, there have been many researches working on
applying computational intelligence to financial modeling
and market security [3, 4], including some visualization
technologies [5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. To prevent
market imperfection, various applications have been
introduced into market practices. Failure to employ
modern technology and methods used in conducting
surveillance can mean significant financial loss to market
abuse or loss of market goodwill as investors choose to
trade their assets elsewhere.
Traditional financial fraud detection relies on many
AI techniques either tries to detect known frauds or
indicates potential new frauds by identifying “abnormal”
978-0-7695-3733-7/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2009.23

197

indicate that an attempt is being made to interfere with
normal market forces, requiring further investigation.
To find similar patterns, as a prerequisite, the behavior
of financial market has to be described by a numerical
form, as traditional applications reply on numeric figures.
Numerous researches are proposed to model the dynamics
beneath a single financial series, and they mainly focus on
the time dependency of input series.

of dynamic financial data that allows users to see the
overall view of market operation and identify an abnormal
performance of a stock in a single visual workspace, 2) a
smart behavior-driven visualization system will display
and analysis the social networks, including a stock trading
network, of the suspected stock. The system will identify a
fraud by conducting an orthogonal analysis (or pattern
recognition); matching an unusual pattern to similar others
in the pattern database.
We will first discuss the traditional framework and
existing visualization solutions to the stock market security
problem and then propose a new framework with extra
stages for detecting frauds and attacking plans in the stock
market.
The effective detection and subsequent analysis of the
types of fraudulent activity which occur within the stock
exchange markets are varied and it changes with the
appearance of new technologies and new forms of the
financial activity. The dynamic nature of fraudulent
activity as well as the changing nature of normal usage of
a service has rendered the detection of fraudulent intent
from observed behavioral patterns a research problem of
some considerable difficulty.
It is recognized
that a common probabilistic
theoretical framework be employed in the development of
dynamic behavioral models which combine a number of
prototypical behavioral aspects to define a model of
acceptable behavior (e.g. patterns of mobile phone
communication, web browsing, stock trading) from which
deductions of the probability of unusual behavior can be
made. In addition to these inferential models a means of
visualizing the observed behavior and the intentions
behind it will significantly aid the pattern recognition
abilities of human fraud analysts in the financial market.
Employing the common probabilistic modeling framework
which defines the “fraud detection” models visualization
tools will be developed to provide meaningful visual
representations of dynamic activity which has been
observed and visualizations of the evolution of the
underlying states generating the observed activity. The
development of detection & analysis tools from the
common theoretical framework will provide enhanced
detection and analysis capability in the identification of
fraud.

2.1 Traditional graphical standards
A commonly used graphical representation in stock market
is the two-dimensional line plot in which every financial
portal or newspaper displays, for example in yahoo
money, see Figure 1. The basic idea is to show time on the
X-axis and price or volume on the Y-axis. Price is often
represented by using a line series and volume by using a
separated bar chart. This standard chart representation is
very appropriate and accepted in technical analysis of
market evolution in low-dimensional time series.
However, based on the nature of financial data, it would
become insufficient and inefficient for multi-dimensional
analysis. [1]

Figure.1: A visualization used in Yahoo web
finance that compares two stocks by price and
volume.

2. 2 Current work in financial data
Later when stock market behavior descriptors that could
extract and characterize the dependencies among stock
market quantities from data distribution are introduced,
visualization techniques come into the solution. The
literature showed that a number of researchers attempted
to solve problems with visualization. Several efforts in
today’s financial graphics world are briefly discussed
below. Some of the innovative solutions coming out of
academic research have been commercialized into the
software in the market, For example, Technology Road
Map (TRM) surveillance system that is used by London
stock exchanges and some others are focused on threedimensional representations.

2. Traditional solution
Current surveillance applications monitor the real-time
raw trading flow (a large amount of information) and
highlight any unusual price or volume movements. They
traditionally compare the electronic signal containing all
details of trading against a series of parameters. When
these parameters are exceeded, the system triggers an
“alert”. Each alert is referred to an analyst, who assesses
the market conditions that caused it. For example, the
analyst might determine that public information, such as a
report on the stock written by a stockbroker, a company
announcement, a newspaper report or broader market
conditions can explain the market activity. Surveillance
analysts also look for “patterns of alerts”, which may

2.2.1 Financial Viewpoints

198

visualization, including trading history network, email
network, telephone network, etc. analysts can explore
suspected the abnormal behaviours and finally identify
attacker (the source of the fraud), and attack plan. To make
sure the attacker and plan, analysts should further explore
the patterns of information based on a similarity-based
clustered visualization, then may identify a group of
trading accounts and finally the action can be taken to
exclude attacker and his or her accounts from the stock
market, see Figure 3. Therefore, the new solution consists
of two stages: 1) Visual Surveillance of Market
Performance, and 2) Behavior-Driven Visual Analysis of
Trading Networks.

An interesting financial analysis tool is created in an
information environment named “Financial Viewpoints”
[2] by Lisa Strausfeld of the MIT Media Lab. The
visualization employs three movable planar spreadsheets,
one on each axis to represent 7 mutual funds, with 50 data
elements each. Bar charts and video feeds have also been
integrated to support interpreting the data. However, this
architecture can not overcome the limits of standard line
plotting, as it doesn’t have ability to illustrate the
relationships beyond three linear dimensions.
2.2.2 Self-Organizing Map
A new visualization tool: Self-Organizing Map [5] for
assisting technical analysis was proposed by Kresimir
Siyunic from the institute for Media Communication,
Fraunhofer Gesellschaft in Germany. An index of assets is
to present a single price path or shape for a given period
and instead of visualizing charts explicitly. This work uses
the principal distribution of chart shapes and clusters
similar chart shapes of component asset. It also shows the
distribution of patterns within the aggregate and maps
them into 2D display. This 2D display method enables the
several interaction mechanisms which allows analysts
navigate from a large index overview to sectors. However,
visualization relationship between the chart shape and the
future course of the chart is not realized in this work yet.
Based on various existing applications available in the
market, we can summarize the traditional solution to the
problem of financial markets security: to detect unusual
patterns, and frauds, the traditional market surveillance
relies largely on real-time visualization and interactive
visualization of large volume of transactions, and in
cooperation with the data mining algorithms. However, the
traditional solution might only be used to identify attackers
from a significant event once and it would be still difficult
for analysts to prevent future unexpected events, as
monitoring real-time trading information only could not
help analysts to find the attack plan and the intentions of
attackers. The framework of traditional approach is
illustrated in Figure 2.
Large
volume of
real-time
trading
data

Market
surveillance

Real-time visualization
+ Interactive visualization
+ data mining algorithms
Large
volume of
real-time
trading
data

Unusual
patterns or
frauds
detection

Market
surveillance

Visual analytics of social networks
A group of
trading
accounts is
identified

Attacker &
future attack
plan is
identified

Behaviour
analysis of
suspected
traders

Similarity-based clustered visualization

Figure 3: A proposed framework for stock market
security.

3.1 Stage 1. Visual Surveillance of Market
Performance
In stage 1, visual surveillance should have the following
functions, including 1) real-time raw data collection, 2)
feature extraction and abstraction, 3) overall view of the
performance and 4) detailed view of the individual’s
performance. An individual could be a particular business
category, or a group of similar stocks, or a particular stock.
On extraction of features from raw data, the visual
analytics process can be conducted effectively and
efficiently; exploring new learning rules to discover
patterns and outline, defining essential features and
attributes, those to be important in identifying unusual
patterns that may be related to a fraud, from the large
volume of raw financial datasets; and discovering how a
specific event is related to other information available in
the massive dataset. We believe that more can be
characterized and abstracted from the stock trading data to
assist the visualization process to perceive suspicious
frauds or identify actual security breaks. However, current
work mostly relies on simple relationships between
elements of raw data and hence we believe more can be
revealed from better abstractions.
The proposed on-line visualization system can
identify a particular stock that produces an unusual

Unusual
patterns or
frauds
detection

Real-time visualization
+ Interactive visualization
+ data mining algorithms

Figure 2: The Pipeline of Traditional Solutions.

3. A New Framework for Stock Market
Security
For the complete solution, conducting behaviour analysis
of suspected traders should be added into the pipeline.
Based on behavioural analysis of social networks

199

performance through a 3D visual surveillance of
recognizable features extracted from the real-time financial
data and then passes it to the next stage “trading network
visualization” for further analysis on the social behaviour
of this suspected stock.
We use a Three-Dimensional EncCon Tree (treemaps)
[14] to perform the stage one that monitor the market
performance. It provides an overall view of the real time
stock market performance, see Figure 4.
The proposed 3D treemaps was upgraded from a 2D
visualization called “SmartMoney” [15], a well done
implementation of 2D treemaps shows 500+ popularly
held stocks, organized by industry groups, size-coded by
market capitalization, and color-coded to show rise or fall.
SmartMoney is also known as a “cluster treemap”
that uses the squarified treemap algorithm to generate
square-like rectangles. It avoids the thin rectangles in the
slice-and-dice algorithm. The SmartMoney website also
offers a for-fee premium service, SmartMoney Select, with
advanced treemap features such as dynamic query filters
and other data search services.
To uncover an additional dimension of complex
financial data, we upgraded the SmartMoney to 3D by
combining a commonly used real–time price chat with a
2D treemaps for visual surveillance in a 3 dimensional
visual space. The proposed visualization shows not only
the performance of real-time stock market through the
visual properties, e.g. size of cubes, colors and labels, but
also the current price of stocks indicated by the height of
cubes and changes of prices according to the time. The
view of an interested individual company can be converted
into plot charts view as an overview of price change.
We utilized the “treemaps” view developed by Ben
Shneiderman and first time being used in stock market by
Jungmeister and Turo in 1992 [6]. The map of the market
also has the capability to show the changing of stock
prices the relative returns and the capitalization of
companies in one compact 3D view. The treemap is
partitioned at the top of its hierarchy by industry sectors, to
categorize a large number of companies. The visualization
updates every 15 minutes. Colored rectangular tiles are
used to represent stocks and ordered tree-maps are used to
lay out the structure.
The proposed 3D visualization uses visual cues, such
as size, colors, positions, etc, to represent the properties of
major stocks concurrently. Two major properties of the
stock are displayed by default: they are market
capitalization (indicated by the size of a cell) and the
current price of stocks (indicated by cell attributes). The
color code of red indicates the decrease of the price. The
dark red indicates the low decrease of price, and the light
red indicates the high decrease of price. Oppositely, green
means the price is increasing. Similarly, the darker green
means the low decrease. The brighter color is the higher
increase is. Black indicates no change.

(a)

(b)
Figure 4: Two displays of a 3D EncCon Tree that
combines a real–time Price Chat and 2D Treemap
for Visual Surveillance of Stock Market.

3.2 Stage 2: Behaviour-driven Visual Analysis of
Trading Networks
The second stage is to conduct behavior-driven visual
analysis of trading networks. We use node-link diagrams
to reveal social relational structures among traders. We
aim to identify “suspected trading patterns” in the trading
network by matching the similar patterns in the historical
pattern database with the suspected one in the historical
trading times slots, and finally to identify fraud patterns,
suspected traders (attackers), and attack plans.
In the visualization of stock trading network, a node
(circle) represents a particular trader and an edge (link)
represents the trading relationship. The area of a circle
(node) represents the trading value (buy & sell) or the
capitalization of a stock share. The width of an edge
represents the weight or exchange amount. The arrows of
an edge indicate the exchange directions from one trader to
another, see Figure 5.
This visualization dynamically tracks the trading
patterns of a particular trader and highlights any unusual
pattern occurred at a time. For example, in Figure 6, a
suspected behavior of domination of the stock price has
been identified.
Once a suspected trading pattern is found, an
200

orthogonal analysis is followed. By orthogonal, the
analysis is done independently and expanded to: analyzing
in the time domain (temporal analysis); analyzing in the
spatial domain (spatial analysis); analyzing in the
frequency domain (spectral analysis); tracking where the
sources of frauds (attack) are in the analytical process and
how they got there; gathering other sources of information
without leaving the visualization console, and
incorporating the results into the view. Most current frauds
detection systems analyze financial data in either the time
domain (time series analysis), or the spatial domain (space
analysis) to correlate coordinated frauds, and hardly any
explores the analysis in the frequency domain. However,
many interesting events can hardly be seen in the time
domain but in the frequency domain, these events can be
readily revealed. Furthermore, spatial correlation (such as
space diversity) in antenna design can provide more
reliable identification of the desired signal by “receiving”
signals from different locations. For these reason, we
propose the “orthogonal analysis” in the second stage.
These analyses are performed only after the
visualization stage when the human analyst is able to point
out areas (circles) of interest. These may be some unusual
financial events or suspected trading activities across the
visualization screen and they need confirmation. Data
associated with these unexpected visual patterns will be
isolated and analyzed to find temporal correlation, spatial
correlation, and dominant frequencies that may link
seemingly isolated events.
In comparison with the existing solutions that
emphasis either on event-driven analysis or a behaviordriven analysis, the proposed solution seems to be a more
completed solution that combines the visual surveillance
of real-time performance and the behavior analysis stages
that could effectively assist users to detect not only the
isolated frauds and attacks, but also the intensions or
future plans of suspected frauds (or attacks), see Figure 7.

Figure 6: A suspected behavior of domination of
the stock price has been identified.

Figure 7: Identify frauds by matching suspected
patterns with similar patterns in the historical
times.

4. Conclusion and recommendation
A fair trading system is crucial to an exchange market and
plays a critical role in determining the overall efficiency of
the market. A smart surveillance system is crucial to
guarantee such a fair system by detecting market
imperfections and human frauds to prevent individual
investors’ fair trading that will potentially increase
investors’ confidence in the marketplace.
However, a good market surveillance platform has
significantly higher performance requirements than other
financial IT systems, both in sheer volume of transactions,
as well as the extremely high transaction rates. Integrating
with such high performance systems is an area which can
involve significant technology advances.
For technology, we believe that most visualization
techniques should have higher ability for tracking
changing data and real time analysis. However, a single
visualization may only be able to achieve one phase of a
complete analytical target, especially in the area of
complex financial data analysis process. Therefore, a

Figure 5: A display of trading pattern in which a
circle (node) represents a particular trader and an
edge represents the trading relationship.

201

higher degree of the integration of several visualizations,
which take advantages of human vision, as well as the
artificial intelligent algorithms, that take advantages of
logical reasoning together as a complete visual analytic
procedure to assist human for identifying attackers and
their further plans of attack is essentially needed. Such an
advanced integration should be considered as an optimized
method for eliminate the source of a variety of attacks and
frauds in the financial market.
In this paper, we proposed a new framework of visual
analytics for stock market security. Our integration
consists of two visualizations: 1) Visual Surveillance of
Market Performance, and 2) Behavior-Driven Visual
Analysis of Trading Networks. In the first stage, we use a
3D treemap to monitor the real-time stock market
performance and to identify a particular stock that
produced an unusual trading pattern. We then move to the
next stage: behavior analysis of suspected traders. Through
the visual pattern analysis, we may finally identify
attackers (the sources of the fraud), and their attack plans.

[9]

[10] Roberts, P. 2004, “Information Visualization for Stock
Market Ticks: Toward a New Trading Interface”, Masters
Thesis, MIT.
[11] Shreck,T., Tekusova,T. and Kohlhammer, J., 2008,
“Trajectory-Based Visual Analysis of large Financial Time
Series Data”, SIGKDD Explorations, Vol. 9, no. 2, pp3037.
[12] Teoh, S.T., Ma, K.L., Wu, S. F. and Jankun-kelly, T.J,
2004, “Detecting Flaws and Intruders with Visual Data
Analysis”, IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
Sept.-Oct. 2004, pp. 27 – 35.
[13] Ziegler, H., Nietzschmann, T. and Keim, D.A. 2007,
“Visual Exploration and Discovery of Atypical Behavior in
Financial Time Series Data using Two-Dimensional
Colormaps”, Proc. 11th International Conference on
Information Visualization, pp. 308 – 315.

Reference

[14] Huang, M.L. and Nguyen, Q.V. 2007, “Three-Dimensional
EncCon Tree”, In Proc. of IEEE Int’l Conference on
Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision (CGIV07), pages
429 – 433, Bangkok Thailand.

[1] Tue D., H., Bazinet, A., Berthier, R., and Shneiderman, B.
2008. “NASDAQ Velocity and Forces: An Interactive
Visualization of Activity and Change”. Journal of Universal
Computer Science, 14:1391-1410.
[2]

Strausfeld, L. 1995, “Embodying Virtual Space to Enhance
the Understanding of Information”, Master’s Theses,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Program in Media
Art and Sciences.

[3]

Fan, M, Stallaert, J. & Whinston, A.B. 2000, “The Internet
and the Future of Financial Markets”, Communications of
the ACM, vol. 43, no.11, pp.83-88.

[4]

Lai, P.S. & Fu, H.C. 2007, “A Polygon Description Based
Similarity Measurement of Stock Market Behaviour”,
Proc. IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation,
pp806-812.

[5]

Simunic, Kresimir, 2003, “Visualization of Stock Market
Charts”, Poster Proc. of 11th International Conference in
Central Europe on Computer Graphics, Visualization and
Computer Vision.

[6]

Jungmeister, G.A. and Turo, D. 1992, “Adapting Treemaps
to Stock Portfolio Visualization”, Technical Report
UMCPCSD CS-TR-2996, University of Maryland, College
Park, Maryland 20742, USA.

[7]

Merino, C.S., Sips, M., Keim, D. A., Panse, C. and Spence
R., 2006, “Task-at-Hand Interface for Change Detection in
Stock Market Data”, Proceedings of the working
Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, pp. 420 – 427.

[8]

Nesbitt, K.V. & Barrass, S. 2004, “Find Trading Patterns
in Stock Market Data”, IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, Vol.24, no.5, pp. 45-55.

Parrish, Edward, 2000, “StockVis: An Internet-Based
System for Visualizing Stock Market Data”, Master’s
Thesis, UC Santa Cruz, Department of Computer Science.

[15] SmartMoney Software: http://www.smartmoney.com/
http://www.smartmoney.com/map-of-the-market/

202

