Experimental Study on Augmented Reality Potentials in Urban Design

1

Xiangyu Wang1, Rui Chen2, Yan Gong2, and Yi-Ting Hsieh2
Lecturer, Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition, Faculty of Architecture, Design &
Planning, University of Sydney, Sydney NSW 2008, Australia.
{x.wang@arch.usyd.edu.au}
2
Graduate Student, Faculty of Architecture, Design & Planning
University of Sydney, Sydney NSW 2008, Australia
{rche0750@mail.usyd.edu.au, ygon8046@mail.usyd.edu.au, yhsi2165@mail.usyd.edu.au}
Abstract

Urban design is generally a pre-organizing process
of land usage and is traditionally regarded as a highly
collaborative activity. Augmented Reality (AR)
technology, the addition of virtual entities into the real
world view, can support design assessment and
collaboration within design team. This paper presented
an experimental study that investigated the capability
of Augmented Reality in the field of urban design and
other related design tasks which involve group design
and planning processes. Two realistic urban design
scenarios were used to compare the performance
between two treatments: the traditional wood block
(TWB) method and the AR technology (ART). The
results obtained from this experiment showed that
although some technical difficulties in the AR system
introduced negative performance factors on the
outcome, all the subjects believed that the system holds
significant potentials in urban design.

1. Introduction
In urban design, issues such as aesthetics, safety,
transport,
environmental
commitment,
access,
circulation, land usage, etc. should be considered. The
traditional design process employs a sequence of
paper-based activities: site visit and drawing, accurate
measurement with printout, sketch of design ideas and
design finalization in CAD systems. This process is a
relatively effective design approach in the circumstance
of single designer. For collaborative design, however,
effective communication could hardly be achieved with
this process, because hand drawings/paper-based work
is difficult to understand for stakeholders (e.g., clients)
other than designers. As an emerging cutting-edge
visualization technology, Augmented Reality (AR), the
addition of virtual entities into the real world view, is a

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

promising visualization platform for further exploration
into collaborative systems, and can support design
assessment and collaboration within design team. AR
can allow urban design solutions to be assessed from
different perspectives that would otherwise be
impossible and inefficient for traditional methods.
Augmented Reality has been exploited to support
architectural and urban design [1][3][5][6]. For
example, in Seichter’s study [7], he introduced a
prototype system that was aimed for analysing and
representational design in an urban design scale. The
system was designed as a workbench that allows both
collaborative and dynamic interactions within an urban
design model with the use of some physical tools (e.g.
pens). Underkoffler et al. [3] introduced a system for
urban planning that is capable of simulating multiple
design aspects into a physical workbench setting by
using the I/O bulb infrastructure. It allows physical
architectural models placed on an ordinary table
surface to cast shadows accurate for arbitrary times of
day.
This paper focused on an experimental study that
investigated the capability of Augmented Reality in the
field of urban design.

2. Augmented Reality system
The AR system was designed to reduce the
possibility of misinterpretation among team members
by providing more detailed visual information on
design objects, and encourage group collaboration and
communication in order to improve the design group’s
overall efficiency and productivity.
The AR system is expected to deliver the design
idea across a group of designers/clients in one
discussion room with a large projection screen instead
of head-mounted displays (HMDs), thus allowing more
social interactions. Moreover, without interfering

designers’ perceptive senses, which normally exist with
HMDs, issues like tunnel vision caused by the lack of
information from the physical environment around
participants, are eliminated. The AR system that was
used for experimentation consists of a PC, a large
screen, a video camera as sensing device, and tracking
markers (see Figure 1 for testbed setup). The AR
system is based on ARToolkit [2], which can overlay
virtual imagery onto the real world object. The virtual
objects are pre-modeled by ArchiCAD and therefore
designers can quickly develop new models according
to the design requirements.

foreigners and tourists. Treatments and scenarios were
mixed for the recruited groups to minimize the bias
from the difference of scenarios.
There are totally 14 design objectives to achieve for
each design scenario, which were exemplified from
realistic urban design practice (see Table 1). Among
them, 11 objectives are the same to each other.
Subjects were asked to accomplish those design
objectives as many as possible within a 10-minute time
window. To measure the effectiveness of the AR
system, the number of accomplished design objectives
by each group using the two methods was documented.

3.2. Subjects, method, and procedure
There are totally four groups recruited for the
experiment: two with architecture background and two
without. Each group has two members for
collaboration. The hypothesis is that subjects with
architecture background should perform better. All
groups were allowed a specific timeframe to use two
methods on two different design scenarios respectively.
All the virtual objects used in the AR system were
modeled in ArchiCAD and the quality is acceptable.
Figure 1. Setup of experimental testbed [8]

3. Experimentation
The objective of the experiment presented in this
section is to identify the strength/weakness of the AR
system in supporting collaborative urban design.
Traditional wooden block (TWB) method (see Figure
2) was chosen as the benchmark for validation of the
AR technology (ART) as shown in Figure 3.

3.1. Urban design scenarios
The major design problem the participants faced in
this experiment was to divide the area up into several
sections for the use of both residential and commercial.
Considerations of traffic and transport network were
also required to be included.
There were two realistic scenarios used by ART and
TWB, respectively. This can minimize the learning
effects that typically exist when only one scenario is
used for the two treatments. The first scenario is to
construct a layout play at Millers Point in Sydney that
focuses on re-establishing new residential area (75%)
in mixture with commercial district (25%). The second
scenario is to design a layout plan that seeks to
transform Millers Point into a new commercial area
(75%) with public services (25%) in order to attract

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 2. Design using TWB

Figure 3. Design using ART

Questionnaire was used as a subjective feedback
methodology, which the participants filled in after
experiment. Video and audio recording was used as an
objective analysis for protocol analysis and the analysis
was focused on the de-facto behavior of user (e.g.
movement, gesture and oral communication). Protocol
analysis has been accepted as a prevailing research
technique allowing elucidation of design processes in

designing (Cross et al. 1996). The continuous streams
of video and audio data for the four groups of
participants collected from the experiment were
segmented for coding and analysis according to the
developed coding scheme listed in Table 2. Four
categories of coding schemes were used: task
communication, design communication, modeling
actions, and body movement and gestures.

Table 1. List of design objectives used in the experiment
Design Objectives for Scenario 1
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

Ensure adequate connectivity for the pedestrians and
local communities.
Optimize the view of sight for local residence.
Construct a layout plan that clearly defines private and
public areas.
Construct a logical transport network for the
resident/local services.
Optimize the use of land and space for residential (or
commercial) purposes.
Make efficient usage of natural lighting (i.e. the Sun).
Establish a layout design that make useful of any existing
resources from its surrounding.
Allow the public to enjoy the waterfront scenery while
ensuring the safety.
Provide easy-access parking spaces for the public.
Provide traffic control that allows efficient flow of traffic
during peak hours while maintaining the safety for
pedestrians.
Promote accessibility and local permeability by making
places that connect with each other and are easy to move
through.
Provide legibility through development of recognisable
routes, intersections and landmarks that help people find
their way around.
Ensure the privacy and security for local residence.
Provide adaptability through development that allows
future change/redevelopment for social, technological
and economic conditions.

4. Results and discussion
The results are discussed in three aspects based on
the types of data collected: protocol analysis, objective
achievements, and questionnaire.

4.1. Results from protocol analysis
Video and verbal protocol analysis of the design
sessions and the results are presented in this section.
The data in protocol analysis were analyzed based on
difference between groups, regardless the treatment.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Design Objectives for Scenario 2
[1] Provide points of interest for the pedestrians and tourists.
[2] Allow point of interest be easy to spot and find.
[3] To promote character in townscape and landscape, by
responding to and reinforcing locally distinctive patterns
of development, landscape and culture.
[4] Construct a logical transport network for the resident/local
services.
[5] Optimize the use of land and space for residential (or
commercial) purposes.
[6] Make efficient usage of natural lighting (i.e. the Sun).
[7] Establish a layout design that make useful of any existing
resources from its surrounding.
[8] Allow the public to enjoy the waterfront scenery while
ensuring the safety.
[9] Provide easy-access parking spaces for the public.
[10] Provide traffic control that allows efficient flow of traffic
during peak hours while maintaining the safety for
pedestrians.
[11] Promote accessibility and local permeability by making
places that connect with each other and are easy to move
through.
[12] Provide legibility through development of recognizable
routes, intersections and landmarks that help people find
their way around.
[13] Ensure the privacy and security for local residence.
[14] Provide adaptability through development that allows
future change/redevelopment for social, technological and
economic conditions.

Each group actually has been through both of the two
treatments (TWB and ART) in the experiment.
The results from protocol analysis showed that
group 1 (G1) spent most of its time in design task
discussion (TWB=64.5%, ART=76.3%) regardless the
treatment used. As for design communication, it is
apparent that G1 spent more efforts in evaluating the
design ideas (TWB=47.4%, ART=44.4%). Although
this group has a fairly similar weight ratio in both
design and task related communications, the results
start to diverse based on the treatment used. In
modeling action, G1 spent most of time on moving and
replacing the existing models (43.8%) while using

TWB, whereas using ART, it tend to check the
projection screen most often (47.8%). Finally, for body
movement and gesture, G1 used many gestures for both
treatments in order to get ideas across (TWB=70.6%,
ART=71.4%).
Table 2. Coding scheme
Task Communication
Analysis Task (ANT)
Task Discussion (TDI)
Task Specification to Goal (TSP)
Task Allocation (TAL)
Argument & Debate (TCA)
Design Communication
New Idea (NEI)
Evolution of Idea (EVI)
Suggest Solution (SUS)
Accept / Reject Idea (ARI)
Argument & Debate (DCA)
Modeling Actions (marker related)
Put New (NEP)
Rotate (ROT)
Replace (REP)
Check with Screen (CHS)
Assignment (wood block) (ASW)
Body Movement & Gestures
Indication (pointing towards) (IND)
Circuit Area (CRA)
Indicate While Check With Screen (INS)

As for the group 2 (G2), it also spent most of its time
discussing the task-related matters (TWB=62.5%,
ART=72%). It is not surprising that this group also
spent large amount of time on evaluating design ideas
(TWB=59.5%, ART=50%). The results showed a
similar outcome for both groups in carrying out
collaborative works with group communications.
Compared to G1, G2 attempted to put more new
models into the design (TWB=61.5%, ART=45.5%)
rather than having them replaced or checked on the
screen. The number of gesture communications
towards certain objects remain the highest in body
movement (TWB=82.4%, ART=50%).
In order to measure the usefulness of a particular
treatment in encouraging group communications,
percentage of design communication involved in each
test was also calculated. The results show that for G1,
there were 76% of communications that were involved
in discussing design concepts while using TWB,
whereas only 50.9% in ART. In contrast, for G2, the
use of ART somehow raised the proportion (70%) of
design communication by 10% in comparison to TWB.
On the other hand, the results from the other two
architecture groups have also been analysed. The group
3 (G3) spent quite a lot of time on the section of design

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

communication. Particularly, there were about 50%
focused on the suggestion ideas with TWB. They also
used a reasonable amount of time for modelling
actions. However it was about 87.4% used in replacing
new models for TWB. In comparison with ART, this
group put much more efforts in the task discussion
which was about 62.5% among the section of task
communication. However, it is also illustrated that this
group need adjusting with the models in the sections of
body movements and gestures. It was about 47.1% and
52.9% on the indication (pointing towards) and he
indication (check with screen), respectively.
For the group 4 (G4), there are two major parts they
spent similar amount of time which are design
communication (36.5%) and task communication
(33.3%) in using TWB. This is similar to the case of
ART, where they spent about 39.3% time on design
communication. Time spent on body movement and
gestures increased from 16.7% in TWB to 23.4% in
ART.
Apparently, some common issues exist for all the
groups using ART. They all spent much time on
indication (while checking with screen) in both
modeling actions and body movements. However, it
seems that ART helped participants to develop the
design ideas better than TWB. This was probably
because that the high-fidelity textures of models gave
more space to the participant to design.

4.2. Results on objective achievements
In order to compare the effectiveness of using TWB
and ART, the number of design objectives that
completed by each group with TWB and ART was
documented. The design objective achievements within
10-minute window for the two methods by the four
groups are summarized in Table 3. It is shown that
group 1 and 2 completed 7 objectives (out of 14) while
working with the TWB and only 6 for ART. It is also
noted that regardless the method, the group 3 and 4
achieved more objectives than the group 1 and 2, which
conforms to the assumption that subjects with
architecture background should perform better due to
their established familiarity with design objectives in
urban design. There is only marginally difference in
performance by the two non-architecture group for the
comparison of the two methods. The slightly lower
performance by ART might result from usability issues
in the current initial prototype. For example, the groups
spent a portion of the time in re-adjusting the tracking
markers in order for the virtual models to appear
properly on the screen. One of the apparent advantages
of TWB is the design model control. It was easy for
subjects to access the models since their eyes and

hands can manipulate naturally without trouble. In
contrast, model control was much harder since the
subjects manipulated the markers and then had to move
their sights from the markers on the table onto the
screen to receive feedbacks when they were using
ART. Most subjects reflected that model control should
be improved for ART, in order to make it a better tool
than TWB. Furthermore, ART also made subjects
much harder to communicate with other team members
since they had to move their eye-sights around to see
the model.
Table 3. Comparison of number of design objectives
accomplished by the four groups using TWB and ART
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3(Arch)
Group 4 (Arch)

TWB
7
7
13
9

ART
6
6
10
9

The group 3 accomplished 13 objectives by TWB
and 10 using ART as compared with even numbers for
group 4. The reason is that the group 3 received less
training for using ART. Thus, participants had to spend
more time to associate each tracking marker with the
represented model. ART could help to improve the
efficiency of design activities if more training time is
allowed to familiarize the users with what each marker
represents. In summary, ART could be easier in getting
ideas across although it could also slow down the entire
process due to certain usability issues.
More results are revealed if the accomplished design
objectives are closely examined. For instance, all the
groups could construct a logical transport network for
the resident/local services and 75% participants did the
task of optimizing the use of land and space for
residential (or commercial) purposes when they used
TWB. In comparison with using ART, the result has
shown exactly the same as TWB. Therefore, both
methods are effective to be used in arrangements for
the transportation and area separation with optimism in
urban design. On the other hand, it seems that all
subjects could use ART to provide points of interest for
the pedestrians and tourists and allow point of interest
be easy to find. In addition, 75% groups could promote
character in townscape and landscape, by responding to
and reinforcing locally distinctive patterns of
development, landscape and culture in ART.

4.3. Results from survey
The advantages of TWB over ART in urban design
are model control and visual perception. It is much

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

easier for participants to access wood blocks since their
eyes and hands could coordinate naturally with no
trouble. In contrast, they had to move their sights back
and forth from projection screen and tracking markers
on table when they were using ART. It also made it
difficult to communicate with other team members
since others had to move their eyesight away from the
markers onto the screen as they discussed. The survey
results shows that most participants found that model
control is the most important element which should be
improved for making ART a better tool than TWB in
urban design.
For the aspect of navigation, some participants found
that ART did not help much and they preferred the use
of blocks which could bring them physical feelings.
For example, if a building is triangle, they can direct
see and touch the model. Some of them found that
wooden blocks gave better reference regarding the
entire planning site as they could visually know the
commercial and residential area. Furthermore, there is
a limitation from the use of markers, because each
marker with different image inside is associated with
different models. Participants had to spend time
categorizing the markers before they really started
working on the task.
There are many reported advantages of ART over
TWB. Firstly, visualization plays an essential role in
discussing design ideas. The traditional method
involves high demand on the mental ability for shared
imagination about what exactly each block represents
and it is difficulty to maintain an accurate
differentiation for all the similar-looking wood blocks.
ART provides more detailed visual aid since the
designer could directly see the virtual versions of the
final buildings. However, such advantage might also be
a drawback because too detailed models might prevent
inspirations of innovative ideas in the initial stage of
urban design with models restricted in certain areas.
For example, the tower can only be placed in some
public or commercial area. Many alternative blocks are
available to represent the tower in TWB, but only one
marker represent the tower in ART. Such pre-defined
way of linking tracking markers with models may
constraint designers from considering other design
solutions that involve the addition of new types of
structures. Therefore, it is suggested that ART might be
more suitable as a presentation tool for final design
solutions instead of sketching tool in initial design
stage. Secondly, it is reported by the subjects that ART
is more portable without the need to carry the blocks
around and saves the massing efforts for the blocks,
which are otherwise required in the traditional method.
Another interesting point is that most participants
raised the idea of combining ART and TWB in urban
design. Both the traditional design approach and the

AR system feature their own advantage. Therefore, a
mixed usage of both tools could possibly inherit the
advantages, and overcome the disadvantages. Other
findings from survey are:
• Some participants supported the tangible feedback of
ART, especially useful when designers present the
design to clients.
• Many participants agreed that ART is especially
helpful in remote collaboration where physical
mock-ups are not feasible.
• People tend to stick to the traditional way and it is
difficult to embrace a new method like ART.
• Most participants indicated their preference to work
in a group of three to four people in using ART.

Conclusions and future views
This paper presented an experimental evaluation of
an Augmented Reality system against traditional wood
block method for urban design. The augmented reality
is still a new area of research. The results show that
although some technical difficulties in the AR system
introduced negative performance factors on the
outcome, all the subjects believed that the system holds
significant potentials in urban design.
Both the traditional design approach and the AR
system feature their own advantage. Therefore, a mixed
usage of both tools could possibly inherit the
advantages, and overcome the disadvantages. Since the
AR system uses virtual representation of objects, the
system could be further developed into distance
collaboration tool by networking remote participants.
The collaboration tool can be used along with video
and audio conferencing software to enhance the
effectiveness.

References
[1] Aliakseyeu, D., Martens, J., and Rauterberg, M. A
Computer Support Tool for the Early Stages of
Architectural Design, Interacting with Computers,
18(4), 507-868. 2006.
[2] ARToolkit, url: www.hitl.washington.edu/artoolkit/
[3] Ben-Joseph, E., Chak, D., Ishii, H., Kangi, Z., Piper, B.,
Underkoffler, J., Yeung, L. Augmented Urban planning
Workbench: Overlaying Drawings, Physical Models and
Digital Simulation, Proceedings of ISMAR 2002, 203211. 2002.
[4] Cross, H., Christiaans, H. Dorst (eds). Analysing Design
Activity, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK. 1996.
[5] Kieferl, J. and Wossner, U. Mixed Realities: Improving
the Planning Process by Using Augmented and Virtual
Reality, Proceedings of the 4th Conference on new
technologies in landscape architecture, Dessau. 2003.
[6] Piekarski, W. Backpacking Scientist Rearranges the
World Using Augmented Reality. 2003. url:

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

http://www.sciencenow.org.au/sciencenow/2003/wayne
_piekarksi.htm
[7] Seichter, H. BenchWorks Augmented Reality Urban
Design, Proceedings of CAADRIA 2004, in H. S. Lee,
J.W. Choi (eds), Seoul, Korea, 937-946. 2004.
[8] Wang, X. Incorporating Intelligent Agents into
Augmented Reality for Urban Design, Proceedings of
the 12th Conference on Computer-Aided Architectural
Design Research in Asia (CAADRIA 2007), Nanjing,
China, April 19-22, In press. 2007.

