An Empirical Classification of Visual Methods for Management:
Results of Picture Sorting Experiments with Managers and Students
Martin J. Eppler
University of Lugano (USI), Faculty of Communication Sciences
{martin.eppler@lu.unisi.ch}
Ken Platts
University of Cambridge (UK), Institute of Manufacturing
{kwp@eng.cam.ac.uk}

Abstract

This paper presents an empirically derived
taxonomy of managerial visualization methods by
reporting on the results of picture sorting experiments
with a total of 65 participants (37 students and 15
experienced and 13 young managers). Participants were
asked to group 30 thumb nailed images of visualizationbased methods based on their spontaneous judgments of
similarity. By conducting an average cluster analysis on
the resulting similarity matrix (based on a pair-wise
analysis of group co-membership), an overall
classification system emerged from the participants’
groupings that revealed salient classification attributes
as well as insights into the grouping rationale of students
and (junior and senior) managers. As a main result, we
present a dendrogram of thirty visual methods and its
limitations due to biases in the perception of the
participants, diagram novelty, and due to ambiguous
conventions employed in some diagrams. In addition, we
present a list of salient grouping attributes used by the
participants. These attributes, as well as the derived
guidelines, can be used for future classification systems
in the area of managerial visualization methods.
Keywords: classification, visualization methods,
picture sorting, card sort, dendrogram, cluster analysis

1. Introduction: Classifying Visual Methods
There is a wide variety of visualization formats that
can assist managers in the construction and
communication of insights regarding their organization,
their environment or their options. Managers, however,
are often not familiar with such formats that help to
structure their knowledge graphically. Managers may
know how to use such frequently employed methods as
pie-, bar- or line-charts to represent quantitative
information and they may use matrices and trees to
represent qualitative information, but they are often not

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

aware of other, more sophisticated methods and thus
under-utilize or misuse visualization in their work [1, 2].
Existing classifications of visual formats (for a review
see [3]) do not focus on formats relevant for managers
and hence can provide only little guidance for managers
who seek to expand their visual toolbox. Providing a
management-focused, systematic and yet accessible
classification of visual methods is consequently an
important step to bring visualization knowledge closer to
the practice of every day management.
Such a
classification should ideally mirror the way that
managers (and students of management) distinguish
visualization methods, yet it should not contain the
inconsistencies caused by their ad-hoc groupings.
The objective of this paper is therefore to derive a
user-based classification of management-related visual
methods and to analyze the underlying characteristics as
a basis for the subsequent development of
comprehensible, sound and useful classifications. For
this context, we define visual methods as standardized,
rule- or procedure-based, diagrammatic (i.e., abstract)
graphic depictions that can be used to represent
information that is relevant for managerial decision
making.
There are numerous benefits that can be achieved
through such a classification: First, it can provide a
descriptive overview of the domain [4, p.12] and it can
function as an inventory or repository [ibid., p.13]. In
this way a classification can also become a problem
solving heuristic [5, p. 68]. A classification reduces the
complexity inherent in choosing a visualization format
for a particular application context. As a further benefit,
a classification helps to recognize the similarities and
differences among different visualization techniques. It
helps to compare different types along pertinent criteria.
A classification, according to Bailey is the ordering of
entities into groups or classes on the basis of their
similarity. Classifications minimize within-group

variance and maximize between-group variance [6].
Classification can also be described as a spatial-temporal
segmentation of the world (or one aspect of it). If a
classification is derived empirically, i.e., ex-post through
cluster analysis, one can refer to this classification as a
taxonomy (ibid.). In the following section we describe
how such a taxonomy was created through a picture card
sorting task completed by managers and students.
Section 3 presents the taxonomy and its characteristics.
Section 4 interprets the findings and derives implications
for theory and practice. The final section concludes with
open issues and limitations of our study.
Figure 1: Thumbnails of the 30 cards
1.
2.

2. Methods: Open Picture Sorting
In order to elicit the classification attributes and
salient features of diagrams that can be used in
management, we have conducted an all in one, open
picture card sorting experiment [7, p. 97; 8, p. 113]. In
this experiment we have asked 15 experienced managers
from Switzerland, Austria and Germany (participants at a
University of Lugano and University of Geneva’s
executive event), as well as 37 fourth year engineering
and manufacturing management students from
Cambridge University (UK), and 13 young HR managers
from the French speaking part of Switzerland (pursuing a
post graduate degree in human resource management at
the University of Lausanne) to group thirty (4 cm by 5
cm) black and white cards (see figure 1 and table 1) into
groups based on their similarity. We have chosen these
three participant types because they reflect the typical
diversity of people who would use a classification of
visual methods for their studies and work (students,
junior and senior managers). There were 21 women and
44 men in the sample.
The cards were given to each participant in an
envelope. Each envelope contained the card set in a
randomized order to prevent a sequence bias. Students
and managers were given 25-35 minutes to complete the
picture sorting task. They were asked to label each
resulting group by writing a label on each envelope that
contained a grouped set. Unlike Lohse et al. [9] we did
not present any prior criteria, questions, or rating scales
to the participants in order not to bias their responses
through previous frames or anchors introduced by the
researchers. In terms of participant demographics we
only captured their gender and group affiliation (i.e.,
student, general manager, HR manager).
The following thirty visual formats were selected for
the card sorting task.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

Fishbone diagram
Porter’s value
chain
The BCG portfolio
matrix
Porter’s five
forces diagram
Technology
roadmap
Trail diagram
Iceberg diagram
Toulmin diagram
Radar chart
Gantt chart
Steps diagram
Concentric circles
diagram
Decision tree
Pie chart
Cartesian
coordinates

16. Connectance
diagram
17. Temple diagram
18. Org chart / tree
19. Pyramid
20. Venn diagram
21. Profile chart
22. Loop (or system)
diagram
23. Concept map
24. Bar chart
25. Life cycle diagram
26. Flow chart
27. Mind map
28. Morphological box
29. Line chart
30. Strategy map (BSC)

Table 1: A selection of 30 visualization-based
methods (ordered by vertical column in figure 1)

These thirty formats were chosen because they have
been used in management media, such as magazines
(e.g., the Harvard Business Review1), in management
books (such as [12]) or on management resource
websites that contain directories of typical management
methods (such as www.valuebasedmanagement.net). The
collection was also compiled so that the diversity of
managerial visualization methods would be reflected
adequately in the selection. The collection thus includes
quantitative, and qualitative, generic and specific,
conceptual
and
metaphoric,
structural
and
1

For example:
Stairs: HBR July-August 1999, p. 91
Iceberg: HBR November-December 1996, p. 115
Line chart: HBR May-June 1995, p. 80
Life cycle: HBR Sept-Oct 1999, p. 49
Value chain: HBR November-December 1995, p. 78
Loop diagram: HBR May-June 1999, p. 64
Pyramid: HBR March-April 1999, p. 99
Venn diagram: HBR July –August 1995, p. 120 (January-February
1997, p. 75, HBR January February 1998, p.117
Bar chart: HBR January-February 1995, p. 129; July-August 1995, p.
78
Toulmin diagram: Huff (1990)
BCG-Matrix, value chain, five forces, strategy map, life cycle: http://
www.valuebasedmanagement.net [last accessed in January 2007]

procedural/temporal formats. We have paid special
attention to homogenize their variance, and reduce
distracting features in each diagram (such as color). For
this purpose we have drawn all card pictures in the same
visual, black and white style, with place holders (capital
letters) as content elements.

‘cut-off’ point, starting from the right, different
groupings emerge from this dendrogram. In isolating
groups, it can help to complement this analysis with
multi-dimensional scaling maps where spatial proximity
implies similarity perceptions (see figure 4 and 5).

3. Results: Emergent Grouping Patterns
In this section we present the results of the picture
sorting exercise in terms of the groups that resulted from
the average cluster analysis performed with the Prodax
statistical data analysis and visualization tool
(www.prodax.ch), as well as the resulting groups from a
multi-dimensional scaling analysis and rendering,
transforming the similarity ratings into a Euclidian
distance model [8, p. 411]. From the original set of 65
participants we have eliminated three outliers (one from
each sub-set of German-speaking senior managers,
French-speaking junior managers, and English-speaking
students). Each outlier was chosen because his or her
grouping behavior was extremely different from the rest
of the participants in that group (i.e., a lot less or more
groups, unlikely pairs). The outlier was identified by
conducting a squared matrix scaling on the aggregated
group matrices and visualizing the results as a
dissimilarity-based multi-dimensional scaling three
dimensional map. For the senior manager group, for
example, participant No. 12 was eliminated, as illustrated
by the MDS map of the senior management participants
below.

Figure 3: The resulting dendrogram (n=62)

Performing a multi-dimensional scaling in two and
three dimensions based on the combined similarity
ratings resulted in the two diagrams represented below.

Figure 2: Similarities of the profiles of the 15
managers and the resulting outlier

The application of an average cluster analysis
resulted in the following dendrogram that shows the
aggregated similarity judgments of all participants and
thus the resulting overall grouping of the thirty methods.
The further the branching is towards the left, the more
often cards were put into the same group by the
participants (for example: line charts and life cycle charts
were almost always put into the same group, whereas
there was not a lot of agreement regarding the group
membership of the Value Chain, Five Forces or Strategy
Map picture with other cards). Depending on the chosen

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 4: MDS Group Analysis (n=62)

The stress number in the two-dimensional MDS
image is an indicator for the amount of error that resulted
from the relative positioning of all items on a plane. The
stress for this picture is 0.165. This indicator can be

further reduced by depicting the groups in a three
dimensional space, as shown below.

and thus followed a typical novice classification based
on look rather than purpose or functionality.
n>10

6≤ n≤ 10

3≤ n ≤5

Trees

Org Charts

Flow
diagrams
Process
diagrams

Decision diagrams

Statistics
diagrams
2d diagrams

Time
diagrams
Hierarchic
diagrams

Link or
Dependency
diagrams
Data charts

Xy(z)
diagrams

Relationship
diagrams
Static diagrams

Comparative
diagrams
Classification
diagrams
Trail/path
diagrams
Mathematical
charts
Mind maps

Strategy diagrams

Figure 5: A 3D Rendering of the MDS results (n=62)

The stress for this three dimensional positioning of
the methods is lower, specifically at 0.128.
The pairs with the highest perceived similarity were
the line chart and the life cycle chart, the flow chart and
the Toulmin diagram, followed by the bar and pie chart.
The grouping attributes, as recorded in the written
group labels on each group envelope, were as follows:
• By form or shape (tree, flow, spider, coordinates,
charts using circles, hierarchy, linear flow,
maps/diagrams/charts)
• By function / purpose (matching, analysis of
multiple options, assessment of market, decision,
relationship, planning)
• By content (data, goals, discrete information,
absolute quantities, dynamic vs. static)
• By application domain (strategic managerial,
mathematical, human resources, project planning,
statistical diagrams)
Other, less frequently used classification attributes
include the following:
• By dimensionality (2D chart, xy charts, xyz
charts)
• By complexity (basic, complex)
• By familiarity (‘famous’)
• By appeal (‘boring’)
• By prototype member (‘flow charts’)
In terms of frequency, the following table lists the
group labels that were used more than ten times, between
six and ten times, and between three and five times by
the participants. From the most widely used group labels
emerges a clear distinction in terms of process or time
diagrams and more structural tree or hierarchic
diagrams. Most of the labels used were format-oriented

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Area diagrams

Table 2: Frequency of the group labels

The average amount of groups used per participant
was 6.7 (for the 15 senior managers the average was 6.6
groups, for the 37 Cambridge students it was 6.5, and for
the 13 Lausanne junior managers it was 7.5). From these
results we can derive groups of similarity as perceived by
the participants. We present these results as overall
results, as gender-specific results, and as professional
group results (students, junior vs. senior managers) as
they differ significantly.
Overall Results
The overall analysis of the similarity judgments
leads to the following eight groups of methods on the
lowest level of grouping (see figure 3):
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Grids (profile chart, morphological box,
coordinates, BCG matrix)
Quantitative charts (bar chart, pie chart, life
cycle, line chart, radar chart)
Containment structures (pyramid, temple, Venn
concentric circles)
Linking/relating diagrams (Five Forces,
Strategy Maps, connectance, loop diagram)
Left-to-right or top down arrows (Fishbone,
flow chart, Toulmin chart)
Process charts (Gantt, roadmap, value chain)
Visual metaphors (iceberg, trail, stairs)
Hierarchic visualization methods (mind map,
tree, decision tree, concept map).

As a first main result, we can see that the
participants have grouped the methods mostly by their
look, and not their purpose. They have grouped methods
that serve vastly different purposes (such as fishbone,
Toulmin diagrams and flow charts) together simply
because they look similar. The participants do, however,
distinguish temporal and structural diagrams as well as

quantitative and qualitative methods (for example: Venn
and pie charts were almost never put into the same
group). This latter distinction becomes especially
apparent when focusing on the purely male group (see
next section).

a large majority of women which may have influenced
the final result as well.

Comparison of Female and Male Groups
Calculating the resulting dendrogram for the 21
women and 44 men separately revealed significant
differences in the way that men and women group the
visual methods:
As an emergent group at the highest level in the all
men sample a quantitative methods group emerged
consisting of line chart, life cycle, bar chart, and pie
chart, as well as radar chart (see the figure below). This
purely quantitative group did not emerge on the highest
level in the female group (see figure 7).

Figure 7: Results of the all female (n=21) cluster
analysis

In the next section we interpret these results and deduce
guidelines for classifications of visual methods for
management.

4. Discussion: Interpretation of Findings
In terms of overall results there are a number of
striking findings worth further comments and analyses.
These findings relate to the classification attributes, the
emergent groups and the differences among participant
groups. In this section we discuss these issues and
attempt to derive prescriptive guidelines from them.
Figure 6: Results of the all male (n= 44) cluster
analysis

The male participants saw the org chart tree and the
decision tree less often as similar than the women.
Women also saw Venn diagrams and concentric circles
as more similar than men perceived them to be.
Comparison of Students and Managers
Comparisons among the groups resulted in similar
differences (probably due to gender majorities in the
respective groups): the mostly male Cambridge students’
categorization led to an all quantitative group on the
highest level, whereas the mixed junior and senior
manager groups did not. The junior managers group had

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Employed Classification Attributes
As illustrated in table 2 and by the various
dendrograms and MDS maps, the dominating
classification attributes relate to the visualization format.
In fact, many similarity judgments were based on the
presence of such secondary elements as arrows and
boxes, even if they had entirely different meanings. This
illustrates the need for knowledge about a visual
method’s context before it can be properly understood
and classified. It also highlights the need for a more
standardized visual business language, including explicit,
grammar- or syntax-like rules and conventions. Sensible
classification attributes did however emerge, such as
those that distinguish among quantitative and qualitative
and process versus (hierarchic or relational) structure
based methods. An interesting fact (that is in line with

modern categorization theory and its discussion of
prototype effects, see [10]) is that a few people used
particularly well known methods as category labels (such
as mind maps, pyramids, or flow charts).
It is thus interesting to note that most participants
classified the methods by form rather than by purpose.
This finding is consistent with Lohse et al.’s results [9],
but we also identified classification principles previously
not identified by Lohse, such as complexity, domain,
familiarity or prototype members.
The classification by form indicates that the
participants’ previous knowledge of visualization
methods is not very high, as classification by perception
rather than by purpose is a typical novice trait. This
confirms our initial hypothesis that knowledge about
visualization methods is not widespread.
Emergent Visualization Groups
As another striking finding, participants did not
distinguish between fixed category methods (such as
Porter’s five forces, Toulmin map, strategy map, BCG
matrix) and more open visualization formats that do not
give any content indications (such as mind maps, concept
maps, concentric circles, etc.). Content specific visual
methods with pre-given labels have been shown to yield
superior results in terms of performance than generic
methods [11]. Yet, although we did not include any
example content in the diagrams to highlight the pregiven categories, very few people clustered them
together in a group.
It became apparent that the Toulmin map, an
argument visualization technique, is among the least
known methods in the collection, as a great majority of
the participants has put it into the same group as the flow
chart. Unlike a flow chart, the Toulmin map does not
represent a process, but rather the structure of an
argument. This is due to the temporal reading of the
arrow symbol. This misreading of arrows also led to the
fact that causal mappings such as in the iceberg diagram
or the strategy map were put into the same group as
temporal depictions, such as the trail metaphor. The
picture sort thus revealed that the meaning of arrows in a
diagram can be ambiguous. Perhaps this was also caused
by the lack of real content in the diagram depictions.
As stipulated by some classifications [13, 14] the
participants saw some visual metaphors as a distinct
group. Stairs, iceberg and trail were grouped similarly,
but distinct from temple or pyramid. It seems that the
upward and downward orientation, as well as the
presence or lack of arrows of a visual metaphor
influenced the grouping decision.
We also found evidence that the grouping decisions
may be biased by certain salient graphic features in
diagrams, such as arrows, arrow directions or boxes,
even if these features are not essential for the diagram

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

type. A strategy map, for example, was classified as a
pyramid because the arrows happened to resemble that
shape.
Differences among Participant Groups
The greatest differences emerged in terms of gender:
Women seem to either apply more sophisticated
classification attributes than men, or they are more
inconsistent. Future research should clarify this aspect, as
well as other differences among different groups, such as
culture-wise, experience-wise, or in terms of professional
focus (engineering versus communication).
From these findings we can derive first tentative
guidelines that can be used in the construction of a
classification for management practice and training.
Guidelines
From our empirical findings we can derive practical
guidelines that can be considered when classifying visual
methods for management, whether for use in
visualization software or online tools used by managers,
as a structure for management textbooks or manuals, or
for internal tool and methods directories. The main
purpose of such guidelines is to structure visualization
methods so that they can be easily accessed and
understood and allocated to management tasks. These
tentative guidelines are summarized in the box below.
• Provide more than one single classification scheme in order
to make the methods more accessible.
• Structure the methods by purpose, application domain, by
represented content, by format, by difficulty, or by
popularity, as our findings show that different people employ
radically different logics to classify these groups.
• Distinguish quantitative from qualitative methods.
• Distinguish procedural or temporal from structural methods.
• Distinguish visual metaphors from diagrams.
• Choose unambiguous informative names for the visual
methods that clearly distinguish them and express their
function.
• Distinguish clear background and foreground structures to
improve the legibility of a diagram.
• Use clear unambiguous prototype members to explain each
group in the class.
• Differentiate (graphically) seemingly similar visual methods
(‘false friends’) that serve different purposes by employing a
different visual style (for example to differentiate
relationship versus temporal arrows).

Following these simple guidelines may help in
distinguishing visual methods clearly from one another.

5. Conclusion
Using visualization in management – beyond the
mere depiction of quantitative content – in order to
represent elaborate knowledge is still, it seems in light of
our study, a largely unexploited practice. Managers and
students alike seem not to be too familiar with seminal
methods that employ graphic schemes. Their

classifications are often based on surface level
resemblances and do not take into account the more
intricate details of use, application context and
conventions. It is thus all the more important to provide
easy interfaces to access this rich field of knowledge and
group visualization methods based on their use rather
than their look. The classification attributes and “false
friends” that have been surfaced by our research can
provide useful guidance in this endeavor in terms of what
users may find intuitive or counter-intuitive. These
inconsistent groupings also point at the need to make the
rules and conventions of a visual business language more
explicit and known. This could mean to harmonize the
use and meaning of (often ambiguous) symbols such as
arrows, boxes, circles, directions, and the like. The visual
Universal Markup Language UML (and its diagram
templates) in the realm of computer science is such an
attempt that could be used as a benchmark and
inspiration for the business community. Our main
contribution in this paper lies in accessing junior and
senior managers’, as well as students’ perception of
visual methods and revealing salient classification
attributes. It also lies in pointing to gender differences in
these perceptions. From these empirical findings we have
derived first tentative guidelines for useful and useable
classifications of visual methods for management. Based
on the conducted card sorting task it seems worthwhile to
classify visual methods into quantitative and qualitative
forms, and in the qualitative area into (hierarchic or
relational) structures and processes.
Our inquiry, however, has not been without
limitations. Methodologically, the restrictions on the
allocated time for the card sorting (between 25 and 35
minutes), the missing prior knowledge about some of the
visualization formats on behalf of the participants, the
limited participant population, and the generic picture
thumbnails (i.e., the lack of illustrative content in the
diagrams) and the schematic style (and thus perhaps
drawing particular attention to the arrangement of the
elements) may have negatively affected the reliability of
our findings. In addition, the selection of 30 methods can
be criticized as arbitrary, as it is not based on absolute
measures, but rather on individual ratings of importance
and representation.
In future studies, we would like to analyze the
differences in the groupings among the different
participant types more closely, i.e., engineering students
vs. communication students, line managers vs. HR
managers, English participants vs. Swiss or Chinese
participants. We would also like to test whether the
provision of examples affects the grouping results. We
would also like to test the impact of prior knowledge
about these methods on their subsequent classification.
These prospective findings, we hope, will enable us
to further improve existing classifications of visual
methods for management and make them both sound and

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

accessible so that visual literacy becomes an every day
skill of future managers.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Chao Wang, Ralph Lengler and
Tatiana Amaudruz for their valuable assistance in the
card sorting task preparation and analysis.

References
[1] Meyer, J.-A. (1996) Visualisierung im Management,
Wiesbaden: Deutscher Universitäts-Verlag.

[2] Meyer, J.-A. (1997) “The acceptance of visual information
in management”. Information & Management, 32, 275287.
[3] Blackwell, A.F., Engelhardt, Y. (1998) A Taxonomy of
Diagram Taxonomies. In Proceedings “Thinking with
Diagrams 98: Is there a science of diagrams?”, 60-70.
reprinted in: Olivier, P. Anderson, M. & Meyer, B. (Eds.),
Diagrammatic Representation and Reasoning, SpringerVerlag.
[4] Bailey, K.D., Typologies and Taxonomies: An
Introduction to Classification Techniques, Thousand
Oakes: Sage, 1994.
[5] Dherbey, G.R., Connaissance des choses naturelles et des
affaires humaines chez Aristote, in: Samana, G. (Ed.) La
Connaissance des Choses, Paris : Ellipses, 2005.
[6] Bowker, G. & S. L. Star (1999) Sorting Things Out:
Classification and Its Consequences. Cambridge.
[7] Rugg, G., Mc George, P. (2005) “The sorting techniques:
a tutorial paper on card sorts, picture sorts and item sorts”,
Expert Systems, 22(8), 94-107.
[8] Borg, I., Groenen, P.J.F. (2005) Modern Multidimensional
Scaling, 2nd Edition, New York: Springer.
[9] Lohse, G., Biolsi, K (1994)., Walker, N., Rueter, H.: “A
classification
of
visual
representations”,
in
Communications of the ACM,. 36-49. Massachusetts:
MIT Press, 1994.
[10] Lakoff, G. Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things. What
Categories Reveal about the Mind, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. 1987
[11] Fischer, F, Bruhn, J., Gräsel, C., Mandl. H. (2002)

“Fostering Collaborative Knowledge Construction with
visualization tools.” Learning and Instruction, 12(2), 213232.
[12] Huff, A. (1990) (Ed.), Mapping Strategic Thought, New
York: Wiley,.
[13] Horn, R. (1998) Visual Language, Lexington: MacroVue
Press.
[14] Eppler, M., Burkhard, R. (2007) “Visual Representations
in Knowledge Management”, Journal of Knowledge
Management, forthcoming.

