Visualizing the Decision-Making Process in a Face-to-Face Meeting
Fouad Shoie Alallah, Mahtab Nezhadasl, Pourang Irani, Dean Jin
Department of Computer Science
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, MB R3T2N2
+1 (204) 474-8340
{umalallf|umnezhad|irani|djin}@cs.umanitoba.ca
Abstract
The decision making process is usually one of the most
critical elements of any face-to-face meeting. Participants
in a group meeting follow certain procedures and
guidelines for facilitating the decision making process.
These include such rules as turn taking, not interrupting
the consultation, and keeping suggestions or ideas clear
and concise. The ultimate objective of such meetings is to
arrive at decisions in a timely manner by having a diversity
of opinions from as many participants as possible. We
postulate that by visualizing the group dynamics during a
face-to-face meeting, administrators might be able to get a
better handle on the strengths and weaknesses of the
group’s consultation process. The end result would be to
improve the overall quality of meetings. We present a
visualization tool that captures and reveals the ongoing
social dynamics during the decision-making process within
a face-to-face and real-time meeting. Our system captures
the required data trough a simple and easy-to-use interface
and then visualizes the outcome of the meeting.

Keywords
Social visualization, group dynamics, turn-taking
conversation, decision-making process, real time displays,
computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW).

1. Introduction
Decision making is a complex social phenomenon. It is
considered to be a cognitive process that helps members of
a group choose an action among a set of alternatives and to
ultimately arrive at a decision, typically referred to as “a
final choice”. Examples of making complex decisions can
is apparent in many environments such as during board
meetings of a corporation, a gathering of doctors before a
complex surgery, and in meetings held by government
officials. The complexity of the decision making process is
a factor of the experience, the background and the number
of participants. As the number of participants rises and as
individuals differ in their opinions, making decisions can
be a daunting task. They may have different viewpoints

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

and ideas about a common problem. For instance, imagine
a scenario in which a group of board directors meet around
a table to decide about hiring new employees for different
departments of their company. Each member of the group
would provide a different perspective from an economic, a
social, or an administrative point of view. Furthermore, in
a group setting it is possible that some individuals may
influence others’ decisions or votes while others may
dominate the discussion.
Understanding the group interaction during a face-toface meeting can enhance the quality and participant’s
experience during meetings. Usually, participants are
unaware of their actions, even though subtle, and how
these can impact the outcomes. For instance, it would be
ideal if the manager or administrator of an organization
were to look at reports of the collaboration, cooperation
and consultation during meetings. The manager could
identify such trends as “who has been the dominant
character during most meetings?”, “if a decision has
reached, how long it has taken to make a decision?”, “have
participants built upon each other's suggestion, or have
they mostly gone off tangent?”, “how many topics were
covered during the meetings?”, etc. Based on such reports
the administrators can introduce new policies, can educate
the participants, and can facilitate more fluid interactions.
Visualization tools can support and facilitate the types
of questions presented above. In a visual tool, details of the
interactions among group members can be represented and
captured. It can help the participants and meeting reviewers
gain a better sense of the group’s social milieu by
portraying patterns (specially those that are unknown) that
occurred during a meeting. In this paper, we present a
visual representation that intends to capture all the
communication and coordination incidents between group
members during a decision making process in a face-toface setting. The paper first presents literature related to
online and face-to-face meetings, followed by an
explanation on the two components of the system designed
to capture the data necessary for the visualization as well
as their data types. We describe the details of our visual
depictions by means of a scenario.

2. Related Literature
A substantial body of research has been developed and
devoted to the study of social communication in groups
from various viewpoints such as sociology, computersupported cooperative work (CSCW), human-computer
interaction (HCI), and linguistics. The work being
discussed here has been largely inspired by a number of
existing social visualizations that fall under the category of
online and face-to-face meetings.

2.1. Online Meetings
Online environments consist of any textual/audio/video
communication or collaboration over computer networks
such as chat programs, instant messaging, and email
applications. Visualizing the interactions that take place in
such an environment is not a trivial task both in terms of
what to depict and how to depict it. However, several
systems have successfully demonstrated the benefits of
visualizing the dynamics of online meetings.
Coterie, People-Garden, and Loom [4] are three
projects that use semantic information to visualize patterns
in online conversations. These projects have different
methods to visualize online users’ interactions. Coterie
visualizes an Internet Relay Chat (IRC) discussion. It
provides a representation of both participants’ activities
and a structural analysis of their written conversation. It
depicts users in a conversation as ovals with different
colors where the ovals change in response to the users’
dialogue. Also, it uses algorithms to support conversational
unity by grouping messages by common content. PeopleGarden uses different mapping techniques to illustrate
users’ conversations. It uses flowers and petals to show
participation activities on a message board. For instance,
the height of the stem indicates user’s involvement and
number of the petals reflect the number of posting
comments. Loom makes use of two visualization
techniques to illustrate discussion in Usenet newsgroups.
The system visualizes both newsgroup participants into
groups based on their involvement in a topic and their
conversational threads.
Threaded Text Chat [12] is another visualization that
addresses some limitations of text chats by modeling the
basic turn-taking structure of face-to-face conversations.
The issues include scarcity of links between people and
what they say, lack of listening-in-progress, lack of turnsin-progress, no control over turn positioning, and lack of
useful recordings and social context. Threaded Chat
presents all chat turns in the form of a tree similar to the
way Microsoft Windows Explorer shows the file system on
a hard disk. Moreover, it organizes turns into turn-andresponse structures called threads that can be extended to
any size. Results have shown that users quickly adapt to
Threaded Chat in spite of giving lower preference rankings
to it compared to standard chat systems. Furthermore, user

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

performance with Threaded Chat was as equally effective
as standard chat.
Several studies have focused on designing an interface
for very large-scale online conversations such as in email
and Usenet newsgroups. Conversation Map [11] is an
interface to browse and display both social and semantic
networks of very large-scale online conversations. The
Conversation Thumbnail [14] is an interface that employs a
focus+context technique and a quick automatic search
mechanism to explore very large-scale discussions. Initial
studies have shown that it is faster than a standard web
interface to navigate very large-scale conversations.
Conversation Space (ConverSpace) [9] is a spatial
representation of computer-mediated conversation that
supports multithreaded discourse structure and improves
oral conversations as well as oral traits of asynchronous
text-based discourse. In ConverSpace, the authors [13]
presented a set of visualizations to depict different patterns
of activity and the structure of discussion threads in social
cyberspaces such as Usenet newsgroups.
Babble [6] and subsequently Loops [5] were two other
studies that were conducted to provide a historical
visualization of text-based group conversation. These
systems show users’ presence and their activities,
conversation topics, and conversation contexts in a
categorical fashion. Although the systems present more
information about group activities, they lack information
abstraction.

2.2. Face-to-face Meetings
Face-to-face meetings require participants to meet in
the same physical place. They differ from online meetings
in that many non-verbal cues can be easily captured in such
settings.
DiMicco, et al. [3] showed that presenting real-time
displays of social information within a group influences the
behavior of the group during a collaboration task so that
over-talkative participants are encouraged to speak less and
under-talkative participants to speak more. As result, it was
found that the group can make more effective and higherquality decisions. The interface in [3] is limited to some
extent by primarily showing how much participants spoke
during a meeting. Furthermore, it requires users to wear a
microphone which may lead to unnatural tendencies during
the meeting process. The conversation chain model [7] is a
visualization system designed to show how students
acquire an understanding of a particular subject. It achieves
this goal by visualizing the classroom progress and the
interactions between students and the teacher. The
visualization illustrates the students’ questions, responses,
and interpretation as well as the quality of the discussion.
Chen [1] also developed a multiparty videoconferencing
system to visualize the interaction dynamics of a remote
classroom. It automatically provides feedback if students
are speaking, making gestures, or moving in their seats.
Second Messenger [2] is a visualization system that

provides an automated method for reviewing the turntaking patterns in a face-to-face meeting so that even nonparticipants can gain insight into the group interaction
dynamics. The system provides four different depictions
for ongoing participation levels, turn-taking patterns,
overlapped speech, and floor control by collecting spoken
timestamps. The results showed that users were able to
recognize people’s side and their extreme behavioral
differences based only on the speaking patterns exhibited
in a debate.
None of the above mentioned studies investigated the
ability to visualize coherent group patterns in online and
face-to-face meetings. We address this issue by presenting
a visualization technique that uses several visual mappings
to see and facilitate post-meeting analyses.

3. The Elements of a Face-to-face Meeting
We first present aspects of a face-to-face meeting that we
felt were important to capture. Before a meeting begins,
participants identify a chairperson (or chair). The chair is
responsible for ensuring that the meeting proceeds fluidly
and ensures that people talk in turn and stay on the topic.
The chair is also responsible for ensuring that items on the
meeting agenda are attended to. Moreover, every meeting
has a secretary to keep the records of the meeting including
the meeting’s agenda(s), the people who were present or
absent, and the content of their consultation and input.
Usually the secretary of the meeting records decisions and
actions that need to be carried out as a result of the
meeting. After starting the meeting, with the permission
from the chairman, participants express their ideas about
the desired agenda as well as their positions. They consult
by showing agreement, disagreement or naturalness to a
topic. During the consultation period members can
maintain their positions or can express new ideas based on
what is learned from others. At the end of the consultation
period for a particular agenda item, a group decision is
made by a vote. However, in some circumstances, a
definite decision can not be made and it can be deferred to
the next meeting.

4. Visual Mapping Strategy
To come up with a visual representation we based our
design on Mackinlay’s [8] perceptual ranking matrix. This
assisted us in the design of the system and mappings
explained in Section 4. Mackinlay categorizes the visual
mapping matrix based on the underlying type of the data quantitative, ordinal or nominal. Figure 1 summarizes the
ranking of perceptual tasks for each type of data.

Figure 1: The rank of perceptual tasks. (adopted
from [8] ).
We selected eleven variables to visualize in our
system; we categorize these variables based on the
effectiveness ranking chart of Mackinlay [8] . These
variables are described as follows and their mappings to
visual attributes are provided in Table 1.
• Individual attendance: did an individual attend the
meeting?
• Individual activities: was the individual speaking,
listening, or interrupting?
• Individual decision: did the individual agree, disagree
or abstain.
• Group decision: did the group agree, disagree or defer
the topic.
• Agenda: a specific topic to be discussed.
• Number of participants: number of people present or
absent.
• Chairperson: the person selected to coordinate the
meeting.
• Duration of topic consultation: how long it took a
participant to discuss the issue.
Variable name
Individual Attendance
Individual activities
Individual decision
Group decision
Agenda
Participants
Chairperson
Duration

Variable
type
Q O N

√
√
√
√
√
√
√
√

Variable map
Color
Color
Color
Color + texture
Position + texture
Position
Color
Position

Table 1: The category of variables we used in
both components based on the Makckinlay’s
approach [8]

5. Capturing Required Data
In order to capture data with our system, we designed two
components. The first interface is used for creating the
particulars of the meeting. The second interface is used for

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

capturing the specifics encountered during the meeting.
The system’s user, in this case is the secretary who is
required to capture the data required for these two
interfaces. The first interface contains three data sets which
are the meeting information, the meeting agenda item(s),
and meeting participants. Meeting information includes
general data about the meeting such as the name, date, and
location of the meeting. The second data set contains the
meeting agenda item(s) that need to be discussed. The third
set of data is the meeting participants. This data set has a
checkbox for each participant (in this example there are ten
participants, so ten checkboxes), who attends the meeting
and a combo box to choose a chairperson for the meeting
who ensures that the meeting is moving smoothly. In
addition, there is a list provided for any external
participants that can join the meeting on an ad-hoc basis.
Figure 2 shows our first interface with its data sets that
must be completed before going to the next interface.
The second interface is filled out from the moment the
meeting starts to its end. It contains the information
captured under the following sets:
• Meeting trend: the system enables the user (in our case
the secretary) to identify all the meeting activities
within a series of time slots. For instance, “who is
talking now?”, “who is waiting?” and so on. If a
person is talking the button listed under “Speak”
beside the participant is pressed. This captures in the
system the time the person is talking. If another person
speaks instead their respective button is pressed and
the system captures the data from that point onward.
• Meeting agenda: the buttons for the meeting agenda
allow the user to navigate and select one of the items
listed for the meeting agendas, as entered initially in
the first interface.
• Participants’ attendance: check boxes allow updating
the attendance of a participant. If any of the
participants who have attended the discussion of the
topic leaves before the meeting has ended, the user can
record that through the interface. Subsequently, if they
re-enter the meeting the secretary recording the data
can reselect the check box.
• Individual decision for each agenda item: by pressing
on the “Vote” button, the systems opens a new panel
(Figure 4) that can facilitate entering the decision of
each individual.
• Group decision for each agenda item: by pressing on
one of three buttons in the section labeled “Group
Decision”, the system can record whether the group
agreed, disagreed or deferred the topic of discussion.
• Timeline scale: the system gives the ability to change
the time slots for the meeting in each item agenda to
present more details.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 2: The first interface to capture the data
before the start of a meeting.
Figure 3 demonstrates our second interface in order to
record the activities done during a meeting.

Figure 3: The second interface designed to record the
data during a meeting. After clicking the Vote button
the interface will change to capture individuals’
decisions as shown in Figure 4.

Figure 5: Our designed mapping technique for the visualization group decision making.
• The group decision for each agenda item. This is the
overall result of the vote on each agenda item: agree,
disagree, or deferred.
• Hidden activities such as collaboration among some
participants in changing the final decision.

Figure 4: User, secretary, select individuals’
decisions by choose their positions in regarding
to each agenda.

In the visualization graph, we have different data
values including numerical and categorical data such as the
topics on the meeting agenda, the names and number of
participants in attendance, the time taken for each agenda
item, the total meeting time, the designated chairperson,
and individual activities of the participants.
We use three visual marks: position, shape, and color.
Position is used for showing the time on an axis. The
agenda items are shown using a glyph or shape. Color is
used for showing the type of participant activity
(attending/not attending, speaking for/against/not decided,
waiting to speak) and the outcome of individual decisions
(Agreed, Disagreed, Abstain). Figure 5 presents these
mappings for our visualization.

6. Visualizing the Decision Making Process

7. Scenario

After inserting data through the data recording component,
the system finally provides a visualization interface of the
group decision making process. It uses a three dimensional
graph to present the following data:
• The overall meeting time.
• The time taken to complete each agenda item.
• A description of the different meeting agenda items.
• The meeting participants.
• The participants who missed the meeting.
• The chairperson for the meeting.
• Individual activities:
1. Who was speaking about the topic with an
opinion for, against or undecided about it.
2. Who was waiting to speak.
3. Who spoke the most time during the discussion.
4. Who was active in the discussion.
5. The trend of the decision making process (i.e.
whether participants built on each other’s
suggestion, or they mostly went off tangent).
• The individual decision of each participant who voted.
• The total number of participants who agreed, disagreed, or abstained from the vote.

We demonstrate the visualization of a group decision
making process using a scenario. Acme Co. is a company
with a board of directors who are meeting to make a
number of decisions regarding the company. Sometimes
other directors from a third party affiliation attend Acme’s
meetings. On one particular meeting, the topics for
discussion on the meeting agenda are:
• Hiring managers for new departments
• Issuing additional common shares for the company
• Improving marketing efforts
• The production process for Widget products
• The establishment of a new corporation
• Approval of new policies recently proposed
There are ten board directors who are expected to attend
the meeting and no individuals from third parties. The
attendees are Dean (designated as the Chairperson), Fouad,
Mahtab, Andrea, Jennifer, Gina, Michelle, Katherine, Bill
and Sophei. A secretary is responsible for monitoring and
observing the meeting’s activities. The activities are
recorded on a Tablet PC operated by a stylus using an
application that executes our proposed meeting recording
component. Before starting the meeting, the secretary

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

creates a new meeting profile in the system by filling out
the following meeting information (shown in Figure 2):
Name:
Meeting No. 13
Date:
December, 9, 2006
Location: E2-460
Purpose: Annual Meeting
Six meeting agenda items are entered. An identifying
symbol is chosen for each agenda item. The symbol is used
to help maximize the space available for summarizing and
presenting visual information about the meeting after it is
completed. The names for all expected participants are
selected and Dean is chosen as the chair. When the meeting
starts, the secretary clicks on the Start Meeting button. This
sets in motion the capturing of the dynamics of the meeting
in the Discussion recording system interface (shown in
Figure 3).
As the meeting is taking place, the secretary uses the
column of check boxes and buttons on the left hand side of
the Discussion recording system interface (see Figure 3) to
keep track of who is attending, who is speaking and who is
waiting to speak. On the right hand side, the interface
scrolls horizontally through the seconds of the meeting,
recording the current status of the meeting using colored
blocks.
By default, the Discussion recording system records a
white block for each second each participant attends the
meeting. When a participant leaves, the secretary removes
their checkmark from the Attend column. The Discussion
recording system records a grey box (indicating “Not
attending”) for each second the participant is not present
for the meeting.
When a participant speaks (whether or not they were
permitted to at that time) the secretary presses their Speak
button and by default the Discussion recording system
records a light blue color indicating an initial status of “Not
decided” for the opinion of the speaker. The secretary
listens as the speaker continues and determines if they are
expressing an opinion for, against or not decided about the
topic being discussed. The Speaking box (shown on the
right hand side of Figure 3) overlaid on the scrolling view
of the meeting status permits the secretary to select an
appropriate color (green, red or light blue) for the colored
block that characterizes the opinion (for, against, or not
decided, respectively) the speaker is presenting. When a
participant indicates a desire to speak (either by raising
their hand or through some other gesture), the secretary
chooses their Wait button. The Discussion recording
system records a purple block each second for the duration
of the period the participant waits before being given the
opportunity to speak.
At a certain point in the discussion of an agenda item
the chair typically determines that it is time to vote on the
matter. At this time, the secretary presses the Vote button
on the Discussion recording system. The timing stops and a
set of buttons for recording the individual decisions for
each meeting participant opens on the right hand side of
the Discussion recording system screen as shown in

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 4. As each participant indicates their individual
decision related to the agenda item being voted on, the
secretary records it by pressing their corresponding
Agreed, Disagreed or Abstain button. The secretary presses
the corresponding Agreed, Disagreed or Deferred button to
record the group decision resulting from the vote after all
participant responses have been tallied. The secretary
continues to the next item in the meeting agenda by
pressing the Next button and a new iteration of recording
the discussion is started again.
The discussion recording/voting process continues
until all the items on the agenda have been discussed and
voted on. At the end of the meeting, the secretary presses
the View Result button to see a detailed visualization of the
meeting discussion and vote results as shown in Figure 6.
Many different characteristics of the discussion can be
observed from the results shown:
The Widget production process agenda item elicited
discussion from many participants. Sophie was the first
person to speak, followed by Bill and Michelle. During the
discussion, Katherine waited to talk after Gina, but ended
up getting interrupted by Bill and Michelle (who spoke out
of turn) before she had an opportunity to speak. Although
the discussion was short (only about 600 seconds or 10
mintues), there was much discussion. Some of the
discussion was not decided, while a few participants were
decidedly speaking for or against the topic. In the vote at
the end of the discussion seven participants disagreed, two
were undecided, and one agreed. The overall group
decision for this agenda item was disagreed as shown by
the down pointing arrow in the red circle. The New
policies and Marketing improvements agenda items also
yielded disagreed vote outcomes. The New corporation
establishment and Hiring managers agenda items were
agreed. The Share issue agenda item was deferred to a later
date.
In each of the six agenda items, the secretary checked
the presence of the participants. For example, Katherine
was absent during the discussion related to the Hiring
managers agenda item. She was present during the
discussion of the other items on the agenda.
Some additional overall characteristics of the meeting
discussion can be observed in Figure 6:
• The longest discussions were for Marketing
improvements and Hiring managers (each lasting 1080
seconds or 18 minutes long), followed by New
policies then New corporation establishment. The least
time consuming topics were Share issue and Widget
production process (both 10 minutes each).
• In each agenda item, we can observe who took up
most of the discussion time. For example, the
dominant character who contributed most on the
Marketing improvement agenda item was Fouad,
followed by Dean. This is shown in Figure 7.
• Waiting queues and their sizes can be easily
recognized through the graph at any given point in

time. For instance, the biggest waiting queue belonged
to the agenda item Marketing improvements. Here
three participants waited to speak. The longest wait
was for Katherine who waited over half of the duration
of the entire meeting to speak.
• We can also infer certain patterns of collaboration. For
instance we observe that by looking at the two agenda
items of improving marketing efforts and issuing more
shares, one can recognize that there is collaboration
between four people (Bill, Katherine, and Michelle,
and Gina) who lean on the same side of the decision.
• Additionally one can observe that for certain agenda
items, several back-and-forth discussions were taking
place. For instance, the topic of widget production
generated a lot of discussion from participants. This
also happens to be one of the shorter agenda items,
and one can possibly watch for the repetition of such a
pattern and induce that as a lot of discussion gets
generated participants are able to arrive at decisions
more rapidly.

Acknowledgements
<omitted for review>

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

8. Conclusions and Future Research
Showing all the details that occur in the decision making
process of a face-to-face meeting can be helpful in
reviewing the structure of a meeting and potentially
improving its quality. In this paper, we presented a
visualization system that addresses the issue by displaying
information that assists the group in reflecting upon its
current and past interactions. The system provides two
major components; to capture data from the user before a
meeting starts and then to visualize the process while the
meeting goes on or after the meeting has ended. We also
used a sample scenario to illustrate how our system
operates. Due to the exploratory nature of the proposed
system, a full evaluation with respect to factors like
applicability in real group settings or usability has not been
conducted. Nonetheless, the practicality and value of the
approach can be demonstrated by looking at the results one
could capture with prearranged scenarios. This work makes
a contribution towards information visualization by
developing a system that has the potential of improving the
group decision making process.
In the near future, we are developing a fully functional
system and will evaluate it in actual face-to-face meetings.
Moreover, we intend on looking at other areas of
application such as displaying communication processes in
parallel computing and/or telephone networks.
It is our intention to move towards supporting
visualization in the context of more formal meeting
procedures. This will involve a more detailed analysis of
meeting dynamics, especially as they relate to formal
meeting such as those outlined in [10] .

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

Chen, M., Visualizing the Pulse of a Classroom.
Proceedings of the ACM international conference on
Multimedia, pp. 555-561, 2003.
DiMicco, J. M., Hollenbach, K. J., and Bender, W., Using
visualizations to review a group’s interaction dynamics.
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI), pp. 706-711, 2006.
DiMicco, J. M., Pandolfo, A., and Bender, W.,
Influencing group participation with a shared display. In
Proceedings of the ACM conference on Computer
supported cooperative work (CSCW), pp. 614-623, 2004.
Donath, J., A semantic approach to visualizing online
conversations. Communications of the ACM, vol. 45, no.
4, pp. 45-49, 2002.
Erickson, T. Halverson, C., Kellogg, W., Laff, M.,
Malkin, P., and Wolf, T., Loops: designing a web-based
environment for persistent, semi-structured conversation.
draft paper, articles from IBM, 2001.
Erickson, T. and Laff, M. R., The design of the 'babble'
timeline: a social proxy for visualizing group activity over
time. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), pp. 329-330, 2001.
Karkin, S., Charles, E. S., and Kolodner, J. L.,
Visualizing discussion by the use of the conversation
chain model. Proceedings of the international conference
on Learning sciences, pp. 946-947, 2006.
Mackinlay, J., Automating the design of graphical
presentations
of
relational
information.
ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 110141, 1986.
Popolov, D., Callaghan, M. and Luker, P., Conversation
space:
visualising
multi-threaded
conversation.
Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced
Visual Interfaces, pp. 246-249, 2000.
Robert III, H. M., Evans, W., Honemann, D. H., and
Balch, J. T., Robert’s rules of order in brief. Da Capo
Press, 2004.
Sack, W., Conversation map: an interface for very largescale conversations. Journal of Management Information
Systems, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 73-92, 2001.
Smith, M., Cadiz, JJ., and Burkhalter, B., Conversation
trees and threaded chats. Proceedings of the ACM
conference on Computer supported cooperative work
(CSCW), pp. 97-105, 2000.
Smith, M. A. and Fiore, A. T., Visualization components
for persistent conversations. Proceedings of the ACM
conference on Human factors in computing systems
(CHI), pp. 136-143, 2001.
Wattenberg, M. M. and Millen, D. R., Conversation
thumbnails for large-scale discussions. Proceedings of the
ACM Conference on Human factors in computing systems
(CHI), pp. 742-743, 2003.

Figure 6: The visualization interface for the sample scenario.
11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 7: Zoomed segment for one of the meeting agendas from the visualization interface. Information and patterns can be
obtained from the graph as explained.

