Revisiting the Open Plan:
Ceilings and Furniture as Display Surfaces for Building Information
Mark Meagher
Ecole Polytechnique
Federale de Lausanne
mark.meagher@epfl.ch

Jeffrey Huang
Ecole Polytechnique
Federale de Lausanne
jeffrey.huang@epfl.ch

Abstract

First developed by the architectural avante-garde in
the early 20th century, the idea of the open plan was the
result of a desire for greater transparency and flexibility
in the design of interior environments. Essential to the
functioning of the open plan in these early projects is the
subtle articulation of differences between one part of the
open interior and another. Later co-opted as an efficient
means of achieving maximum density in office
environments, the open plan as commonly practiced in
the latter half of the 20th century resulted in
undifferentiated, homogeneous settings that failed to
realize the original intentions of this architectural idea.
Embedded information technology offers an opportunity
to support the differentiation and legibility of the open
plan by sensing and displaying aspects of the building’s
environmental conditions and patterns of use. We
introduce two ongoing projects as examples of building
interfaces that enhance the transparency of information
in the building, using surfaces embedded in the building
to reveal invisible attributes of the interior that can be
used by inhabitants to better understand their
environment.
Keywords--- Building Visualization, Building
Environmental Systems, Open Plan, Workplace.

1. Introduction
The open plan as it was built by avante-garde
architects like Le Corbusier, Mies and Frank Lloyd
Wright was not simply about the elimination of walls
and partitions: it also involved the creation of a new
architectural language for distinguishing between distinct
settings while maintaining transparency. The two
ongoing projects introduced here explore the use of
sensors and displays embedded in architectural elements
(ceilings, built-in shelving) to enhance the experience of
the building by selectively revealing aspects of its
functioning and operation through information
visualization.
The question we have addressed in these projects is:
How can we augment the open plan to better support the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

David Gerber
Southern California
Institute of Architecture
djgerber@post.harvard.edu

migratory and spontaneous work habits of the
contemporary distributed workforce? By displaying
information about the building and its use that can be
appropriated by inhabitants to make better use of their
environment, these projects suggest one approach to
recapturing the differentiation of the open plan.

1.1. The open plan
The open plan emerged in the 20th century as the
result of a desire for increased transparency and
flexibility in the arrangement of architectural interiors.
As Le Corbusier wrote in 1929, “With reinforced
concrete you get rid of walls completely” [1]. Similarly,
Frank Lloyd Wright writing in 1931 stated: “Walls as
walls fell away [with the dawn of the machine age]. The
vanishing wall joined the disappearing cave” [2].
Prevailing architectural practice prior to this time had
conceived rooms as volumes enclosed by walls, with one
activity assigned to each room. The open plan was
developed in contrast to such a strict delineation of
function, and proposed instead a transparency and
flexibility of function: transparency because each setting
within the interior was open and visible to every other,
and flexibility in that any given part of the interior was
designed to support a range of possible activities.
Activities could flow as needed from one part of the plan
to another, supporting a more spontaneous and nomadic
lifestyle.
It is important to note that the flexibility of the open
plan did not for these early practitioners imply a
homogeneous interior. The open plan as developed in the
single family houses of such pioneering 20th century
architects as Frank Lloyd Wright, Le Corbusier and Mies
was a subtly modulated sequence of spaces, each
differentiated by changes in materials, lighting, built-in
furniture, and shifts in floor and ceiling levels. The use
of architectural elements other than walls to define
settings had the added advantage of permitting a visual
and experiential continuity from one setting to another.
In the early development of the open plan the distinction
between zones within the plan was just as important as
the transparency of the whole, and it was these subtle
distinctions that allowed the plan to function as an
organizing principle for diverse activities that implied

varying degrees of privacy, visibility, and temperature
[3].
The concepts of the open plan have also been
applied widely outside the domain of the home. In the
workplace, a belief in the organizational benefits of large
open floor space in the latter half of the 20th century
resulted in a move away from cellular office
configurations to an open plan, with system furniture
configured to facilitate coordination among teams as
well as supervision of employees [4, 5]. The move to the
open plan as a standard form of office configuration also
corresponded to a reconsideration of the role of work,
with less emphasis on visible signs of hierarchy in the
workplace and a promotion of flexible work styles that
supported the needs of employees who were often on the
road and collaborating remotely with project teams. In
terms of building technology, the development of the
raised floor and drop ceiling, as well as structural
systems permitting long spans between columns allowed
the implementation of office interiors that were more
open and deep than would have been possible before
these enabling technologies were introduced. With the
efficient provision of artificial illumination and air it was
also possible to create ever more homogeneous interior
environments, where there was not necessarily a strong
sense of orientation or differentiation of space due to the
uniform distribution of essential resources like light and
ventilation.

1.2. The legibility of spaces
Essential to the functioning of the open plan (or of
any architectural environment for that matter) is the
legibility of the space. Legibility can be defined as the
provision of subtle cues that allow one without
noticeable effort to navigate complex environments,
distinguish between private and public spaces, and gauge
the social appropriateness of a given action in a given
space. These cues can take the form of furniture,
artefacts, changes in floor and ceiling levels, and
material changes [6]. Studies of office spaces have
indicated the importance of furniture and spatial
configuration to the perception of acceptable or desirable
behaviour in the space [7].
In open plan homes, a variety of architectural
elements were used to substitute for the functions of the
wall. The open plan would be highly disorienting if it
were not possible to define boundaries between spaces,
to set limits, to indicate zones of circulation, and
otherwise to articulate in the plan an anticipated range of
activities. For all their clear disadvantages, vertical
space-defining elements such as walls clearly provide a
sense of orientation and identity, and in their absence it
was necessary for the early proponents of the open plan
to invent new techniques for spatial definition and
differentiation.
In cases where attention is not dedicated to reinscribing on the space the articulation and orientation
otherwise provided by walls, the result has usually been
highly homogeneous and disorienting environments that
fail to provide any of the heterogeneity and subtle
expression that were promised by early experiments with
the open plan. We propose in the two projects presented
here that the homogeneously open office environment
fails to deliver another promise of the open plan, the
flexibility to occupy the building as one wishes. It is
helpful in this context to recall that ‘open plan’ has not
always been synonymous with a disorienting lack of
differentiation and with a bland uniformity, and could
again become an effective design strategy for enabling
migratory and spontaneous work practices.

1.3. Building visualization

Figure 1: Open office layout: CIS Building,
Manchester.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

We believe that information visualizations
embedded in the building are one promising means of
addressing the lack of legibility in the open plan as it is
commonly implemented. By visualizing invisible
attributes of the interior, such as activity and
environmental conditions, we hope to reintroduce some
of the spatial differentiation which was essential to the
early concept of the open plan.
The use of information visualization at the scale of
the room has been explored in numerous projects at the
intersection of ubiquitous computing and information
visualization [8, 9, 10]. The rapid development of new

architectural materials in recent years has offered many
new opportunities for creating building surfaces that are
capable of performing multiple functions, including
sensing and display. In parallel, new display
technologies are being developed that permit lowenergy, non-emissive display over a large surface [11,
12, 13].
The display of information related to the experience
of the building on screens embedded in the building
itself offers several advantages over visualization on
screens not embedded in the architecture. First,
computers embedded in the environment offer the
potential to convey information that can be processed in
the background of one’s awareness, without disrupting
the foreground tasks in which one is currently engaged.
Because they are designed to stay at the periphery of
consciousness, such ambient displays make use of the
kinds of environmental stimuli that users are familiar
with and unconsciously make use of to monitor and
understand their surroundings. One example of an
ambient display that maps new meanings onto familiar
environmental stimuli is the ambientROOM at MIT, an
enclosed workspace with a number of devices for the
display of information: the ceiling in this room is used as
a surface for the display of information related to a
distant loved one, with water ripples projected on the
ceiling representing activity [14]. In the Swisshouse, a
novel type of "inhabitable interface" that supports direct
and indirect communication and cultural awareness of
habitants in different nations, the display surfaces occupy
entire walls, creating the impression of continuity
between local and remote settings [15].

embedded in tables have benefited from studies of the
social use of tables, such as the subtle use of spatial cues
to establish group and personal spaces and to signal
ownership of objects or of ideas [16].

2. Projects
The following two projects use displays embedded
in architectural elements (ceiling panels, built-in shelves)
to display information about the immediate built
environment. In implementing the two projects, we will
evaluate the hypothesis that information visualizations
describing environmental conditions and use will support
migratory and spontaneous work habits by providing
users of the building with real-time data that
differentiates one part of the open plan from another. The
basis of this hypothesis is the observation that the
uniform environment of today’s open plan workspaces is
not so uniform as it appears: microclimatic variation
within the building results in work environments that are
significantly different experientially, and patterns of use
establish
differentiation
even
within
highly
homogeneous interior environments. The hypothesis will
be evaluated through structured observation and
interviews, once the two interfaces described below have
been installed in our lab space. Using these projects, we
hope to better understand the extent to which information
visualization embedded in the building can reveal the
(often invisible) differentiation within the open plan, and
whether this will result in a better understanding of the
environment and in changed work practices.

2.1. Augmented Ceiling
Le Corbusier’s ideal of a respiration exacte [17]
which would provide precisely the same environmental
conditions (temperature, humidity) throughout the
building has proved to be elusive, and experience
indicates that variations in environmental conditions are
not uncommon in modern buildings. Both from room to
room, and within large rooms, it is possible to find
significant variations in the temperature and humidity of
the air, especially where operable windows allow the
introduction of air directly from outside. Environmental
systems in institutional buildings are typically designed
to provide air at a standard temperature and humidity
throughout the building, and sacrifice local control for
the economy and efficiency of centralized control.
Figure 2: Swisshouse, Cambridge, MA: Display
surfaces extend to the floor without framing to
enhance the perception of continuity between
local and remote settings.
Another reason to embed displays in the built
environment is to take advantage of the complex
affordances for interaction provided by objects and
spaces. For example, designers of computer interfaces

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

This project involves the display of variations in
environmental conditions within an open plan
workspace, allowing users of the building to choose the
conditions that best suit their preferences and current
needs. Given that variations often exist due to the
technological limitations of air handling systems, we
propose making these variations a positive feature of the
building by making users aware of this environmental
differentiation, introducing the possibility of selecting a

place to work within the open plan based on (current)
environmental conditions. We will use augmented
ceiling tiles to record local environmental data, and to
visualize this information using a display embedded in
the tile.
The ceilings of most contemporary buildings consist
of a ‘false’ ceiling composed of modular panels or tiles
suspended from building structure and concealing a
plenum that contains ducts and wiring. Since its
invention in the 1930’s, this system quickly became so
universal in its application that the module of the ceiling
tile became a primary determining factor for the
dimensions of rooms, and of most lighting and
environmental systems technologies that have been

several weeks in order to refine the design of the sensor
module. It will also be important to determine during this
period which environmental factors are subject to change
and which tend to remain constant in our test
environment: in other words, which factors are the best
indicators of microclimatic variation within the building.
Based on this information, we will design the
information visualization to be displayed on the ceiling
panels. The first display prototype will be built using an
array of LED’s; in later prototypes we will explore the
creation of non-emissive displays using microencapsulated ink that changes colour based on changes in
temperature [11, 12].
The evaluation of the project hypothesis in the case
of this project will involve observations of work
practices and how these are affected by knowledge of
microclimatic variation within an open plan
environment. If the ceiling display demonstrates that the
air in a particular corner of the open space is consistently
unhealthy (perhaps due to inadequate air changes and/or
the offgassing of building materials), how will this
information be used by inhabitants of the building and
how will it affect their work practices? Will this
information result in new ways of occupying the open
plan?

2.2. Augmented Shelving
Figure 3: Sketch of the ceiling visualisation,
displaying zones of variation in temperature
and activity. Adapted from a rendering by
SANAA ( kazuyo sejima + ryue nishizawa)
introduced since [18]. Our project proposes to selectively
replace acoustic ceiling tiles with a new acoustic panel
that has been designed to incorporate a microprocessor,
sensors, and display.
The ceiling is interesting for a number of reasons as
an interface for interacting with data collected from a
sensor network. First, the modularity of the ‘false’
ceiling supports the selective replacement of standard
acoustic ceiling tiles with the augmented tile. Second, in
open plan spaces, where the presence of partition walls
has been minimized to favour an atmosphere of openness
and transparency, the ceiling becomes a large
uninterrupted surface that is visible from many viewing
angles. Third, the ceiling is a highly under utilized
architectural surface, and is not already burdened with
significant architectural program.
Each ceiling panel will contain a single wireless
sensor node, capable of detecting local environmental
conditions: light, temperature, humidity, noise level,
activity level, and the level of common workplace
airborne toxins. In the first stage of the project we will
augment ceiling panels in an open plan office with
sensors and collect measurements over a period of

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The augmented shelving project involves the
construction of a freestanding wall of shelves for use in
an electronics and digital fabrication workshop. The
shelving is designed to accommodate a variety of
objects, and also incorporates horizontal surfaces that
can serve as workstations or as a platform for printers or
fabrication equipment (laser cutter, CNC milling
machine, etc). The project is a collaboration between the
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne
(EPFL) and students at the Southern California Institute
of Architecture (SCI Arc) under the direction of David
Gerber.
The goal of the project has been to design a roomscale interface to computer functionality and data.
Transactions with information on the computer can
easily be tracked, searched, and represented visually; this
project will provide an interface for tracking, searching,
and representing visually interactions with the books,
materials, and electronic components stored in the
shelves. The wall will be equipped with a network of
wireless sensor nodes to detect the presence of objects,
as well as the proximity of people to each of the nodes,
data that will be interpreted to extrapolate a history of
use of the objects stored on the shelves. This history will
be stored in a database that can be queried through an
online interface; the query results will be displayed
directly on the wall. For example, a query could request
the current position in the shelving wall of a particular
object or type of object, a history of the recent
position(s) on the shelving wall of an object, or a trace of
the movement of people associated with a particular

shelving wall will be an ambient display of activity that
uses the surface of wall as a large display.
A section of the wall containing 15 shelves will be
built in the summer of 2007 and installed in the Media
and Design Lab at EPFL. Using this installation, we will
test our hypothesis that knowledge of activity patterns in
a space can lead to new work practices. In other words,
we anticipate that even in highly uniform environments
the movement and activity of people working in the
space are not uniform – and that the display of this
variation in the use of the space will lead to changes in
the way one organizes and uses one’s built environment.

Discussion
Figure 4: Shelving wall: parametrically
generated form, with sensor nodes. Image by:
SCI Arc Design and Hard Technology
Curriculum 2006-2007: "The Parametric Affect":
David Gerber (Instructor) and Jun Yu (Student).
object or type of object. In its default state (when a
search query has not been performed), the shelving will
present an ambient visualization of recent movement of
people within close proximity.
The design of the shelving takes into account two
types of information visualization: 1) a representation of
the (invisible) presence of the wireless sensor network,
and 2) the presentation of results from search queries.
For reasons related to usability and privacy, we feel that
the wall should express the fact that a network of
wireless sensors has been invisibly embedded, and
should also provide an indication of how to interact with
the wall. While it is often necessary (and beneficial) to
conceal computer interfaces within traditional building
interfaces like the door, the window, the ceiling, or a
wall of shelves, concern for usability requires that these
interfaces communicate the range of interaction that is
possible and the information that influences the
behaviour of the interface. In the shelving wall, the
design of the nodes connecting vertical and horizontal
elements is the primary means for communicating the
functionality of the wall, and the range of interaction that
it affords. We chose to use associative parametric design
modelling techniques as a tool for developing the design,
in order to rapidly produce multiple iterations and to
output these designs to fabrication equipment for
prototyping.
Each sensor node will consist of an RFID reader and
an ultrasonic proximity sensor, as well as an array of
LED’s. The LED’s will be used for illuminating the
shelves and for creating an ambient information display
on the surface of the wall. The result of a query made in
the online search interface will be the illumination of a
particular shelf or shelves, while the default state of the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The function of both the projects presented here is
the display of information that articulates or
differentiates the non-hierarchical space of the open plan.
More precisely, the visualizations described are designed
to reveal invisible attributes of the building that can be
used by inhabitants to make better use of their
environment. The two projects are also an exploration in
the legibility of the built environment, which is to say the
ability of interiors to both determine and be determined
by the activity of the building’s occupants.
Our hypothesis in both projects is that the attributes
of the built environment are rarely uniform, even when
the environment has been designed for uniformity and
homogeneity (as is the case in most open plan office
interiors). Microclimatic variation due to imperfections
in the building’s HVAC system can result in perceptibly
different working conditions, even within a single large
open space, and knowledge of these variations can lead
to new work practices and ways of occupying the open
plan. Similarly, patterns of activity within the open plan
are shaped as much by furniture and objects as by the
qualities of the architecture, and a visual representation
of these patterns can lead to a better awareness of one’s
work practices (and to new appropriations of the space).
These hypotheses will be evaluated through the
construction of the ceiling display and the interactive
shelving wall, both of which will be implemented in an
open plan work environment whose culture and physical
layout allow considerable flexibility in work habits,
affording individuals the freedom to change their work
habits based on input received from the ceiling and wall
displays. In the next stage of the project, the impact of
the ceiling and wall will be evaluated using structured
observation techniques and interviews with occupants of
the space.

References
[1]
[2]

Corbusier, Le. Precisions. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
1991, p. 38.
Wright, F.L. An American Architecture. New York,
Horizon Press, 1955, p.218.

[3]

Leatherbarrow, D. Uncommon Ground: Architecture,
Technology and Topography. Cambridge, MA, MIT
Press, 2000, p. 38.
[4] Hatch, M. J. Physical Barriers, Task Characteristics, and
Interaction Activity in Research and Development Firms.
In Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 32, No. 3.
(Sep., 1987), pp. 387-399.
[5] Duffy, F., Cave, C., Worthington, J. Planning Office
Space. London, The Architectural Press Ltd, 1985.
[6] Leatherbarrow, D. Uncommon Ground: Architecture,
Technology and Topography. Cambridge, MA, MIT
Press, 2000, p. 65.
[7] Nova, N. A Review of How Space Affords SocioCognitive Processes during Collaboration. In
PsychNology Journal, 2005, p. 20.
[8] Johanson, B., Fox, A., Winograd, T., 2002. “The
Interactive Workspaces Project: Experiences with
Ubiquitous Computing Rooms.” In IEEE Pervasive
Computing Special Issue on Overviews of Real-World
Ubiquitous Computing Environments, April-June 2002.
[9] Prante, T., Röcker, C., Streitz, N. A., Stenzel, R.,
Magerkurth, C., van Alphen, D., Plewe, D. A.
Hello.Wall® – Beyond Ambient Displays. In Peter
Ljungstrand, Jason Brotherton (Ed.): Video Track and
Adjunct Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UBICOMP’03),
Seattle, Washington, USA, October 12-15, 2003. pp.
277-278.
[10] Patten, J., Ishii, H. A Comparison of Spatial
Organization Strategies in Graphical and Tangible User
Interfaces. In Proc. of Designing Augmented Reality
Environments (DARE '00).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[11] Buzzini. D.: Not So White Walls – Interactive
Wallpaper. Project completed at Design Institute Ivrea.
http://people.interaction-ivrea.it/d.buzzini/
[12] Wakita, A. and Shibutami, M. Mosaic Textile: Wearable
Ambient Display with Non-emissive Color-changing
Modules. In Proceedings of the 2006 ACM conference
on Advances in computer entertainment technology.
[13] Andersson , P. et al. Active Matrix Displays Based on
All-Organic Electrochemical Smart Pixels Printed on
Paper. In Advanced Materials, Volume 14, Issue 20 ,
Pages 1460 – 1464 (2002).
[14] Wisneski, C., Ishii, H., Dahley, A., Gorbet, M., Brave,
S., Ullmer, B. and Yarin, P. Ambient Displays: Turning
Architectural Space into an Interface between People and
Digital Information. In First International Workshop on
Cooperative Buildings (CoBuild '98), Springer-Verlag,
pp. 22-32.
[15] Huang, J., and Waldvogel, M. Inhabitable Interfaces for
Connecting Nations. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Designing Interactive Systems: Processes, Practices,
Methods, and Techniques, ACM 2004; 195-204.
[16] Kruger, R., Carpendale, S., Scott, S., and Greenber, S.
How People Use Orientation on Tables: Comprehension,
Coordination and Communication. In Proceedings of the
2003 international ACM SIGGROUP conference on
Supporting group work.
[17] Corbusier, Le. Precisions. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
1991, p. 64.
[18] Banham, R.: The Architecture of the Well-Tempered
Environment. London, The Architectural Press, 1969, pp.
216-219.

