Research Mining using the Relationships among Authors, Topics and Papers
Ryutaro Ichise
National Institute
of Informatics
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi Chiyoda-ku
Tokyo, 101-8430, Japan
ichise@nii.ac.jp

Setsu Fujita, Taichi Muraki
TriAx
Corporation
4-29-3 Yoyogi Shibuya-ku
Tokyo 151-0053, Japan
{fujita,muraki}@triax.jp

Abstract
As information technology progress, we are able to obtain much information about the advanced research of others. As a result, researchers and research managers need
to track the current research trends amid the information
flood. In order to support these efforts to gather knowledge of current research, we propose a research trend mining method. The method utilizes an author-topic model for
establishing the relationships between authors, topics, and
papers by probabilities, and interactively visualizes the relationships using self-organizing maps. We implemented a
research area mapping system and validated it with a case
study. In addition, we conducted experiments to show the
performance of our system. The experimental results indicate that this system can induce the appropriate relationships for finding research trends.

Hideaki Takeda
National Institute
of Informatics
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi Chiyoda-ku
Tokyo, 101-8430, Japan
takeda@nii.ac.jp

cluding physics, social sciences, information science and
communication science. Therefore, the research in the related areas cannot be found in a single journal in a particular
research domain. In this paper, we propose a new system by
which we can explore new research trends. The system uses
a graphical user interface(GUI) to visualize authors and paper information on a research area map by using bibliography data. The system consists of two parts: inducing the
probability of topics for researchers and keywords by using
an author-topic model, and visualizing the probability by
using self-organizing maps.
The present paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
we discuss related work. In Section 3, we explain the proposed system consisting of two main parts: an author-topic
model and self-organizing maps. In Section 4, we describe
the case study of our system using a real bibliography example. In Section 5, we describe an experimental evaluation of
our method and then discuss the results. Finally, in Section
6, we present our conclusions.

1 Introduction
2 Related Work
As information technology progresses, information
about the sciences circulates more rapidly than ever before. For example, previously research results were published and distributed by paper-based journals; however, recent journals are published online for easy circulation. As a
result, researchers and research managers must track and
detect recent trends in this information flood. Many research results are produced all over the world, so we cannot trace all research results even if we had enough time.
Therefore, it is necessary to have the tools to gather trends
from many papers. One of the important issues of tracing
the trends of research is finding new areas of research, such
as network science and environmental research. A new research area is usually separate from a traditional research
area or marginally overlaps several research areas, which
means many researchers are involved. For example, network science has recently emerged from several areas in-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

In our work, we try to mine the knowledge of new trends
using bibliography data. One of the typical approaches for
this problem is to use citation information such as the cocitation network [11]. Chen and Paul used citation information to ascertain the recent trend of research impacts [3].
The methods using citations are able to find out new trends
within one particular research domain, but cannot be utilized to find an area across multiple domains when the
authors cannot find the related papers in other domains.
B¨orner et al. utilized co-authorship networks to find research groups [1]. Ichise et al. [5] focused on mining research groups as communities. If a new research community is detected, it might be a new research trend. However,
if there is no identification such as a research domain label for the research area, we cannot judge whether it is a
new area or not. Ichise et al. also developed a new system

to solve this problem of identification [4]. Although the
system can identify the research keywords for a particular
group, the system cannot show the relationships between
researchers and research works within a research domain.
Skupin [9, 10] proposed to use self-organizing maps to visualize research domains using the abstracts of papers. Although the visualization is useful for finding new research
areas across multiple research domains, it is hard to determine the relationships among researchers, research topics
and research papers. In this paper, we propose a method to
find those relationships through effective visualizations.

Figure 1. Graphical model of author-topic
model

3 Research Area Mapping System
3.1

Approach

In order to discover new trends of research, we propose a method to mine knowledge from bibliography data.
The proposed method mainly consists of two components.
The first component is the author-topic model [12]. This
method can induce the probability of the relationships of the
“authors-topics” and “topics-words” from the authorship
and words of papers. After we identify the relationships
among the authors, topics and words by the author-topic
model, we can easily mine research communities in particular domains. The second component is self-organizing
maps (SOM) [6]. This method is used to visualize the relationships detected by the author-topic model for easy understanding. We will explain both methods in the order they
are used.

3.2

Author-Topic Model

The author-topic model [12] is a method for analyzing
the relationships among authors, topics and words. Research works are usually created by researchers, and the results of research works are presented as research papers. In
the author-topic model, the model utilizes this point for inducing the relationships among them. The method assumes
a model for creating research papers. The model can be
explained by the graphical model shown in Figure 1. Figure 1 illustrates the paper creation process. In the figure,
variables are represented as nodes, and the dependences of
the variables are represented as arcs. The left-most node
ad denotes the set of authors who collaboratively work for
a research paper. We assume that each researcher has his
or her own characteristics of research topics, even if one
has a specialty in multiple domains. In other words, each
researcher has a distribution of specialties in research topics. In the author-topic model, we define the researcher’s
characteristics of research topics as a probabilistic distribution, which is denoted by θ. For example, suppose we have

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

two topic domains, electronics and informatics, and a researcher works for telecommunications. The researcher’s
characteristics can be represented as a vector such as (0.8,
0.2) when he works mainly with electronics in the telecommunication domain. When we choose researcher x from
the set of authors ad , the topic z will decided according to
the probabilistic distribution θ. In the same manner, when
we decided the topic z in a paper, the words on the paper
will decided based on the topic z. The relationship between
topic and word is represented as the probabilistic distribution φ, and the word w is selected for the paper by topic z
according to probability distribution φ. The α and β in the
figure are parameters used for deciding the distributions.
The problem in this method is how to estimate the probability distribution θ and φ from available information. Fortunately, we can observe authorship information ad and
words w in research papers. The observable information
is presented as a gray circle in Figure 1. In order to induce
the probabilistic distribution, we usually implement the EM
(expectation-maximization) algorithm. However, because
the EM algorithm has a high computational cost, we introduce Gibbs Sampling, which is one of the Monte Carlo
Markov Chain methods, to induce the distribution. Gibbs
Sampling starts from randomly selected initial states, and
revises distributions by changing the authors or topics to
find the correct distributions. Finally, we can obtain the relationships of an author-topic and topic-word by the vector
formed probabilistic representations.

3.3

Self-Organizing Maps

After we obtain the relationships of the author-topic and
topic-word as probabilistic distributions by the author-topic
model, we want to find new trends such as the marginal
cluster of authors across research domains. To do this,
one effective method is to visualize the distribution data
which is represented in vector format. The methods include
multidimensional scaling (MDS) and self-organizing maps
(SOM). We use SOM for our system.

Self-organizing maps [6] are a method for visualizing
vectors. One of the features of SOM is mapping highdimensional data into low-dimensional data, which is usually represented with two dimensions for display. The basic
mechanism of SOM is an artificial neural network, which is
organized into grids. When data is input, the neuron on the
grid is revised according to the data. After training with the
data, the SOM can classify the data on the grid, which is
then used for visualization. When the vector data are close,
the data will be located close to each other on the map. As
a result, we can find the author groups, which form a community by using the author-topic vectors.
In our system, we utilize the growing hierarchical selforganizing maps (GHSOM) [8] as a SOM library. The GHSOM starts from a small map and gradually extends the
map. The author-topic vector is fed to create the map and after the creation is completed, the authors and papers are assigned on the map. The authors are assigned to a grid on the
map, according to the vector closest to the topic vector for
an author. The topic vector for papers is made from topicword vectors. Since papers have many words, the topic vector for papers is combined from topic-word vectors, which
are the words used in a paper. Then the papers are assigned
to the grid which has the vector closest to the topic vector
for the paper.

3.4

Figure 2. A screenshot of the research area
mapping system.

System Overview

Figure 2 illustrates the research area mapping system.
There are six parts to our system. Window 1 in Figure 2
is the main component for showing the relationships among
authors, topics and papers. The topics created by the authortopic model are shown on the map with different colors.
For example, the map shown in Figure 2 is divided into 10
regions with different colors. In the center of each region,
the keywords that have a high probability for the region are
displayed. In each region, the colors gradually change from
the center of the region to its margins. In other words, the
center of the topics has a stronger color and the margins of
the topics have weak colors.
The map has two modes, one for showing the authors and
another for showing the papers. Figure 3 is an example of
the mapping window, called the author mode, for showing
the authors. In the author mode, the map is shown in light
colors and author names are shown in the grids. However,
if all author names are shown on the map, it would hard
to see because the map is filled with many author names.
In order to avoid such situations, our map design includes
only the authors who wrote a certain minimum number of
papers. When we magnify the map by using the slide bar in
the upper left corner in Figure 3, the threshold of the display
is changed automatically and more details of authors on the
map are displayed.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 3. An example of the author mode
screen.

When we click on an author name in the author mode,
the mode is changed to the paper mode, shown in Figure 4.
In this mode, the map becomes darker and only a specified
author and the papers written by the author are shown. For
example, the middle of the left-most rectangle in Figure 4
represents the author name and the circles represent the papers. By using this method, we understand that the author
is mainly working on the research topics shown in the middle left area in the map and also understand that the author
anomalously works for the bottom center area of the topic.
Let us return back to our system screen shown in Figure 2. Window 2 is used for showing the author names on
the map. When we move the mouse cursor to an author
in window 1, the author name and the probability of the
most probable topic for the author are displayed in window
2. The probability is colored with the topic color, which is
the same color displayed in window 1. In addition, we can

Figure 4. An example of the paper mode
screen.

specify the author name from the author list in window 2.
In that case, the author name is highlighted in window 1.
Window 3 is used for showing the paper titles for the
author specified by window 1 or 2. Window 3 also shows
the probability of the most probable topic with the topic
colors. When we specify a paper in window 3, the location
of the paper is highlighted in window 1. In addition, the
abstract and journal name for the paper are shown as a popup. The paper can be selected by using window 1. In this
case, we can see the abstract and journal name for the paper
by the pop-up and also highlight the paper name in the paper
list in window 3.
Window 4 is used for showing the probability of topics.
The probability of topics for the author and the paper are
shown with a bar graph. If the probability of a topic is high,
the bar is high. Since the bar is colored with the topic color,
we can understand the topic probability for the author and
the paper. Windows 5 and 6 are used for searching the authors and words, respectively.

4 Case Study
Let us now explain our system by using a case study.
The current system has several databases for the mapping.
Figure 2 illustrates an example mapping of our system. The
map has 10 topics, such as “alloy,” “network,” and “syllepsis.” Since the highly probable words in the topics are displayed, we can understand the relationships between the
topics. For example, the topics of “syllepsis” and “tumor”
are relatively near; however, the topic of “coding” is far
from the topics.
Let us assume that we want to investigate the topics of
“network, system, method” in the upper right corner of Figure 3 and “graphics, method, coding, information” in the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

middle right of Figure 3. When we magnify the mapping
region around the topics by using the slide bar shown in
the upper left corner of Figure 3, we can see many researchers’ names located on the grids. The grids are colored
for each topic. The topic of “network” is blue and the topic
of “graphics” is azure. As you can see from the figure, the
color gradually changes. As a result, we can understand the
topics which the author has worked on. For example, Prof.
Aoyama is located in the topic of “network.” In fact, he
worked with a Japanese telephone company and universities, and mainly worked on networking. On the other hand,
Prof. Sakai is located in the middle of both topics. He is
working on multimedia networking, including graphics signal processing. We can understand the researcher’s position
of research topics thorough this system. In addition, we are
also able to find research communities by using this system.
When we find a grid or a nearby grid which has several authors, we can understand that the researchers work for similar topics which can be organized into communities.
When we move the mouse cursor on an author name,
the topic distributions are shown in window 4 in Figure 2.
For example, Prof. Sakai has long bars colored with blue
and azure, and short bars colored with red and other colors.
As a result, we understand that he works only for blue and
azure colored topics, which are “network” and “graphics,”
and does not work for the red-colored topics, which include
“syllepsis” and other topics. When we click on an author,
the mode changes to the paper mode. In this mode, papers
are shown as in Figure 4. We can see the distribution of the
research topics with this screen. If the papers are spread in a
wide area of the map, then the author covers a wide area of
research topics. If the papers converge in a particular grid,
then the author would be a specialist for this topic. When
we move the cursor on a paper, we can see the title, journal
name, and abstract of the paper. In addition, we can see the
distributions of topics of the paper in window 4, as shown
in Figure 2. As a result, we understand the characteristics of
the paper. For example, even if there are two papers in the
same grid, the two papers are able to have different characteristics. In fact, we can find two papers in the same grid,
but the papers are not the same in the second probable topic,
even though the first probable topic is the same. We can find
these papers according to these characteristics by using our
system.

5 Experiments
5.1

Experimental Settings

In order to show the performance of our system, we conducted experiments using real bibliography data. We used
CiNii data [7] for our experiments. We created our experimental data by the following method. First we selected 16

Table 1. Journal name list used for the experiments.
Abbreviation
veterinary
allergology
bronch
dental
IPSJ
IEICE
mechanical
surgical
crop
obstetrica
gastr
phyto
urology
forestry
lung
analyst

Journal title
The journal of veterinary medical science
Japanese journal of allergology
The journal of the Japan society for bronchology
Journal of the Japanese society for dental
materials and devices
IPSJ (Information Processing Society of Japan)
journal
The IEICE(Institute of Electronics, Information
and Communication Engineers) transactions
Transactions of the Japan society of
mechanical engineers
Journal of Japan surgical society
Japanese journal of crop science
Acta obstetrica et gynaecologica Japonica
The Japanese journal of gastroenterological surgery
Japanese journal of phytopathology
The Japanese journal of urology
Journal of the Japanese forestry society
Japanese journal of lung cancer
Japan analyst

journals, listed in Table 1, which have many papers and contain abstracts in the CiNii database. Next, we selected the
top 40 authors who write many papers for each journal. We
call these authors the core authors. Next, we randomly select 10 papers for each core author. A paper is selected from
the journal from which the core author is derived. Next, the
author information of selected papers is retrieved from the
database. We call the authors in the data the derived authors. The derived author list contains the core authors and
their coauthors for selected papers. Next, the nouns are retrieved from the abstracts of the selected papers by using the
Japanese morphological analysis system called ChaSen [2].
We treat these nouns as keywords for the papers. The number of data which we used in our experiments are shown in
Table 2. In the experiments, we set the parameter for the
number of topics for the author-topic model as 16. In our
experimental settings, we can assume that the core authors
worked for the research topic represented by journal from
which the author was retrieved. As a result, we consider
our system performs well when the research topics are divided by each journal and the core authors are also divided
into each topic.

5.2

Experimental Results

Table 3 represents the results of the experiments. The
first column represents the topic number. As we discussed
in the previous section, the author-topic model induces the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Table 2. Statistics of experimental data.
Authors
Papers
Different kinds of keywords
Total number of keywords

Number of data
12,730
5,948
28,245
540,777

Table 3. Author classification results for each
topic by journal names.
Topic
number
Topic 0
Topic 1
Topic 2

Num. of
core
authors
39
37
26

Topic 3
Topic 4
Topic 5

32
72
51

Topic 6
Topic 7

16
32

Topic 8

73

Topic 9
Topic 10
Topic 11
Topic 12

6
7
28
72

Topic 13
Topic 14
Topic 15

42
78
24

allergology (37), lung (1), crop (1)
crop (37)
obstetrica (20), veterinary (5),
allergology (1)
forestry (32)
gastr (38), surgical (32), lung (2)
mechanical (38), IEICE (10),
IPSJ (2), dental (1)
phyto (14), crop (2)
veterinary (28), surgical (2),
allergology (1), forestry (1)
bronch (40), lung (31),
allergology (1), gastr (1)
surgical (5), lung (1)
forestry (6), veterinary (1)
phyto (26), veterinary (1), forestry (1)
IPSJ (38), IEICE (30), mechanical (2),
gastr (1), analyst (1)
urology (40), lung (1), obstetrica (1)
dental (39), analyst (39)
obstetrica (19), veterinary (5)

probability of topics for each author. Then, we can assign
authors into the most probable topics. The second column
in Table 3 represents the number of core authors who have
the most probability for the topic. The third column represents the abbreviated journal name from which the core
authors were retrieved. The number of core authors for the
journal is shown in parentheses.
As we discussed in the previous section, the system divides topics and authors by each journal in the best situation. In other words, one topic has 40 core authors and the
topic has authors from only one journal in the ideal situation. As you can see from the results presented in Table 3,
our system basically performs well. For example, topics
0, 1, 3, 11 and 13 consist of core authors retrieved from
almost one journal. Since the topics seems to be independent from the other topics, the system performs well with
respect to the topics. On the other hand, topics 4, 8, 12 and

Table 4. Examples of word probabilities for
topics.
Topic 0
Probability
asthma
0.0192
antigen
0.0173
reaction 0.016
patient
0.0142
IgE
0.0124
Topic 2
Probability
cell
0.0612
organization 0.0218
positive
0.0154
tumor
0.0126
uterus
0.0118

Topic 1
breed
deterioration
influence
relation
grow
Topic 3
this
that
relation
cryptomere
grow

Probability
0.0167
0.0128
0.0126
0.0104
0.0096
Probability
0.0101
0.0095
0.0087
0.0076
0.0076

14 have a large cluster consisting of core authors retrieved
from almost two journals. For example, topic 12 has two
core author groups retrieved from the IPSJ journal and IEICE journal. Since the topics treated by the two journals
are very close, it is difficult to divide the core authors into
each group. The other topics are also in a similar situation.
Although the detailed category is not the same as the classification by journals, we can see the system performance
is good because of the valid classification from the experiments.
Table 4 illustrates examples of the word probabilities
which are the best five probable words for the topic. We
only show the words for some topics because of the shortage of paper space. For example, the most probable word
of topic 0 is “asthma,” which has a probability of 0.0192 for
the topic. Because we understand that topic 0 mainly treats
the topics of allergology from Table 3, we can insist that the
word “asthma” is correct for the topic.
From the experiments, we can conclude our system has
the ability to calculate valid relationships among the author,
topic and words. As a result, we expect our system will provide good support for mining knowledge of research trends.

6 Conclusion
We presented a novel research mining method in this paper. The proposed method uses the author-topic model to induce the relationships between authors, topics and words by
probability vectors, and then, it uses self-organizing maps
to map the authors, topics and papers using the vectors. We
implemented a research area mapping system based on the
proposed method. The system can interactively explore a
research area to find knowledge for research trends. We
conducted experiments for our system using real bibliography data and the result shows that the system has enough
performance to induce the relationships. From this, we can

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

conclude that our system is a good support system to mine
knowledge for research trends.
Although the research area mapping system is good for
showing the relationships of authors, topics and papers, it
needs further research. One of the problems of the current
system is the computational costs of the author-topic model.
Since the author-topic model has high computational costs,
the current system cannot display the results on the fly. In
fact, it takes several days for our experiments. We think that
the computational cost can be reduced using the proper keyword selection method during the calculation of the probability. The other problem concerns selecting the number of
topics for data. We have to specify the number of topics for
the current system, but we do not know it in advance for
unknown bibliography data. We think the number can be
determined by a certain method using information theory.
We will investigate such topics in our future work.

References
[1] K. B¨orner, L. Dall’Asta, W. Ke, and A. Vespignani. Studying the emerging global brain: Analyzing and visualizing
the impact of co-authorship teams. Complexity, 10(4):58–
67, 2005.
[2] Morphological Analysis System ChaSen Manual.
[3] C. Chen and R. J. Paul. Visualizing a knowledge domain’s
intellectual structure. Computer, 34(3):65–71, 2001.
[4] R. Ichise, H. Takeda, and T. Muraki. Research community mining with topic identification. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Information Visualization,
pages 276–281, 2006.
[5] R. Ichise, H. Takeda, and K. Ueyama. Community mining
tool using bibliography data. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Information Visualization, pages
953–958, 2005.
[6] T. Kohonen. Self-Organizing Maps. Springer, 2001.
[7] CiNii (Citation Information by NII). National Institute of
Informatics, 2006. http://ci.nii.ac.jp/.
[8] A. Rauber, D. Merkl, and M. Dittenbach. The growing hierarchical self-organizing map: Exploratory analysis of highdimensional data. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks,
13(6):1331–1341, 2002.
[9] A. Skupin. A cartographic approach to visualizing conference abstracts. IEEE Computer and Graphics and Applications, 22(1):50–58, 2002.
[10] A. Skupin. The world of geography: Visualizing a knowledge domain with cartographic means. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 101(1):5274–5278, 2004.
[11] H. Small. Co-citation in the scientific literature: A new measure of the relationship between two documents. Journal of
the American Society of Information Science, 24:265–269,
1973.
[12] M. Steyvers, P. Smyth, M. Rosen-Zvi, and T. Griffiths. Probabilistic author-topic models for information discovery. In
Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages
306–315, 2004.

