The Application of 3D range images in the interior design practice
Naai-Jung Shih and Je-Zen Hu
Department of Architecture, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology
shihnj@mail.ntust.edu.tw
Abstract
The study applies 3D range technology to improve
efficiency in interior design and construction with
better accuracy and quality. The feasibility of as-built
range data was used for visual inspection and drawing
production. The technology improved measurement
accuracy,
retrieved
unreachable
coordinates,
controlled working schedule, compared construction
with design, and facilitated follow-up interior
maintenance and management over Internet. This
study also showed that only accurate design
specifications can meet design requirements and
prevent construction error. Accurate as-built data
solve design problems and control construction quality
without increasing budget.

1. Introduction
Active surface measuring techniques have been
used to automatically reconstruct 3D models by joining
polygon meshes since 1994 [8]. The techniques enable
highly accurate measurement of 3D surfaces. 3D range
images were also used to survey archeology and
engineering site [3,5] with higher precision 3D
coordinates and correct 3D inter-relationship between
parts. The measurement is made by scanning laser
beams in a non-intrusive manner. The scanned parts
are shown as-built with surface configuration feasible
for follow-up drafting checks.
Traditional representation of architectural design
information was mainly illustrated through 2D vector
drawings and 3D computer models. The real world
data used to be retrieved manually with limited
assistance
of
survey
instruments.
On-site
measurements are usually sampled in a discontinuous
manner and subject to human errors. Lacking accurate
as-built spatial information may delay working
schedule and miscount bill of materials (BOM). Wrong
information may come from measurement mistake,
dimensional misreading, or setup error. The types of

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

measurement tolerance, which usually come from
traditional working habit, can be accumulated to a
certain amount and cause problems in installation and
budget control. The digital representations used to be
design-oriented data which are different from as-built
information used for interior renovation or afterconstruction facility management. The as-built data
should include the most updated design modification
or dimension adjustments to the virtual design
environment.
Traditional architectural graphic data do not
support the spatial representation of as-built
environment. Although the data are represented, the
amount and format of data are not suitable for the
production environment in design practice.

2. Research purpose
This study tries to combine the range images
retrieved from a 3D long-range laser scanner and the
drafting working platform to create a system for asbuilt data review and comparison with old design data.
The most important of all, the system enables a
designer to control the spatial relationship of building
components before, during, and after a building design
project is executed. The range images are feasible not
only for visual inspection, but also production needs.

3. A range finder’s approach
Construction assessment with a laser range finder is
a kind of non-intrusive data retrieval technology [7].
Cases have demonstrated that a laser scanner is a
useful tool in either accessing data in a construction
site or measuring data for interior billing of materials
[2,4,5]. A scanner seems to be feasible to record
ground profile in a large construction site with a
demand for accuracy less than one centimeter, or for
cost estimations of interior renovation. Being able to
conduct scans in a large area and to inspect the
dimensions of a small region at the same time extends

a long-range laser scanner’s functionality to take
advantage of both types of measurements and displays.
Combining laser ranging with commercial design
software can model existing facilities four times faster
than photogrammetry [1]. The range finder, which uses
laser beams to locate the position of a surface point,
has been used in construction for a long time. Recent
developments in technology have enabled the tool to
cover a large area for the continuous recording of a
surface configuration. For example, rapid local area
sensing and 3D modeling was applied for better
planning and control of construction equipment
operation [6].

Figure 1: The long-range 3D laser scanner

amount of laser points. The resolution of a view can be
increased by tiling scans with the highest resolution
each from left to right and from top to bottom. Once a
scan is done, its corresponding computer format is
stored as the point cloud model. The cloud format can
then be wrapped or transferred into a polygonal model.

4. Interior renovation
Based on the definition of local Building
Technology Regulations, interior renovation specifies
the works for space rearrangement, circulation, and the
allocation of materials without original building usages
being changed. Renovation usually includes design,
construction, and finishing stages. Upon to the client’s
request, the design process starts from site survey,
planning, space layout, detail design, defining
specification, to construction preparation. A
construction firm will be hired based on the design
specifications under clearly defined contract and
schedule to make sure the whole works are completed
correctly and timely.
The test case is a campus building interior
renovation job located in the Department of
Architecture, NTUST. The floor area is shown in
Appendix. Real construction took about 13 days to
complete.

5. 3D scan process

Table 1. Scan statistics
Stages
Design
Construction
Port-const.
total

Data
(MB)
116.34
61.61
25.74
203.69

No. of
scans
76
35
17
128

working
days
5
3
2
10

Duration
(days)
31
13
4
48

This study tries to built-up a monitor procedure
during the construction process. Instead of traditional
discrete and point-based data survey, this study applied
a long-range 3D laser scanner (Fig. 1) as a survey
device for continuous data retrieval. It can reach 100 m
and generate a 999x999 laser dots at about 4 mm
interval in 17 minutes. The distribution of dots is
considered as a continuous sampling of x-, y-, zcoordinate of a particular component. Scans are
conducted automatically. The sample points can be
easily added up to millions. The initial cost of a 3D
long-range laser scanner is about $100000 USD, which
is much higher than traditional tools do.
Projection efficiency has also increased. If each
point takes a total station about five seconds to aim, a
laser scanner that projects 999*999 points in 999
seconds would be 4,995 times faster for the same

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

In addition to represent the as-built space data in
3D form, scan data have to be integrated with design
data. So the scan procedure has to combine design
inspection to create a new working process. Scan
works are divided into stages, such as planning, on-site
jobs, data editing, and publishing.
1.
planning stage:
z Define scan region: based on the
description of working drawings, scan
targets, and spaces to define scan scope;
z Scan planning: identifying objects and their
locations for possible scan obstructions and
best scan locations;
z Schedule: planning scans with construction
progress to avoid interference and to
retrieve the most updated data in time.
2.
scan stage: the on-site jobs including preparation,
execution, and edit of scan data (Tab. 1).
3.
scan data editing:
z cloud registration: Clouds are registered to
show the dimensions of spaces as a whole.
z cloud editing: Remove noise from each
point cloud and slice it for profiles export.
z CAD system integration: Export edited

4.

clouds to AutoCAD, a popular drafting
platform, and merge with 2D vector
drawings.
scan data publishing: Publish cloud data on web
pages based on Octree format and AutoCAD
DWF format. The former format enables large
point cloud file being browsed and measured in
full scale over Internet.

Figure 2: Plan and scan data overlaid with
remark tools available

Figure 3: Scan data can be rotated, scaled,
translated, and measured in a browser mode

6. As-built data representation system
An as-built data representation system consists two
major parts feasible for design-, construction-, and
finishing- related data manipulation.
1.
as-built data retrieval module: The spaces have
to be recorded before, during, and after
construction process. 3D data include the exact
locations and configurations of building parts.
Since the locations are accurate to laser
measurement level, the inter-relationships
between parts are defined correctly. The as-built
data are originally retrieved as point clouds

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

which count for millions of surface sampling
coordinates. The data are good for as-built
drawing records before and after construction.
The as-built data are also important in the middle
of construction process for quality control.
2.
drafting module that incorporate as-built data: A
information management system is required to
integrate the data into, for example, layer
classifications. In one way existing drafting
process can proceed (Fig. 2), and in another a 3D
browsing view is provided to designer for 3D
data manipulation (Fig. 3), as it can be rotated,
scaled, translated, and measured.
The integration and management of 3D point
clouds includes layer management of design data and
file management of web pages. The system has to
incorporate different data formats. Most of the layer
management system stores 2D vector symbols as
graphic components in different layers to create plans,
elevations, sections, or details. The layers are made of
furniture, openings, mechanical/electrical parts,
finishes, structures, partitions, etc. To incorporate asbuilt data, the system is ready to import point clouds in
DXF, and to store and display the data as layers.

7. The analysis of construction data
Former research has accomplished 3D comparison
of scan data sets [13]. In this application, scan data are
applied specifically for a better control of renovation
quality. As shown in the system interface (Appendix),
user can access scan data by dates and stages under
design, construction, and post-construction categories.
As a result, the data are applicable along a building’s
life cycle. The data analysis at design stage is related to
drawing production, furniture system evaluation, and
BOM. Registered point clouds verify the real structure
plans through column and partition locations. Interior
dimensions can be measured, noted, and compared
with old drawings in higher accuracy. The plans then
were used to evaluate furniture layout.
Existing kitchen and interior partitions in room
807 and 808 were demolished. The demolition plan
and range images (Fig.4) show the partitions and
ceiling tiles had been removed on Dec. 12. New
partitions started before ceiling jobs. Both ceilings and
HVAC were installed almost at the same time (Fig. 5).
As former researches have been achieved [3,4] in 4D
schedule simulation, this study added point cloud
browser interface for a virtual 3D walk-through as a
schedule inspection aid after scans were registered.

layout.

Room 806: Ceiling, which included lighting fixture and air ducts,
was almost done.

Figure 4: Demolition plan and range image
Scans were made in full scale to facilitate
measurements in an internet browser mode. When
scans were imported into vector drafting platform, data
were scaled down to 1/100 or 1/200 to create the same
comparison base with drawings. Overlapping design
drawings with point cloud sections was found to be the
most efficient and practical way to detect any possible
old drawing error, comparing to tape or theodolite
measures. Since most building parts were built
orthogonally, the alignment of cloud registration can
also be inspected straight forward.

Room 807: Workers were installing ducts while some ceiling tiles
were removed.

8. Comparing design and construction
Post-construction scans helped create finish
drawings to be compared with original design
drawings for differences occurred at several locations.
1.
Lobby and corridor: Only ceiling was renovated
at this area. Comparing the design and as-built
data, real wall location was found a 27.83 cm
sideway offset and actual elevator opening width
was 6.38 cm less (Fig. 6).
2.
Classrooms: Room 806-808 had demolition,
ceiling, and HVAC jobs. Room dimension was
important for a proper layout of system furniture;
however, scan data showed two errors:
z Column size: The real column size should
be 62cmX80cm, instead of 80cmX80cm. A
20 cm difference existed.
z Wall location: A 39 cm difference existed
between real wall location and drawing data
(Fig. 6). The actual room size was larger
than what drawing indicated. The size error
led to mistakes in BOM and furniture

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Room 808: Room 808, next to 807, shared the same corridor. Air
ducts were installed at the same time. Range image showed
uninstalled ceiling tiles and exposed wires.

Figure 5: Ceiling jobs and HVAC installation
3.

Department office and library: New partitions
were installed to separate a conference room into
office and library. Ceiling remained. Three errors
were found (Fig. 6):
z
Wall length: Wrong measurement of wall
length turned out to be the key mistake that
led to other construction problems.
z Wrong partition location: Previous wrong
wall length led to the partition located 31
cm to the left of the designed location.
z Partition ran into opening: Due to the
survey and construction errors, partition ran
into an opening, instead of wall.

This study was conducted space by space. Cases
showed that incomplete design information lead to
miss perception of inter-relationship among design
components, and caused design or construction errors
consequently.

be referenced for future maintenance (Fig. 7).
Graduate students moved in with system furniture
after renovation was completed. Whether or not the
original design met user’s need, post-occupancy
observation was conducted to reveal user response.
Room 807 and 808 were originally designed for
graduate students. After scans were made, the furniture
layout showed a different pattern in which a classroom
had become a seminar cube.

Figure 7: Scan record (top left), original
design (top right), and overlaid image (bottom)

10. Conclusion

Figure 6: Difference in lobby / corridor (top),
classrooms (middle), and department office /
library (bottom two)
All the site jobs were conducted by a graduate
student in 10 working days, out of a period of 48 days.
Although this case is considered as a pilot study,
accurate as-built data and user-friendly internet
interface could have solved design problem initially
and improve construction quality without increasing
working forces.

9. Post-occupancy scan
The scan data can be exported and classified by
layers in AutoCAD. Point clouds with related 2D
information were used as the final drawings for
working schedule control in the middle of construction
or even after spaces were occupied. In this study,
related layers were overlaid to show the difference to

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The study applies 3D range technology to improve
efficiency in interior design and construction with
better accuracy and quality over Internet. The as-built
range data used for visual inspection and production is
feasible to the control of accuracy, coordinates,
working schedule, construction and design comparison,
and follow-up interior maintenance and management.
The study also enables large data sets being browsed
and measured on Internet.

11. Acknowledgements
This study is sponsored by National Science
Council, Taiwan, under the project no. NSC 95-2211E-011-174.

12. References
[1]

[2]

Al, S., and Salman, T., Large-scale construction
projects: Management,design and execution, Batsford,
London, 1985.
Bailey, A. D., Reverse engineering a process plant to
produce a 3-D CAD model, Congres sur la

[3]

[4]

[5]

numerisation 3D, design et digitalisation,creation
industrielle et artistique, Paris, French, 19–20, 1999.
Besuner, P. and Springfield, J., Modeling existing
facilities via laser, Lasers & Optronics, 17(5), 43-4,
1998.
Cheok, G.S., and Stone, W.C., Non-intrusive scanning
technology for construction assessment, ISARC’99: Int.
Symp. on Automation and Robotics in Construction,
IAARC, Madrid, Spain, 645–650, 1999.
Cheok, G.S., Stone, W.C., Lipman, R. R., and
Witzgall, C., Ladars for construction assessment and
update, ISARC’99 Int. Symp. on Automation and
Robotics in Construction, International Association
for Automation and Robotics in Construction
(IAARC), Madrid, Spain, 16(9), 5–6, 463–477, 1999.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[6]

[7]

[8]

Cho, Y.K., Haas, C., Liapi, K., and Sreenivasan, S.V.,
A framework for rapid local area modeling for
construction automation, Automation in Construction,
11(6), 629–641, 2002.
Tseng, A.A., Tanaka, M., and Leeladharan, B., Laserbased internal profile measurement system,
Automation in Construction, 11(6), 667–679, 2002.
Turk, G. and Levoy, M., Zippered Polygon Meshes
from Range Images. In ACM Computer Graphics
Proceedings, SIGGRAPH, Orlando, Florida, pp. 311–
318, 1994.

Appendix: The management interface

