High Dynamic Range Images: Evolution, Applications and Suggested Processes

1

Ahmad Rafi1, Musstanser Tinauli1&2, Mohd Izani1
Faculty of Creative Multimedia, Multimedia University
Malaysia (63100), Cyberjaya, Selangor, Malaysia
2
INDACO Department, Politecnico Di Milano
Italy (20258), Milano,Via Durando 38/a, Italy

{ahmadrafi.eshaq@mmu.edu.my, musstanser@gmail.com, izani@mmu.edu.my}
Abstract
Three dimensional (3D) and Computer Graphics
(CG) industries nowadays require ‘instant’ realism and
extreme special effects while imposing the balance in
cost, time and solution acceptance standard. It has been
known that realistic rendering is time consuming,
difficult to use, complex, expensive and often produces
insufficient digital output to predict particularly in the
early visualization process. This paper focuses on one of
the emerging technologies, High Dynamic Range Image
(HDRI) and how it can be developed in achieving
effective solution, while maintaining ‘realism’ or
required result based on a specific application. We firstly
introduce the overall HDRI processes before continue to
present a framework of captured Low Density Range
Image (LDRI) source sequence effectively in HDRI
environment. This paper concludes with discussions and
lists the application of HDRI.
Keywords: HDRI, Rendering, HDRI Applications

1. Introduction
Realism in computer graphics has gained enormous
amount of attraction over the last two decades [1].
Realism is becoming more critical due to the new and
demanding needs of virtual reality, human computer
interface (HCI), multimedia applications, scientific
visualizations, pre-architectural visualization, growing
education needs [2]. The existing 3D development tools
provide quite a few techniques for achieving realism to
represent or replace reality [3]. 3D Studio Max and Maya
are two common tools used by academicians and content
industries especially for 3D digital development due to
the fact that both has certain built in features and allow
3rd party plug-ins for achieving special effects and
realism.
The open and the growing 3D industry raises a cost
and balance issue, i.e. the realistic solution has to be cost
effective, time effective and the final solution in a
acceptable form to audience and researchers [4]. The cost

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

effective solution includes parameters such as minimum
required ram, processor, engine to render (renderer, e.g.
final render), and number of developers to setup. The
time effective solution refers to parameters such as time
needed to render (including in real-time environment),
time needed to setup lights, and special effects.
There are several solutions to achieve realism while
ensuring time and cost effective results. These are:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Special effects via detailed lighting
Realistic detailed textures for each object
Network rendering
Global illumination
Radiosity
Mental ray
Final gather renderer, Brazil plug-in and
High dynamic range image (HDRI)

In comparing to other solutions, we select HDRI due
to its capability and strength as an alternate to detailed
textures, detailed lighting, cost of texture collection [5]
while reducing the overall processing time and cost. In
fact, image processing, manipulation, display,
recognition and other operations will no longer be
limited by the number of bits used to represent each pixel
[6]. According to this research, it is anticipated that in
the next decade, the imaging industry will inevitably
move to HDRI which will affect all aspects of the
imaging pipeline, from capture (sensor, camera), to
storage (compression coding) to reproduction (rendering,
tone mapping, printing and display). New image
processing and computational vision algorithms will also
be developed around this new emerging imaging
paradigm.
The idea of HDRI originated from exposure
bracketing [8-9,11-12] explained in section 3.2.2. In the
paper we will present the A-Z of HDRI, starting from
skills needed to generate an HDRI till its effective use.
We define HDRI, relevant essential skills and
terminologies significant for HDRI in section 3.0. In
section 4.0 we present and discuss a framework for

ensuring an effective HDRI. Later in section 5.0 we
discuss and present HDRI uses and its applications [7].

2. High Dynamic Range Images
High dynamic range image, referred as HDRI is a
combination of multiple images with different exposures.
HDRI comes to picture due to the inability of standard
digital still cameras to capture the dark and the bright
regions present in a scene under observation [8, 9, 10 and
11]. HDRI removes this basic inability of these cameras
by combining a sequence of differently exposed images
into a unit image. The sequence of low dynamic range
images can be captured either by varying aperture,
varying shutter speed or by varying both [5]. The term
varying aperture means changing the depth of the scene,
choosing which is debatable. The suggestion by a few is
to keep the aperture constant and change the shutter
speed, which seems logical, however the results of both
seem to be pretty much the same.
Figure 1- Figure 3 explain two scenarios implicating
the significance of HDR images. In scenario 1, we focus
the design in the figures bounded by the white
rectangles, and in scenario 2 we discuss the shields
encircled.

Figure 3: Shields (completely visible)
In the case of scenario 1, we focus the design in the
rectangular boundaries and the design is visible in Figure
1 and 2. This however is not detailed in Figure 3. In
contrast with scenario 2, the encircled are visible in
Figure 2 and 3, and very vague in the Figure 1. The two
scenarios exist in the same scene under observation,
which clearly highlights the importance of HDRI as if
there was only one image with unit exposure, the details
of both design and shields could never had been
observed.

2.1 HDRI Process
In HDRI, the image files record the actual colour
and dynamic range of the real world scene rather than the
limited gamut and dynamic range of the monitor or other
reproduction media [6]. The process of HDRI generation
is explained in Figure 4.

HDRI Process
- Presence of
sufficient bright
and dark regions

Scene Selection

Figure 1: Shields (not visible)

LDRI Sequence
Shoot

- Presence of
sufficient bright
and dark regions

Assembly and
HDRI Formation

Figure 2: Shields (slightly visible)

- Availability of a
manual camera,
e.g. Nikon D100

- Access to a HDR
Shop or relevant tool
to combine several
LDR images to unit
image

Figure 4: HDRI Process

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

2.1.1 Scene Selection. The selection of scene is
crucial to ensure researchers have enough illumination
data between dark and light scene. Standard variation can
neither be a good lighting source later nor can it serve the
purpose of a stand-alone HDRI image, i.e. to see all the
objects present in the scene. An example scene is shown
in Figure 5.

Figure 5: Example Scene
2.1.2 LDRI sequence shoot. In the HDRI
generation process, the next step after scene selection is
shooting the sequence of images with different
exposures. To capture different exposures, there is a need
a camera that allows option to control the exposure
before capturing an image, via changing the shutter
speed or aperture. The variance in shutter speed has to be
constant from the minimum F-Stop value to the
maximum. To avoid the displacement in camera while
shooting the sequence of images, the F-stop can be set to
the minimum and then for each image, a transition of 1-2
F-stop(s) is established until it reaches the maximum Fstop value or vice versa.
2.1.3 Assembly and HDRI formation. The
simplest task of all in HDR image generation is
assembling of the sequence of images and forming a
resultant HDRI curtsey to HDR shop and other plug-in
tools to convert the sequence into a unit image, called
HDRI.
2.1.4 Photography skills for HDRI. Photography
fundamentals can be seen as one of the required skills
before developing any HDRI formation. This includes
the understanding of aperture, dynamic range, F-stop,
and shutter speed.

2.2 Related terminologies
2.2.1 Aperture. Aperture is the diameter of a
camera’s lens opening. The larger the diameter of
aperture, the more light is allowed to pass through the
lens into the cameras film or image sensor. The unit of
measuring aperture is F-Stop.
2.2.2 Exposure bracketing. Exposure bracketing is
a simple technique used by photographers when they are
not sure of the exact exposure or if they want to ensure
that the exact exposure is captured. Most of the advanced

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

digital/non digital cameras have exposure bracketing as a
built in feature. Before capturing the image, an exposure
value is calculated by the light meter, this value is chosen
as the exposure settings. Two or more images of the
same scene of the chosen exposure setting are required,
including under exposed and over exposed settings. The
task of capturing exact exposure values is called
exposure bracketing.
2.2.3 Dynamic range. Dynamic range is the amount
of detail present in a scene, a camera can capture, i.e. the
dark and bright regions present in a scene in the form of
shadows and highlights. Neither camera nor the naked
eye can capture the dynamic range present in a scene in
reality; however the camera dynamic range is based on
the sensitivity of human naked eye. Conventional films
have a dynamic range of 5 F-stops, black and white have
about 9 F-stops.
2.2.4 F-Stop. The unit of measuring aperture is
called F-Stop. Smaller F-Stop value refers to larger lens
opening (diameter of the lens). Most good apertures are
ranging from F1.8 till F16.
2.2.5 Depth of field. Depth of Field (DOF) is the
distance from the nearest object till end of sight, which
you want to focus while capturing an image. Two
extreme examples about the use of DOF are landscape
shoots and portraits. When the subject is a portrait the
DOF has to be deeper, i.e. the F-Stop value has to be
smallest and whereas incase of landscape the DOF
should be narrowed, that employs to a bigger F-stop
value.
2.2.6 Shutter speed. Shutter speed controls the
amount of light to be allowed to pass through the lens.
Shutter speed does not affect the aperture directly,
though it shuts the cover slowly or rapidly controlling the
amount of light to pass through the lens independently of
the aperture. A fast shutter speed can capture a fast
moving object whereas to blur an image, a slower shutter
speed is applicable.

3. A framework to identify captured LDRI
source sequence
Compiling of HDR images include capturing of
many images of the same scene with different exposure
values. In general while taking photographs there is a
high tendency that a photographer will introduce certain
camera movements while changing the exposure settings,
unless the camera is handled by a remote control. In our
experiments such movements often reveal a duplication
of images (circled) as shown in Figure 6. With a closer
observation, a light shadow is revealed just besides the
real buildings. This issue is carefully considered as part
of the overall HDRI framework design development as
shown in Figure 8.

The vector is obtained by following the zigzag
traversal of matrix, starting from position [row, column]
(0,0) to (0,1) a diagonal down to a row below then a
diagonal up and one column right, and after that a
diagonal down till one row down and it continues till the
whole matrix is traversed as show in Figure 7.

Figure 6: Visible Camera Shake
The framework introduces the first image as the
reference image before passing through the edge
detection process that is useful at a later stage. Each
image is required to undergo four major processes and
sequences of basic mathematical manipulations. A more
comprehensive explanation is discussed in section 3.1.

3.1

Framework processes

3.1.1
Histogram
equalization.
Histogram
equalization is performed on each image; the purpose to
do so is to normalize the image.
3.1.2 Edge detection. The edge detection is the
most crucial part of the system, therefore three kinds of
edge detection techniques are utilized, i.e. Sobel, Roberto
and Candy within the process. The edge detection
process obtains three edges vector and sums it all
together. Finally the resultant edge vector is digitized.
3.1.3 Zigzag. Zigzag is the standard operation in
image processing. The initial idea behind zigzag is to
obtain a vector for analyzing at a later stage. The zigzag
pattern is employed so that the matrix takes a new row of
the vector shape. This process helps in reducing the
matrix size representation when the zeros are extracted
from the resultant vector in the ‘Extract Zeros’ process.

Figure 7: ‘ZigZag’ Traversal Matrix
3.1.4 Extract zeros. Extract zero is a simple process
that is used to extract all zeros out of any vector under
observation or analysis. We utilize it to remove all the
zeros in the obtained resultant vector.

3.2

Framework Explanation

The framework is developed on simple digital image
processing concepts. All reference images are required to
go through ‘Edge Detection’ process. Each image in the
sequence will pass through ‘Histogram Equalization’
stage. The edges of the sequence are subtracted from the
reference image to obtain the difference in the image and
edge detection. The results of the difference images are
summed up and passed through the ‘Zig Zag’ process to
obtain 1 row vector. The zeros in the one row vector are
extracted the ‘Extract Zeroes’ process. The final

Figure 8: Framework to Identify Captured LDRI Source

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

calculated vector is the result of the process, analysis of
which reveals the camera movement while the images
are being taken. The resultant vector consists of positive
and negative decimal values.
The positive values refer to those edges that were
presented earlier and not in others, while the negative
values refer to those points that were not existed in the
first but were revealed in the second.

In general the size of the vector is enough to
continuously observed image sequences for
producing HDRI. Though however the values
of the vectors can also be utilized, as for
example if there was no handshake at all, the
vectors would consist of almost same positive
and negative values and the size of the vector
will be small and in the opposite case the
values would be entirely different and the size
of the vector would be exceptionally large.

Figure 10: HDRI (Environment + Global Light)

4. HDRI Applications and examples
4.1 HDRI-based lighting and environment
Neither human nor any existing tool can produce
exact lighting conditions as they were at any particular
moment of the day and environment. It requires vast
through a ‘trial and error’ method. We can easily capture
different light intensities at a designated surrounding
using HDRI with at least a 180 Degree Lens for a better
(‘realistic’) atmosphere especially when the images are
developed in the form of animation, games or real-time
simulation (virtual reality).

Figure 11: HDRI (Environment + Global Light)
with a ‘Radiosity’ Solution

4.2 Pre Architectural Visualization

Figure 9: HDRI Environment

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Pre-visualization for architectural purpose is crucial
to better understand the architectural design, look, and its
feasibility before actually building it in reality [12, 13
and 14]. Its complexity increased due to existence of
complex and design demands. It becomes even more
complicated particularly realistic rendering of
architectural and building detailing when visualizing and
comparing to realistic experience [1]. Pre-architectural
visualization plays an important role for the client and
the designers. The problems of traditional design
techniques including (plans, sections, facades) have been
reported by Ucelli et. al, [2]. He claimed that these basic
designs are insufficient for non-professional to feel or
understand what the designs actually represent.
Ideas of visualizations are made possible through
computer graphic technologies and presented in the form
of 3D animations and virtual environments. One of the
key problems is how to establish ‘fast’ or ‘instant’ 3D
visualization able to portray ‘effective’ visual for design
decisions while at the same time reduce the rendering
time and cost. We experimented with HDRI to visualize
architecture in a particular place. One example of this

work is the feasibility study of a helipad in Multimedia
University, Malaysia.
We imposed a 3D model of a helicopter in the
existing (real) environment to compare and discuss on
certain design factors. This includes scale, shadows,
visibility and noise issues. This 3D object placement is
just an example of possibility of visualization
understanding (Figure 12).

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

Figure 12: A 3D object (helicopter) is imposed
in a ‘real’ environment using HDRI technique

[6]

Similar ideas for use of computer-animated objects
have been well proven by researchers on computer
animation trends in architectural practice and digital
modeling [12 and 13].

[7]

5. Conclusion

[9]

The paper explains the basic understanding of the
HDRI. We enlisted a few applications of HDRI namely
HDRI-based lighting and environment, and Architectural
visualization. We analyzed how it provides a cost and
time effective solution. We also presented a framework
to enhance the speed of creating HDRI. Future
consideration based on the suggested framework may
consider brightness variables suitable for specific
application of HDRI image generation such virtual
environment and games.

Acknowledgement
We acknowledges the financial support given by the
Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation,
Malaysia (MOSTI) through the IRPA Grant Project –
Utilising a Real/Fake Radiosity and HDRI Rendering
Method for Local Culture Content (Project ID: 04-99-010060 EA056), Melaka State Government and Multimedia
University for allowing the research location.

References
[1]

Gottig, R., Newton, J. and Kaufmann, S., A comparison
of 3D visualisation technologies and their user interfaces

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[8]

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

with data specific to architecture. In Proceedings of 7th
International Conference on Design and Decision
Support Systems in Architecture and Urban Planning
(DDSS), De Ruwenberg, Sint-Michielsgestel, The
Netherlands, July 2004, pp. 99-111.
Ucelli, G., Conti, G. and Af Klercker, J., Visualisation:
The customer's Perception, Architectural Computing
from Turing to 2000. In Proceedings of the 17th
International
Conference
on
Computer-aided
Architectural Design in Europe (eCAADe), Liverpool
(UK) 15-17 Sept 1999, pp. 539-544.
Besuievsky, G. and Pueyo, X., A Monte Carlo method
for accelerating the computation of animated radiosity
sequences. In Proceedings of Computer Graphics
International, 2001, pp. 201-208.
Bekaert, P., Hierarchical and stochastic algorithms for
radiosity, http://www.cs. kuleuven.ac.be/ ~graphics/
CGRG.PUBLICATIONS/Dag2000/, PhD Dissertation,
Dec 1999
Debevec, P., Rendering synthetic objects into real
scenes: Bridging traditional and image-based graphics
with global illumination and high dynamic range
photography. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 98,
Computer Graphics Proceedings, Annual Conference
Series, 1998, pp. 189-198.
Qui, G., Reinhard, E. and Finlayson, G. Journal of Visual
Communication and Image Representation, Special Issue
on High Dynamic Range Imaging, (article in press) 2006.
Kollig and Keller, A., Efficient illumination by high
dynamic range images. In Euro graphics symposium on
rendering, 2003, pp.45-51.
Ward, G., High dynamic range imaging. In Proceedings
of IS&T/SID 9th Color Imaging Conference, 2001, pp.916.
Robertson, M. A., Borman, S. and Stevenson, R. L.,
Dynamic range improvement through multiple
exposures. In Proceedings of the International
conference on Image Processing, Oct 1999, pp.159-163.
Grossberg, M. D. and Nayar, S. K., In Proceedings of
ICCV workshop on color and photometric methods in
computer vision, Nice, France, Oct 2003.
Nayar, S. K. and Mitsunaga, T., High dynamic range
imaging: spatially varying pixel exposures. In
Proceeding of IEEE CVPR, 2000, pp. 472-479.
Rafi, A., Izani, M. and Tinauli, M., A comparative study
on photorealistic rendering methods for architectural
visualization. In Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Computer-aided Architectural Design in
Europe (eCAADe), 21-24 Sept. 2005, pp. 349-356
Mullins, M., Zupancic-Strojan, T. and Juvancic, M.,
Experts and users efficiency and accuracy in the
presentation of design ideas across networks, connecting
the real and the virtual - design e-ducation.
In
Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on
Computer-aided Architectural Design in Europe
(eCAADe), Warsaw (Poland) 18-20 Sept 2002, pp. 430439.
Rafi, A., Visualisation of design using animation for
virtual prototyping, architectural computing from Turing
to 2000. In Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Computer-aided Architectural Design in
Europe (eCAADe), Liverpool (UK) 15-17 September
1999, pp. 519-525.

