How to Induce the Beholder to Persuade Himself:
Learning from Advertising Research for Information Visualization
Ralph Lengler
University of Lugano, Faculty of Communication Sciences
ralph.lengler@lu.unisi.ch
Abstract
Research on the interplay of cognition and effect in
the interpretation of visuals has made significant theoretical advances. This literature review highlights three
themes which have emerged in advertising research. First
it looks at the determinants constituting and influencing
’likeability’- the best predictor of advertisement effectiveness. Second it presents evidence how emotional advertising frames and shapes perception and how it could influence persuasion. Finally it discusses the role of ‘coauthoring’ in the interpretation of visuals and how it does
affect persuasion over the emotional route.

1. Introduction
Clever advertisers have always relied on the power of
visualization to get their messages across. Besides, advertisers – or rather the advertiser’s clients – always had a
keen interest in researching how effectively their money
was spent. In most disciplines of visualization science, on
the other hand, there has been little systematic analysis on
the effectiveness of visualization [3].
Information Visualization can learn from Advertising: Advertisers are experts in getting people interested in
what they have to say, they also know how to make messages memorable. And it is the oldest visualization field
which constantly monitors and evaluates the effectiveness
of its results. Unlike Information Visualization, Advertising amplifies emotion, not cognition. For both fields decision making is important, but for opposite reasons.
Whereas Information Visualization expands processing
capacity of the decision maker, Advertising induces ‘somatic’ decision markers [1, 2] which guide the decision
maker by reducing the number of decision options. Information Visualization can learn from Advertising how to
use decision markers to reduce the cognitive load, thus
freeing the decision maker for other tasks. In the hope that
this may lead to more effective visualizations in other
visualization disciplines, this literature review elaborates
the following questions:
•
•

What makes visual communication effective?
How do ads shape and frame perception?

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

•

How does the role of ‘co-creation’ and ‘coauthorship’ affect emotional persuasion?

Thanks to the all-but-total saturation of our culture by
commercial advertising [3], “Advertisers know they need
to have more and more advertising to get an ever narrower
slice of the consumer’s attention”, says Bob Garfield [43],
Columnist of the Advertising Age. “Of course this makes
us ever more resistant, requiring ever better advertising,
making us ever more resistant."
60 years of co-evolution between consumers and advertisers has fundamentally transformed advertising but
also other forms visual representation. Let us begin our
journey in 1948 when advertising researcher David
Ogilvy [10] launched his agency dedicated to “claim” advertising, as opposed to Leo Burnett’s “image” advertising [12]. By combining modern imagery with research on
advertising effectiveness, Ogilvy created powerful, original ad campaigns. But is it true that content is more important than form as Ogilvy claimed? Or is it vice-versa?
In any case, visual advertising has always been the main
focus of advertising research. As visuals produce more
expenditure, there is a greater need justifying their effectiveness. The best predictor for visualization effectiveness
is ‘likeability’ [13, 5 6]. We will investigate what ‘likeability’ means and also what triggers it.
Practitioners acknowledge that effective visual advertising (or visualization in general) should address head
and heart. As most people in information visualization
know how to address the head, this article will investigate
what you can gain by also addressing the heart. However,
little investment in research and theory development has
been dedicated to measuring the heart response – until recently. Research is just now beginning to apply learning
from cognitive psychology and the affective
(neuro)sciences on how meaning is created and memories
retained when we are looking at visuals [5, 6].
Visuals are more open to multiple interpretations than
similar messages presented in words [24]. The implicitness of a visual message, involves the beholder more in
meaning creation, effectively making him a co-author.
This co-authoring-effect [26, 6, 25] moves the beholder
from adversary to accomplice and makes visuals so persuasive. Recent theoretical developments in emotional

branding show while it’s nice to be liked, nothing beats
the power of love. Lovemarks, as those brands are called,
rely heavily on co-authoring and co-creation-effects by
their users. Lovemarks create strong emotional bonds with
the consumer: a relationship [38, 35, 36]. Should we
therefore postulate that co-creation is the ultimate means
for (emotional) persuasion? When we love, we literally
wear ‘pink glasses’ and our perception changes without us
noticing it. This paper emphasizes research on framing effects as a cautionary tale. Visual representations in Information Visualization change the framing of information
with profound effects on heuristics, biases and judgments.
Framing effects are unconscious by nature, making them
not fully detectable by questionnaires, projective methods
and Neuroscientific imaging [40-43, 29].
Finally, Science is still too text-centric and largely
disregards the scientific value of visuals. Any documentary for example is the result of intensive research, but
neither film nor the preliminary research is available in
(electronic) libraries. A shining example of how to do it is
the ‘frontline’ documentary “The Persuaders” [43] which
is entirely viewable on PBS [pbs.org]. It not only provides
a rare inside look at the advertising industry and how they
conduct research, its website features additional readings,
research and interview transcripts with industry icons like
Kevin Roberts [38] and Frank Luntz [43].

2. A longstanding debate
Advertisers have two related goals for all their advertising
messages. First, they want them to be convincing [Measurement: Persuasion], using either the approach of Lecture
or Story/Drama [27]. The lecture approach uses logic,
reason, and rhetoric to persuade us: "Buy this product because it has all-wheel-drive." The story/drama approach
relies more on feelings and emotions and is called transformational — as it takes us inside the story and delivers
a message while creating an emotional connection. Second, they want them to be remembered [Measurement:
Recall]. An advertisement fails to do its work unless it
persuades the consumer and the consumer remembers the
message at purchase time [Measurement: Purchase Intention]. It sometimes happens that an advertisement will
succeed at one of these while it fails to do the other. It
makes no difference whether the consumer is persuaded
by an ad unless he remembers the brand. Nothing is more
disappointing to an advertiser than to hear a consumer
say, "I saw a commercial for jeans lately — I don't remember the brand— but it was really funny" [5, 6].
Is what you say (message content) more important
than how you say it (creative execution), or vice versa?
Over the past decades, prominent advertisers have taken
diametrically opposed positions regarding this issue. For

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

example, David Ogilvy advocates that advertisers should
focus the lion's share of their efforts on message content
rather than creative execution. In his seminal work, Confessions of an Advertising Man, Ogilvy declares that what
you say in advertising is more important than how you say
it [10]. Ogilvy believes that successful advertising campaigns sell products by presenting consumers with a sufficient amount of factual information. While it might be
tempting to assume that Ogilvy attaches no relevance to
creative execution, such a conjecture would be false. In
other writings, Ogilvy acknowledges that execution plays
at least a minor role in advertising effectiveness. Specifically, he observed that "if the execution is inept nobody
pays attention to the commercials" [11]. In its purest form
“what-you-say” advertising could be likened to Google
AdWords: A relevant selling message is tailored to the
needs and interests of a likely buyer.
Leo Burnett, in contrast to David Ogilvy, promotes
the idea that advertisers should devote the bulk of their efforts toward creative execution. Specifically, Leo Burnett
recommends that advertisers identify and isolate the inherent drama associated with each product. Through a series of investigative interviews with prominent advertisers, Mayer [12] observes that Burnett has operated under
the assumption that the inherent drama is often hard to
find but it is always there, and once found it is the most
interesting and believable of all advertising appeals.
Hence, Burnett holds the position that advertising effectiveness stems from clearly presenting consumer benefits
with an emphasis on how those benefits are communicated (e.g., drama advertisements, slice-of-life advertisements, and demonstration advertisements). The prototypical example of such an inherent drama campaign is the
launch campaign of the Apple Macintosh in 1984. For that
Apple commissioned a commercial by esteemed Film Director Ridley Scott. The commercial aired during Super
Bowl on January 22, 1984 showing an unnamed heroine
wearing red shorts, red running shoes, and a white tank
top, running through a grey, Orwellian world to throw a
sledgehammer at a TV image of Big Brother — an implied representation of IBM. This was followed by an onscreen message and voiceover "On January 24th, Apple
Computer will introduce Macintosh. And you'll see why
1984 won't be like '1984'.” [32]. Apple has exploited the
subliminal fear of an Orwellian society ever since, positioning itself as colorful, cool and inspiring alternative to
conformity [31].
The question, which of the two views is more important has divided advertisers, market researchers and academics alike. In a speech by Biel [7], then CEO of Ogilvy
Research, no other sector of consumer research provoked
more passionate battles than the one between recallers and
persuasionists. Each side claimed that truth, beauty and
sales success were theirs and theirs alone. On the academic front, the battles were fought with the same zeal

and “over-my-dead-body” attitude: In Ogilvy’s camp we
have John Philip Jones [8] who champions advertising as
a form of salesmanship stressing that effective advertising
says something important and meaningful about the brand
in a visual way. In Burnett’s camp we have Andrew
Ehrenberg [9] who sees advertising as the communicator
of a brand experience: Effective advertising must be based
on an understanding of the subtleties of consumers, their
behavior and their hidden desires.

3. Neuroscientific foundations
The first formal advertising model was AIDA (Attention
→ Interest → Desire → Action), attributed to Elmo Lewis
in 1898. These types of hierarchy of effects models have
dominated the literature ever since [37]. Consumers
“change their minds” about a product, then they change
their attitude, and then they act. In other words, the process begins with cognition, which translates to affect,
which then translates to behavior [14].
Putting together the recent developments in neuroscience and psychology of how consumers actually feel,
think and perceive, let us have a look at how advertising
could work, especially after the excellent review and taxonomy by Vakratsas and Ambler [37] has (seriously)
damaged most advertising and persuasion theories.

3.1 Emotion vs. Reason. 1:0
Antonio Damasio, one of the pioneers in the neuroscience
who has led the field in exploring the broader implications
of this scientific revolution, has expressed this shifting
view of the mind succinctly [1]: “Descartes' Error, the
concept of a clinically reasoned human mind, is no longer
a tenable hypothesis. The mind cannot approach an object
in the abstract without a set of parameters to bring it into
consciousness”.
Drawing on various case studies, Damasio [1] asserts
that although our highly developed neocortex equips us to
perform wondrous feats of reason and analysis it is still
‘wired up’ through our older biological brain. More recently Damasio [2] provides an improved psychobiological explanation of emotional processing: Emotions and
feelings are formed in what he calls the proto-self,
whereas thoughts are formed in what he calls core consciousness. He shows that activity in the proto-self always
precedes activity in the core consciousness, which confirms that emotions and feelings will always be formed
precognitively and preattentively, before any information
processing takes place. Co-pioneer Joseph LeDoux [21]
adds, the wiring of the brain favors emotion —the communications from the emotional to the rational are
stronger than the other way round. Emotion and reason

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

are intertwined, but when they conflict — emotion wins
every time. Calne [28] adds: The essential difference between emotion and reason is that emotion leads to action
while reason leads to conclusions.

3.2 Intuition: The role of ‘Somatic’ markers
So however hard we ‘think’ about a decision, we can only
make that decision via a brain area which interfaces with
our senses, emotions, instinct, and intuition, which in addition tells us how to perceive the sensory input. Furthermore Damasio postulates that we construct throughout our
lives what he calls ‘somatic’ markers (derived from Greek
soma, meaning body) [1]:
Somatic markers are … feelings generated
from secondary emotions … (which) … have been
connected, by learning, to predict future outcomes.
When a negative somatic marker is juxtaposed to a
particular future outcome the combination acts as
an alarm bell. When a positive somatic marker is
juxtaposed instead, it becomes a beacon of incentive. …
There is still room for using a cost/benefit
analysis and proper deductive competence, but
only after the automated step drastically reduces
the number of options. Somatic markers may not
be sufficient for normal human decision making
since a subsequent process of reasoning and final
selection will still take place in many though not
all instances.
Heath [16] explains that we frequently use somatic
markers when we make intuitive brand choices. Most of
us have a marker that tells us that Germans have an outstanding reputation for high-quality, durable engineering,
and that Paris is the center of fashion; therefore we willingly pay more for German washing machines and cars
and French perfume and fashion goods. Of course somatic
markers change over time - Japan, once synonymous with
cheapness and poor quality, is now the acknowledged
leader in countless technological fields.
Somatic markers collectively form a disorganized, incessantly modifying, sometimes interconnected network
of all the person's ideas, knowledge, intuitions, and feelings about the brand at a single point in time. Some are
explicit and may be retrievable, and some are implicit,
operating at the level of unconscious feeling [16, 6]. And
while the rational communication content of advertising
fades and vanishes over time, the relationship building influence of the emotional meta-communication content
will endure thanks to the somatic markers. Just as a short
glimpse to later chapters, the decision making process for
buying a new car stretches over a three year period. The

fact that rational arguments fade but emotional ‘somatic’
markers endure would explain why clever auto-makers do
so much emotional advertising, even if we assumed that
car-buying is a rational decision.

3.3 Cognition: The role of the ‘Interpreter’
Another key development is the new functional map of
the brain which represents a profoundly different view of
how the brain actually operates, and how mind is created.
They view the brain as an adaptive organism, thus each
memory event is dynamic and context sensitive. Every act
of remembering involves a reconstruction of information.
No two memories involving the same event are exactly
the same [29]. These differences may often be very small
and of no practical consequence. They also may be substantial and of great consequence as in certain cases of
false memory [22]. Neuroscientific evidence confirms that
the brain activity when recalling a ‘true’ memory is very
similar to that involved when recalling a ‘false’ memory.
There is a conviction when recalling a memory that it
feels real, regardless of its actual veracity [29].
One of the most significant elements of this new view
is the concept of the interpreter. Gazzaniga [46] identifies
the interpreter as an element of the left cortex that reacts
to the emotions, messages, and impulses that the brain
generates. It tries to make sense of, or interpret, these
emotions, in an apparently logical way.
The relevance of the interpreter to understanding how
advertising works in the consumer's mind is in its rationalization function. “The interpreter is … really trying to
keep our personal story together. To do that, we have to
learn to lie to ourselves.… We need something that expands the actual facts of our experience into an ongoing
narrative, the self-image we have been building in our
mind for years” [46].
This interpreter has a very unrewarding job. First it
has to make sense of a series of complex and “irrational”
emotions and impulses, making them seem consistent with
processes in the neocortex. Second it has to make each act
of remembering look the same. In most cases it is successful in making us believe that memories are closely linked
to objective truths and reality, even though external information can distort memories without our awareness.
This gives us a false sense of security that it is our own
experiences which drive our decision making. So one of
main goals of the interpreter is what social psychologists
call dissonance reduction or to create coherence out of
conflicting cognitions, motivations and behavior. In most
cases of decision making this means to use postdecision
information to reinforce the merits of our decisions
thereby creating after-the-fact a greater sense of confidence in our initial decisions than may have actually been
experienced [29].

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

In advertising, but also in visualization, the interpreter has a powerful role. Visuals are more open to multiple interpretations than similar messages presented in
words, because most of the visual message is implicit
[24]. Several researchers (and practitioners) contend that
the openness or ambiguity of pictures in advertising is
what makes them to persuasive [25, 26, 5, 6, 47, 10, 12,
43]. But there is a caveat to it: Because of the ambiguity
of a visual, it is of utmost importance to guide the interpreter in its work. Because the interpreter has to keep the
viewer's personal story together, and if no story is explicitly supplied to explain the emotions the advertising has
generated, the interpreter will create one. David Ogilvy
[10] cautioned “customers need a rational excuse to justify their emotional decisions. So always include one”.
Without an (implicit) reason-why-to-believe, the interpreter may conclude, that we have been influenced inappropriately and then everything goes awry. Because if we
become aware that (contextual) information has influenced us inappropriately and we possess and are willing
to expand cognitive resources, we will try to partial out
the inappropriate influence. Yet because the process of
correcting and partialling out bias is imperfect, the correction process will lead to fairly extreme opposite judgments of the original interpretation [47].

3.4 Implications for Visualization Science
The new Neuroscientific imaging methods are providing
us with revolutionizing insights on how visual imagery affects information processing in the brain.
When a memory trace is laid down, the information
part is coded over the hippocampus, feelings over the
amygdala. Adding emotion to information will double the
strength of any memory trace. While cognitive information fades over time, emotional memories will endure.
Memories of past decisions are laid down in ‘somatic’
markers which make fast and adequate decisions possible.
As we will see in chapter 4.3, somatic markers also regulate which parts of our visual field should or should not be
processed.
The sense making center of our brain – the interpreter – has the strongest implications for information
visualization. Any visual information (upon its arrival in
the visual cortex) is preprocessed and then distributed to
other centers for further processing. Out of those results
the interpreter makes then meaning. If the interpreter has
nothing left to do, because the visual is too clear, the visualization will fail. Therefore any visualization should
strive to be as clear as possible but leave something open
to explore. That can be in form of interactivity or metaphor. But before we go into that, let us first investigate
whether content (Ogilvy) or form (Burnett) is more important for effectiveness in visualization.

4. Likeability
To answer the question once and for all whether the message should rather be relevant and persuasive (Ogilvy) or
entertaining and remembered (Burnett) [i.e. whether recall
or persuasion is a good proxy for measuring adeffectiveness], the American Advertising Research Foundation (ARF) commissioned the Copy Research Validation Project (Haley & Baldinger [13]). Advertisers were
asked to identify pairs of advertisements that had been
used for the same brand, where one had been a big success and the other had been a failure. Eventually eight
pairs of advertisements were identified. Haley’s team also
gathered all the research that had been done on them. It
then devised a questionnaire which asked respondents to
rate advertisements on every possible measure that can be
taken of a commercial. At the last moment someone suggested that maybe they should also simply ask if they like
the commercial [13, 5]. The conclusions showed that advertising liking was the most predictive factor for sales.
This was an unexpected result, since whether people liked
an ad did not feature in any of the recognized ways of researching effectiveness [5].

encoding, influencing how the information is organized in
memory and highlighting specific features that will later
be retrievable. Thus, positive affect may be used by viewers in encoding, storing, and then in retrieving [19].
Finally, others have suggested that showing simple,
positive emotions induces similar emotions in the viewer
[20, 5, 6]. This induced emotion, when positive, triggers a
positive attitude toward the advertisement. What is more,
the likeability of the advertisement is transferred to the
likeability of the brand, which in turn results in a higher
purchase intention.
Factor analytical studies1 from 1970 to date have
identified the following main dimensions of likeability
[e.g.: 15, 13, 20, 5, 30]:
•

•

4.1 Reasons explaining ‘Likeability’
It is claimed that likeable advertisements are better at interrupting the scanning phase of consumers — also referred to as the stopping power of advertisements — improving processing, and producing more positive judgments of the message and, hopefully, the brand.
Several reasons have been suggested to account for
the effects of likeability (e.g., Biel, [15]; Du Plessis [5];
Haley and Baldinger [13]). First, the consumer may be
willing to pay attention to a commercial that is well liked
and may be willing to watch it again [15]. If the first impression of a commercial is favorable, consumers are
likely to continue and to process it more fully. In this
sense, likeability can function as a "gatekeeper" for further processing.
A second reason for the effectiveness of likeability is
that the advertising itself may be considered as a brand attribute [17]. This is especially true for product categories
where the functional characteristics of different brands are
perceived as very similar. Therefore, liking the advertisement will be closely related to buying the brand: "love the
advertisement, buy the product."
Others have explained the power of likeability in
terms of the cognitive processing of advertising messages
[17]. A well-liked advertisement is thought to affect information processing by creating positive arousal and activation, improving the recall of the advertised material,
and producing positive judgments of the message. Favorable feelings influence memory at the time of stimulus

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

•

•
•

•

Entertaining (or clever, ingenuity, humorous): Entertainment can be achieved by humor, but it can
also be achieved by sheer enthusiasm in the presentation or other ways. This is the most affective of
all likeability measures [5].
Relevant (or clear, informative, believable, meaningful): People like advertisement which provide
them with relevant information. This dimension
can be thought of as a persuasion measure and is
the most cognitive [5].
Empathetic (or warm, sensual): People like to see
situations which they can identify with or to aspire
to. Empathy reflects the involvement or the interaction of the viewer with the commercial.
Energetic (or stimulating, lively, appealing):
Irritating (or alienating, tasteless, confusing):
Whereas unclear or confusing advertisements are
just ignored by the audience, an alienating one
achieves the opposite, hating the ad and the brand.
Familiar (or: boring, worn out): Basically this is a
measure of how boring an ad is. It could also mean
that the ad has been seen too many times.

4.2 Temporal stability
In a (re)analysis of audience reactions to over 3000 (i.e.
all) commercials broadcast on Dutch TV between 19922001, Smit, Van Meurs & Neijens [30] investigated the
question whether ‘advertising likeability’ had changed
during that period. They found, that during those ten years
advertisements were perceived as less interesting, less
convincing, less stimulating in terms of buying behavior,
1

As it is in the researcher’s discretion to properly name the found dimensions, the assigned names vary across the studies. Furthermore, any
dimension has a positive and a negative pole. The researcher naming the
factor can thus choose to name it either positively or negatively. That
means a likeable ad should score high in relevance, low in irritation and
familiarity and correlate highly between them.

and especially less personally relevant. The only significant positive change was that the commercials were perceived to be more amusing. It is remarkable, however,
that the predictive value of all advertising likeability dimensions remained stable over time.

4.3 Likeability as moderator on attentioning
Du Plessis [5] stresses that viewers decide during the
first three seconds of exposure if the ad is likeable and
worthy of their attention. During those three seconds the
viewer evaluates the ad on those five criteria, namely ‘entertainment value’, relevance, stimulation, empathy,
clearness and novelty. This decision will leave a ‘somatic’
decision marker [1, 2] behind, which will act as gatekeeper enabling/preventing further processing when we
see the ad again. Getting past this gatekeeper is very important for advertising as a durable memory trace is only
laid down after the third full processing of the ad.
The learning part (i.e. the first three exposures to an
Ad) has to be done by giving full attention during a one
week period. This applies to any kind of information, is
dependant on the amount of information and is commonly
called the Ebbinghaus’ learning/forgetting curve. In other
words the frequency of exposure should be relatively high
at the start, but then reduce exponentially. Emotions reinforce learning in two ways: First they strengthen the
memory trace effectively doubling recall and recognition
[33, 5]. Second emotion has the biggest influence on getting and keeping attention than any other bought dimension, like size, length, color, etc. [5]. In the case of a print
or outdoor ad it takes only three seconds for a durable
memory trace to be formed, therefore making it highly
likely that a memory trace for the visual is formed even if
the copy text hasn’t been processed.
Attention is a result of emotion, not its cause [34, 5].
Some advertisers mistakenly believe that shouting or
shocking in the first seconds will get their attention. As
this is a negative emotion, it will lay down a strong ‘somatic’ marker against future processing [5]. On the Internet advertisers had to learn this lesson the hard way when
consumers decided to ‘mark’ the location of banner ads
for non-processing, effectively destroying this ad-form
and paving the road for Google’s success [4].

founded variable, combining ⅔ affective and ⅓ cognitive
interdependent elements [44, 5, 6].
Morris, Woo, Geason & Kim [44] found in a study of
23’000 responses to 240 advertising messages that affect
has more explanatory power in all but one product category [food retailing], in all advertising media except radio. Advertisement of supermarkets just state sales prices,
which are technically cognitive. But this cognitive stimulus (prospect of saving money) triggers the reward center
in our brain – an affective reaction.
Concerning the dimensions constituting likeability, in
the Information Visualization literature we find similar
characteristics for visual representations [3], namely visual perspective (interactivity and depth of field) and information context (vividness, evaluability and framing).
The likeability dimensions could correspond to the
visual representation characteristics [3] followingly:
•
•

•

•

•

4.3 Implications for Visualization Science
It may not seem much, but when your target user says ‘I
like it’, it is most likely that the visualization does what it
is supposed to do. So what does likeability mean regarding to our questions? Liking is a subjective feeling, somehow tied up with consciousness. In short it is a con-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

•

Familiarity and Irritation are usability measures,
reflecting its cognitive and affective components.
They are quality criteria in the development phase.
Vividness refers to the saliency or availability of
specific information using preattentive graphic features leading to greater attention [45]. Visualization
tools are likely to affect vividness simply by presenting data in a form that uses preattentive graphic
features such as line orientation, width, length and
color which are processed with little effort [3]. As
attention is the result of emotion, vividness corresponds most closely to Entertainment.
Evaluability refers to the ease with which information can be assessed and compared [45, 23]. Making information easier to compare is likely to lead
to increased acquisition, weighting and processing
of information. Relevance which is also called
clearness is the only cognitive likeability measure.
As a measure of information acquisition, clearness
could correspond with evaluability.
Interactivity reflects the manipulability of a visualization and enhances the experience of realism by
the user [48]. Empathy which reflects the viewer’s
involvement corresponds closest to Interactivity,
but more in chapter 6.2
Depth of Field reflects to what extent a visualization allows a user to see contextual overview
and/or detail information and to keep both levels in
focus at the same time [49]. We could speculatively
map Energy (also named Liveliness) to it.
Framing or how a given representation changes the
reference point against which information can be
evaluated [23, 45]. As we will see in Chapter 5,
framing effects are considerable, but are not detectable with self report measures. Therefore Framing
lies outside of the likeability construct.

5. Framing & the effect of Advertising
Empirically, as long ago as 1964, experimental research in
psychology concluded that a positive brand schema made
beer taste better. Allison & Uhl [40] had beer drinkers
with well established preferences rate several brands in a
blind taste test and again when the brands were identified.
They found that the beer drinkers tended to rate the taste
of their preferred brand significantly higher when it was
identified than they did in the blind taste test. Moreover,
the beer drinkers were unable to distinguish their preferred brand from the others tasted in the blind taste test.
Recently Plassmann et al. [41] replicated this experiment
under the PET-Scanner. When consumers were shown
their preferred beer brand (PBB) in a decision task, the
PBB was chosen with brain activity in regions responsible
for emotion processing, whereas the information was
processed via the analytic system in presence of the second choice or lower ranked brands. In presence of the
PBB, subjects showed a brain activity pattern similar to
when they were shown a picture of their loved one. Like
in a ‘love’ relationship we see our preferred (beer) brand
through ‘pink’ glasses.
Neuromarketing, in one form or another, is now one
of the hottest new tools of its trade. By replicating the
Pepsi Challenge under the PET-Scanner, Read Montague
from BrightHouse, a neurosciences market research firm,
suggests that branding makes a difference in consumer
preference [42, 5, 43]:
“In the series of TV commercials from the 70's and 80's that
pitted Coke against Pepsi in a blind taste test, Pepsi was
usually the winner. So why, Montague asked himself not
long ago, did Coke appeal so strongly to so many people if
it didn't taste any better?
[…]
His results confirmed those of the TV campaign: Pepsi
tended to produce a stronger response than Coke in the
brain's ventral putamen, a region thought to process feelings of reward. (Monkeys, for instance, exhibit activity in
the ventral putamen when they receive food for completing
a task.) Indeed, in people who preferred Pepsi, the ventral
putamen was five times more active when drinking Pepsi
than that of Coke fans when drinking Coke.
In the real world, of course, taste is not everything. So
Montague tried to gauge the appeal of Coke's image,
its ''brand influence,'' by repeating the experiment with a
small variation: this time, he announced which of the sample tastes were Coke. The outcome was remarkable: almost
all the subjects said they preferred Coke. What's more, the
brain activity of the subjects was now different. There was
also activity in the medial prefrontal cortex; an area of the
brain that scientists say governs high-level cognitive powers. Apparently, the subjects were meditating in a more sophisticated way on the taste of Coke, allowing memories
and other impressions of the drink -- in a word, its brand to shape their preference.”

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

This could explain why the great majority of advertising is devoted to brands that are extremely well known.
When such companies cut brand advertising, sales fall not
because consumers forget to look for the product in the
grocery store, but because their memory of the “objective
sensory experience” they have had with the product begins to degrade. Without ongoing advertising, the consumer's experience begins to match the actual product experience. Unless the consumer's recall of product quality
is constantly maintained at a higher level than the product
alone can support, consumers will soon abandon it.

5.2 Anticipation & perception shaping
Advertising tells people how to perceive a brand, not just
why to buy it. Without that framing, they may literally
never be aware the brand exists, even if they encounter it
directly. Framing has two effects on the consumer.
The first is creating an expectation for the brand, that
is, to prompt the consumer to expect to see it. Viewing an
advertisement for a new product or brand creates a perceptual prompt that brings the product into a particular
frame of reference. Without that frame of reference, no
meaningful perception will take place.
Second, Advertising exposure creates anticipation.
An obvious example of how this works is food advertising. Food advertisements (at least the good ones) are designed to make you hungry. Advertising professionals
have developed and codified very specific rules defining
how to do that: lifting bite-size portions of food off the
plate toward the viewer, highlighting certain elements,
and so forth. “Food Stylists” and food photographers are
very highly paid specialists in the industry, because they
can achieve those effects. In beer advertising, the moment
when the cap is opened to release the carbonation (the
“whoosh”) is an essential element. Business-to-business
technology advertising articulates a fear of disaster so IT
managers will visualize the safety of a particular solution.
Car advertisements try to give us the feel of driving, and
so on. Each of these is trying to create a sense of anticipation of a certain experience.

5.3 Enhancing experience
The next key phase in the process is enhancing experience. Both when exposed to the consumer before the experience and, in retrospect, when exposed afterward [40 –
43]. In addition to sensory experience enhancement, the
social aspects of the experience are equally critical. Research on person-object relations reveals that people assign human properties to a range of consumer goods.
Rushkoff [43] takes up Montague’s story, adding:

In a study of men's reactions to cars, Daimler-Chrysler has
found that sportier models activate the brain's reward centers –
the same areas that light up in response to alcohol and drugs – as
well as activating the area that recognizes faces, which may explain people's tendency to anthropomorphize their cars.

For the brand to serve as a legitimate partner, it must
surpass the personification qualification and actually behave as an active, contributing member of the dyad [36].
The brand cannot act nor think nor feel – except through
social interactions it creates with the consumer. Brand
meanings are not (solely) controlled by managers but
rather are co-created through ongoing interactions among
their users. The role of advertising lies in establishing a
basis for that relationship [36, 35].

5.4 Implications of framing for research
Taking the unconscious nature of framing effects into account, Hall [14] proposes a new way of conducting research: Since we know that advertising is operating both
directly and indirectly on sensory experience and social
experience, the most comprehensive and accurate measure
should be the experience itself. Rather than test the advertising, we should test the product itself, after the consumer
has been exposed to the advertising.
Braun-Latour & Zaltman [29] took up Hall’s [14]
suggestion and designed an experiment testing memory.
Two days before the experiment subjects were asked
about their attitude to health care issues. Then one group
was shown an ad for a new health care product, one the ad
of the competitor and one did a memory game. All three
groups were asked again to answer the same questions exactly as they did two days ago. This was repeated two
days later. The two treatment groups showed a significant
attitude change, whereas the control group showed no difference. In both advertising conditions more people felt
they were relying solely on their past memories than the
advertising – suggesting that for the most part people
were discounting the advertising's impact.

5.5 Implications for Visualization Science
By changing the presentation of a given problem, visual
representations may accentuate or dampen biases and heuristics in decision making [23]. Framing effects affect
perception: therefore if you want to test the effectiveness
of a new treemap implementation, you could design an information selection experiment. One group is exposed to
new implementation, one group to a benchmark treemap
and a control group uses another tool e.g. TableLens [50].
Then each group would do the information retrieval and
decision making task. The critical aspect of this design is
that respondents would not be told that they were evaluat-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

ing the information visualization tool, and they would not
be asked about the tool. They would respond to a set of
diagnostic questions about the information selection task,
designed to capture cognitively the process of information
selection, retrieval and decision making.

6. Co-Authorship & the role of ‘love’
Advertising creatives regularly inspire themselves by
reading Lürzer’s Archive [www.luerzersarchive.net]. This
monthly trade journal showcases “70 to 80 of the world's
best new print campaigns and short synopses of 50 TV
commercials”. As it has a large international circulation,
featured campaigns are considered role models and confer
international visibility, recognition and status for client,
agency and external creatives. Highly ranked (the most
featured) agencies and external creatives can thus demand
a premium for their services (in form of fees charged
and/or in being selective of projects).
If we take up the argument from chapter 4.3 that a
client buys with his premium an expertise in emotion,
then the most featured clients should be exceptionally
likeable. During the last 10 years, Volkswagen was most
featured, followed by Nike, Levi’s, Adidas, Audi, Ikea,
BMW, Daimler-Chrysler, Sony and McDonald’s. All of
the advertisements of the top 10 ranked companies are
clearly communicating experiences. Any parent can tell
stories about the futility in arguing that #2 Nike or #4
Adidas are just sneakers and as good as any other brand.
After what we have seen in chapter 5.3 it should not surprise anybody that 15 car companies are under the 50 first
ranked clients.

6.1 Lovemarks
In 2004, Kevin Roberts [38] has put forward a branding
theory whose Top 200 ranking [www.lovemarks.com] incorporates all brands of the Top 50 Lürzer’s Archive list.
Interestingly – but if you think of it, obviously – the #1
spot in the global Lovemark list is held not by a product
but by Indian actor-superstar Shah Rukh Khan. In this
ranking only half of the entries are taken by products – the
first product manufacturer is Apple coming at #4.
Roberts [38] states that consumers nowadays understand how brands work and, most importantly, how
brands are intended to work on them. Loyalty cannot be
bought for money, but it can be for love. Lovemarks, as
described by Roberts, are super-evolved brands, which
maximize their connection with consumers by creating
strong emotional bonds. A strong emotional bond reinvigorates loyalty and creates advocacy. The key definition
of a Lovemark is that it is a product, service, or entity that
inspires loyalty beyond reason. We all have our own

Lovemarks and feel we have a unique relationship with
them. We feel they are highly personal, but there are
likely millions of people having the same kind of relationship with them. Like great brands, they sit on top of high
levels of respect, but there the similarities end. Lovemarks
reach the heart and gut, as well as the mind, creating intimate, emotional connections. Take a brand away and people will find a replacement. Take a Lovemark away and
people will mourn its absence. Lovemarks are a relationship, not a mere transaction.
In a first empirical study Pawle & Cooper [39] confirmed the view put forward in Lovemark theory that the
key factors that influence love are intimacy, mystery, and
sensuality, and the key factors that influence respect
(which mark traditional brands as well as Lovemarks) are
trust, reputation, and performance. Pawle & Cooper investigated two product categories: Cereals and Cars. They
found that Lovemarks are between 4 (cereals) and 7 times
(cars) more likely to be bought than "products" and between 1.6 (cereals) and 2.3 times (cars) more likely to be
bought than "brands." The factors overall that have the
strongest influence on buying intention are the emotional
factors that drive love, in particular intimacy followed
closely by mystery underpinned by sensuality.
The key emotional trigger for strengthening the consumer-brand relationship [38, 39] is to create strong brand
intimacy. The triggers for this are the need to make the
brand highly relevant to me, the consumer, and to make
consumers feel more closely in tune with and passionate
about the brand. The second most important factor is mystery — the brand must tap consumer dreams by being
iconic and having great stories associated with it. Sensuality is about creating a rich and full brand experience by
touching all the senses.
Apple’s current advertising campaign [31] alludes to
the 1984 campaign [32] by anthromorphizing the differences between Macs and PCs. The campaign neither
shows two computers nor does it contain any complex
symbols that require decoding – just two actors filmed
against a white background who impersonate Mac and
PC. The core message of the campaign is simplicity. Macs
are hip and simple to use. In addition, Apple smartly plays
the card of conformity vs. individuality and turns the
negative implications of comparative advertising to its
advantage. By contrasting a hip in-group vs. uncool outgroup Apple creates intimacy which is at the base of its
faithful community. Simplicity – in contrast to the technical complexity of the competitors – confer Apple a sense
of mythical mystery. The designs of the Mac as well as
the GUI are icons of sensuality. It is difficult to find a
more striking example of ‘loyalty beyond reason’ than the
community of Apple devotees.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

6.2 Co-creation & co-authorship
Commercials that are liked, involve some kind of coauthorship in meaning creation. Bullmore [26] argues that
good advertising entices the consumer into mental collaboration. He suggests that if an ad goes beyond mere
message registration to elicit a contribution from the consumer it is likely to be more effective. The consumer has
moved from being an observer or maybe even an adversary to become an accomplice or, a part author.
To elicit this part-authoring effect, the ad-creator designs the picture/commercial unambiguous but leaves one
part unfinished, like a broken Gestalt. Our need for closure makes us complete the Gestalt, thereby forming a
new memory to complete the ‘story’. Braun-Latour &
Zaltman [29] argue that as this new memory is interacting
with those contained in the advertisement; consumers take
up ownership for the whole belief structure and mistakenly attribute the learned advertising information to having been their own personal consistent beliefs/ attitudes all
along. Consumers consider themselves as the storyteller,
not the external communication.
If we take up the argument from Chapter 3.3 and 3.4
and the results of Braun-Latour & Zaltman’s experiment
[29], an effective ad ‘knows’ how to involve the interpreter. It strategically uses the interpretation gap for persuasion. One way is to use visual metaphors. The use of
visual metaphor makes the viewer compare something
new with something he knows stirring his imagination. In
addition advertisers turn to visual metaphors when they
don’t want to take responsibility for the covert content of
their advertising messages [25]. Apple’s 1984 commercial
[32] is the prototypical example for the use of such a visual metaphor.

Der Deutsche Gruss (Scholz & Friends Berlin)
A second way to use co-authorship is to use the interpretation gap in the form of a guided interactivity, like in
the following example of a free-card campaign (distributed in cafés and bars). At first the card looks like the picture on the left, where you see in large gothic letters "The

German Salute". When you then examine the card, you
will notice a notch and besides in tiny writing: "And how
to retort it". When you then try to fold the card, the notch
will break and the picture on the right will emerge.

7. Conclusions & Implications
Frank Luntz' [43] specialty is “to look for words that trigger emotion”. He creates and tests words which frame the
public perception of issues like ‘tax relief’, ‘death tax’ or
‘climate change’. We began our journey with the debate
between Ogilvy and Burnett whether what you say (content) is more important than how you say it (form). So let
us Luntz [43] conclude the debate: “it’s not what you say,
it’s what people hear what matters”. In other words, the
framing of a message is just as powerful as form and content. ‘Framing’ can be thought as a moderator or an algorithm telling the brain how (visual) information should be
processed. This explains why framing is largely unconscious and their effects underestimated. Information Visualization could benefit greatly by more research on how
visualizations frame perception.
This paper always tried to present two opposing
views, which basically boil down to the opposition of affect vs. cognition and their role in the interpretation of
visuals. And as Ogilvy never drank the water he preached,
we should also mix water with wine. In the interpretation
of visuals, reason and emotion are distributed in the proportion of ⅓ vs. ⅔ [44]. During the last 60 years, the coevolution between advertisers and consumers together
with the advent of television shifted the balance from the
cognitive textual to the affective visual [24]. The cognitive route has its advantages too: Persuasion with arguments is quicker and cheaper. But arguments invite
counterarguments and assertions skepticism. Whereas arguments persuade, visuals inspire belief [18]. In chapters
3.3, 3.4, 6.1 and 6.2 we looked at evidence how the emotional route in visual persuasion could work. “People lack
the ability to argue with pictures” [18] because the coauthoring effect turns adversaries into accomplices [26].
What can Information Visualization learn?
The visual representation dimensions known in Information Visualization correspond well with the likeability dimensions of Advertising Research. As Information
Visualization strives to amplify cognition – they excel in
the most cognitive likeability dimension – evaluability
(ease of information assessment and comparison). It is
also clear that the visual perspective (interactivity and
depth of field) is well incorporated. We can learn from
Advertising Research why interactivity and depth of field
are important. As they involve the viewer this leads to relational ‘love’ and a ‘relationship’ with the application.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

However most (commercial) Information Visualization applications like TableLens [50], MarketMap [51], or
Photomesa [52] won’t score high in vividness. Improving
the vividness [3, 48, 45] of a visualization has a triplewhammy-effect (DuPlessis [5]):
• It improves memory (recognition and recall) [5]
• It leads to greater attention [5]
• It leads to enhanced tele-presence (together with interactivity) in which the experience of the virtual
environment becomes more real than the immediate physical environment [4]
MarketMap [51] and Newsmap [53] are treemap implementations. Both use color to make price (MarketMap) or
time (Newsmap) changes more vivid. However those
graphic features should be applied skillfully and in a subtle way. Newsmap’s implementation is much more vivid
as it takes advantage of color luminosity graphic design
and typesetting. Using variations of luminosity (Newsmap) instead of color (MarketMap) to show day to day
changes has the same effect of informing the user. Newsmap uses variations of color to distinguish categories
(world, business, sports, etc.) whereas MarketMap has
now to rely on text. The same can be said about TableLens and PhotoMesa as they could take advantage of more
graphic features. However using as many graphic features
doesn’t make a visualization vivid. Vividness is the result
of arranging a harmonious ensemble. Advertising has
mastered it – Information Visualization should do it too.

References
[1]

Damasio, A. R. (1994) Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York: Putnam’s Son.
[2] Damasio, A. R., The Feeling of What Happens: Body and
Emotion in the Making of Consciousness. New York: Harcourt Brace and Co., 1999.
[3] Lurie, N. H. & Mason, Ch. H. (2007) “Visual Representation: Implications for Decision Making”, Journal of Marketing 71(1), 160-177.
[4] Benway, J. P. (1999) Banner blindness: What searching
users notice and do not notice on the WWW, Rice Univ.
[5] Du Plessis, E. C. (2001) The Advertised Mind, London
and Philadelphia: Kogan Page. 2001.
[6] Gordon, W. (2006) “What Do Consumers Do Emotionally
with Advertising?” Journal of Advert. Res. 46(1), 2-10.
[7] Biel, A. L. (1996) “Do You Really Want to Know?”
Journal of Advertising Research 36(2), pRC2-pRC7.
[8] Jones, J. P. (1997) “Is Advertising still Salesmanship”,
Journal of Advertising Research 37(2), 9-15.
[9] Ehrenberg, A. S. C., Goodhardt, G. J. & Barwise, T. P.
(1990) “Double jeopardy revisited”, Journal of Marketing
54(3), 82-91.
[10] Ogilvy, D. (1963) Confessions of an Advertising Man.
New York: Atheneum Publishers.

[11] Ogilvy, D. & Raphaelson, J. (1982) "Research on Advertising Techniques That Work and Don't Work." Harvard
Business Review 60(4), 14-18.
[12] Mayer, M. (1958) Madison Avenue. U.S.A. New York:
Pocket Books.
[13] Haley, R. E. & Baldinger, A. L. (1992) "The ARF Copy
Research Validity Project." Journal of Advertising Research 31(2), 11-32.
[14] Hall, B. (2002) "A New Model for Measuring Advertising
Effectiveness", Journal of Advertising Res. 42(2), 23-32.
[15] Biel, A. L. (1990) "Love the Ad. Buy the Product? Why
Liking the Advertising and Preferring the Brand Aren't
Such Strange Bedfellows After All", Admap.
[16] Heath, R. (2000) "Low Involvement Processing — A New
Model of Brands and Advertising", International Journal
of Advertising 19(3), 287-98.
[17] Aaker, D. A. & Myers, J. G. (1987) Advertising Management 3rd Ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
[18] Marchand, R. (1985), Advertising and the American
Dream: Making Way for Modernity, 1920-1940, Berkeley:
University of California Press.
[19] Youn, S., Sun, T., Wells, W. D. & Zhao, X. (2001) "Commercial Liking & Memory: Moderating Effects of Product
Categories," Journal of Advertising Research 41(3), 7-14.
[20] DeCock, B. & DePelsmacker, P. (2000) "Emotions Matter", In Proceedings of the 2000 ESOMAR Conference,
Rio de Janeiro, 154-179.
[21] LeDoux, J. E. (1996) The Emotional Brain. New York:
Simon and Schuster.
[22] Loftus, E. F., & Ketchum, K. (1996) Myth of Repressed
Memory: False Memories and Allegations of Sexual
Abuse for the Defense. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin.
[23] Gilovich, T., Griffin, D. & Kahnemann D. (2002) Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
[24] Eco, U. (1976) A Theory of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
[25] McQuarrie, E. F. & Phillips, B. J. (2005) “Indirect Persuasion in Advertising: How Consumers Process Metaphors
Presented in Pictures and Words”, Journal of Advertising
34(2), 7-20.
[26] Bullmore, J. (1990) “Encouraging Creative People to Do
their Best”, Intern. Journal of Advertising 9(1), 35-37.
[27] Wells, W. D. (1988) “Lectures and Dramas”, In P. Cafferata & A. Tybout (Eds) Cognitive and Affective Responses
to Advertising, Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath.
[28] Calne, D. Within Reason: Rationality and Human Behavior. New York: Vintage Books, 2000.
[29] Braun-Latour, K. A. & Zaltman, G. (2006) “Memory
Change: An Intimate Measure of Persuasion”, Journal of
Advertising Research 46(1), 57-72.
[30] Smit, E. G., Van Meurs, L. & Neijens, P. C. (2006) “Effects of Advertising Likeability: A 10-Year Perspective”,
Journal of Advertising Research 46(1), 73-83.
[31] Apple (2007), Url: http://www.apple.com/getamac/ads/
[32] Friedman, T. (1997) Apple's 1984: The Introduction of the
Macintosh in the Cultural History of Personal Computers,
Url: http://www.duke.edu/~tlove/mac.htm

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[33] Ambler, T. & Burne, T. (1999) “The Impact of Affect on
Memory of Advertising”, Journal of Advertising Research
39(2), 25-34.
[34] Oatley, K. & Jenkins, J. M. (1995) Understanding Emotions, Oxford: Blackwell.
[35] Thompson, C., Rindfleisch, A. & Arsel, Z. (2006) “Emotional Branding and the Strategic Value of the Doppelgänger Brand Image”, Journal of Marketing 70(1), 50-64.
[36] Fournier, S. (1998), „Consumers and Their Brands: Developing Relationship Theory in Consumer Research“,
Journal of Consumer Research 24(2), 343-373.
[37] Vakratsas, D. & Ambler, T. (1999) “How Advertising
Works: What Do We Really Know?” Journal of Marketing 63(1), 26–43.
[38] Roberts, K. Lovemarks: The Future beyond Brands. New
York; Powerhouse Books, 2004.
[39] Pawle, J. & Cooper, P. (2006) “Measuring Emotion Lovemarks, The Future Beyond Brands”, Journal of Advertising Research 46(1), 38-48.
[40] Allison, R. I., & Uhl, K. P. (1964) “Influence of Beer
Brand Identification on Taste Perception”, Journal of
Marketing Research 1(3), 36–39.
[41] Plassmann, H., Kenning, P., Deppe, M., Kugel, H.,
Schwindt, W. & Ahlert, D. (2005) How brands twist heart
and mind. Experimental 0509004, EconWPA. Url:
http://ideas.repec.org/p/wpa/wuwpex/0509004.html
[42] Thompson, C. (2003) “There’s a sucker born in every medial prefrontal cortex”, NY Times, 26-10-2003. Url:
http://www.cognitiveliberty.org/neuro/neuromarketing_nyt.html

[43] Rushkoff, D. (2004) The Persuaders, Documentary in the
PBS
Frontline
Series
(November
9),
Url:
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/persuaders

[44] Morris, J.D., Woo, C., Geason, J. A. & Kim, J. (2002)
"The Power of Affect: Predicting Intention." Journal of
Advertising Research 42(3), 7-17.
[45] Jarvenpaa, S. L. (1990) “Graphic Displays in Decision
Making: The Visual Salience Effect”, Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 3(4), 247-262.
[46] Gazzaniga, M. S. (1998) The Mind's Past. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
[47] Meyers-Levy, J. & Malaviya, P. (1999) “Consumer’s
Processing of Persuasive Advertisements: An Integrative
Framework of Persuasion Theories”, Journal of Marketing
63(Special Issue), 45-60.
[48] Card S. K., Mackinlay J. D. & Shneiderman B. (1999)
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
Think, San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
[49] Shneiderman, B. (1996) “The Eyes Have It: A Task by
Data Type Taxonomy for Information Visualizations”,
Proceedings of 1996 IEEE Conf. on Visual Languages.
[50] Tablelens (2007), Url:
http://www.inxight.com/products/sdks/tl/sample.php
[51] SmartMoney’s Market Map (2007), Url:
http://www.smartmoney.com/marketmap/
[52] Photomesa (2007), Url:
http://www.windsorinterfaces.com/photomesa.shtml
[53] Newsmap (2007), Url:
http://www.marumushi.com/apps/newsmap/newsmap.cfm

