Exemplifying the Inter-Disciplinary Nature of Visualization Research
Robert F. Erbacher
Department of Computer Science, UMC 4205
Utah State University
Logan, UT 84322
Robert.Erbacher@usu.edu
Abstract—This paper proposes an interdisciplinary
design process for the development of novel
visualization techniques and discusses requirements
for ensuring that such a process results in effective
techniques which meet the demands of a the target
user base. In essence, we are attempting to make
explicit the process by which many researchers
implicitly design visualizations and urge for greater
explicit collaborations between fields to improve the
effectiveness of visualization design. This process is
dependent on the application of cognitive psychology,
art and architecture, domain experts, and target users.
We discuss how such a wide and disparate group must
work together in an integrated fashion within the
design process. We lay out the process itself as well as
typical design goals. Given the importance of
perception, we highlight the impact of perception, and
thus cognitive psychology, on the visual interpretation
process.
Index Terms—Visualization,
Design, Design Processes

Inter-Disciplinary

1. Introduction
Data Visualization is the creation of graphical
images for the representation of data through either
abstract or physical relationships [19]. Such data
visualization has garnered enormous interest in recent
years due to the need for exploration and analysis of
enormous volumes of data and the inability of
automated techniques to provide the needed analysis.
Visualization also maintains the user in the loop,
allowing for intuition and expertise to take part in the
analysis process. For example, bioinformatics-based
data sets can be huge, in the GB range, with hundreds

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

or thousands of parameters. The problem with such
data sets is that it is not known what the analyst
should be looking for in such a data set. Thus,
automated techniques are limited in their
effectiveness. The human analyst must direct the
exploration and analysis process. Relying on solely
textual responses from the analysis tools is a slow
process as the human analysts must interpret and
correlate the huge amounts of raw data with large
amounts of computed data.
Thus, visualization attempts to represent both data
in its raw form as well as the computed values, i.e.,
often statistical or mathematical results. In addition,
when dealing with such large data sets the
environment must provide for sampling, selection, or
filtering of the data to ensure the most relevant
information is presented on the screen. It is unfeasible
to assume that even future display capabilities will be
able to visually display the volume of data being
discussed; especially considering the rate of growth of
data collection processes in comparison with the
growth rate of display technology.
The success of visualization derives from its
reliance on human perception. Humans are able to
visually interpret enormous amount of information
that through other forms would be extremely slow and
tedious. More specifically, reading textual information
is considered a perceptually serial process as the
reader must perceptually interpret each character in
sequence to interpret a word and subsequently each
sentence. A graphical image on the other hand can be
interpreted in parallel, allowing a conceptualization of
the image to be interpreted essentially instantaneously.
There are particular visual characteristics that humans
are particularly noteworthy at identifying and
interpreting. These are traditionally termed preattentive components [8]. Such components include:
texture, color, size, orientation, etc. These components

allow the identification of anomalies, trends, and
similarities
essentially
instantaneously.
Thus,
perception is a critical component of visualization
research.
The development of novel and effective
visualization techniques additionally requires more of
an artistic component to ensure that the developed
capabilities meet aesthetic requirements in addition to
technical requirements. Incorporation of this discipline
also provides more effective avenues for the
generation of original visualization techniques; as
computer scientists, the traditional designers of
visualization techniques do not receive the level of
training in design that artists or architects do.
As can be seen from the brief overview outlined
above, data visualization research requires the
integration of many disparate domains, including:
Computer Science – Computer Science provides
for the identification of feasibility and appropriateness
of proposed techniques, applications and integration
of actual data, as well as for the implementation and
deployment of the visualization techniques.
Mathematics and Statistics – Visualization
essentially derives from statistics. This domain
provides for much of the transformation and modeling
metaphors as well as the sampling, filtering, and
computational algorithms.
Art and Architecture – Experts in art and
architecture are essentially trained to think outside the
box and develop novel and interesting visual formats.
Such individuals are critical for the development of
really unique and fascinating visualization displays.
Many of the best visualization research groups work
hand in hand with such experts.
Cognitive Psychology – Perception, a specific
field of cognitive psychology, identifies the rules
intrinsic to designing a good visualization from a
human vision point of view. Such rules are essentially
used to refine the models developed by artists and
architects.
Domain Experts – Visualization experts often
design visualization techniques for specific domains
based on their own comprehension of that domains
needs.
Alternatively,
visualization
techniques
designed with the assistance of and in collaboration
with domain experts are generally more effective and
usable by the domain experts. This becomes of great
importance when it is the domain expert that must use
the resultant capability, and not the visualization
expert.
Only through the integration of these domains can
the most effective and usable visualization capabilities

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

be developed. The rest of this paper examines the
processes by which these disciplines are integrated
and how they impact the resulting capabilities. Thus,
the paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 outlines types
of visualization techniques and their roles. Section 3
identifies the process of developing novel
visualization techniques effectively. Section 4
discusses how perception can be integral to a
visualization model. The remaining sections conclude
the paper and discuss future work.

2. Visualization Techniques
Visualization techniques have been applied to a
wide range of tasks and activities. In order to
categorize the goals of a developed visualization
technique MacEachren et al. describe visualization
techniques based on their role or task (i.e., user goals)
as follows [13]:
Presentation: Presentation based visualizations
are designed to provide already discovered
information in a meaningful way. For example,
providing the results of an analysis to management or
decision makers would be provided using presentation
visualizations.
Analysis: Analysis based visualizations are
designed to aid in determining meaning of a particular
data set. Characteristics of the data set are already
known and the analysis processes in conjunction with
analysis visualizations are applied to derive greater
understanding of the data.
Exploration: Exploratory visualizations are
designed to support users when basic details of the
data set are not known and the users ultimately do not
know what they are looking for. Often this takes place
as a first step with analysis being applied as a second
step. Exploration aids the user in discovering the
fundamental characteristics as well as anomalies,
trends, etc. within the data set.
Synthesis: Synthesis provides for the integration
of multiple data streams. In essence, it provides a form
of visual data fusion. Such fusion is critical for
correlating datasets and identifying meaning based on
interrelationships, or a lack thereof.
The distinct differences in these different
visualization techniques create a need for very
different visualization techniques and interestingly
enough additional participants in the design and
development process. It becomes critical to include
the users for whom the visualizations are being
designed into the design process; i.e., the domain
experts. For instance, presentation visualizations must

incorporate management personnel and the decision
makes who will be provided the resultant
visualizations to ensure the visualizations meet their
needs and whether or not they truly understand what
the visualization is telling them. Similarly, with the
other visualization types the appropriate users must be
included in the process and their feedback taken
seriously in the refinement and implementation of the
techniques.
Of critical importance in the consideration of
users is determining the capabilities that would be
deemed appropriate for the target audience [3][7].
What capabilities would our target analysts be willing
and capable of using? For example, Erbacher et al. [3]
have described the need to design intrusion detection
tools to work with an administrator’s other tasks. This
was done by limiting the work to two-dimensional
visualizations that would not require an
administrator’s sole attention and with which they can
easily associate. For work targeting security analysts,
in contrast with system administrators, the
visualizations would incorporate a wider variety of
representations, due to their greater acceptance and
ability to accommodate such techniques. As this is
their primary responsibility they will be more willing
to put in the time to learn a greater variety of
techniques. However, the analysts will likely be
working with system administrators and thus
representations that not only provide exploratory

Figure 1: Original concept drawing for the
network monitoring visualization environment
and
associated
techniques.
Concept
drawings are critical for developing good
visualizations and lay the ground work for the
ideas to be implemented. At this stage the
identified visual concepts may not be
feasible, realistic, or perceptually refined.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

capabilities but also present the identified data through
a more familiar metaphor to system administrators will
be a necessity.
Similar considerations must be applied to any
domain to which visualization is being applied. The
first step of such a process is determining the needs
and requirements of the target user base. This is most
effectively done through a cognitive task analysis
(CTA) [8].

3. Developing Visualization Techniques
The development of visualization techniques
requires that the involved researchers consider all
relevant information in a cyclic process of refinement
to ensure the creation of a complete and effective
capability. In essence, the development of
visualization techniques has a methodology as
follows:
1.

Identification of parameters
characteristics to be incorporated.

and

data

3.

Identification of relationships critical to the
analyst to be incorporated.

4.

Generation of concept drawings. It is unlikely

Figure 3: Final implementation of the network
monitoring environment, derived from the
concept drawing exhibited in figure 1. Clearly,
much iteration was required to achieve this
final result. Of particular note is the final node
layout algorithm which was designed to
minimize
and
make
meaningful
line
intersections.

Data and MetaData

Domain Experts

1

2

Identification of Parameters and
Characteristics to be Incorporated

Identification of Critical
Relationships

Data Set Knowledge Base

3
Create/Enhance Concept Diagrams
(Artists, Architects, Cognitive
Psychologists, Computer Scientists)

Concept Diagrams

4

5

Concept Diagram Perceptual Analysis
(Cognitive Psychologists)

Concept Diagram Domain Analysis
(Computer Scientists, Domain Experts)

Refined Diagrams

6
Initial Implementation

Figure 2: Process flow diagram for the development and implementation of effective visualization
techniques. Many disciplines must take part in the process to ensure scientific and user needs are
met.
jumping right into development will be
effective. Multiple iterations of concept
drawings will aid the development of
techniques most likely to be effective. For
example, figure 1 shows one of the original
concept drawings for the design of network
monitoring visualizations [5], [6]. Clearly much
iteration
resulted
before
the
final
implementation came to light.
5.

Analysis of perceptual implications of design
and concept drawing.

6.

Garner feedback on concept drawings; i.e., are
we missing anything? Do the techniques fulfill
usability, effectiveness, and representational
needs?

7.

Initial implementation.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

8.

Repeat as needed.

This process is further exemplified in figure 2.
This diagram is designed to show the integration of
the multiple domains of expertise critical to the
development of an effective visualization technique.
Required or needed domains of expertise are exhibited
in italic for each of the process steps. Steps not listing
domains are within the domain of the computer
scientists.
Applying this paradigm and consideration of the
impacts of human perception led to the migration from
the concept diagram in figure 1 to the implemented
capability shown in figure 3 [4]. The philosophy
behind this resultant visualization is that we are
reducing line intersections, which act as perceptual
foci, and making them meaningful when they do
occur. Such effectiveness is critical for an effective

visualization and highlights the scientific foundations
underlying such research.
Without such solid underpinnings it becomes
difficult to refine, improve, or validate the
effectiveness of visualization techniques. Previously,
this paper discussed the need to incorporate artists and
architects in the design stage. This provides for the
aesthetics but not the science. Comprehension of
cognitive psychology and perception must further be
applied to refine the purely aesthetic representations to
provide a scientifically well-founded capability for the
representation of data.
4. Mathematics and Statistics
Many of the fundamental visualization techniques
and associated algorithms are derived directly,
explicitly or implicitly, from mathematics and
statistics. For instance, sub-sampling, dimension
reduction, formal models, analysis of user study
results, etc., are all fundamentally mathematical and
statistical capabilities. While computer scientists often
derive their own mathematical techniques there are
additional avenues for research through collaborative
research with mathematics; i.e. by relying on the
expertise of mathematicians there is enormous
potential to more substantially improve the underlying
algorithms critical for visualization effectiveness.
Additionally, there is growing interest in creating
formal models, i.e. algebras [10], for the
representation or description of visualization
techniques. Future work will require refinement of the
algebras as well as the development of formal proofs.

5.1.

In terms of perception of visual displays we are
relying on two processes. First, is the process by
which users will view the display in its entirety at a
global scale before drilling down their focus to
examine individual features or elements [11], i.e., the
typical concepts of focus and context as well as drill
down? Second, is the concept of perception of scale
[19]. With perception of scale, larger elements within
the display will perceptually draw the user’s attention
before smaller details do. This can be used in
conjunction with the fact that crossed lines, and other
visual characteristics, are perceived preattentively.
Thus, a user interpreting the image in figure 4 will
first perceive the larger crossed lines (center of the
display) and their associated intersection before
drilling down their focus to perceive the smaller line
intersections shown in the upper left corner of the
display. This becomes a contrast between global or
large-scale artifacts and local, detail specific artifacts.
Local
Intersections

User’s Region
of Focus
Theoretical
Glyph
Attributes

5. Cognitive Psychology
We’ve indicated that perception is a critical
component of data visualization. In this section we
look at the impacts that perception has on the
visualization techniques and some of the
characteristics of perception that must be considered
not only when designing visualization techniques but
when they are being applied and used. In the use of
visualization techniques, we are primarily concerned
with the impact of the data parameter to visual
attribute mappings, the selection of available and used
visual attributes, and the choice of value ranges for the
different visual attributes; e.g., the range of acceptable
intensities, the range of acceptable line thicknesses,
etc.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Perceptual Foci

Globally Perceived
Intersection

Figure 4: This image shows a combination of
intersections at various scales, i.e., various
perceptual levels. At the global focus,
highlighted by the blue ring, the users
attention will be dominated by, drawn to, the
intersection within the red circle.

5.2.

Preattentively Viewed Attributes

The described perceptual examples are not meant
to be complete by any means. Many visual attributes
could be included through the incorporation of

different perceptual artifacts in which one group of
characteristics are more quickly or readily perceived
than a second group, e.g., preattentive versus
nonpreattentive attributes or first order versus second
order statistically linked visual attributes [8].
For example, typical glyph based (i.e., multiparametric) visualizations create visual objects with
multiple visual characteristics. Each of these visual
characteristics is used to represent a different
parameter in the database. Visual attributes such as
size, color, and orientation are first order statistics and
are perceived preattentively, not requiring analysis to
identify trends and anomalies. Other characteristics
such as position are second order statistics and require
more analysis to interpret the meaning of.
In this paradigm, users will acquire first order
statistical (preattentive) information first, followed by
second order statistical information and so on. Thus,
second order statistical information requires more
attention (e.g., a visual search) in order to identify and
extract meaning from.

5.3.

Inter-Affects Between Visual Attributes

An additional characteristic of the impact of a
user’s focal scale is the inter-affects between visual
attributes. This becomes particularly relevant with the
ability to dynamically change the data parameters
mapped to a visual attribute and the ability to enable
or disable visual attributes. Our intention here is to
exemplify the impact of changing visual attributes,
either through changing the data parameters mapped
to them, disabling or enabling them, or changing their
range of exerted values.
For example, simply changing one visual attribute
may impact the perception of many others. Making
one visual attribute more dominant will have the effect
of ensuring others require more analysis in order to
interpret, and vice versa. This inter-dependency
between visual attributes is one of the most
challenging aspects of visualization research as it
makes not only designing effective visualizations
difficult but makes selection of parameters and ranges
for the most effective representation of a specific
dataset challenging. In this application of perception
each visual attribute presents one view of the data and
the fused set of parameters provide interdependent
fused views of the data.

5.4.

User Studies
Finally, cognitive science is critical in the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

performance of user studies. Again, while computer
science has begun performing user studies in their
own rights, this expertise derives from the cognitive
science discipline and they are ultimately the experts.
As visualization becomes more refined,
evaluations will become not only more common but
also their deviations will narrow. This will require
more refined, extensive, and carefully constructed user
studies. Collaborations with cognitive science will
guarantee more useful results.
Currently, the majority of user studies rely on
qualitative assessments; often relying solely on Likertstyle questionnaires. As user studies are refined there
must be a more extensive reliance on quantitative
assessments. These quantitative assessments will
provide more accurately comparisons of the
perceptual impact of various techniques. This will rely
on accurately designing the experiments to avoid bias
and include measures such as: critical performance
parameters (CPPs) [14], heuristic evaluation [15],
cognitive walkthrough [18], receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) graphs [16][17], etc.

6. Art and Architecture
Artists and architects are trained fundamentally in
design and aesthetics. Such individuals are trained to
consider all aspects of visual design and how such
design is interpreted by the viewer. Often they receive
some understanding of perception as well. While
computer scientists can design functional and usable
visualization techniques incorporating an amount of
aesthetic value, artists and architects can incorporate
additional design characteristics that will significantly
improve the effectiveness and aesthetics of the
technique. Similarly, the artists and architects do not
have enough understanding of the implementability,
the algorithms, the data needing analysis, etc. to be
able to independently design visualization techniques.
This is becoming particularly important as
visualization techniques become more main stream.
Recent work by Lang [12] has looked more
extensively at the issues of design. More specifically,
this work examines the design processes not just from
art and architecture but from other fields such as
engineering, management, and nature. Similarly, there
are potential design ideas from theatre, dance, film,
animation, choreography, etc [2]. These last domains
can potentially provide new ideas for transitions,
motion, and interaction. Thus, while we have focused
on art and architecture there are many other domains
which incorporate design that can provide new ideas

for visualization design. The goal is to bring together
complete interdisciplinary teams to provide for the
most effective and yet aesthetic capabilities.

7. Domain Experts
It is the domain experts that will identify the type
of visualizations that are needed; presentation,
exploration, analysis, or synthesis. Domain experts
will also aid identification of what data parameters are
most relevant and in what combinations. Finally,
domain experts will aid in interpreting results of the
visualization techniques and identification of what
needs improvement.
As an example, consider a bioinformatics dataset.
With thousands of parameters and gigabytes of data it
is much more efficient and effective to have a
biologist identify a specific task, identify the relevant
data parameters, and interpret the results, than having
a computer scientist attempt the same task. Even a
computer scientist that has become an expert in
bioinformatics likely will not have the same level of
expertise as a biologist who has trained in the field.

8. Computer and information Science
Computer and information sciences, in which
visualization has traditionally been performed in
isolation, must continue to be the catalyst for
visualization research. It is these fields that must
identify the implementability of the designed
techniques, the representability of data parameters,
integrate feedback from all other domains, interpret
needs exerted by domain experts, etc. An actual
implementation will generally deviate substantially
from the original design and it is the computer and
information sciences that must determine how the
implementation should be done.
Additionally, it is the computer and information
scientist that will design the added capability (the
software architecture, the efficiency issues, etc.) which
will make the actual design useful and effective.

9. Discussion
Each of the identified domains can contribute
substantially to visualization research. Few fields
receive as much benefit from as wide an
interdisciplinary research team as visualization.
The importance of perception can not be under
represented. As identified in this paper, the impact of
perception on individual elements and the display as a

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

whole can be extensive. It must therefore be
considered throughout the design process in a series of
refinement stages to ensure the most effective
application of the human visual system. Ensuring the
most effective integration of human perception
requires collaboration with cognitive science.
The need to ensure that the resultant capabilities
meet the needs of the target users brings in a wide
variety of user domains. Additionally, the need for
novel, yet aesthetic, visual displays requires
collaboration with artists, architectures, and other
visual design specialists.
Similarly, extensions can be sought which will
require participation by even more domains. For
example, sonification is the auditorial representation
of data and is often used to enhance the visual
representation. This requires collaborations with
musicians and other audiophiles to ensure effective
and meaningful sound reproduction.

10. Conclusion
This paper identified the interdisciplinary nature
of computer visualization based research. Even more,
we have identified the criticality of the
interdisciplinary nature of this field of research. In
particular, effective interdisciplinary collaborations
within the visualization research process will ensure
the development of more effective, usable, and
deployable techniques. By working together the two
domains can provide far better results than either
working individually. A single researcher can not have
the same level of expertise in multiple domains as
multiple researchers focusing on their individual
domains; this becomes particularly important when
considering the number of domains impacting the
visualization field.
Developing novel, effective displays requires a
carefully tuned framework, incorporating expertise
from the afore-mentioned disciplines. It is this interdisciplinary knowledge base that validates the
correctness of the visualization techniques under
development within each domain, whether it is the
user or target domain, the perception domain,
aesthetics, etc.
While visualization experts have traditionally
done many of the steps in isolation from other fields,
they can not possible achieve the same level of
expertise in all of the fields involved in the
visualization design process and thus would benefit
from collaborations with experts in these domains.
With increasing interest in formalizing visualization as

a scientific discipline [1], strengthening the identified
collaborative ties will improve the acceptance of
visualization as a scientific discipline. This is
particularly true as cognitive science and mathematics
are more tightly integrated.

11. Future Work
This paper provides a look at the interdisciplinary
nature of visualization and our design process for
incorporating experts from each domain into the
design process. Lacking, however, are representative
examples from successful design processes by other
research groups. Additionally, a more extensive paper
is required to examine the appearance of perceptual
artifacts and impacts within developed visualization
techniques.

12. References

Knowledge Domains,” Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Information Visualisation
(IV'06), London, UK, July, 2006, pp. 264-269.
[8] S.E. Gordon and R.T. Gill, “Cognitive Task Analysis,”
In C. Zsambok and G. Klein (Eds.). Naturalistic
Decision Making, Mahwah, NJ, Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 1997, pp. 131-140.
[9] W. Hendee, “Cogntitive Interpretation of Visual
Signals,” W.H. Hendee and P.N.T. Wells (Editors),
Springer-Verlag, 1997, pp. 149-175.
[10] M. Hutchins, Modelling Visualisation Using Formal
Algebra, Ph.D. Thesis, Australian National University.
1999.
[11] C.A. Kelsey, “Detection of Vision Information,” The
Perception of Visual Information, W.H. Hendee and
P.N.T. Wells (Editors), Springer-Verlag, 1997, pp. 3355.
[12] S.B. Lang, “Merging Knowledge from Different
Disciplines in Search of Potential Design Axioms,”
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
Information Visualisation (IV'06), London, UK, July,
2006, pp. 183-188.

[1] R. Burkhard, “Is it Now Time to Establish
Visualization Science as a Scientific Discipline?,”
Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
Information Visualisation (IV'06), London, UK, July,
2006, pp. 189-194.

[13] A.M. MacEachren and D.R.F. Taylor (Eds.),
Visualization in Modern Cartography, Pergamon Press,
London, 1994.

[2] C. Coopmans and J. Whyte, “Changing Visual
Practices,” Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Information Visualisation (IV'06),
London, UK, July, 2006, pp. 845-852.

[14] W. M. Newman, A. S. Taylor, C. R. Dance, and S. A.
Taylor, “Performance Targets, Models, and Innovation
in Interactive Systems Design,” Proceedings of DIS
'00, Brooklyn, New York, USA, 2000.

[3] R.F. Erbacher, “User Issues in Visual Monitoring
Environments,” Proceedings of the 2001 International
Conference on Imaging Science, Systems, and
Technology ‘2001, Vol. 2, Las Vegas, NV, June, 2001,
pp. 644-650.

[15] J. Nielsen, “Finding Usability Problems Through
Heuristic Evaluation,” Proceedings of CHI '92:
Conference on Human Factors and Computing
Systems, Monterey, CA, 1992, pp. 373-380.

[4] R.F. Erbacher, K.L. Walker, and D.A. Frincke,
“Intrusion and Misuse Detection in Large-Scale
Systems,” Computer Graphics and Applications, Vol.
22, No. 1, January/February 2002, pp. 38-48.
[5] R.F. Erbacher and Z. Teng, “Analysis and Application
of Node Layout Algorithms for Intrusion Detection,”
Proceedings of the SPIE ‘2003 Conference on
Visualization and Data Analysis, Santa Clara, CA,
January, 2003, pp. 160-170.
[6] R.F. Erbacher, K.L. Walker, and D.A. Frincke,
“Intrusion and Misuse Detection in Large-Scale
Systems,” Computer Graphics and Applications, Vol.
22, No. 1, January/February 2002, pp. 38-48.
[7] S. Faisal, P. Cairns, and A. Blandford, “Developing
User Requirements for Visualizations of Literature

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[16] J.A. Swets, “Is there a sensory threshold?,” Science,
134:168-177, 1961.
[17] J.A. Swets, “Measuring the accuracy of diagnostic
systems,” Science, 240:1285-1293, 1988.
[18] C. Wharton, J. Bradford, R. Jeffries, and M. Franzke,
“Applying Cognitive Walkthroughs to More Complex
User
Interfaces:
Experiences,
Issues,
and
Recommendations,” Proceedings of CHI '92:
Conference on Human Factors and Computing
Systems, Monterey, CA, 1992, pp. 381-388.
[19] J.M. Wolfe, “Visual Attention,” In Seeing: Handbook
of Perception and Cognition, K.K. De Valois (Editor),
Second Edition, Academic Press, pp. 335-386, 2000.
[20] http://www.infovis.org

