Panel Session gIV07
Geovisualization and synergies from InfoVis and Visual Analytics
Panel Organizers: gIV07
Panellists:
Gennady Andreinko
Fraunhofer Institute, St. Augustin, Germany
gennady.andrienko@ais.fraunhofer.de

Mikael Jern
Linkoping University, Sweden
mikael.jern@itn.liu.se

Sara Fabrikant
Department of Geography, University of Zurich
sara@geo.unizh.ch

Abstract
Geovisualization (GeoViz) is an intrinsically complex
process. The analyst needs to look at data from various
perspectives and at various scales, from “seeing the
whole” to “attending to particulars” (Andrienko and
Andrienko 2006). The analyst is also supposed to “see
in relation”, i.e. make numerous comparisons. This
inherent complexity is multiplied by the complexity of
the data that is explored and analyzed. The complex,
multivariate data structure and heterogeneous
components of most contemporary datasets necessitate
a combined use of multiple techniques and approaches.
There is no single visualization method capable to
show “the whole”. The analyst has to decompose this
whole into views, examine these views and then try to
synthesize the whole picture from the partial views.
Also, because of large data volumes, we must use
methods capable of simultaneously providing an
overall view and exposing various “particulars”.
Looking for “particulars” requires therefore different
techniques than “seeing the whole”. Some existing
visualization tools such as GeoVista and CommonGIS
have successfully demonstrated the advantage of
multiple-linked views and the use of information
visualization (InfoViz) methods such as Parallel
Coordinates and Heat maps to explore spatial
multivariate data.
GeoViz
tools
support
interactive
visual
representation and analysis of spatio-temporal data,
enabling analysts to explore geospatial and multivariate
data from multiple perspectives. GeoViz is differentiated
from GIS because it focuses on exploratory visual
analysis rather than the pre-defined mapping. GeoViz
research focuses particular attention on integrating

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Jason Dykes
London City university work
jad7@city.ac.uk
Chris Weaver

Penn State University,US
cew15@psu.edu

cartographic approaches with interactive visual
representations from information visualization,
analytical data dissemination and visual analytics.
Emerging geovisualization tools will feature
increasingly new or extended methods of visual
representations and integrate many supplementary
data types such as text, pictures, sound, and video.
This panel will discuss result and experience from
existing synergies between GeoViz and InfoViz and
future potential synergies from, for example, visual
analytics technology not yet explored that could benefit
the evolution of geovisualization.
Besides the synergy issue, data analysts do not only
need tools that allow them to make discoveries and
generate hypotheses but they also need the means to
verify these discoveries and to test the hypotheses. Can
exploratory tools be linked with appropriate
confirmatory techniques, and, for example, implemented
as extensions to statistical packages.
One more challenge, which does not yet seem to be
properly realized in the visualization research
community, is related to the fact that observations and
discoveries that people make in the course of visual
data exploration cannot be conveniently captured for
later recall and for communication to others. The
difficulty of recording and reporting the findings is a
serious obstacle to wide recognition and use of
visualization tools.

1. Panellists statements
1.1 Gennady Andrienko
GeoVisualization faces a number of key challenges:
1) The complexity of geographic phenomena,
including the...
• Diversity of properties;
• Multitude and diversity of objects and
phenomena;
• Strength of relationships between
phenomena, data and space;
• Temporal aspects of geographic
phenomena.
2) The complexity of the information that needs
to be analyzed, which is...
• Multi-dimensional
• Heterogeneous
• Increasingly voluminous
• Diverse in form
To address these challenges properly, it is necessary
to coordinate visualization with computations. D.Keim
proposed to replace B.Shnederman’s Information
Seeking Mantra “Overview, zoom & filter, details-ondemand” by the Visual Analytics Mantra: “Analyze
First - Show the Important - Zoom, Filter and Analyze
Further - Details on Demand”. The Visual Analytics
Mantra stresses the fact that fully visual and interactive
methods do not properly work with big datasets. It is
necessary to start with database operations and
computations (“Analyze First”) and apply visualization
to the results obtained (“Show the Important”). The
user may interact with the visualization and the
secondary data it represents (i.e. the outcomes of the
analysis but not the original data), in particular, zoom
and filter, and trigger further analysis, which, again,
requires visualization of the results. In this way, visual
analytics is an iterative process involving three major
steps, computational analysis, visualization of the
results of the computational analysis, and interactive
visual analysis of these results. A detailed
consideration (“Details on Demand”) is possible for
small data portions when they require, for some reason,
a special attention of the analyst. This does not
necessarily happen at the end of the process.
An important task is to design computational data
analysis methods so that they integrate visualizations
and interactive visual interfaces in order to involve
users in the process of data analysis.
Synergetic visual analytics methods should be
designed so as to be able to deal with the specifics of
geographical space and time. Geographical space is not
limited to just two or three coordinates but includes the
geographical context, which has many aspects and is

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

difficult to formalize. Time has two models, linear and
cyclical, and it is often necessary to consider
simultaneously several temporal cycles (monthly,
weekly, daily etc.; these cycles may overlap). A
combination of several ordinary dimensions with space
and time dramatically increases the complexity and is
not properly supported by visual analytics yet.R
Research on geovisual analytics and development
of visual analytics methods for spatial and temporal
data is coordinated by the Commission on
Geovisualization of the International Cartographic
Association (http://kartoweb.itc.nl/icavis/index.html)
which regularly organizes scientific meetings and
publishes books and special issues of journals.
Recently the commission has developed a research
agenda on geovisual analytics for spatial decision
support (to appear in International Journal Geographic
Information Science, 2007).
Bio: Dr. Gennady Andrienko is a research fellow at
the Fraunhofer Institute Intelligent Analysis- and
Information Systems (IAIS) Schloss Birlinghoven,
Sankt Augustin; 53754 Germany
Email Gennady.andrienko@iais.fraunhofer.de
http://www.ais.fraunhofer.de/and
Gennady Andrienko received a Masters degree and
Ph.D. equivalent in Computer Science from Kiev State
University in 1986 and from Moscow State University
in 1992, respectively. He undertook research on
knowledge-based systems at the Mathematics Institute
of Moldavian Academy of Sciences (Kishinev,
Moldova), then at the Institute on Mathematical
Problems of Biology of Russian Academy of Science
(Pushchino Research Center, Russia). Since 1997 Dr.
Andrienko has a research position at GMD, now
Fraunhofer Institute IAIS.
He is a co-author of a monograph "Exploratory
Analysis of Spatial and Temporal Data" (published in
December 2005 in Springer), 30+ peer-reviewed
journal papers, 10+ book chapters, and 100+ papers in
conference proceedings. He has been involved in
numerous international research projects.
Research interests include geovisualization,
information visualization with a focus on spatial and
temporal data, visual analytics, interactive knowledge
discovery and data mining, spatial decision support and
optimization.

1.2 Mikael Jern

During the course of the analysis, it’s important to
provide the analyst the capability and tools to share the
visualization and associated analytics reasoning that led
to the resulting conclusions. Little research has been
done to integrate presentation and dissemination with
the analytical process. The visual analytics research

agenda “Illuminating the Path” [Thomas & Cook 2005]
addresses the need to conduct research that enable the
capture of the explorative process into information
packages that allow the analysts to communicate their
discovery and decision recommendations.
In geovisualization practice, tools are generally
entirely separate from presentation and reporting tools.
Results from using geovisualization can be visual
impressions, or mental images, which are hard to
verbalize or express in any other form without
referring to the discoveries from which they originate.
The passive disseminations are characterized by the
personal view of the author. The difficulty of recording
and reporting the findings is a serious obstacle to wide
recognition and use of geovisualization tools. The
visual presentation of analytic results needs to be clear
and concise, and it must take place as soon as possible
after the analyst reaches a conclusion.
An integration of interactive and reporting tools
would improve the communication and dissemination
process. Geovisualization must therefore equip the
analyst with tools that easily reveal what is going on
already during the course of the analysis and be able to
share with colleagues, visualizations and associated
visual analytical reasoning that led to the resulting
conclusion. It must be essential for analysts to be able
to:
• Records the status (attributes) of a data navigation
experience (events, conditioning, views,
highlights, colour, etc);
• Helps in visual communication of gained insight,
constructed knowledge and recommended
decisions;
• Allows team members to share their
understandings of unfolding events and see what
their colleagues are thinking;
• Framework for producing interactive electronic
documents - communicating analytical
assessments to colleagues and operation
management;
Bio: Professor Mikael Jern Dept of Science and
Technology, NVIS, Linkoping University, Sweden.
mikael.jern@itn.liu.se; http://vita.itn.liu.se
During 1970-1976, he worked with Professor Hertz
at the University of Lund. Together they invented the
Color Graphics System based on the first ink jet plotter
for raster based visualisation software in the world. In
1980 he founded UNIRAS to address the industry with
a more general-purpose raster graphics approach.
UNIRAS became a world-leading supplier of Visual
Data Analysis and Presentation graphics software for
scientists and engineers. UNIRAS was also a supplier
of raster software to IBM, Tectronix and Versatec.
When Advanced Visual Systems (AVS) acquired
UNIRAS in 1993, he was appointed to the position of

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

AVS Fellow to recognize his contributions to the
evolution of AVS. Prof Jern is committed to graphics
standards and was the project leader in a joint
UNIRAS-IBM project to develop the standard graphics
software system (GKS) for IBM in Hursley UK. He has
coordinated several large EC funded projects in the
domain of knowledge-based information visualization.
He was awarded for his innovative research about
interactive documents “SmartDoc”.
He has also
consulted with the EC Commission as a technical
expert in visualization. He has published more than 200
technical papers and several books in visual computing
and visualization application areas. At SIGGRAPH 93,
he was elected "pioneer of computer graphics" based
on his breaking new ground research together with
professor Hertz in raster graphics. In Sept 1999, he
returned to academic research and was appointed
professor in information visualization at Linkoping
University, Sweden and also serves as the Vice
Director for Norrkoping Visualization Centre NVIS.
His latest research interest includes InfoViz, GeoViz
and Visual Analytics with focus on visual interaction
methods.

1.3 Chris Weaver
Bio:Dr. Chris Weaver, Research Associate / Research
Scientist GeoVISTA Center / North-East Visualization
and Analytics Center Department of Geography, Penn
State University, US; Email: cweaver@psu.edu;
Dr Weaver is a Research Associate with the NorthEast Visualization and Analytics Center (NEVAC) and
the GeoVISTA Center at The Pennsylvania State
University. My primary research interests are in
geographic and information visualization, with a focus
on domain-specific query languages and highly
coordinated user interface architectures. Recent
projects concentrate on applications of and extensions
to
the
Improvise
information
visualization
environment. This research aims to support a broad
range of applications in scientific data analysis,
business planning, intelligence analysis, and crisis
management through acquisition, exploration, and
dissemination of information in a collaborative live
design visualization environment that is rapid and
flexible yet accessible to users with minimal training.

1.4 Sara Fabrikant
The analytics portion of „Visual Analytics“ (VA) is not
only about solving societal needs or problems in the
world using visual tools, but also analysing how people
make inferences with visual tools for problem-solving.
How do visual tools shape, modify and
influence people's inferences? What kind of knowledge
about the world can be gained from visual displays?

How can this potential knowledge be modified through
display design decisions? The current emphasis in VA
seems to be too much on the technical challenges.
While important, we still know little about visualspatial thinking, inference making, and problem
solving. Tools need to be designed based on empirical
evidence, thus based on results of evaluations with
actual users in real world situations.
Bio: Sara Irina Fabrikant is currently an Associate
Professor of Geography and head of the Geographic
Information Visualization and Analysis (GIVA) group
at the GIScience Center at the Geography Department
of the University of Zurich, Switzerland. Her research
and teaching interests lie in geographic information
visualization (geovis), GIScience and cognition,
graphical user interface design, dynamic cartography
and hypermedia. She received an M.S. in geography
from the University of Zurich and a Ph.D. in geography
from the University of Colorado at Boulder. She was
awarded a Rotary International Ambassadorial
Scholarship to study Geographic Information Science

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

for one academic year at the University of Canterbury,
Christchurch, New Zealand, in 1993. She publishes in a
variety of GIScience/Geovis related journals and is
currently a member of the Editorial Boards
of Cartographic Perspectives, Cartographica, Revue
Internationale de Géomatique, and Transactions in GIS,
in addition to her Program Committee memberships for
various GIScience/Geovis related conferences (e.g.,
GIScience, COSIT, InfoVis (UK), Diagrams, etc.). She
has made various presentations (in English and in
German) at national and international professional
meetings, including invited keynotes and other lectures
at universities in North America, Europe, Asia, and
New Zealand. Other service includes memberships of
the Association of American Geographers (including
an elected post as academic director of the cartography
specialty group), the International Cartographic
Association’s Commission on Visualization and Virtual
Environments, the North American Cartographic
Information Society, and the Swiss Society of
Cartography. sara@geo.unizh.ch

