Specifying Augmented Virtuality Systems for Creative Architectural Design
Xiangyu Wang
Lecturer, Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition, Faculty of Architecture, Design
& Planning, University of Sydney, Sydney NSW 2006, Australia.
{x.wang@arch.usyd.edu.au}
Abstract
Despite active research in Virtual and Augmented
Reality, the emerging new technology of Augmented
Virtuality (AV) has rarely been explored in the
architecture arena. Augmented Virtuality, where a
predominantly virtual environment is enhanced by the
addition of real entities, provides a means to merge
richly layered, multi-modal, 3D real context and
experience acquired from the real world into virtual
architectural designs. There are no noted
investigations on principles of implementing AV
concept in the context of architectural design with the
purpose of maximizing its full potentials. This paper
discusses issues and approaches in establishing
scientific principles for applying AV technology in
supporting architectural design comprehension. As an
initial effort towards those issues, the paper also
formulates a comprehensive taxonomy for specifying
AV technology for architectural applications.

1. Introduction
The continuing emergence of 3D computer-aided
design (3D CAD) and visualization has ushered in
new opportunities for enhancing both the design and
planning functions in the architecture, engineering,
and construction (AEC) industry [2]. This move
toward less abstract graphic representations of facility
project designs has prompted more innovation in
effectively communicating project design information.
Examples of emerging developments in Virtual
Reality (VR) visualization for facilities with highly
complex designs has further inspired the drive toward
technology and information integration to facilitate
more efficient design collaboration.
Virtual Reality (VR) technology was originally
embraced by architecture visionaries for design
concept presentations during the last decade, as
computing
advances
have
supported
more
sophisticated graphics capabilities [3]. Virtual reality

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

research attracts a considerably wide range of interest
in diverse fields and the typical application is webbased design review and computer supported
cooperative work (CSCW) as well as 3D type of
thinking with desktop PC virtual environments.
Architecture industry opens the door for more
innovations in Augmented Virtuality [4], a more
expansive form of Virtual Reality. Augmented
Virtuality (AV) (see Figure 1), the augmentation of a
virtual setting with real objects, provides a means to
merge richly layered, multi-modal, 3D real context
and experience into a virtual environment. Despite its
potential, Augmented Virtuality has not received
nearly the amount of attention paid to Virtual Reality
and Augmented Reality. AV has only been applied in
very limited domains: as display on unmanned air
vehicles [6], 3D videoconferencing system [7], and
scientific center [1]. There is no recognized research
effort towards AV applications in architecture domain.
The novelty of the work presented in this paper is
supported by the paucity of published research that
investigates AV applications in architectural design
and collaboration.
It is envisaged that the architecture industry
constitutes a prime applications arena for exploiting
AV technology. By providing context and additional
details not always available in purely virtual
environments, the effective addition of real entities
into a virtual design could greatly enhance the
intuitive objective of design in architecture industry.
For example, an AV-based design platform could
allow an architect equipped with an immersive head
mounted display (HMD) to either “step into” the
design space or in some similar fashion to have his or
her view of a virtual building augmented with a
projection of real images/video registered to the
virtual world coordinate system. Real entities like
image/video acquired from the real world by camera
could be mapped or registered into the virtual world to
essentially “decorate” it with much of the richness of
the real world. Figure 1 demonstrates a conceptual
example of how an AV environment might look like

where the real-time video of a remote collaborator and
the real design sketch are texture-mapped onto
appropriate spots inside the virtual design space for
the architect’s convenience of reference. Thus the
architect could interact within a mixed world which
contains real entities that can be recognized in familiar

and potentially useful ways. The objective in any case
would be to define an AV interface that maximizes the
designer’s ability to comprehend the design and effect
corresponding actions in the display space under the
given conditions.

Figure 1. A Conceptual Example of Augmented Virtuality based on ActiveWorlds

2. Augmented virtuality research issues
and approaches
This section discussed three major research issues
and their approaches for establishing scientific
principles for creating efficient AV applications in
supporting architectural design comprehension.

2.1. First issue: presentation of real entity
What basic knowledge should be applied in
representing design models in AV design
environments for the architecture industry to enhance
design comprehension for the design functions
performed by individuals? AV space might provide
perceptual and cognitive support and augmentation for
interactions within a virtual design which contains real
entities that can be potentially exploited in useful ways.
To address this issue, the major challenge — or class
of challenges — is the effective presentation of real
entity information that supplements the 3D virtual
environment (virtual design model). The real entity
refers to any kind of sampled image data which the
computer does not possess, or does not attribute
meaning [4]. Full understanding of virtual design
model will often demand these real visual forms.
Information visualization, combining aspects of
conventional scientific visualization with humancomputer interfaces, data mining, imaging, and
graphics will be able to meet this challenge. This class
of challenges should be addressed by combining

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

application of information visualization and cognitive
psychology principles with an iterative methodology
of demonstration and feedback solicitation with
architecture industry.

2.2. Second issue: interface
What interface mechanisms and technologies
should be incorporated in AV design/detailing and
planning environments to facilitate interactions with
design models? A typically AV system constitutes a
head-mounted-display, a computer, a camera,
interaction tool, and a tracker. The major challenge to
this issue is to gain an understanding of the intuitive
modes of interaction that best support individual
design and matching those modes to appropriate
display devices and interaction tools to best
accommodate the user’s own innate spatial abilities.
For instance, Ware and Rose [8] investigated types of
manipulation metaphors for rotating objects to learn
how near real world performance might be achieved in
rotating models. These examples illustrate the major
aspects of this challenge. This challenge could be
addressed by experimentation designed for testing of
the leading options of AV system technical
configuration.

2.3. Third issue: collaborative work
For the collaborative work scheme, spatial
knowledge acquired from the merging of real entities

(e.g., image of real landmark) into the virtual space
combined with the real-time communication channel
by configuring collaborators’ faces as real video
streams into the virtual design space could help
designers to employ effective conventional spatial
reference strategies for carrying out collaborative
navigation tasks in complex surroundings, especially a
large-scale design project. This issue could be
addressed through tests of spatial cognition benefits
and effectiveness of communication. The processes
that occur in spatial cognition are complex and not
fully understood, but differences in performance under
different circumstances can be measured through
controlled experimentation [5].

3. Taxonomy for specifying Augmented
Virtuality systems
As a first research step towards the above research
framework of AV in architectural design and
collaboration, especially for addressing the first
question, this section formulates a comprehensive
taxonomy for specifying AV technology and
characteristics from lab-based AV prototypes in
various domains, and discusses them in the context of
architectural design. The taxonomy is developed based
on observations of lab-based AV prototypes in various
domains. Characteristics including real augmenting
content and virtual augmented surrounding are

progressively disclosed and presented as continuums
according to magnitude of cognitive load each mode
of characteristics imposes on designers. The
specification presents an ordered classification,
according to which real and virtual scene content can
be specified. The specification serves as a framework
for definition, development, analysis, comparison, and
usability evaluation of AV systems for architectural
design and collaboration. The taxonomy is developed
to be comprehensive therefore some options might not
even currently feasible or available for architecture
applications.
AV systems use more varied media
representations than VR and different activities have
varying requirements for media representations. In an
AV scene, real contents augment and are registered
onto a predominantly virtual
environment.
Considering the many different forms of sensed
information from real world which could be presented
via an electronic display, an augmenting real content
continuum consisting of sequenced options is shown
on along the left column in Figure 2 according to the
extent of realism. Each option represents a class of
information with common characteristics. This
continuum goes from the extreme of 2D sampled data
with lowest reality to the other extreme of a direct
optical view with complete fidelity to the real
environment.

Figure 2. Continuum for augmenting real contents and augmented virtual environment

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

A direct optical scene of a real environment is
directly observed by human eyes (that are binocular)
for accurate depth judgment. A 3D real time video
scene is a video stream of a real environment captured
by sensors. It could take the form of textured video
views, for example views of remote collaborators’ real
faces (see Figure 1), or views of remote construction
site as captured by a monitoring video camera and
transmitted back to the virtual environment over a
computer network. Compared with direct optical view,
the 3D video could be distorted by the camera lens and
does not provide the stereoscopic sense that is
essential for depth judgment. Therefore, the human
viewer needs to apply other mental strategies to
understand the depth relationships, which induces
additional cognitive load as compared with direct
optical view. Less realistic than 3D video are still real
images, either 2D or 3D (stereoscopic), captured by
remote cameras. For example, a 3D picture of a real
modular stairs could be positioned as proposed in the
virtual building for the designers’ convenience of
reviewing constructability. The 2D real design
documents could be texture-mapped onto the top of a
virtual table so that the designers could use such a
traditional viewing platform to review the real relevant
design documents in a familiar manner. In addition,
designers could also see the atheistic effects of
proposed wallpapers by texture-mapping the real 2D
images of wallpaper samples stored in remote
supplier’s repository onto the virtual walls.
Sampled data (2D or 3D) is the most abstract
format. An example for 3D sampled data is telemetry
data (e.g., distance) measured by remote physical
sensors purposely located in a built environment and
then visualized in the virtual environment using
graphics. Since it is computationally expensive to
render sampled data in a realistic way, simplified
graphics representations of different properties (e.g.,
color, texture, geometry etc.) are usually applied.
Therefore, the format of sampled data is more abstract
than images discussed above. Even though computer
software can accurately distinguish these sample data
and accurately visualize them with corresponding
representations, users still have to understand what
each representation stands for and also the depth cues
are difficult to apprehend. Therefore these necessary
interpretations require more cognitive transformations
for 2D/3D sampled data than a 2D/3D image.
As thus, it is reasonable to infer cognitive load
increases as the representation of the augmenting real
contents becomes less realistic as shown in Figure 2.
This continuum arrangement, however, is not meant to
imply that concrete media representation is always
superior to abstract media representation because each
type of representation has its own advantages and

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

appropriate application domains.
Concrete
representations, for example, may involve too much
detail for some cases. Also, two or more types of
media representation presented together on a single
display, a hybrid representation, may be very useful in
some situations and especially when the AV system
supports multiple functions (see Figure 1).
The augmented virtual environment technically
acts as the registration base for the augmenting real
content.
The augmented virtual environment
continuum shown along the right column in Figure 2
depicts a transition from abstract to realistic types of
media representation. Moving from up to down across
the continuum, the cognitive load required to interpret
the virtual information is surmised to generally
decrease. That is, the form of information requires
less transformation to be comprehended. It is apparent
that realistic representations convey more detailed and
richer information that can speed human
comprehension in many situations thus augmenting
the cognitive process of the work activity.
If two continua in Figure 2 are considered together
as a combination from the perspective of cognitive
science, Figure 3 depicts the combined cognitive load
distribution for interpreting both the virtual and real
entities in a scene. Since the cognitive load trends for
each continuum have already been revealed in Figure
2, it is a reasonable assert that the highest cognitive
load area is located around the point P1 representing
the scenario where text as augmented virtual
environment and 2D-sampled data as augmenting real
contents are combined in a display (see Figure 3).
Likewise, it is inferred that the lowest cognitive load
area should be around the point P2 representing the
scenario where 3D solid object as augmented virtual
environment and direct optical view as augmenting
real content are combined on a display. The closer the
combination is graphically located to P1, the greater
will be the cognitive load imposed by the media
representation. Likewise, the closer the combination
is graphically located to P2, lesser is the cognitive load
involved. However, it is difficult to compare the
cognitive load among any combinations located along
the line from point P3 (representing scenario where
direct optical view augments a virtual environment
consisting of texts only) to point P4 (representing the
scenario where 2D sampled data augments a virtual
environment full of 3D solid objects) because there is
a trade-off in cognitive load associated with the virtual
and real contents. The notion of a quantitative
comparison is further complicated by the absence of a
common absolute scale on the two axes. The straight
band between P1 and P2 could roughly depict the
intermediate transition along which the different
combination involves different extent of cognitive

load. The cognitive load of the combination which
does not locate on the band can be determined by the
perpendicularly projected location on the band. It is

inferred that cognitive loads from the AV scenes
represented by P3 and P4 are similar.

Figure 3. Hypothetical Cognitive Load for Different Real and Virtual Combinations

Conclusions

References

This paper discussed issues and approaches for
establishing scientific principles for applying AV
technology in supporting architectural design. This
paper also formulates a comprehensive taxonomy for
specifying AV technology and characteristics for
architecture applications. The benefit of the presented
work to developers and researchers is a structured
framework for developing AV systems for industrial
and experimental use. The benefit for architecture
practitioners is an enhanced understanding of how
AV-based computer interfaces might be exploited to
facilitate their work.

[1] Clarke, J. Vines, J. Mark, E.: 2003, An Augmented
Virtuality scientific data center, Proceeding of 2003
User Group Conference, pp. 354- 357.
[2] Griffis, F. H. and Sturts, C. (2000). Three-Dimensional
Computer Models and the Fully Integrated and
Automated Project Process for the Management of
Construction. Research report (RR152-11) of the
Construction Industry Institute.
[3] Hendrickson, C. and Rehak, D. R. (1993). “The
potential of a ‘virtual’ construction site for automation
planning and analysis.” Proceedings of the 10th
International Symposium on Automation and Robotics
in Construction (ISARC). Elsevier, 511-518.
[4] Milgram, P. and Colquhoun H.: 1999, A taxonomy of
real and virtual world display integration, In Y Ohta
and H Tamura (eds), Mixed Reality: Merging Real and

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]

Virtual Worlds, Ohmsha Ltd and Springer-Verlag, pp.
5-30.
Oxman, R.: 2000, Design media for the cognitive
designer, Automation in Construction, 9(4), 337-346.
Rackliffe, N.: 2005, An Augmented Virtuality display
for
improving
UAV
usability,
URL:
http://www.mitre.org/work/tech_papers/tech_papers_05
/05_1208/05_1208.pdf
Regenbrecht, H., Lum, T., Kohler, P., Ott, C., Wagner,
M., Wilke, W., Mueller, E.: 2004, Using Augmented
Virtuality for remote collaboration, Presence:
Teleoperators & Virtual Environments, 13(3), 338-354.
Ware, C. and Rose, J.: 1999, Rotating virtual objects
with real handles, ACM Transactions on CHI, 6(2),
162-180.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

