2D and 3D Neural-Network Based Visualization of
High-Dimensional Biomedical Data
Urška Cvek1,2,†,‡, Marjan Trutschl1,2,†,‡, John C. Cannon1, Rona S. Scott3, Robert E. Rhoads4
1
Department of Computer Science, Louisiana State University, Shreveport, LA 71115
2
Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, 3 Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, 4 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, LSUHSC, Shreveport, LA 71103
{ucvek, mtrutsch, cannonj69}@lsus.edu, {rscott1, rrhoad}@lsuhsc.edu
†

‡

These authors equally contributed to this work and should be considered first authors. Primary contact.

Abstract
In this paper we integrate self-organizing map algorithm
(SOM) with scatter plot and Radviz, extending these
visualizations into the third dimension and reducing
overlap. Classic visualizations are used as the twodimensional base, combined with a self-organizing map
that extends them into the third dimension, with an
adjusted neighborhood function. This approach solves
the problem of overlap where more than one point plots
to the same space and uncovers additional information
about relationships inherent in high-dimensional data
sets, including distribution of points, outliers and
associations. Case studies are presented on a microarray
and miRNA data sets.
Keywords---microarray, miRNA, occlusion, selforganizing maps, information visualization.

1. Introduction
Physical and natural sciences, instruments,
biomedical and other scientific research generate large
amounts of high-dimensional data. This not only creates
the need for the analysis of the data and interpretation of
results, but also the need for the development of tools
and methods that can handle these data. Tools for the
data analysis are used not only in the hypothesis
generation or exploratory analysis stage (where we try to
find patterns, outliers, and other meaningful domainspecific insights), but also when looking for answers for
these hypotheses. Many techniques are graphical in
nature, such as scatter plots and histograms, but many of
them can only represent two variables at a time.
High data dimensionality is one of the data’s
challenging traits and we have to resort to choices of
projections of multiple dimensions onto this space, or a
projection transformation function in order to display it.
Visualization and data mining are part of the process that
allows the user to find optimal or close to optimal
answers to their questions. Applications of visualizations

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

using neural network techniques enhance knowledge
extraction and are targeted towards complex data and
provide for a very small, if any, loss of information.
Microarray experiments are one such set of
biomedical data and they can be augmented with
additional information from other databases in the
domain, which extends their dimensionality. These
experiments produce very high dimensional data sets that
can result in long lists of genes that are possibly involved
in or interact with a particular biological process, in a
large number of possible combinations. A biologist’s
goal is to find a smaller list of genes that are biologically
significant and worth pursuing in further investigations.
Furthermore, information about genes whose
involvement is unknown is compared to the genes that
have well-known and published associations to find
relationships for which it is hard to find support [1].
One of the most important advances in biology in
recent years may be the discovery of RNAs that can
regulate gene expression. As one kind of such functional
noncoding RNAs, microRNAs (miRNAs) are
endogenous approximately 22 nucleotide snippets having
important regulatory roles by targeting transcripts for
cleavage or translational repression. miRNAs use two
distinct posttranscriptional mechanisms to downregulate
gene expression. A number of computational approaches
have been developed for the prediction of miRNAs and
miRNA target genes [2, 3] to supplement the tedious and
lengthy in-vivo testing. Currently, the visual
representation of results from the computational
approaches to miRNAs and miRNA target genes is
mostly limited to lengthy tables with scores and
annotations. A location on the gene is predicted for a
miRNA and since gene lengths vary from several tens to
thousands of base pairs, the representation of these hits is
an interesting problem.
We present a technique that combines twodimensional (2D) visualizations with self-organizing
maps, creating three-dimensional (3D) visualizations.
These new displays reveal a lot of information about the

inherent relationships of high-dimensional data sets,
including distribution of points, outliers, and
associations. We increase the visual scalability of scatter
plot and Radviz displays by extending them with SOMs
into the third dimension, also removing the point overlap
of partially related records. Our technique has been
implemented as an interactive package that links to
additional biological information about genes, and their
related biological processes.
We start with an overview of the background work
and related research. We follow with the description of
our VizSOM approach for the classic visualizations and
present case studies based on a microarray and miRNA
data set. We close with conclusions and a summary.

2. Background
A scatter plot is a point projection of the data into a
two or three-dimensional space, represented on the
screen in classic (x,y) or (x,y,z) format. Scatter plots are
one of the most commonly utilized visualizations, and
can, depending on the data pattern, represent large
numbers of records [4]. To interpret the 3D projection
interaction, we need to resolve ambiguities, although
other techniques can be used (jitter, animation, etc.). In
our previous work, we combined a self-organizing map
within the 2D scatter plot called SmartJitter [5], which
creates a new 2D arrangement of records. The technique
was employed for occlusion removal with an intelligent
record displacement. In SmartJitter the algorithm maps
the nodes around an overplotted (x,y) position on the
“primary output grid” with a “secondary output grid”
which is a modified SOM fitted within the original
primary grid cell of the x and y dimensions.
Radviz [6, 7] is a radial display technique that places
dimensional anchors (dimensions) around the perimeter
of a circle and utilizes spring constants to represent
relational values among points. A record is represented
as a vector (xi1 ,..., xim ) on m dimensions and its location
in the visualization is determined by the pull of the
position vectors (dimensions) S1,..., S m . Each position

(

)

vector points from (0,0) to the corresponding fixed point
on the perimeter of a unit circle. To eliminate the effect
of dimensional outliers, the values of each dimension are
usually normalized to [0..1] range. Each data point is
displayed at the point where the sum of all spring forces
equals zero ∑ S j − ui xij = 0 . The position of the data

(

j =1,m

)

point depends largely on the arrangement of dimensions
around the circle; however, data items with similar
values are always placed closer together. The technique
has been used in several data domains, and
complemented with dimension ordering techniques,
where the dimension order is determined by the structure
of the data, or the inherent class separation [8-10] .
SOM is an unsupervised, topology preserving neural
network that maps a set of n-dimensional vectors to a
two-dimensional topographic map [11]. Training of the
unsupervised neural network is data-driven, and the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

output represents relationships among the input vectors,
effectively working as a summarization technique that
attempts to reduce the complexity of the data by
displaying clusters of data in a grid. Several extensions
have been developed to the basic approach, one of them
is the Unified Distance Matrix (U-Matrix) display [12],
which aids in the detection of clusters. The idea is to
visualize the weights at each cell of the lattice with
respect to its neighbors.

3. VizSOM
3.1. Basic VizSOM approach
The basis for our approach is the SOM algorithm
combined with a classic visualization, applied to a scatter
plot and Radviz displays. In the original SOM algorithm,
a training data set is presented to it first, with all of the
output nodes' weight vectors initially set to random
vectors in which each component is a random value
within the range defined for that component in the
training data set. The algorithm cycles through a
predefined number of iterations, or epochs, performing
search and update operations. The m-dimensional vectors
are chosen randomly from the training data set so as to
only use a record once per epoch. The winning node is
determined based on smallest Euclidean distance d,
calculated from the input vector V and every weight
vector wj.
d 2j = V − w j ⇒ c = min d j

{ }

Each output node’s weight vector wj is updated to
resemble the current training vector, using a Gaussian
function g(k).
g (k ) = e

⎛ dε ( t ) 2 ⎞
⎜−
⎟
⎜ σ ( k )2 ⎟
⎝
⎠

w j (t + 1) = w j (t ) + β (k ) ⋅ g (k ) ⋅ d j (t )
The amount by which the vectors around the winning
node are modified decreases with each epoch based on
the learning rate βk, where k represents an epoch.
k

⎞k
⎛β
β (k ) = β initial ⋅ ⎜⎜ final ⎟⎟
⎝ β initial ⎠
As the training proceeds through the epochs, the effect
on neighboring nodes is diminished, until the last epoch
in which only the winning node is affected.
We introduce several modifications to the original
SOM algorithm. The most significant change is related to
the initial positioning of each record (primary mapping)
and to adjusting the neighborhood function’s effect into
the third dimension effectively changing not only the
horizontal, but also vertical and diagonal output nodes
(approximately represented as a spherical neighborhood
adjustment). Usually, the dimensions not used for the
initial visualization are selected to create the third
dimension. We describe this process applied to two
visualization techniques.
max

3.2. VizSOM: scatter plot
The initial grid for mapping the records is the classic
(x,y) scatter plot, where x and y are any two dimensions
di and dj of the data set. As shown in Figure 1, we find a
position in the scatter plot for the record based on two
selected dimensions, and then select a grid cell (node)
into which this record would fall (R’). We select a fine
equally-spaced grid of nodes for each of the di, dj, in
order to mimic a true scatter plot as closely as possible.
Ideally, the number of nodes would be the same as the
number of unique pixels in a scatter plot. However, fine
spaced grids are CPU-intense; therefore the number of
the nodes is directly related to the number of available
processors and the memory size.

subset of dimensions laid out on the radius (Figure 2,
left). We overlay a grid of nodes over the Radviz
imaginary unit circle, in order to determine the location
for each input vector. Additionally, each node is
associated with a stack of SOM output nodes, to project
the input vectors into the third dimension. The same as in
VizSOM scatter plot, this technique significantly
increases the intrinsic dimensionality of a Radviz
visualization. In particular, our algorithm is able to
handle the input vectors that exhibit the same profiles
that differ in magnitude (i.e., {1,2,1,2} and {5,6,5,6}).
The original Radviz algorithm maps such vectors to the
same location thus introducing ambiguity. VizSOM
Radviz algorithm also places such records at the same
(x,y) location, but different locations on the z-axis, where
only records with the same or very similar profile are
placed near each other.

R’’
dj

R’
di

Figure 1: VizSOM scatter plot with original mapping
into the scatter plot grid, and extension of SOM into the
third dimension.

Figure 2: Left: original Radviz mapping with a 15x15
grid; Right: VizSOM Radviz mapping into the third
dimension based on the SOM algorithm.

A projection is made into the third dimension
(secondary mapping) using a SOM algorithm based on
whole or a selected subset of dimensions of the data set,
where two different subsets of dimensions could be used
for the two steps. We constrain the movement of a record
to a vertical stack of SOM output nodes at every grid cell
on the scatter plot, as shown in Figure 1. Each of these
output nodes is associated with a weight vector. The
position R’ for a record is adjusted into position R”
based on the mapping according to the SOM algorithm to
the closest neighborhood node in the vertical stack of
output nodes. After the winning node c is found, a
neighborhood function g(k) adjusts the neighborhood
nodes not only in this vertical stack of SOM output
nodes at position R” but for all neighboring output nodes
in the 3D grid, effectively performing a 3D Gaussian
neighborhood function (as opposed to the original 2D
Gaussian neighborhood function). This process is
repeated for each of the records in the data set, for a
selected number of training epochs.

As shown in Figure 2 (right), the position R’ for a
record is determined based on SOM algorithm
identifying a new mapping position R”, identically to the
process used in VizSOM Scatter Plot.

3.3. VizSOM: Radviz
In order to determine the position R’ for a record in
the 2D space, we use the Radviz algorithm with selected

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

4. Case studies
4.1. Microarray data set
In this study we are testing the hypothesis that
changes in mRNA distribution on polysomes caused by
deletion of a gene are correlated with the expression
patterns of these mRNA during development. Microarray
data was obtained from C. elegans heavy (H) and light
(L) polysomes. The RNAs were hybridized to
Affymetrix GeneChip microarrays containing 22,625
probe sets to all C. elegans genes (~18,967), and the
signals were determined using Affymetrix software,
filtering only for genes that were called “present” in at
least one of the samples. Additional normalization and
filtering was done, as previously described in [13] to
obtain the list of 14,764 mRNAs. Manual inspection of
these mRNAs did not identify any unifying feature that
would explain their common sensitivity, e.g., nucleotide
sequence, trans-splicing, chromosomal location, and so

forth. This data set was linked with a published data set
that gives expression of each mRNA as a function of
developmental stage (embryo, larvae 1 through 4, and
adult) using an Affymetrix-to-WormBase lookup table
[14]. This complementary data is only available for
9,298 records of the above 14,764 genes. The complete
data set has 24 dimensions, 6 of which are the expression
on different developmental stages and the other 18 are
the expression done in triplicate for each, the low, high
polysomes and total RNA, for the wild type and mutant
C. elegans (wild: 3L, 3H, 3T; mutant: 3L, 3H, 3T).
We created a 5x5 or 25 output node classic SOM on
developmental data, to determine the polysomal behavior
of mRNAs in subpopulations defined by developmental
expression patterns. We labeled output nodes according
to a 2D color scale (a 2D slice obtained from a 3D color
cube), with each node represented by a single color, as
shown in Figure 3. Centroids were drawn for each SOM
output node representing the developmental stagespecific gene expression). We also plot a scatter plot
matrix of polysomal behavior for both H and L
polysomes of the gene expression set, effectively linking
the two data sets. The color is used to link the scatter plot
matrix to the output nodes in the SOM visualization. The
results indicate that significant differences in polysomal
behavior exist among the various output nodes. For
instance, output nodes 3, 4, and 5 have a large number of
records in class 7, compared with other output nodes.
Interestingly, output nodes 3, 4 and 5 also have similar
developmental expression profiles with gene activity
increasing in the larvae 4 developmental stage. These
results provide more compelling evidence for a
correlation between developmental expression and
dependence on a particular translational initiation factor
for efficient initiation.

Figure 3: 5x5 SOM of developmental data with colormatched centroids of the H and L polysomal behavior.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

We defined 9 classes of polysomal behavior on the
basis of differences in mRNA abundance in H or L
polysomes comparing the mutant with the wild type. The
classes were determined by the fold of change (±1) in
both H and L polysomes. Figure 4 and 5 show the
distribution of these mRNAs with class 5 in green, which
has the largest count, or 8356 mRNAs. This class is the
only class where no significant changes were detected in
the signal values for H and L (-1 < fold change < +1).

Figure 4: Nine polysomal behavior classes are
defined by the mRNA abundance in H or L polysomes
(x, y). The “selection arrow” marks three overlapping
records we explore in Figure 5. Note that these are
discrete colors and are not related to colors in Figure 3.

While the representation in Figure 3 proved very
useful, it was still difficult to correlate the resulting plots.
To provide a more descriptive visualization, we
combined the two data sets (two-dimensional polysomal
behavior and six-dimensional developmental stages data
set from Figure 3) and visualized all eight dimensions
using VizSOM.
We were interested in discovering relationships of
the developmental stages data for the high and low
polysomal behaviors. We created a VizSOM based on a
scatter plot using the high and low polysomes as the x
and y variables, creating a grid of 100 sections on each
axis. For the third dimension, we created a 40-node-high
stack of SOM output nodes at each of these grid sections,
and initialized them with random values from the data
set. Figure 5 presents a visualization of this dataset while
Figure 6 shows an overall view of all the records in this
three-dimensional space. After we observed this
visualization, we removed the records that belong to the
fifth class (out of the nine defined above), as these
records were not changed and are of less interest. We
rotated this image to display the third dimension
horizontally, in order to show that there are differences
among the records that appear very similar with respect
to the polysomal behavior, but are very different based
on the developmental stages. An arrow marks a group of
records that appear related in Figure 4, but whose

developmental stage expression is different. By changing
the view, we can see the separation of these three points
(Figure 5). There are several outliers in this data set, for
example, at the bottom of Figure 4, that are differentially
expressed in the polysomal behavior data set.

4.2. miRNA data set
We examined a miRNA data set to determine
potential target sites. We used over 25,000 3’ UTR
sequences for all transcripts from Ensembl’s human
(Homo sapiens) genome, and since some transcripts are
alternatively spliced for the same gene, the total number
of genes is smaller than the number of transcripts. We
obtained a virus miRNA from the literature, trying to
predict the target genes for it. The miRanda algorithm
[13] was used to scan the miRNA sequence against the
3’ UTR sequences of the human genome. The algorithm
uses dynamic programming to search for maximal local
complementary alignment, corresponding to a doublestranded antiparallel duplex. Cutoff parameters were
chosen to capture currently known experimentally
verified miRNA target properties [14]: (1) 5’-3’
asymmetry (the complementary pairing of 7 nucleotides
at the 5’ end is more important than that of the 7
nucleotides at the 3’ end); (2) influence of G:U wobbles
on binding. We also added the following requirements:
(3) less than four misalignments; (4) we adjusted the
scoring and energy thresholds, filtering out all predicted
sites that do not match the behavior of true miRNAs.

Figure 5: Rotated VizSOM Scatter Plot displays records
with the third dimension placed along the z-axis; three
arrow-marked overlapping records from Figure 4 are
located at different locations resulting in greater intrinsic
dimensionality.

The data set we obtain has 10,017 3’ UTRs, for
which at least one potential target site was identified. We
divided each of the 3’UTRs into 20 bins, each section’s
length was dependent on the length of the whole UTR.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

We decided on 20 sections, based on the length of the
smallest 3’ UTR (only 23 nucleotides) and largest (over
68,000 nucleotides) and based on the biology of the
predicted hits. Hits for each miRNA were identified for
each of the 20 sections, and count of hits was recorded.
These columns were amended with the length of the 3’
UTR, and the 6 dimensions of the computational results:
score, energy and shuffle, produced by miRanda, each
with a max and average measurement. As shown in
Figure 6, each of these computational scores is important
in the determination of the final prediction, but not one
by itself, rather several in combination.

Figure 6: Selected records from Figure 5 exhibit similar
profiles in 6 out of 8 dimensions. Such records are colocated in Radviz. Subtle differences in dimensional
values among the records explain different z-coordinates
in Figure 5.

The images in Figure 7 shows the VizSOM Radviz
visualization. We used the 20 bins for the dimensions of
the Radviz, laid out from the 9 o’clock position in
clockwise fashion towards the right, gridded into 41 by
41 grid after the assignments of records was performed
using a classic Radviz approach. The 5’ end bins are
located around the 5 o’clock to 8 o’clock positions. For
the third dimension we used an 80-node constrained
stack of SOM output nodes based on the six
computational outputs from miRanda, complemented by
a histogram that displays the count of the records located
in each layer of the output display.
From the images we see that the 3D space is
sparsely populated in some sections. When we look at
the projections from the bottom and the top, we notice
that an uneven distribution of records is present here as
well. From the histograms on the side we can discern that
although the bottom appears to be sparsely populated, its
count of records is actually fairly high, as the largest
histogram is located at the bottom, with a count of 344
records, compared with 99 records at the top. We
interactively selected several records exhibiting potential
to be real matches for the miRNA.

Conclusions
We presented a novel technique that combines the
SOM with classic visualizations, still keeping the
projection space extended into the third dimension. The

a)
b)
c)
Figure 7: VizSOM Radviz with the miRNA data set. and 50-node stack of SOM output nodes; (a) 3D view from side, Radviz
projection base at the bottom; (b) bottom projection; (c) top projection, all with color scale based on the MaxScore variable.
user can select one set of variables for the initial visual
display (scatter plot or Radviz in our examples) and
extend it into the third dimension with a SOM on other
or additional dimensions of the data. We have identified
biologically interesting findings in a microarray and
miRNA data set, using the VizSOM Scatter Plot and
VizSOM Radviz techniques. Our methods work well for
large and high-dimensional data sets and provide
meaningful associations in an interactive space.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Paula Polk and the Research
Core Facility at LSUHSC-S for processing the
microarrays, Brent Nycum and Scot Adams at LSUS for
parsing the miRNA data set as well as the reviewers for
valuable feedback.
This publication was made possible by NIH Grant
Number P20 RR16456 from the INBRE Program of the
National Center for Research Resources. Its contents are
solely the responsibility of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official views of NIH.

References
[1] I. S. Kohane, A. T. Kho, and A. J. Butte, Microarrays for an
Integrative Genomics: MIT Press, 2002.
[2] L. Lim, N. Lau, E. Weinstein, A. Abdelhakim, S. Yekta, M.
Rhoades, C. Burge, and D. Bartel, "The microRNAs of
Caenorhabditis elegans," Genes Development, vol. 2, 2003.
[3] P. Sethupathy, M. Megraw, and A. G. Hatzigeorgiou, "A
guide through present computational approaches for the
identification of mammalian microRNA targets," Nature
Methods, pp. 881-886, 2006.
[4] S. G. Eick, "Visual Discovery and Analysis," IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol.
6, pp. 44-58, 2000.
[5] M. Trutschl, G. Grinstein, and U. Cvek, "Intelligently
Resolving Point Occlusion," presented at IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization, Seattle, Washington, 2003.
[6] P. Hoffman, "Dimensional Anchors: A Graphic Primitive for
Multidimensional Multivariate Information Visualizations,"
G. Grinstein, Ed.: Workshop on New Paradigms in
Information Visualization and Manipulation, 1999.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[7] C. Brunsdon, A. S. Fotheringham, and M. Charlton, "An
investigation of methods for visualising highly multivariate
datasets," in Case Studies of Visualization in the Social
Sciences, D. Unwin and P. Fisher, Eds., 1998, pp. 55-80.
[8] G. Leban, I. Bratko, U. Petrovic, T. Curk, and B. Zupan,
"VizRank: finding informative data projections in functional
genomics by machine learning," Bioinformatics, (21), 2005.
[9] P. Au, M. Carey, S. Sewraz, Y. Guo, and S. Ruger, "New
paradigms in information visualization," presented at 23rd
International ACM SIGIR Conference, Athens, Greece, 2000.
[10] E. Bertini, L. D. Aquila, and G. Santucci, "SpringView:
Cooperation of Radviz and Parallel Coordinates for View
Optimization and Clutter Reduction," presented at (CMV'05).
[11] T. Kohonen, "Self-organized Formation of Topologically
Correct Feature Maps," Biol. Cybernetics, (43) 59-69, 1982.
[12] A. Ultsch, Vetter, C., "Self-Organizing-Feature-Maps versus
Statistical Clustering: A Benchmark," University of Marburg,
Marburg, Germany 1994.
[13] A. Enright, B. John, U. Gaul, T. Tuschl, and C. Sander,
"MicroRNA targets in Drosophila," Genome Biology, vol. 5,
pp. R1, 2003.
[14] B. John, A. Enright, A. Aravin, T. Tuschl, C. Sander, and D.
S. Marks, "Human microRNA Targets," PLoS Biology, vol. 2,
2004.

