Text Visualization – What Colors Tell About a Text
Wibke Weber
Stuttgart Media University (HdM), Information Design
weberw@hdm-stuttgart.de
Abstract
This article introduces an approach to text
visualization by colors. I suggest a color code that
displays word classes: noun (black), verb (red),
adjective (green), determiner (grey), particle (brown),
conjunction (blue), and interjection (yellow). The
colored words provide some details about 1. text
genre, 2. sentence structure, and 3. writing style.
Samples with fictional narratives and scientific articles
(both in German) show that fictional texts have a
brighter color pattern compared to scientific texts. The
color pattern might be related to the hidden sound or
melody of a text. Therefore, text visualization could be
useful both as a future method to analyze different text
genres and as a method helping laypersons getting a
better feeling for texts, identifying troublesome
phrases, and perhaps improving their writing style.
Keywords: text visualization, writing style, text
genres, color code

1. Introduction
Science journals, business plans, technical reports,
sales letters, press releases, newsletters — considering
the large and increasing number of text documents it
seems that we get lost in the glut of texts. All these
texts want to be written and to be read. The question is:
How can I write a text that is not only easy to
understand, but also enables the reader to catch the
message immediately? Journalists and authors are
aware of all the guidelines on how to write an
attractive news article or story. But how can the
layperson be sure that his or her text works? And could
journalistic writing techniques be useful for
businesspersons, engineers, or scientists? Text
Visualization might provide some help.
Text Visualization belongs to the scientific field of
Information Visualization. Information Visualization
displays data that would be hard or even impossible to

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

understand. The visualization can give new insights,
e.g. into the structure of the data [2; 3]. I propose using
Information Visualization as a text analysis tool for
text structures, i.e. for the analysis of writing styles.
The research question is: Can text visualization help
improve the writing style? The goal is to develop a
color code that supports writers in designing a better
text. In this article, I will first give some examples for
known tools of text visualization, then describe the
basic elements of a good writing style, and finally
propose and discuss the new method of color-coded
text visualization.

2. Different kinds of text visualization
Different ways to analyze and visualize a text
already exist. Mostly, visualization scientists have
developed software programs (such as TokenX and
Neoformix) for text mining, i.e. to browse different
kinds of textual data, to illustrate patterns in data, or to
locate specific topics. Token X is a text visualization,
analysis, and play tool that highlights keywords and
punctuation, counts words in context and
decontextualizes the words [14]. Neoformix is „an
interactive tool to explore the structure of a text
document” by highlighting „key terms“ and „the interrelationships“ between words [8]. Miller et al. created
the interactive software “Topic IslandsTM”, an
information visualization tool that allows analyzing the
content of a large document and provide useful
summaries [7]. The goal is “to enable the user to
rapidly assess the relevance of documents to his
specific interest” [7, p.1]. Literary computing like the
TAPoR-Project (Text Analysis Portal for Research)
explores the possibilities of computer assisted text
analysis and retrieval [13]. The results of these
techniques are often statistics, tables and charts —
elements that reduce the text to its mathematical
structure.
Barlow [1] proposes another kind of text
visualization: On his website he outlines a mock-up in

which he uses colors to indicate the parts of speech.
Liu, Selker, and Lieberman [6] work with color, too;
they suggest a color-based affect bar to visualize the
affective structure of a text document. The “colorapproach” seems to be promising for text visualization
because colors are easy to grasp and because they
arouse emotions.

3. About a good writing style
Texts should be written in a manner that the target
audience could read them easily. “Have something to
say and say it as clearly as you can. That is the secret
of style”, wrote Matthew Arnold, the British poet and
critic. Writing experts like Wolf Schneider [12] and
Gary Provost [11] recommend many proven techniques
for powerful writing; some of them are similar in
English and German, e.g.:
•

•

•

•

Use verbs: Verbs are the driving force of a
sentence. Particularly strong verbs are
important for text comprehensibility. The
smaller the ratio of verbs to other words in a
sentence, the harder it is to read. Studies about
comprehensibility confirm these guidelines
[5; 9]
Avoid nominalization: Nominal style creates
long strings of nouns and prepositional
phrases that are hard to read and to
understand. Business and academic writers
make use of the nominal-passive style and
often disregard the vigor of the verbs.
Use active voice instead of passive voice: A
sentence is mostly about actors and actions.
Sentences in active voice are clearer and more
direct than those in passive voice.
Vary sentence length: If every sentence has
only a few words the text becomes
monotonous and boring. Variety in sentence
length adds some rhythm to the text.

There are various books about and style guides for
good and effective writing as well as computer
programs that check the writing style. Software like
Microsoft Word or StyleWriter searches for abstract
words, wordy phrases, hidden verbs, confused verbs,
clichés, passive sentences, long sentences, etc.; both
highlight the writing problems and suggest
improvements. No doubt, a style checker can help the
writer to avoid mistakes. However, do these programs
allow enough freedom for individual writing?
The suggested improvements are formalized and
standardized, based on writing rules. Word processors

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

disregard the nuances of the language. They carry the
risk to be sterile, unemotional, and bare of any link to
lively language. Furthermore, they carry the risk to
overload the user with statistical information, e.g. via
word analysis like syllable count, instant graphs of
sentence variety, weighted score for long sentences,
passive index, document ratings, and readability scores
like the Flesch Reading Ease Formula. Statistical data
ignores the instinctive feeling for the language, the
rhythm, and the sound of a written text.

4. From written words to „text sound“
“The words you write make sounds, and when those
sounds are in harmony, the writing will work.” [11, p.
58] For the most part of history, humankind had an
oral culture, conveying information by sound and
spoken words. Writing changed this. With the
introduction of writing and the development of print,
western culture moved even further away from a
sensory world dominated by hearing to a world
governed by sight. Writing and printing completely
carried words from a “sound world” into a visual one
[10]. Printed words became abstract things, no longer
necessarily written, but also to be read out loud. The
reader became silent. Remembering the oral culture, it
is safe to say that every written text has a hidden
sound. Radio journalists always read texts aloud right
away as they are writing them. Reading aloud shows
whether a sentence flows or not. Reading aloud
discovers a clumsy sentence structure. Reading aloud
reveals gaps and dissonances. However, when reading
a text most people keep silent. Therefore, colors might
be helpful to reveal the silent sound structure of a text.
Colors might depict what people in former days could
hear: whether the text is well written or not.

5. Text visualization by colors
I suggest to use colors for the text analysis and to
visualize the hidden sound of a text by a special color
code. Why colors? First, colors are “visually distinct”
[6, p.2]. They can encode different word classes and
identify even small words like articles and
prepositions. Second, “colors have an inherent
affectively evocative nature” [6, p.2]. Therefore, the
color code makes use of the meanings of colors;
nevertheless, the encoding scheme is not per se
intuitive — it has to be learned.
For the color code, I tried to follow the meanings of
colors (according to the western culture). Each word
class received the color corresponding to its function.
Verbs are the driving force of a sentence, so the color

that fits best would be red because red is associated
with energy and vigor. In contrast, the color black
denotes strength, authority, and formality. Too many
nouns and especially a nominal writing style make a
text heavy and wordy, and hard to understand. Grey
would best be allotted to the determiners because they
are more likely neutral. Adjectives are colored green
because they can make a text rich; but they should not
be used too excessively because too many adjectives
tend to cover the information and make the text grow
exuberantly. Prepositions have a down-to-earthcharacter, they are solid — that is why I have chosen
brown. And conjunction are unifying, so the color blue
seems to be suited the best. Interjections express
emotions and vitality like the color yellow does.

sentence cited from the Information Design Source
Book [4, p. 15].
Text-Image 1

Encoding Scheme
Verb
Noun, personal pronoun
Adjective, adverbial adjective
Determinative (article, demonstrative
pronoun, indefinite pronoun, relative
pronoun, interrogative pronoun)
Particle (preposition, conjunctive
adverb, adverb of time, space, cause e.g.
today)
Conjunction
Interjection
Table: The colors highlight the different parts
of speech
The traditional English grammar classifies eight
parts of speech. I decided to use only seven parts of
speech to avoid too many colors. Adverbs and
preposition can be combined in one class (particles).
Each part of speech does not explain what the word is,
but how it is used in the text. For example: A hidden
verb like the distributing (see figure 1) is a verb
converted into a noun and used as a noun.
The primary goal is to create a text-image that
demonstrates to the writer whether his or her text
works or not: whether he or she overuses nouns,
adjectives, or hidden verbs (nominalization) —
according to the writing guidelines. Here an example: a

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 1: Many nouns and prepositions are
used in this text, but only one verb is used.
The text-image of figure 1 shows at a glance that
this text might sound dull because of its dark color.
The writer can realize quickly that only one verb was
used and that too many nouns and perhaps too many
prepositions were used. He or she can realize quickly
that the verb comes too late, nearly at the end of the
sentence. The text-image reveals the preponderance of
nouns and the lack of verbs that is typical for academic
and scientific style. This type of writing makes use of
the nominal-passive style and disregards the vigor of
verbs – therefore not easy to understand.
I rewrite the text according to the writing guidelines
for effective writing. I transformed the sentence in an
active style and used verbs instead of nominalizations
(see figure 2).

Text-Image 2

Text-Image 3

Figure 2: The utilization of fewer nouns and
more verbs gives dynamic to the text.

Figure 3: Different paragraphs taken from
scientific articles (natural sciences and
humanities)

The color pattern of text 1 (figure 1) differs from
the color pattern of text 2 (figure 2). The text-image of
text 2 looks brighter and more friendly because it
counts more verbs and fewer nouns. Therefore, it is
more dynamic and is easier to understand.

Text-Image 4

6. Visualization of text genres
As shown in figure 1 and 2 a sentence with the
same message can have different text-images –
depending on its writing style. A modified sentence
structure produces a modified color pattern. This leads
to the hypothesis that text genres might have different
text-images because they are written in different styles,
e.g. scientific texts and fictional narratives. The idea is
to visualize the writing style of a text genre by the
suggested color code. In order to test the hypothesis
that scientific and narrative texts show different color
patterns, a group of Information Design students
(n=52; male: 16; female: 36) were asked to select and
analyze samples of scientific and narrative texts in
German (max. 100 words, without headlines and
pictures). 104 texts were obtained (mean word count =
67). However, in approximately 60 percent of the texts
(62 texts) the word classes were correctly highlighted
according to the color code. The remaining texts had to
be excluded because a significant number of words (>
20 percent) were assigned to wrong word classes
(colors). A representative example of the analysis is
demonstrated in figure 3 and figure 4. Ten samples of
scientific articles (figure 3) are compared to the same
number of fictional narratives (figure 4).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 4: Different paragraphs taken from
fictional narratives
At first glance, the text-images have a different
appearance. Figure 3 shows a darker text-image. In
contrast, figure 4 appears more mellow and light.
These differences are due to different writing styles:
the scientific samples (figure 3) contain more nouns,
more nominalizations, more adjectives, and few verbs.
The lighter image of the narrative texts (figure 4)
reflects the use of more verbs and less nominalization.
Since the students randomly selected the texts used in
the study, this observation supports the initial
hypothesis that scientific texts have a different text
structure than fictional narratives. Moreover, this

suggested color code seems to be helpful to visualize
the writing style of different text genres. It remains to
be investigated whether this holds true for other texts
such as business plans, sales reports, or letters of
administration.
The color assignment has been done on purpose: a
dynamic writing style with active verbs (red) leads to a
more dynamic text-image; vice versa a text written in a
nominal-passive style appears heavier (black).
By doing this, I attempted to mimic a sound
structure of the individual text with the color code. „To
write is to create music. (...) So think of your writing as
music“, recommends Provost [11, p. 58]. Colors appeal
to the senses as music does. The color visualization of
a text can convey to the writer how his text might
sound: dull (dark text-image) or light, easy to
understand (bright text-image). Therefore, the focus of
the study is the production of a colored text-image, e.g.
imitating a harmonic text melody.

7. Discussion
The color code can only be fully appreciated if the
text is regarded as an entity and is not dissected in
different parts as other text visualization tools do
(TokenX, Neoformix). At the same time, this is the
advantage of the colored text-image: the text remains
en bloc. The benefit for the writer is that he or she can
identify single words and word classes easily because
the length of the words is encoded by the length of the
color bars. The text-image tells the writer what the text
sounds like. A graphic visualization of word counts or
a bar graph displaying the primary words of a text
(Neoformix) may not have the same effect. These tools
often pursue a different purpose: to analyze texts as a
set of mathematical data. Text visualization tools like
TokenX or Neoformix often translate the text structure
in their own graphical language – far away from the
written text, its sound, and its structure. In contrast, the
suggested color method wants to convey a feeling or an
impression for a good writing style.
There are several limitations to this method. It has
only been tested on two text genres (scientific and
narratives texts) and it is not sure whether the
conclusion can be extended to other text genres. The
results of the study are too preliminary to offer a kind
of visual style guide that reflects an effective writing
style. In order to achieve this a correlation between
color patterns and a good writing style would have to
be established. Although the presented data in the
study are far from doing so, they outline a first

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

approach to visualize text by a color code in order to
transform text into a text-image.

8. Conclusion and future work
Starting from the writing guidelines it is the idea to
visualize the writing style of a text or a text genre. The
color pattern reflects the text structure: that is the parts
of speech. The result: The darker the text the more dull
its sound may be, and the harder it is to understand.
The text visualization should enable the writer to see
troublesome phrases rapidly, to be conscious of the
sentence structure, and to “feel” the emotional appeal
of the text. This example is a first step towards
visualization of writing style. Research questions that
still remain are: How to highlight passive style or
abstract words, how to tag sentence length, bridge
words or clichés, or how to highlight corporate
wording. The next steps will be 1. to evaluate the
color-coded visualization with untrained writers 2. to
apply the method to different text corpora, text genres
or speeches.

References
[1] Barlow, M.: Understanding Texts Through Visualisation.
http://www.michaelbarlow.com/viz.html [Retrieved April 15,
2007].
[2] Bradley, John and Geoffrey, Rockwell. 1994. 'What
Scientific Visualization Teaches us about Text Analysis.'
Presented at the ALLC/ACH Conference in Paris.
[3] Bradley, John and Geoffrey, Rockwell. 1999. “Printing in
Sand; Scientific Visualization and the Analysis of Texts.
Preprint of English version published in French as Rockwell,
Geoffrey and John Bradley, "Empreintes dans le sable:
Visualisation scientifique et analyse de texte", in Litterature,
informatique, lecture edited by Vuillemin and LeNoble,
Paris: Pulim, p. 130-160, 1999. French reprinted online at
L’Astrolabe
at
http://www.uottawa.ca/academic/arts/astrolabe/. [Retrieved
April 15, 2007].
[4] IIIDj Institute for Information Design Japan (ed.):
Information Design. Source Book. Birkhäuser, Basel 2005.
[5] Langer, I.; Schulz von Thun, F.; Tausch, R.: Sich
verständlich ausdrücken. Reinhardt, München, Basel, 2002.
[6] Liu, H.; Selker, T.; Lieberman, H.: Visualizing the
Affective Structure of a Text Document. CHI 2003, April 510, 2003. Ft. Lauderdale, Florida (USA) 2003.
[7] Miller, N.E.; Wong, P.C; Brewster, M.; Foote, H.: Topic
Islands TM – A Wavelet-Based Text Visualization System.
Ninth IEEE Visualization 1998 (VIS'98). 1998.

[8]
Neoformix:
A
Text
Visualization
Tool.
http://www.neoformix.com/2007/ATextExplorer.html.
[Retrieved April 15, 2007].
[9] Nielsen, J.: How Users Read on the Web.
http://www.useit.com/alertbox/9710a.html. [Retrieved April
15, 2007].
[10] Ong, W.: Orality and literacy. Routledge, New York,
2002.
[11] Provost, G.: 100 Ways to Improve Your Writing.
Mentor Books, New York, 1985.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[12] Schneider, W.: Deutsch für Profis. Wilhelm Goldmann
Verlag, München, 2001.
[13] TAPoR-Project: text analysis portal for research.
http://www.tapor.ca/. [Retrieved April 15, 2007].
[14] TokenX: a text visualization, analysis, and play tool.
http://tokenx.unl.edu:8888/etext/tokenx/index.html?file=../x
ml/base.xml. [Retrieved April 15, 2007].

