Rethinking Practise
S.Gowans
University of Lincoln
sgowans@lincoln.ac.uk

R.M.Wright
University of Lincoln
rwright@lincoln.ac.uk

Abstract

This fundamental realignment of contemporary
thinking has led to the re-evaluation and re-definition
of traditionally accepted modi operandi and has
revealed new and unparalleled opportunities for
creative engagement.
If the design process can be seen as an unrelenting
quest for certainty, it is undoubtedly designers who are
most acutely aware of the conflicts inherent in what
M.Merleau Ponty refers to as ‘sense experience’, for it
is our passive association with the real world which
represents the ‘intentional tissue which the effort to
know will try to take apart’ [7].
This observation supports our belief that in
design, innovation and insight are ultimately only
possible
through
an
understanding
and
acknowledgement of, and a necessary dissociation
from, the known and the familiar.
Ironically perhaps, it is often designers who,
through the process of creative investigation and
construction, both confirm and deny the actuality of
the ‘here and now’ by simultaneously defining the
present whilst alluding to the possible.
It is the act of creative synthesis that allows for
the realisation of indefinite possibilities by revealing
the potential for transition.
To this end, and in common with other architects,
artists and academics, we have become increasingly
intrigued by the potential of computer technologies to
elicit new perspectives and to facilitate a required
disengagement from real-world parameters.
It is the attainment of this disconnection at the
very earliest stages of the design process, and the
consequences of such disconnection, that provides the
focus for our investigations.
In the use of available and appropriate
technologies our approach displays a resonance with
that of architect/artists Diller+Scoffidio whose
interests lie “…in the practice of implementing
technologies in specific applications for explicit

Many architects rely upon a sense of common practise
and a routine reworking of the same set of slowly
evolving icons married to site, programme and
available technology to generate design solutions.
The paper discusses an experimental, computerassisted approach to architectural design and assesses
its applicability to mainstream architectural practise.
The process illustrated deals with the observation
of latent, place-specific phenomena and their effects,
and the reconfiguring of these through their
transposition to other mediums, into underpinning
rationales for architecture.
We highlight the experimental use of digital
technologies to reveal elaborate matrixes of hidden
relationships present in the mundane and
unremarkable, and discuss the fostering of unexpected
non-linear connections between these, to produce
design proposals defined by the subliminal effect
relationships observed.
The paper conjectures upon the further
development of this approach in relation to current
software capability and interoperability, and we
consider the implications for its wider adoption by the
architectural profession as a design tool and its
potential impact upon traditional modes of working
practise.

1. Position
“Ultimately, Theory and the avant-garde work
that it supported, has proven inadequate to the
vicissitudes of the contemporary world. And so today
we stand at the end of a historical period” [9].
At this juncture in history, it is apparent that the
fusion of technology with information has elicited a
paradigm shift in the perceptions, aspirations and
adopted methodologies of the creative community.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

consequences and effects”, [8] and who are optimistic
about the use of ‘non-efficient’ technologies “…not to
project an idealised future but instead to reconfigure a
very real present” [8].
We have therefore, initiated a relationship with
technology that does not purport to address every
difficult issue associated with the production of the
built form but which is one that we feel can make a
valid contribution to the advancement of any design
discipline and can successfully address the issue of
how to begin.
Nonetheless, in the broadest sense, our
investigation of technologically-based methods of
generating architectural form can be seen as not only
vital to the evolution of architecture as an art form and
as a potential mechanism for generating successful
human environments, but also as a means of
addressing issues of uncertainty inherent in the
creative process.
Paradoxically perhaps, we are proposing a
resolution to the quest for certainty in design by
promoting engagement with uncertainty developing a
fluid relationship with technology.
The particular objective of our studies has been to
define a design process characterised by the
production of architectonic language through the
observation of ephemeral, transitory, place-particular
phenomena and their effects.
We refer to these immaterial phenomena as the
quanta of place.
Our developing methodologies utilise the
potential of digital technology to examine
microscopically, place-specific events or artefacts.
This in turn can facilitate a disconnection from the
arid, traditionally accepted determinants of initial
place-assessment (site analysis), and foster the
creation of “…unexpected non-linear connections
between diverse phenomena” [3]. For us, it is this
area of ‘productive overlap’ realised through the
revealing of place-specific phenomena that is of
interest.

2. Process
Within our design-studio environment the word
‘evolve’ was, and is continually used, with regard to
the development of architectural and installation
projects. This in itself became a starting point for our
investigations.
Our early studio endeavours focussed upon
providing a disconnected ‘starting point’ for a design
by revealing the subliminal hidden order of an oftendissociated two-dimensional composition.
The process of revealing this hidden order was
generally
characterised
by
the
systematic

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

deconstruction of a planar source and its subsequent
reconstruction as a three-dimensional object.
We became increasingly aware however, that
whilst this process was successful in producing
polemic and stimulating design proposals, it almost
invariably exhibited an inability to respond in any
meaningful way to the plethora of issues specifically
related to site, context and program use; these resultant
schemes were in essence ‘one-liners’.
Our attention then focussed upon the refinement
and evolution of the studio design process in order to
evolve methodologies that provided for seamless
disconnection, experimentation and context-specific
re-engagement.
Our initial attempts to address these issues were
characterised by the addition of formal site
investigations as a concurrent stream of analysis.
It is important to note however, that even at this
early stage, the observation of site phenomena was not
undertaken solely as an assessment of the physical
attributes associated with a site, but instead focused
primarily upon the ritual, events and the imperceptible
‘prime movers’ associated with any given location.
This approach produced interesting results.
However, the resultant designs (although generally
challenging), invariably embodied conflicts as a result
of being a hybrid of two separate streams of
investigation.
An ideal solution appeared to be the development
of a process that allowed for the crystallisation of
design intention through the manipulation of recorded
observations but which, in addition, could provide a
framework within which formal proposals could
necessarily mutate in response to the influence of realworld parameters.
With this in mind, the studio emphasis focussed
upon the development of methodologies that nurtured
the emergence of an experimental thoughtstream
robust and rich enough to invite continual reinterpretation, mutation and necessary evolution, when
responding to any new condition or instance applied
during the process of design development.
This period of re-focus coincided with a
developing interest within the studio in the application
of computer technologies to assist the design process,
in particular, the potential use of digital imagery and
the capacity of computers to record vast amounts of
information.
We had been aware for some time that computer
applications, in many instances, had been employed
simply rationalise the generation of perpetually novel,
permanent built forms in unresponsive ways. Our
intention therefore was not to emulate this process but
fully to utilise the potential of new technologies for
spacio-visual exploration and integration.

Within the realm of architectural research we
already knew of the generative computer modelling
programs being developed at the University of East
London by Paul Coates, applications that effectively
‘breed’ architectonic form from user-defined
parameters seeded within the program. This approach
was rejected because it did not appear to offer real
insights into how computer applications could help
address the plethora of extremely complex building
design issues
However, this did lead us to the investigation of
contemporary paradigms developed in other fields
specifically to address issues of creation and
evolution.
We were particularly intrigued by the theories of
‘emergent phenomena’ and ‘emergent systems’ as
proposed by John H. Holland and Kevin Kelly, and of
the idea of applying such models to the design
process.
Holland contests that, ‘Emergence is a ubiquitous
feature of the world around us’, and that a
characteristic of emergent systems is where
recognisable, recurring and “Persistent patterns at one
level of investigation…become building blocks for
persistent patterns at still more complex levels” [5].
The revelation of recognisable and persistent
patterns and features is pivotal to the study of
emergent systems. In such systems, higher-level
complexity arises from the accretion of vast numbers
of low-level actions.
The tracing of these imperceptible low-level
actions to reveal ‘meaningful’ patterns on a larger
scale appealed to us, and immediately appeared to
have great potential in an architectural context if
applied to the observation and understanding of a site.
These aspirations provided a new focus for our
existing design-studio practices and dovetailed
seamlessly with our use of computer technology.
Subsequently, the generative phase of our design
investigations focussed upon capturing fixed moments
in time and space, and translating often-imperceptible
micro-moments and micro-events into unique physical
forms.
A further key development that emerged from this
investigation was our reinterpretation of what
constituted a “non-site” [2].environment. Originally,
non-site as defined by Robert Smithson meant gallery
space, a place where artefacts were transported to and
arranged, in order to create a representational model of
site. For us, non-site became a computer-generated
composite, a “counterfeit world” [1] in Cartesian
space (as opposed to virtual space which implies an
acceptance of some, if not all, real world parameters)
in which to explore and test our propositions.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

3. Practice
“When a system of “meaningless” symbols has
patterns in it that accurately track, or mirror, various
phenomena in the world, then that tracking or
mirroring imbues the symbols with some degree of
meaning – indeed, such tracking or mirroring is no
less and no more than what meaning is. Depending on
how complex and subtle and reliable the tracking is,
different degrees of meaningfulness arise” [4].
The initial phase of our investigations is
concerned therefore, with the determination of the
‘essence’ of a particular environment (site) through the
systematic recording and analysis of ‘place
fragments’. These fragments may or may not be
manifest as connected elements to the site. Our
intention is to reveal the effects of both ‘obvious’ and
‘immaterial’ phenomena at micro-pattern level in
order to provide a basis for valid, diverse
experimentation. As this process of analysis is
unrestricted, it is designed to influence, permeate and
inform
concurrent,
embryonic
streams
of
programmatic and technological investigation.
We then engage in a process characterised by the
transposition and reconstruction of collected data into
our ‘non-site’. This allows for the dissection, mutation
and synthesis of visual material with the intention of
producing a wholly new and unique matrix of effect
relationships that constitute a recognisable and
meaningful macro-pattern useable as a starting point
for the development of design proposals.
This experimentation is not carried out in
isolation; it is informed and transformed by the
dynamics of engagement with intertwining strands of
investigation.
The transposition from a non-site environment to
a real-world context can be a difficult and protracted
process. Project-specific factors are gradually fed into
the process to define the framework within which the
design must evolve. At specific junctures each exerts a
‘field of influence’ upon the ‘conceptual ribbons’
underpinning the project, resulting in possible
deflection and redirection.
The final iteration in this process is a full
engagement with all the factors that shape a design
proposal. Fundamental to this is the move from nonsite to site, and the acknowledgement of hierarchical
real-world criteria.

4. Project
In accordance with the design process outlined,
this project developed in response to concurrent
strands
of
place-investigation
and
digital
experimentation. In the interests of clarity only one
strand of the investigative process has been illustrated.
The project brief was to design a visitors’ centre
within the landscape of the Burren, a limestone
landscape stretching towards the Atlantic Ocean on the
west coast of Ireland. As part of the brief the building
had to incorporate a safe route through the landscape
whilst providing shelter and short stay accommodation
for those wishing to explore the Burren.
The essence of the project was to allow the
frequently changing weather conditions to inhabit the
building as a fundamental and transient influence to
the experience of the user. The building’s form is a
series of connected paths that carve through existing
fissures and cracks in the rock, being enlarged at
intervals to provide shelter and accommodation. The
building signposts the route it follows with a series of
fractured roof structures; a combination of voids, paths
pools and habitable spaces.
The landscape of the Burren is shaped by wellunderstood phenomena; the actions of wind, water and
temperature change. These actions are in themselves
not visible. The intention was to make these
phenomena more apparent through the documentation
of their effects. Very simple solutions were found;
perhaps the most beguiling was digitally to film a
piece of string flapping in the breeze. This generated a
mapping of the effects the wind has upon an object
within that landscape. These are, of course, common
effects and similar patterns that will occur in any
location with the same piece of string. However, in
other locations the effect of wind is not likely to be as
profound or to be a prime mover in forming that site
and environment. This investigation informed
proposals that elements of the building would sit
above the landscape and in the airflow. It would
therefore be desirable to have these elements formed
or informed by this prime mover.

When the sequences were watched repeatedly it
became apparent that there was a consistency of
movement and a repetition of roughly similar patterns.
A process of dissection was then undertaken, reducing
the number of recordings to one and then cropping the
remaining clip to a 2:00 second sequence. This radical
reduction was necessary to make a translation and
manipulation of the resultant patterns possible.

Image 2. Mapping of 2.00 second clip. No
spatial separation.

Image 3. Spatial separation on x and y-axis.

Image 4. Spatial separation on x, y and z-axis.

Image 5. Inverted diagram.
Image 1. Still images from digital video
recording of a length of string flapping in the
wind.
The recording lasted for 1:04 minutes with a total
of ten recordings in different locations around the site.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

At this point the diagram was also inverted so
what became visible was the space between lines. This
allowed each line to be imbued with the form from the
line preceding and the line following. The lines
became a series of connected potential spaces or
solids.

Image 6. Non-site manipulation of
resultant forms.

same set of slowly evolving icons married to site,
program and available technologies to generate a
design solution.
We are aware that in currently emerging
environments the often-unenlightened application of
continually emerging technologies is forcing a break
with certain aspects of the past. We feel that it is vital
that everyday associations held to be ‘deeply known’
within the collective subconscious, are treated as a
reservoir of catalysts for any new creative endeavour.
If, as Alejandro Zaera Polo believes we “no
longer live in a single world…but a world made of
worlds, each governed by its own set of conjectures
about the truth” [9], then the revelation, manipulation
and displacement of innately understood signifiers
from specific contexts to new associations will lend
them an abstracted sense of the contextual, and
provide any resultant formal proposition with a
resonance of the “strangely familiar” [10].
They will become mementos in the landscape.

6. References
Image 7
Visualisation.

5. Conclusion
Whilst research at the very early stages of the
design process is often speculative and seldom leads to
methodologically valid solutions, the process we have
outlined attempts to address these issues through its
attention to the non-traditional generators, and by
facilitating the evolution and mutation of design
proposals in response to the influence of real-world
parameters.
As illustrated, our investigations focus upon the
nascence of architectural expression and the
formalising of architectural propositions from the
interpretation of the space between the obvious and
the immaterial, and the phenomena that exist there.
We believe our adopted position to be distinct and
vital, and capable of generating robust design
solutions appropriate to the spectrum of architectural
endeavour.
Our approach gives emphasis to the conceptual
corollary that underpins all considered design work
whilst challenging traditionally accepted methods of
project evolution.
It attempts to define mechanisms for clarifying
creative intention and initialising design-language
development through experimentation in order to
allow for the revelation and reconstruction of key
immaterial generators and their effects.
In comparison, most architects rely upon a sense
of common practice and a routine reworking of the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]

Dawkins, D (1988) The Blind Watchmaker,
Penguin Books Ltd, London p76.
De Oliveira, N (et al) (1994) Installation Art,
Thames and Hudson Ltd, London, p33.
Hill, J (1998) The Illegal Architect, Blackdog
Publishing Limited, London p40.
Hofstadter, D (2000) Godel Esher Bach: An
Eternal Golden Braid, Penguin Books Ltd,
London (Preface p.xxi).
Holland, J (2000) Emergence: From Chaos to
Order, Oxford University Press, Oxford pp. 3-7.
Kelly, K (1994) Out of Control: The New Biology
of Mechanics, Social Systems and the Economic
World, Addison Wesly New York p22.
Ponty, M. Merlau (1996) Phenomenology of
Perception (Translated from French by Colin
Smith) Routledge Publishing, London 1996.
Shafer (et al) (2003) Scanning: The abberant
architecture of Diller+Scofidio, New York, pp1822.
Speaks, M. How the New Economy is
Transforming Theory and Practice, Proceedings A
of the Research by Design International
Conference, Delft, The Netherlands, November 13, 2000, pp. 52-55.
Rattray, C. and Hutton, G. (2000) Concepts and
Material Associations in the work of Gigon/Guyer,
Architecture Research Quarterly, Volume 4, No1,
pp.16-31.

Information on the work of Paul Coates and The Centre
for Evolutionary Computing in Architecture (CECA) can be
found at http://www.uel.ac.uk/ceca
Primary studio participant for Landform Observation
project: Barbara Griffin.

