Narratological Constructs in the Gestalt of the 3D Game environment: Aboriginal
Knowledge and its Connection to the Data Landscape Metaphor
Theodor G Wyeld and Malcolm Pumpa.
Media, H&SS, The University of Adelaide, Australia; Queensland University of Technology,
Australia; and the Australian CRC for Interactive Design (ACID), Australia.
{theodor.wyeld@adelaide.edu.au, m.pumpa@qut.edu.au}
Abstract

This paper reports on a project federally funded by
the Australian CRC for Interaction Design (ACID). It
investigates the use of a 3D game engine as a landscape
metaphor for hosting Australian Aboriginal knowledge
practices based on performed narratives. It
communicates some recent findings. Central to these
findings is the need to communicate a better
understanding of the complex interrelationships
indigenous Australian people share with their country,
how this is reflected in their narratives, and what this
can tell us about digital narrative in general. It is pitched
at a broad audience which includes, theorists,
practitioners, and technologists. It continues issues
raised in another paper presented to the European
Information Visualisation conference 2006 (IV’06) (see
[1]).
Keywords:
Aboriginal
Knowledge
Domain,
Narrative as Metadata, Torque Game Engine as
Information Interface.

1. Exordium
This paper reports on an investigation into the use of
a 3D game engine as a landscape metaphor for hosting
Australian Aboriginal knowledge practices based on
performed narratives. It communicates some recent
findings. Central to these findings is the need to
communicate a better understanding of the complex
interrelationships indigenous Australian people share
with their country, how this is reflected in their
narratives, and what this can tell us about digital
narrative in general. It is pitched at a broad audience
which
includes,
theorists,
practitioners,
and
technologists. It continues issues raised in another paper
presented to the European Information Visualisation
conference 2006 (IV’06) (see [1]).
In the previous paper, we described the problem that
much of what is written on traditional Aboriginal
knowledge systems is written by non-Aboriginals, cast in
a Eurocentric framework. We attempted to explain
Aboriginality in less Eurocentric terms. However, as the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

audience for that paper was ostensibly European by
origin we needed to use Eurocentric analogies to
communicate non-Eurocentric concepts. The issue that
was the most difficult to communicate was the unity of
the virtual and the actual in traditional Aboriginal
knowledge and thought. With few material possessions
and no written language, traditional Australian
Aborigines have held their memories in a virtual space
for millennia. They describe this space through abstract
dot paintings, dance and song, imparting their
subconscious ethereal landscapes by projecting them
back onto the physical world through everyday ritual and
performative storytelling. Hence, the role of much
Aboriginal tangible culture and technology is to mobilise
the connection between the virtual and the actual. This is
substantially different to Eurocentric tangible culture
which serves as a consistent historical record of the
manipulation of the phenomenological world.
Unlike the European or Western practice of
recording cultural practices using a written language,
without a formal written language, interpretations of
Aboriginal culture by anthropologists, sociologists, and
ethnographers tend to be speculative or simply
contemporised versions of a ‘fantasy’ knowledge.
Clearly there is a need to reverse the paradigm of
thinking of other cultures through Eurocentric eyes.
Hence, we sought a way of empowering the
underpinnings of Aboriginal socio-cultural practice
through their own eyes. A method that allows Aboriginal
and non-Aboriginal peoples to experience, albeit in a
cursory manner, notions of Aboriginality. The method
we found most useful was through the practice of
performative storytelling embedded in a 3D game
environment.

2. Truth Testing
Like the transience of Australian Aboriginal culture,
the West’s very scientific ontology is underpinned by a
similarly insubstantial philosophical proposition:
Descartes’ cogito ergo sum – I think therefore I am.
Hence, as a cornerstone of modern Western rationalist
thought, there is merit in using Descartes’ proposition as

a springboard to understanding the nature of Aboriginal
cultural meanings for the ‘uninitiated’. Descartes’
proposition highlights the seeming transience of the very
premise of modern Western science – observable proof.
Where science uses statistical probability to bolster its
proof theorems or ontological truths, Aborigines’
interactions with their traditional environments have a
similar truth-testing mechanism, but it is much more
procedural and accepting of change. Traditional and
contemporary Aboriginal storytelling is a part of this
truth-testing. However, Aboriginal storytelling truthtesting is not in the same realm of abstract thought such
as that used in the West – the symbolic application of
thought as text. Rather, it is highly contextualised and
inextricably linked to the country or landscapes that give
rise to the narratives constructed. These narratives are
embedded in the spatial relatedness of entities within the
landscape and serve as a cognitive mnemonic for the
environments they describe (similar to Deleuze and
Guattari’s [2] notions of re-territorialisation). The
relationship of narrative to landscape is deeply
reciprocal. Narratives are implicit in the landscape. They
are told by the landscape as well as giving form to, and
bringing the landscape continually into being. Attempts
to express these narratives extracted from the landscape
which nourishes them, “must be seen as a peculiar form
of violence, wherein the stories are torn from the visible
landforms and topographic features that materially
embody and provoke those stories” [3, p177].
However, access to these landscapes for
contextualising specific stories is not always possible. A
vehicle for re-presenting the landscape context is the 3D
game engine. In conjunction with local Aboriginal
artists, activists, and Traditional Owners in rural
Queensland and suburban Brisbane, we found the 3D
game engine a workable ‘landscape metaphor’ for
embedding the narratological structures of Aboriginal
knowledge practices. We found we could embed nodes
for interaction which could be traversed in an endless
narrative of the user, or inter-actor’s, making. As a
metaphor for landscape contexts it suffices for specific
storytelling episodes (see figure 1). What we have
learned from these collaborations and the use of the 3D
game engine are new notions of performative spatial
narratives that have largely been lost in the West’s
pursuit of a material existence, and the recording of
narrative in textual formats.

3. The Digital Songlines Game Engine
The Digital Songlines (DSL) software developed for
Aboriginal storytelling is based on the display and
manipulation of arrays of 3D objects recreating
landscapes populated by indigenous Australian flora and
fauna (see [4] for a more detailed overview of the DSL
project). These assets have been imported into the game
style application based on the Torque Game Engine
(TGE). The active features include sound, animations,
weather and daylight simulation. An established
mechanism to import digital terrain models has been

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

modified for importing satellite based geo-spatial data, or
data that is prepared for use in GIS software, for
accurately mapping the cultural heritage landscape.

Figure 1 Example of Aboriginal knowledge in
practice – woman weaving a fishing net.
Many issues arise from the creation of virtual spaces
representing vast rural lands and its reliance on the
computational capacity of real-time hardware and
visualization technologies. Some are difficult to resolve
in a suitable way to communicate the presence required
within the virtual space. For example, how to convey
immersive narratologies such as, while in place,
indigenous knowing pauses at each rock, knows the
cycles of the winds, can track underground water, find
food and medicine, and uses of the land to speak its
stories and keep its history? The kind of knowledge
represented and the ‘field’ in which it is held by local
indigenous peoples is often deep, subtle and most
intimate [5].
Although some of these issues remain unresolved,
most have been addressed by a ‘tiered’ model of
development. ‘Layers’ of content are created, accessed,
and linked back to the virtual model of the physical
place. With such a model, we are able to conceive of the
(virtual) land as an interface through which the more
traditional dynamics of software creation can be
accessed. Moreover, this layered model allows the
creator to participate in indigenous knowing and beingwith, at the most basic level, as the tool is used.
The content can be layered to support virtual
heritage applications and narratives (such as land
ownership issues, spiritual knowledge, historical and oral
stories) and as a community content development and
archiving tool (re-populate the virtual spaces with
indigenous content) (see figure 2). These can be used in
entertainment, display, community consultation and
education, such as museums, cultural centre displays, as
an indigenous language walk, ‘bush tucker’ walk, or oral
history lesson. These are all developed with the notion of
land-as-interface where the (virtual) land is layered with

information and practices that arise from that very
landscape.

on the tool, but shapes itself to support and enable the
voices which are carried upon and create the tool.

4. The Gestalt of the DSE

Figure 2 Indicative of issues of authenticity, this
screen image of animated fish with
representative contemporary Indigenous art
work is incongruous. Such fish are not normally
associated with this region’s artwork.
The implementation in DSL of a networked
structure of community-based content creation is a
powerful paradigm model for research in interaction
design, ambient, or serious gaming. The sociologist
Manuel Castells [6] describes such networks as
consisting of knowledge-based information technologies
which enhance and accelerate the production of
knowledge and information, in a self-expanding, virtuous
circle. The network represents the divergence of
production, access, and display of nodes of knowledge.
While traditional models of production in the field of
display-based technologies tend to concentrate on either
the product (the game), or the hardware (display), DSL
sees workflows and methodologies that incorporate and
evolve the two in a constant communication for the life
of the product. For DSL, this communication begins with
the recognition that the landscape is the ideal and
essential metaphor for addressing indigenous cultural
heritage issues, and provides a rich base for branching
development and production.
Thus, the networked toolkit, as represented by DSL,
becomes an empowering model of research and
production – at once a site for capturing, archiving,
developing culturally-appropriate virtual environments,
and a site for sharing, collaboration and community
content development. In the networked environment,
knowledge becomes more powerful as it is shared and
deployed [7; 8; 9; 10; 11; 12]. DSL has grown through
this network model. The umbrella of digital content and
database development has provided a rich sandbox of
opportunities for researchers, communities, educators,
archivists,
government
and
non-government
organizations alike.
How we see, store, integrate and serve knowledge
across the network is vital. Rather than merely seeking to
refine and consolidate existing forms of knowledge –
film, 3D animation, or game technologies – DSL has
sought to provide methods of access and creation across
combined knowledge bases, as it concentrates not only

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

To make sense of how the DSL game environment
is interpreted, we can draw on another Eurocentric
analogy – the Gestalt. In the Gestalt’s view of thought
and existence two distinct world views emerge – the
external or phenomenological world we live and the
internalised or noumenal world. The latter is a
reconstruction of the former. Hence, in Gestalt terms, the
3D gaming environment used in DSL is a reconstructed
world. As we move through the phenomenological
world, things come in and out of it. We can add or
remove these things from our noumenal or internalised
worldview. In this sense, the DSL game environment is a
reconstructed, internalised or noumenal world. The game
environment is used to re-project the phenomenological
landscape into a virtuality which is not that different to
what we would see if we closed our eyes and imagined
it. On the one hand, it is also a wayfinding schema for
fathoming the conjunction of the noumenal and
phenomenological
worlds.
Both
worlds
are
circumscribed by the boundary of our perceptions of the
environments around us – the extent of our ability to
detect things in our immediate environment. This
boundary moves as we move. Within its bounds, we
attach personal significance to things we think of as
important in the landscapes encountered; we attach
cognitive information to these ‘nodes’ of importance. For
example, we might say, or think, something like: “there’s
the big tree with the yellow bark”; or, “there’s the big
black rock by the creek”; or, “there’s the burrow where
the echidna lives.” Movement between these nodes helps
construct the spatial and cognitive narratives we use to
make sense of our environments. It is the narratives we
construct about the data that gives the data its cohesion,
and we can revisit it to make sense of the, otherwise,
isolated nodes of data. Embodied in movement and
wayfinding navigation, these data nodes are joined using
a narrative scheme. This often takes the form of
conceptual metaphors. For example, “that big black rock,
also looks like a wombat,” or deeper still, “that rock ‘is’
wombat which ‘is’ the totem for my grandfather.”
It is a spatial, metaphorical, and historical,
collective-memory-narrative. In the game environment, it
builds up as players or ‘inter-actors’ navigate the nodes.
These inter-actors build a Gestalt. It is an example of the
notion of the extended mind; that our cognition is not
only contained in the internalised mind but is extended
out into the phenomenological world – we use external
props, mnemonic devices, all sorts of external data,
including all sorts of technology and machines to build
our narrative of the world as we find it – from feeling the
warmth of the sun on one’s face, to using a stone as a
tool or weapon. In this sense, our cognitive processes are
plastic [13]. In fact, we need to extend it into the
environment to test truth – “is that really the way that
rock looks?” We may compare, handle, explore an

object’s function, to test the validity of our initial
assumptions. In this way, we test for change. In turn, our
noumenal world builds up a narrative over time [14].
The noumenal world narrative can be thought of as
that which is established through behaviour, ritual, or
habit. For example, imagining an escalator is in motion
as we walk up it, when it is not, because we are so used
to it in motion that the notion of escalators always in
motion is embedded in our narrative of the noumenal
experience of climbing an escalator. It is this continuum
of the mind-body-environment that means technological
things within the environment are also where our
consciousness lies. We cannot isolate our consciousness
in one or the other – in the immediate phenomenological
or that which is extended by the tools we use to explore
it. Indeed, in Deleuze and Guattari’s [2] terms, if
phenomenological thought, dependent on relations with
the world, draws also from these relations what happens
when this relation is reversed, and the relation to the
world, which is fundamentally a spatial relation, now
depends on thought, on thinking this relation anew? Are
they not one and the same? Are not thought and spatial
relation intertwined in the phenomenology of our
existence in the world? If we can accept this premise
then, ‘I think, therefore I am’ does not seem so far
detached from ‘I think into existence that rock’. This is
what is enacted in the game world – a space both real
and unreal, somewhere in between the phenomenological
and the noumenal, or dreamlike.

5. A Flattened Ontology
What we find within the DSL environment, within
the specific context of the Aboriginal cultural
experience, is that the spatial, metaphorical, and
historical narrative, like the landscapes it re-presents, is
contained within an epistemologically flattened
ontology. Rather than a hierarchical ontology, where
some things, events, or occurrences are more important
than others, in the DSL environment, the narratologies
constructed allow for the existence of entities which
otherwise would not fit into a hierarchical dataset. For
example, it allows for the existence of ‘dreamings’
(Dreamtime: in Australian Aboriginal terms, the time of
creation of all things) and all the entities that go with
dreamings, that may or may not manifest themselves.
There is also the possibility of allowing the
categorisations of human and non-human – so essential
in Western thought – to be eroded. This erosion of
categories privileges an ontology that is founded on the
sentience of the entities of land and the possibilities of
metamorphosis between human and non-human. They
may not always be there, but there is a metaphysical
believing that they exist, and so they are able to be
injected into our flattened game-based dataset because it
is flexible enough to allow these new fields to emerge –
for the moment that the narrative is played out.
In the phenomenological world of the ritualised
performance – the lingua franca of Aboriginal
storytelling – this is acted out time and time again. Every

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

performance is an improvisation. There is every chance,
and acceptance, that entities previously unknown may, or
could, emerge. The role these performances play is that
they test the narrative every time for the correct
relatedness of human and non-human entities (this is
part of the storytelling truth-testing notion mentioned
earlier.) Unlike the rigidity of the Eurocentric or Western
tradition, in Aboriginal storytelling through performance
there is no subservience to a tradition. Instead, every
time there is a performance a truth is tested and that truth
only lasts until the next time it is performed. In
Eurocentric terms we would say this is allowing for
variance – we cannot always say what the weather will
be like in the following year. But in Aboriginal sociocultural terms of understanding ritual performance and
natural phenomena are inextricably linked – one informs
the other. For example, if the blowflies do not come,
indicating a good time for hunting crocodile eggs, then
there is a reason. Even if they are not able to articulate
why, it is still accepted. Hence, in every instance, the
blowflies coming is a unique event. There may be a
pattern, and the pattern may be recognised, but that
pattern is unique on every occasion. If the blowflies do
not come, then they look to the narrative of their
everyday actions – the performance of that narrative – to
see if something was wrong with it. One explanation
might follow a scenario such as: “Uncle Joe wasn’t here
this year because he died.” Hence, the whole
performance was not correct in the acting out of its
narrative. Some nodes of data were missing. The
blowflies ‘not coming’ is attributed to this. There is a
direct connection between performance and a
phenomenological outcome which is constructed in the
internalised noumenal world of the narrative with
consequences in the phenomenological world that is
lived [15]. Thus, truth-testing as improvisatory
performance is essential.

6. Sequitur
In Eurocentric terms, we would generalise truthtesting algorithmically and say a solution applies in all
situations. But even Western science has a problem with
this – a solution may not be provable in every case. We
can but provide a statistical average based on the
probability of something happening. In Aboriginal
culture, they do not have to accept this. Every time the
truth may be something else, and they are ready for this.
In the West, the truth is absolute, an absolute rule,
generalisable, and then it is represented somehow,
symbolically, as an equation, as solid knowledge, as
symbol encapsulating the knowledge. In Aboriginal
terms, the narrative is emergent, contingent – the
narrative starts again once the performance starts again –
nothing is concrete. The difference is in the West’s
acceptance of the absoluteness of truth (as data).
It is here that we come full cycle. If we accept that
Western truth is founded on an unprovable proposition –
cogito ergo sum – then, what the use of the 3D game
engine provides is a landscape metaphor with a flat

ontology that does not dispute the transience of the
narratives constructed within it but rather elevates each
performance into a meaning making-journey; a unique
event that reflects the essence of the ritual of Aboriginal
storytelling, as knowledge that must be ‘done’ or
performed in order to continue to be held as true.

[6]
[7]

Acknowledgements

[8]

This work is supported by ACID (the Australasian
CRC for Interaction Design) established and supported
under the Cooperative Research Centres Program
through the Australian Government’s Department of
Education, Science and Training.

[9]

References

[10]

[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

Pumpa, M, and Wyeld, T. G., 2006, “Database and
Narratological Representation of Australian Aboriginal
Knowledge as Information Visualisation using a Game
Engine”, in proc. of Information Visualisation 2006,
London, England Jul05 -07.
Deleuze, G., and Guattari, F., 1994, What is Philosophy?,
(trans.) Tomlinson, H., and Burchell, G., Verso, London.
Abram, D., 1997, The Spell of the Sensuous: Perception
and Language in a More-Than-Human World (1st
Vintage Books ed. ed.). New York : Vintage Books.
Leavy, B., Hills, J., Barker, C., Gard, S., and Wyeld, T.
G., 2006, “Digital Songlines: Digitising the Arts, Culture
and Heritage Landscape of Aboriginal Australia”, in
proc. of New Heritage Forum 2006, Uni HK, HK,
Mar13-14.
Langloh-Parker, C., 1953, Australian Legendary Tales.
Australia: Angus and Robertson.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

Castells, M., 2000, Materials for an Exploratory Theory
of the Network Society, in British Journal of Sociology,
vol. no. 51, no.1 (January/March 2000), p5.
Gutierrez, Diego., and Francisco Seron. 2004.
“Archaeological And Cultural Heritage: Bringing Life
To An Unearthed Muslim Suburb In An Immersive
Environment”, in Journal of Cultural Heritage 5(1): 6374.
Ibanez, Jesús, and Rocio Ruiz-Rodarte. 2003.
“Storytelling In Virtual Environments From A Virtual
Guide Perspective”, in Virtual Reality - Research
Development and Applications 7(1): 30.
Kim, Youngseok, and Thenkurussi Kesavadas. 2001.
“Real-time animation of King Ashur-nasir-pal II (883859 BC) in the Virtual Recreated Northwest Palace”, in
Virtual Systems and Multimedia, 2001, p128-132.
Bernd, L., and Weintke, M., 1999, “Virtual Dunhuang
Art Cave: A Cave within a CAVE”, in Computer
Graphics Forum, Volume 18, Issue 3, Sept. 1999.
Daniele, M., and Rossi, M., 1997, Virtual Reality and
Web Tools to Convey the Visual Information of Ancient
Monuments,
http://www.hmg.polimi.it/events/CHNH/CHNH98/speak
ers/rossi/rossi.htm; accessed December 2004.
Donald, S., 2001, “Persuade Or Perish: Moving Virtual
Heritage Beyond Pretty Pictures Of The Past”, in Virtual
Systems and Multimedia, 2001, p236-240.
Turkle, S, 1997, Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age of
the Internet, Touchstone, NY, NY.
Certeau, de M., 1984, The Practice of Everyday Life,
(trans.) Rendall, S. F., University of California Press,
Berkeley; London.
Lefebvre, H. 1991, The Production of Space, Blackwell,
Oxford UK & Cambridge USA.

