Visualization of Growth Curve Data from Phenotype Microarray Experiments
Janet S. Jacobsen1, Dominique C. Joyner2, Sharon E. Borglin2,
Terry C. Hazen2,4, Adam P. Arkin3,4, E. Wes Bethel1
1
Computational Research Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
2
Earth Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
3
Physical Biosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
4
Virtual Institute for Microbial Stress and Survival
{JSJacobsen, DCJoyner, SEBorglin, TEHazen, APArkin, EWBethel}@lbl.gov
Abstract
Phenotype microarrays provide a technology to
simultaneously survey the response of an organism to
nearly 2,000 substrates, including carbon, nitrogen and
potassium sources; varying pH; varying salt
concentrations; and antibiotics. In order to more quickly
and easily view and compare the large number of growth
curves produced by phenotype microarray experiments,
we have developed software to produce and display
color images, each of which corresponds to a set of 96
growth curves. Using color images to represent growth
curves data has proven to be a valuable way to assess
experiment quality, compare replicates, facilitate
comparison of the responses of different organisms, and
identify significant phenotypes. The color images are
linked to traditional plots of growth versus time, as well
as to information about the experiment, organism, and
substrate. In order to share and view information and
data project-wide, all information, plots, and data are
accessible using only a Web browser.
Keywords--- Desulfovibrio vulgaris, growth curve,
phenotype microarray, space efficient color display,
information visualization

1. Introduction
Phenotype microarrays (PM) provide a highthroughput technique for screening the response of an
organism to thousands of chemical treatments. We have
developed a suite of software tools that display growth
curve data generated by PM experiments on the
researcher's computer screen without having to install
any software other than a Web browser. The software
presents the growth curve data at different levels of detail
and using different display and visualization techniques
so that the researcher may easily and quickly assess
experiment quality, compare replicates, compare the
responses of different organisms to chemical treatments,

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

and determine which growth curves represent interesting
and significant phenotypes. The tools were developed at
the request of and with design guidance from
experimentalists generating PM data.
With current PM technology, it is possible to screen
the response of an organism to as many as 1,920
chemical treatments in a matter of days. The chemical
treatments are provided as substrates in microwells on
96-well plates that are inoculated with the organism(s)
being studied. The Omnilog® instrument [1], which
provides a digital readout of the growth in each well, can
scan fifty 96-well plates at one time, so that replicate
data can be produced, or more than one organism can be
studied. The result is that in one to four days, data for
4,800 growth curves can be generated. By representing
sets of growth curves as color images, we are able to
display growth curves corresponding to thousands of
treatments on a single Web page with a window size of
8½ by 12 inches. This was done at the request of the
experimentalists in order to match data analysis
efficiency with data generation capability.
The traditional way of looking at cell growth is to
plot cell density (or a surrogate for cell density) vs. time.
Under normal conditions in a microwell (i.e., limited
source of nutrients), cell growth shows a sharp increase
(this is the log phase), reaches a maximum, and then
levels off as cell increase is offset by cell death. When
an organism is subjected to a stressor, its growth is
affected, resulting in poor or no growth, a delay in the
onset of growth, or a combination. When using PM
technology, analysis of growth is complicated by factors
such as noise in the digital signal, under or over
inoculation of the microwells, or chemical reactions
between the media the cells were grown in (prior to
inoculation) and the chemical treatment in the microwell.
Currently, researchers performing PM experiments
have three options for viewing data: use the vendorsupplied software for looking at the data [2], import the
data into another plotting program (e.g., spreadsheet), or
look at digital images of the plates [3]. The third option

may be appropriate for studies limited to growth/no
growth results as only the endpoint data can be assessed.
In general, however, the onset of growth and the rate of
growth are as important as the maximum cell density
reached, so that it is essential to be able to look at kinetic
plots of growth versus time. Our software tools were
developed with that need in mind.
None of the three options above is ideal for sharing
large amounts of data with project participants at
different institutions. Our approach is to provide remote
users, using only a Web browser, with the ability to
display and access growth curve data stored in a project
repository. This approach saves the researcher from
having to import the PM data into a plotting program and
generate thousands of plots, does not require the
researcher to export images as files and email them to
colleagues, and does not require the installation of any
software other than a Web browser.
In addition, we have implemented a number of color
maps (transfer functions) that map the magnitude of
growth to a color in order to generate color images
representing growth curves. Though this is not a new
visualization technique, the application to visualizing
growth curve data, in particular, growth curve data from
phenotype microarray experiments, is new.
Our
approach combines the advantage of the 'small multiple'
[4] representation of data with the use of color to
highlight anomalies and facilitate comparisons. The
vendor-supplied software also uses small multiples, but
relies on curve shape or 'difference' plots to compare
experiments.
Because the eye is very good at
discriminating differences in color, using color to
represent of growth has a significant advantage over
using shape when trying to scan or compare hundreds of
growth curves at one time. As described later, the color
images are linked to growth curves plotted in the
traditional manner, so the user has a choice of how the
data are displayed.
The next section discusses the microbe that we are
studying, followed by more details about PM
experiments. The software tools that we have developed
are described in detail, including examples of how color
images are used to detect anomalous results, compare
replicates, and compare the responses of different
organisms to chemical treatments. We conclude with a
brief discussion of other techniques for mining data from
PM experiments.

Hildenborough (DvH), an anaerobic, sulfate-reducing,
bacterium found in sediments, to environmental stressors
such as oxygen, sodium chloride, nitrate, nitrite, and low
and high pH levels. These environmental stressors are
typical of environmental conditions found in DOE waste
sites contaminated with metals and radionuclides. The
VIMSS project uses not only phenotype microarray
experiments to study response characteristics, but also
gene expression, metabolomic, and proteomic
experiments [7].
Phenotype microarray experiments primarily are
being used to survey the phenotypic response of DvH
and other microbes of interest to a larger number of
stressors than could be studied using other more time and
labor-intensive analysis methods. PM experiments also
are being used to compare the response of wild-type
DvH to constructs created by knocking out selected
genes [8].

2. Use of Phenotype Microarrays

Because DvH is an anaerobe (its growth is inhibited
by oxygen), studying DvH using phenotype microarrays
presents a particular challenge [9]. DvH cells must be
grown and handled in anaerobic conditions. After the
PM plates are inoculated with the DvH cell culture, the
PM plates are sealed in oxygen-impermeable bags before
being placed in the Omnilog®. Runs times for wild-type
DvH and DvH mutant PM experiments vary from 24 to
96 hours.
DvH is grown in a defined minimal medium that
reacts with the hydrogen sulfide produced by the
microbe as it grows. The product is a black iron sulfide

The United States Department of Energy's (DOE)
Genomics:GTL program [5] is investigating the potential
of using microbes for bioremediation, energy production,
and carbon sequestration. Microbes are ubiquitous and
have adapted to practically every environmental niche on
earth. Some microbes live and even thrive in conditions
generally thought to be inhospitable to life.
Funded by the Genomics:GTL program, the Virtual
Institute for Microbial Stress and Survival (VIMSS) [6]
has been studying the response of Desulfovibrio vulgaris

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

3. Phenotype Microarray Experiments
In a PM experiment, each microwell of a 96-well
plate is inoculated with a culture containing cells that
have been harvested at mid-log phase. (The log phase is
the stage of cell growth where the cells are dividing at a
constant rate.) The plate is then placed in the Omnilog®
instrument that records a digital image of the change in
color or opacity of each well on the plate.
Each PM plate consists of a 96 microwells arranged
in eight rows, labeled A to H, and twelve columns,
labeled 1 to 12. Generally, each PM plate contains
substrates from one or two mode of action (MOA)
categories (Table 1). MOA refers to the expected effect
that the chemical in the well will have on the organism.
Plate Type
PM01-PM02
PM03
PM04
PM05
PM06-PM08
PM09
PM10
PM11-PM20

Mode of Action Category
carbon source
nitrogen source
sulfur, phosphorus sources
nutritional supplement
nitrogen utilization
osmotic sensitivity, toxicity
pH
inhibitors, chemical sensitivity

Table 1. Mode of action categories for phenotype
microarray plates PM01 to PM20.

precipitate, which as it accumulates, results in a
darkening (increase in turbidity) of the microwell. Cell
growth also contributes to turbidity.

4. Visualization of Growth Curve Data
For the purpose of this discussion, a PM dataset
consists of growth curve data from a phenotype
microarray experiment involving a single organism and a
set of distinct PM plates run on the same day with the
same inoculum. We have developed two categories of
interfaces that display growth curves in one of two
formats: either as traditional growth curves (measure of
growth vs. time) or as color images. Because the color
image format is linked to the traditional format, we
describe the PMRowView interface first.
a. Select data, plate, and row.

4.1. PMRowView Interface
Figure 1 shows an example of the typical way in
which the PMRowView interface is used. The figure
was constructed using screenshots of the interface rather
than a text-block diagram in order to give a better feel for
how the interface operates. (The screenshots may be
enlarged to see additional detail.)
The first page of the PMRowView interface (Fig.
1a) allows the user to select one or more PM datasets, a
single plate type, and a row (12 wells) on that plate. The
user has the option to pre-select the colors to use for
plotting the growth curves for each dataset, and in
addition, may choose to plot log values (the underlying
plotting program does not support log scales), or
normalize the curves by the maximum value.
b. Display wells in one row.

+

+
c. Plot for
one well.

d. Download data for one well.

Figure 1. Typical use of the PMRowView interface. (a) On the home page for the interface, the user selects
datasets, plate type, and row on plate, and clicks the Continue button (red cross). (b) Screenshot shows the
results of selecting four datasets, plate type PM09 and row A. (c) Growth curve for well selected by clicking on
the plot for well A05 (red cross in b). (d) Spreadsheet, which can be downloaded by clicking on the download
link (red cross in c), of growth curve data plotted in (c).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The interface will flag any datasets not containing
the selected plate type (some PM experiments are run
with fewer than 20 plates) and will plot the growth
curves for the datasets that contain the selected plate
type. The PMRowView interface plots the growth
curves twelve to a page in a three-column, four-row
format (Fig. 1b). A view of one plot (at the approximate
size that it would be viewed on the Web page), showing
how each small plot is labeled with the chemical name,
plate type, and well id, of one of the small plots in Fig.
1b, is shown in Fig. 2.

from files; information about each selected dataset
(organism and experiment date) and the chemical
treatments are read from a relational database.
The PMRowView interface is useful for single row
(12 wells) or single well comparisons of technical
replicates (same inoculum), biological replicates (same
organism, but different inoculum), and the responses of
different strains of an organism.
An extension of the PMRowView interface (not
shown) displays pre-averaged replicates (either
biological or technical) and error bars (+/- one standard
deviation).

4.2. PMColorMap Interface
The PMColorMap interface displays a growth curve
as a thin horizontal line in which the magnitude of
turbidity is represented by color. Using this visualization
technique, and by vertically stacking the horizontal lines
representing the growth curves, it is possible to display
growth curves for all 96 wells on a single PM plate in a
relatively small space. In a Web browser, each color
image in the preview mode is approximately 1 ½ by 2
inches. An example of such a color image is shown in
Fig. 3, which also includes annotation that explains the
direction of increasing time and which region and which
line of the color image corresponds to each row and well
on the PM plate.
Figure 2. Example of one of twelve plots that make
up the PMRowView display. The plot shows two
pairs of technical replicates. The blue and black
curves are biological replicates of the green and
turquoise curves. The label on the y-axis, OL,
stands for Omnilog units referring to the
measurement unit of the Omnilog® instrument.

mapping of turbidity to color
0

300
well A01
row A

Note that the vertical scales on each plot in Fig. 1b
vary. The reason for this is to see the maximum amount
of detail in each growth curve. We plan to implement a
plot option in the future so that all growth curves can be
plotted on the same scale.
Because some chemicals are used to treat four
consecutive wells (using different doses) on a plate, the
plots shown in Fig. 1b are placed on the page so that
when a chemical is repeated, growth curves for all four
doses appear in one column in order to facilitate
comparing dose responses. A link on the Web page (not
shown) allows the user to advance to the growth curves
for the next row on the plate (for the selected dataset(s))
without having to return to the selection menu page.
If the user clicks on one of the twelve small plots, a
new window will open showing a larger version of the
plot (Fig. 1c). In the new window, the user is given the
option to download the growth curve data for the
curve(s) shown in the plot (Fig. 1d) in spreadsheet
format.
The plots produced by the PMRowView interface
are generated on the fly. The growth curve data are read

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

row B
row C
row D
row E
row F
row G
row H
0

68

well H12

time (hr)

Figure 3. Color image for plate PM09 showing
color map (top), time scale (bottom), and row and
well locations (sides).
The growth curve data are smoothed using a moving
window average algorithm [10] prior to generating the
corresponding color image. The reason for smoothing

the data prior to generating the color images is that PM
data are noisy. Without smoothing the data, the amount
of noise in the data results in color images with rapid
changes in color (vs. time) that make it difficult to see
trends in the data. Our goal is to be able to use the color
images to show general characteristics of and trends in
the data (see Section 4.3), which requires displaying the
growth curve data as smoothly varying and thus
precludes other coloring methods (e.g., two-tone pseudo
coloring [11]).
We experimented with different methods of
averaging the data, as well as different color maps, until
we achieved result that satisfied the experimentalists.
Because two people working on the VIMSS project have
some degree of colorblindness, we implemented three
color maps to color code the growth curve. Figure 4
illustrates how the data for the same 96-well PM plate
looks when colored using each of the three available
color maps. The color map whose use is illustrated in
Fig. 4b, uses a 'color safe' palette [12], that excludes
colors that a person with colorblindness cannot easily
distinguish.

a

b

c

Figure 4. Examples of a single 96-well dataset
colored coded using the three PMColorMap
options: (a) standard, (b) color safe, (c) gray scale.
Images are shown reduced in width. The colors for
color map b were chosen from a color safe palette
[12] suitable for people who are colorblind.
Figure 5 shows the typical use of the PMColorMap
interface for comparing data from a single PM plate used
in multiple PM experiments. As with Fig 1, this figure
was constructed using screenshots instead of text blocks.
Larger versions of the color images shown in Figs. 5b
and 5c are presented in Figs. 3 and 6, respectively.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The use of the PMColorMap interface shown in Fig.
5 illustrates Shneiderman's "Visual Information Seeking
Mantra" [13]: “overview” (Fig. 5b), “zoom” (Fig. 5c),
“filter” (Fig. 5d), “details” (Fig. 5e, 5f). The first page of
the interface (Fig. 5a) allows the user to select the
datasets, plate type, and color map. The selected data are
displayed as small color images in the 'preview' mode
shown in Fig. 5b.
The four small color images in the preview mode
show the equivalent of 384 growth curves in a single
view. Even at the scale of the reduced-size screenshot,
this example shows a couple of interesting features that
would be very time consuming to discover looking at
hundreds of growth curve plots. The four plots are two
pairs of technical replicates. The two technical replicates
on the right hand side show good agreement with each
other, but not with the two biological replicates (two
images on the left) that they correspond to. In addition,
the image on the far left shows a region (yellow circle)
where the wells were not properly inoculated.
Clicking on one of the small color images in the
preview mode (Fig. 5b) opens a separate window that
shows the data in the 'full-size' mode (Fig. 5c). The fullsize color image is about 6 by 5½ inches (see Fig. 6).
In the full-size version, the thin horizontal lines that
represent the growth curves are slightly separated (see
Fig. 6) so that when the cursor is moved slowly over
individual lines, a 'tool tip' appears that displays the plate
type, well id, chemical name, and the mode of action of
the chemical (Table 1). If the user clicks on a colored
line, a separate window opens that displays a plot of
growth vs. time for that well (Fig. 5e). The separation
between the colored lines (white spaces between the
colored lines in Fig. 6) is necessary to help the user to be
able to distinguish between individual colored lines so
that the user is able to select (by clicking on the colored
line) the growth curve for the well of interest.
If the user clicks on one of the row labels to the left
of the color image (e.g., the red cross in Fig. 5c or "row
A" in Fig. 6), a window opens that displays the growth
curves for all twelve wells in that row using the
PMRowView interface (Fig. 5d). In this way, the user
can easily navigate between the 96-well, plate-level
view, and the more detailed single-row (12 wells) view
or single-well view. Figs. 5e and 5f are analogous to
Figs. 1c and 1d.
Though not shown, there is a second version of the
PMColorMap interface that displays all of the data for all
of the PM plates run for a single experiment. This
interface provides a quick check of the overall quality of
an experiment.

a. Select data, plate, color map.

b. Preview data for 4 x 96 wells.

Ο

+

d. Display wells in one row.

+

c. Full-size view of
data for 96 wells.

+
+

e. Plot for one well.

f. Download data for one well.

+

Figure 5. Typical use of the PMColorMap interface. (a) On the home page for the interface, the user selects
datasets, plate type, and color map, and clicks the Continue button (red cross). (b) Preview page shows the
results of selecting plate type PM09 and datasets from four PM experiments using DvH (4 x 96 wells) . Yellow
circle shows a group of wells that were not properly inoculated. (c) Results of the user selecting (red cross in b)
a single dataset (96 wells) from the preview mode. Next user can opt to display data for all of the wells in a
single row (red cross) or from a single well (yellow arrow). (d) Screenshot showing the result of clicking on the
"row A" label in c, i.e., growth curves for the twelve wells in row A. (e) Growth curve for single well selected
either from c (red cross) or d (yellow arrow). (f) Spreadsheet, which can be downloaded by clicking on the
download link (red cross in e), of growth curve data plotted in (e).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[PM09, A05] 5% NaCl, osmotic sensitivity

Figure 6. Full-size color image. To provide detailed information about the well (chemical and mode of action),
the yellow label appears when the cursor is positioned over (in this example) the 5th color line. The row labels
to the left of the figure are linked to the PMRowView interface (see text).

4.3. Application of the PMColorMap Interface
Because of its compact display of growth curves, the
preview mode of the PMColorMap interface shows at a
glance whether there are anomalies resulting from
equipment malfunctions, chemical reactions between the
medium that the cells were grown in and the substrate in
the microwell, or poor cell growth. Figures 7 to 9 show
examples of each of these.
The sharp spikes shown in the growth curve in
Fig. 7a are the result of instrument malfunction or
operator interrupt, i.e., they are not biological in nature.
Note that due to the smoothing of the growth curve data
(described in section 4.2), the spikes shown in Fig. 7a are
not mapped to the color orange (per the color map shown
in Fig. 4) in Fig. 7b. The smoothing method is not used
to eliminate spikes in the data because in fact, it is useful
to be able to quickly identify which plates for a given
PM experiment show spikes.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

250

a

t
A05

b

Figure 7. Example of using color image
representation of growth curves to identify wells
where camera readings spiked. (a) Plot of turbidity
vs. time for well A05 showing three large spikes in
signal. (b) Color image of rows A and B. Black
arrow points to well A05 whose growth curve is
shown in (a). The vertical scale for the color image
in (b) has been increased to show more detail.

Figure 8b shows part of a color image for plate type
PM20. The orange band at the bottom of the color image
corresponds to wells B09-B12. These wells are pretreated with tetrazolium violet, which reacts with the
growth medium that the DvH cells were growth in. The
result is that when the DvH inoculum is added to these
wells, the wells darken immediately resulting in high
readings of opacity. Wells such as these are excluded
from further analysis because the high values are a result
of a chemical reaction, not a biological process. Using
the PMColorMap interface makes it easy to detect
chemical reactions occurring between growth media and
well pre-treatments.
Figure 9. Two technical replicates of the same PM
plate. The color image on the left shows normal
growth. The color image on the right is a technical
replicate of that on the left. Comparison of the two
color images suggests that rows A09 to C12, G03
to G08, and rows H08 to H12 were not properly
inoculated.

400

a

250

t

b
B12

Figure 8. Example of using color images to identify
wells in which the growth medium reacted with the
substrate resulting in high values. (a) Plot of
turbidity vs. time for well B12. (b) Color image of
rows A and B. Arrow points to well B12 whose
growth curve is shown in (a).

The two color images shown in Fig. 9 are technical
replicates (same inoculum) of data from the same plate
type. Given the number of phenotype microarray
experiments that have been run as part of the VIMSS
project, our experience tells us that when comparing
images such as those in Fig. 9, quite a number of wells
on plate corresponding to the image on the right were not
properly inoculated with cells so that the wells show
little growth (indicated by a right brace).
The
PMColorMap interface thus provides a quick way to
screen experiments to decide which ones may need to be
re-run, and it also helps the experimentalist decide on
which datasets and wells to focus.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 10 provides an example of using the
PMColorMap interface to compare the phenotypic
responses of two different organisms. The figure shows
four images for a single plate (PM15; mode of action chemical inhibitors, chemical sensitivity). Two of the
images (Fig. 10a and 10b) are technical replicates of
wild-type DvH, and the other two (Fig. 10c and 10d) are
technical replicates of a mutant of DvH constructed by
knocking out the gene DVU3335, which is part of the
kdp operon [8]. These pairs of images show that for this
phenotype microarray experiment, the technical
replicates reproduce the same behavior, i.e., Fig. 10a is
similar to Fig. 10b, and Fig. 10c is similar to Fig. 10d.
Similarity of results from replicates, i.e., reproducibility,
gives us confidence when comparing the results of
phenotypic responses.
Comparing the images for the wild-type DvH (Figs.
10a and 10b) with those for the mutant (Figs. 10c and
10d) shows that the growth of the mutant was more
robust (showed more vigorous growth, i.e., higher
values) than that of the wild-type DvH suggesting that
knocking out the DVU3335 gene conferred an advantage
on the mutant in the presence of the chemicals on plate
PM15.
In comparing the phenotypic responses of the wildtype DvH and the knockout mutant to a range of PM
substrate, the PMColorMap interface played a key role in
helping the experimentalists to decide which phenotype
microarray experiments were of good quality, which
experiments needed to be re-run, and which PM plate
types showed interesting and significant differences
between the responses of the wild-type DvH and the
knockout mutant [8].

a

b

c

d

Figure 10. Using color images to compare the response of the wild-type DvH with a knockout mutant of DvH.
Images a and b are technical replicates of wild-type DvH. Images c and d are technical replicates of the
knockout mutant of DvH. Images a and b show good agreement in growth characteristics, as do c and d. For
this PM plate, the growth of the knockout mutant (c and d) was more vigorous than that of the wild-type.

4.2. Technical Details

Summary

The PMRowView and PMColorMap interfaces are
Perl-CGI scripts. The Perl module GD [14] is used both
for drawing the growth curves on the fly and for creating
the color images displayed by the PMColorMap
interface. The color images are created when the PM
datasets are uploaded to the VIMSS file server. In
addition, information about the PM datasets (name,
organism, date that the data were generated) is stored in a
relational database. The information is accessed from
the database when the color images are displayed or the
growth curves drawn.
Though the PMRowView and PMColorMap
interfaces are Web-based, downloading VIMSS
phenotype microarray data is restricted to VIMSS project
participants at this time.

Because of the large amount of growth data
generated by phenotype microaray experiments, current
ways of viewing these data are insufficient for displaying
hundreds to thousands of growth curves at one time, and
are far from ideal for sharing data and results between
researchers working at different institutions.
We have solved the first problem by creating color
images of all 96 growth curves corresponding to a single
PM plate. This novel and space-efficient way of
displaying growth curves has a significant advantage
over traditional growth curve plots in that the overall
quality of a phenotype microarray experiment and the
reproducibility of technical or biological replicates can
be quickly assessed by looking at small multiples of
color images on a single Web page. The responses of
different strains to the substrates on a single PM plate
can be easily compared using the color image approach,
and Because the color images are linked to more detailed
views of the growth curve data, the user can quickly
confirm his/her assessments.
The PMRowView and PMColorMap interfaces
solve the second problem of data access by providing
easy and convenient access to thousands of growth
curves and the raw data via a Web browser. The
interfaces display the data differently, and at different
levels of detail, in order to enable assessment of data
quality, to facilitate different types of comparisons
(biological replicate, technical replicates, different
strains), and to highlight sought for, or unexpected,
phenotypic responses.

Future Directions
The PMRowView and PMColorMap interfaces
provide convenient and flexible ways to view and
compare phenotype microarray data; however, due to the
amount of data being generated, we plan to use
additional computational methods to assess the quality of
and to facilitate comparing datasets. In general, two
approaches are used to characterize growth curves:
growth curve models [14, 16] and calculation of growth
indices [17]. We will evaluate the latter method first and
will link the display of the growth curves with the
calculated growth indices in order to be able to easily
evaluate how well the growth indices reflect the actual
growth.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Our tools, developed entirely using open source
software, provide both new and traditional ways of
looking at phenotype microarray data, use a relational
database to store information about the data, and by
providing data displays and raw data via the Internet,
make it possible to easily share large amounts of
information and data with project collaborators
anywhere. The software development was guided by the
needs and requests of the experimentalist generating the
PM data. The experimentalists are using the software
interfaces to assess data quality, compare replicates, and
determine which datasets to focus their time and
attention on.

[7]

[8]
[9]

Acknowledgements

[10]

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
suggestions on how to improve this paper.
This work was supported by the Genomics:GTL Program,
Office of Biological and Environmental Research, Office of
Science, U.S. Department of Energy, through contract DEAC02-05CH11231 with Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, California.

[11]

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]
[6]

Biolog, Inc. URL: http://www.biolog.com
L. Zhou, X.-H. Lei, B.R. Bochner, and B.L. Wanner.
Phenotype microarray analysis of Esherichia coli K-12
mutants with deletions of all two-component systems. J.
of Bacteriology, 185(16):4956-4972. August 2003.
K.D. Loh, P. Gyaneshwar, E.M. Papadimitriou, R. Fong,
K.-S.Kim, R. Parales, Z. Zhou, W. Inwood, and S. Kustu.
A previously undescribed pathway for pyrimidine
catabolism. PNAS, 103(13):5114-5119, March 28, 2006.
E.R. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT.
Graphics Press, 1990.
DOE
Genomics:GTL
Program
URL:
http://genomicsgtl.energy.gov
Virtual Institute for Microbial Stress and Survival
(VIMSS) URL: http://vimss.lbl.gov

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

A. Mukhopadhyay, Z. He, E.J. Alm, AP. Arkin, E.
Baidoo, S.C. Borglin, W. Chen, T.C. Hazen, Q. He, H.Y. Holman, K. Huang, R. Huang, D.J. Joyner, N. Katz,
M. Keller, P. Oeller, A. Redding, J. Sun, J. Wall, J. Wei,
A. Yang, H.-C. Yen, J. Zhou, J., and J.D. Keasling. Salt
stress in Desulfovibrio vulgaris Hildenborough: An
integrated genomics approach. J. of Bacteriology,
188(11):4068-4078. June 2006.
A. Mukhopadhyay, D.C. Joyner, J.S. Jacobsen, T.C.
Hazen. Phenotypic characterization of a Desulfovibrio
vulgaris high affinity K+ uptake mutant. In preparation.
S.E. Borglin, D.C. Joyner, J.S. Jacobsen, and T.C.
Hazen. Anaerobic growth of Desulfovibrio vulgaris
Hildenborough in microwell plates. In preparation.
Wolfram
MathWorld Moving Average URL:
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/MovingAverage.html
T. Saito, H.N. Miyamura, M. Yamamoto, H. Saito, Y.
Hoshiya, T. Kaseda.
Two-tone pseudo coloring:
compact visualization for one-dimensional data.
INFOVIS 2005. IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization. October 23-25, 2005.
Colorblind
Web
Page
filter
URL:
http://colorfilter.wickline.org
B. Shneiderman. The next generation of graphical user
interfaces: information visualization and better window
management. Displays, 17(3,4):125-129. May 1997.
Comprehensive Perl Network URL: http://www.cpan.org
S. Lopez, M. Prieto, J. Dijkstra, M.S. Dhanoa, and J.
France. Statistical evaluation of mathematical models for
microbial growth. Int. J. of Food Microbiol., 96(3):289300. November 15, 2004.
J.M. Ponciano, F.P.J. Vandecasteele, T.F. Hess, L.J.
Forney, R.L. Crawford, and P. Joyce. Use of stochastic
models to assess the effect of environmental factors on
microbial growth.
Applied and Environmental
Microbiology, 71(5): 2355-2364. May 2005.
J. Warringer, E. Ericson, L. Fernandez, O. Nerman, and
A. Blomberg. High-resolution yeast phenomics resolves
different physiological features in the saline response.
PNAS, 100(26):15724-15729. December 23, 2003.

