Collaborative Virtual Environments as Research and Teaching Instruments in
the Field of Disaster Medicine: the “e-DISTRICT CiPro” Simulator
F. La Mura1, F. Della Corte1, M. Gribaudo2, B. Tosi3, S. Alciati4, R. Bordino4, G. Franceschinis5
1
SCDU Anestesia I, Ospedale Maggiore della Carità, Novara – Univ. del Piemonte Orientale
2
Dipartimento di Informatica, Università degli Studi di Torino
3
Consorzio Scuola Comunità Impresa, Novara
4
Infolearning S.r.l., Alessandria
5
Dipartimento di Informatica, Università del Piemonte Orientale
{info@flamura.com, fdcorte@tin.it, marcog@di.unito.it, tosi@cscinovara.it,
simone_alciati@infolearning.net, roberta_bordino@infolearning.net,
giuliana.franceschinis@mfn.unipmn.it}
Abstract
The virtual reality simulator used in the e-DISTRICT
CiPro Pilot-Project, in the context of the EU programme
Leonardo da Vinci II, allows the realization of an Internet
based Collaborative Virtual Environment and it can be
used for Education and Training for Civil Protection
Operators, and for Research purposes in new operational
protocols and their effectiveness (which would be very
expensive in case of real drills, and also very difficult to
organize). In this article we focus on the goals of the eDistrict CiPro Project, and we present the virtual reality
simulator. We also address the importance of the detail
level of the scenarios and we consider their customization
and their integration with other software that simulates
the phase of treatment in hospital.
Keywords--- Disaster Medicine, Emergency
Medicine, Internet, Virtual Reality, Computer Game
Learning, Multi-user Computer Games, Collaborative
Virtual Environments, Europe

1

Introduction

Emergency medicine deals with the stabilization and
the treatment of patients who suffer from pathologies that
evolve very rapidly and that carry a high mortality risk if
no effective measures are taken within a short time. In
such a situation there is an ideal balance between
resources and needs. Another branch of Medical Sciences,
Disaster Medicine, has to face complex situations where
there is a strong imbalance between needs and available

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

resources. Within the Pilot Project “European DIStance
TRaining Interactive and Collaborative Tools for the Civil
Protection” (e-DISTRICT CiPro – www.edcipro.org )
developed in the framework of the EU programme
“Leonardo da Vinci II” through the collaboration of 11
partners of 6 different European countries (Italy, Belgium,
Ireland, Romania, Spain, Hungary), we have implemented
a prototype of distance-learning system. It is based on
some learning modules in SCORM format (an
international standard for e-learning modules) and a 3D
multi-user Common Virtual Environment. The latter
allows the training of all the actors taking part to Rescue
Operation in case of Mass Casualty Incident (MCI) or
Disaster, such as Medical Doctors, Nurses, Fire Brigades,
Civil Protection, etc. The prototype is an Internet based
integrated system for distance learning that contains a
competence evaluation system (which allows to develop
individually-tailored learning programmes), Educational
Learning Modules, and – as said above - a 3D
Collaborative Virtual Environment. This paper will focus
on this last topic. One of the first tasks carried out by the
Project Partners was the analysis of the competencies and
expectations of the final users by a survey at European
level. As far as the competencies are concerned we had
three main groups: a) personnel related to the Medical
Area: 42,4%; b) personnel related to the Civil Protection
Area: 64,4%; c) personnel involved in Big Sport Events:
18,6% (out of 61 properly filled questionnaires). As far as
the Medical Area is concerned, we had 15 vocational
training categories the European Institutions and
Hospitals promoted in the previous two years, ranging
from the management of the pre-hospital phase to the

hospital phase, Logistics, Planning, Toxicology, Mental
Health, etc. It was possible to find out that 39% of people
had Coordination and Communication attitude; 39% had
Planning attitude; 37,3% wanted to be involved in
Disaster Risk Analysis (source: e-DISTRICT CiPro
Report 1, 2005 [1] ). Those data suggest that not only a
Training tool but also a complete framework for
Education purposes was needed.
The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. 2 the
simulation scenario is outlined, in Sec. 3 the innovative
(from the application point of view) and technological
aspects of the simulator are presented, Sec. 4 issues the
level of realism actually needed in the considered
application field, and finally we summarize the results
achieved and the future developments in Sec. 5.

2

Simulation Scenario

The 3D scenario developed within e-DISTRICT
CiPro is a stadium with 23,800 spectators (Figure 1 (d)).
Following an accident in a nearby chemical plant, the
Stadium must be evacuated. The increasing panic and
further accidents happening in the Stadium (the northwest tier falls down after an explosion due to a local fire)
require that all the emergency squads (Firemen, Medical
Doctors, Nurses, Civil Protection, Volunteers) co-operate
to face the situation. The nearby Hospitals will be
responsible for organizing spaces and for trying to
guarantee the highest possible receptivity, even if neither
the number nor the type of the injured people involved are
known in advance. The road connecting the accident
scenario and the hospitals will probably be congested by
traffic and it will not be easy to make an estimation of the
time taken to drive from one location to another. The
current version of the 3D Simulator just includes the preHospital phase. However it is possible to imagine an
interconnection with an in-Hospital phase Simulators such
as HDPnetS® (Hospital Disaster Preparedness Networked
Simulator, developed by Virtual Engine S.r.l.,
www.virtualengine.it) that is specific for these purpose
(see Section 4).
The key elements in the representation of this
situation are: structural damages of the north-west
tribune; flames; fire extinguishers; smoke that impairs the
vision of the Rescue Personnel; people trapped under the
rubble; “walking woundeds”; possibility of building an
Advanced Medical Post (AMP), which the Incident
Commander can establish in the position that he evaluates
as the most appropriate: this is a very important element,
because if the decision of setting up an AMP is made, its
location will be crucial for the logistics aspects and for the
global outcome.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The game develops according to the following steps:
the Fire Brigades use fire extinguishers, protective
barriers and extricate trapped injured people; in
addition to this they have to refer (via a chat system
simulating a multichannel radio) to the Commander
of the Fire Brigades about the number of victims.
Finally they will declare – if this is possible – a
whole area or part of the area to be safe so that the
medical Rescue Teams may bring help;
• the Medical Personnel is divided into three squads:
one has to do the Triage and another has to take care
of the Victims. The other group of doctors are in in
charge as Command team and of the AMP tent: the
latter have to guarantee the normal in-out flow of the
patients treated on the spot. In Figure 1 some
visualization examples are shown. In particular in (a)
we can see that the AMP is located in the middle of
the field, a choice which from the logistic point of
view will turn out to be wrong, in (b) a view from the
tiers is shown, and in (c) the rubble after the
collapsing of the north-west tribune is shown, with
smoke that makes the evaluation of the scene
difficult.
For each patient, his/her status (e.g. the Vital Signs)
can be visualized and actions can be taken, depending on
the specific role of a rescuer. In particular rescuers can:
evaluate the state of consciousness through the Glasgow
Coma Score (GCS), in its Eye, Verbal and Motor
components; evaluate the respiratory rate; evaluate the
symmetry of the chest movement; evaluate the pupillary
diameter and the reactivity; evaluate the burned body
surface (in realisation); evaluate if the patient is
immobile, moving, sitting, walking.
This visual information (and, in the case of the V
component of the GSC, also the audio information)
allows: to carry out the triage (for example following the
START protocol); to detect tension pneumothorax; to
diagnose cerebral damage following an head trauma; the
assumption of severe intoxication from smoke inhalation;
the evaluation of possible damages to the spine. The detail
level needed to convey these audio/visual information is
higher than that provided by the 3D VR simulation engine
employed: for this reason once a user is working on a
specific patient, a more refined audio visual
representation is presented in a separate pop-up window
(see Figure 4 and Figure 6 (a)).
•

3

Innovative and technological aspects

In this section we briefly describe the innovation that
the e-DISTRICT CiPro Virtual Reality simulator brings in

the field of disaster medicine teaching and outline the
technological choices made for the implementation of the
prototype.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Some simulation snaphots: the Advanced Medical
Post officer (a), Fire Brigades’ view of the fire and collapsed
tiers (b), Victims under the rubble (c), the Stadium with about
24.000 Spectators

3.1

Multi-user 3D simulation on the Internet

The target users of the prototype 3D Virtual Reality
simulator built in the project are Civil Protection
operators, located in different European Countries. It was
required to build an environment that could be used
through the Internet and that could be deployed and
developed at low cost.
The main functions required were: the possibility of
forming help squads (possibly constituted by a large
number of helpers); the possibility of creating
communication channels among the squads; the
possibility of recruiting a huge number of players (thanks
to the accessibility of the simulator from a simple PC).
Many existing Game and Virtual Reality engines
were considered and evaluated before starting the
development of the simulator: Torque game engine
(www.garagegames.com), Unreal (www.unrealtechnology.com), Blaxxun
(www.blaxxun.com, Windows only at the moment) just to cite
some. The key issue in the choice was not obtain the
state-of-the-art visual realism, but to reduce both the
production and the development cost. This led to the
choice of using VRML based graphic and Blaxxun

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

technology. The effectiveness of the chosen level of
visual representation will be considered in Section 4.

3.2

Representation of the key elements

In designing the 3D environment and the “role game”
interface, efforts have been taken to obtain a “realistic
enough” representation of both the scenario and the
patients.
The key elements for the scenario representation are:
infrastructures, damage to the infrastructures with related
accessibility issues, environmental elements that make
understanding of what is happening in the scenario more
or less difficult (e.g. smoke, rubble, fire and structural
collapse may impair the vision).
The key elements for the patients representation,
which distinguishes our prototype from commercial
patients simulators, is the actual visualisation of clinical
signs rather than a representation through numbers. In
many
“patient simulators”, the evaluation of the
respiration frequency – as required in the START Triage
protocol – is performed by literally observing the
inspiration and expiration movement, as it is in the reality,
rather than looking at numbers on the screen as in
commercial simulators.
Thanks to the above mentioned points the simulator
produces results that are particularly effective in
satisfying the following needs: training of people
involved in rescue operations both on the national and the
international level; possibility of moving within a virtual
world represented through 3D graphics where each player
can meet the other players, who are represented by the
respective avatars, or interactive objects on which it is
possible to intervene; evaluation of the environmental
safety; patients management (triage, extrication of people
from rubble, application of therapy procedures,
management of the AMP and of the collecting areas,
transfer to the destination hospitals); availability of a
medical-logistical research instrument that aids
understanding the ability of the operators to face the
difficulties in a situation in which normal training and
communication cannot be used; performance evaluation,
made on the basis of a detailed report of the activities
carried out by all the participants in each individual
moment of the action.
In our vision, the e-DISTRICT CiPro simulator is an
instrument for the operator’s cultural education and
training. While training addresses the learning of a wellknown protocol or decisional pattern in highly branched
decisional trees (in some extent this is the case of
Emergency Medicine procedures), Education deals with

Problem Solving issues, in situations that constantly
change and that cannot be identified in advance (as, in
some extent, in Disaster Medicine). It also supplies the
decision makers with methods to find the best possible
solution, and not with the solution itself. Embedded in the
3D Simulator is the START Triage Protocol [2]; besides
the protocol, every decision taken by the players will be
based on “positive improvisation”. A classical example
from the literature is the following: if the Triage tags get
lost for any reasons, how will I perfom the Triage
procedures? [3]
In the article “Nurses in war”
(D’Antonio, 2002) the Author describes a way the Nurses
could have performed the Triage procedures using their
lipsticks during the Pearl Harbor attack in World War II.
The Triage Tag issue is just one of the most simple
possible occurring events. In the specific case of our 3D
Simulator, we allow a certain degree of discretionality in
doing or not doing some logistical procedures (some of
them expected to be right), such as the set-up of the
Advanced Medical Post tent, and its location. This
decision could be crucial. Another unpredictable factor is
how effectively the players (Fire Brigades, Medical
Doctors, etc.) will interact and communicate with each
other. A further non-predetermined thing concerns how
the Command team will report on the situation to the
representatives of the Local Government, how they take
care of relations with the Press, how will they handle
ways to quickly and effectively communicate with the
Rescue teams on the spot. All these elements are very
useful for the debriefing phase, in order to understand
what the “right” or “wrong” decisions and procedures
turned out to be interesting or impairing the Rescue chain.
The only training factor is just a part of the “skills”
necessary to handle the Scene. In fact, if the collapsing of
the tiers is not the first cause of the chain of the events but
just one of the components, the ability to integrate and
interpret the scenario as a whole becomes fundamental.

3.3

Technological choices

In order to realize a game situation and take part to
the game itself two interfaces are necessary: one for the
preparation of the drill, used by the teachers, and a second
one for the running of the game, used by the group of the
players/students. The teacher’s interface is used to update
a data base that contains all the information relating to a
specific drill. The interface which the student accesses
after having authenticated himself and after having
selected his own role is shown in Figure 2. This interface
is also used by the teacher who has the master role during
the game.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 2. The player interface
Figure 3 shows the general architecture of the system.
It is a typical client-server architecture constituted by
three main components: the student interface (player
client), the teacher interface (drills designer client) and
the game server.

Figure 3: The multi-user simulator architecture
The functional mechanism integrates a VR 3D
simulation engine and dynamical web pages. The system
described up to now has been implemented through the
following technologies: Blaxxun for the management of
the 3D virtual environment [4] (many Universities used
similar technologies for training purposes [5] but often
without properly made Educational support, that in our
project is given by SCORM compliant modules); Cult 3D
(www.cult3d.com ) for the more detailed 3D visualization
used during patient treatment, the Apache Web server,
PHP for the interaction with data bases, Javascript for the
interaction with the user and the synchronization of the
different frames, and finally the MySQL DBMS.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Virtual manikins: Anisocoria sin>dx (a); a movement
suggesting a decortication

3.4

Creating new scenarios

The philosophy of the e-DISTRICT CiPro prototype
is to allow the customisation of learning contents, which
can be tailored for a specific organisation or government
that would like to use the framework as a learning or
research tool. Currently the customisation can be obtain
by means of a simple web application that allows include
new automata representing the possible evolution of each
patient or controllable object (Figure 5), and to define the
initial placement of the simulation objects in the 3D
scenario. The graphical features (objects’ appearance and
animations) can be chosen from a graphic models library.
For the sake of space we do not discuss in this paper the
3D scenario and objects production problem. However
this issue has been covered by the project with a
considerable effort.

Figure 5: Automata representation of a patient

4

What is useful and what is less useful to
represent in computer simulated 3D
scenario

The
anaesthesiologists-intensivists,
and
the
emergency physicians tend to develop methods that allow
them a quick visual interpretation of clinical signs, visual
skills, multiparametric monitors, and environment
evaluation. Very often the process of recognising the vital
parameters profits from the ability of the operator to

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

discern which information among the manifold of visual
and sensorial information is useful for the interpretation
of the given case [6].
In a recent work we compared the capability to
understand some clinical signs by using two levels of
photorealism within 3D computer simulations [7]. A more
detailed photorealism level was offered by the Virtual
Manikin used within e-DISTRICT CiPro while a less
defined photorealism was supplied by the 3D City Car
Accident prototype Simulator [8] (see Figure 6).
The results of the comparison suggest that the
comprehension ability was very similar for both the group
of individuals that had received an animation with less
representation details and the group that had received the
animation with more representation details.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: Comparing different representations
As far as the Victims are concerned, the 3D
Simulator allows several “layers” of data visualisation: a)
the players see the Victims’ avatar (walking, sitting,
laying or immobilised under the rubble); b) by clicking on
the Avatar, a video showing the head, chest and arms of
the Patient appears: these videos are produced using the
Virtual Manikin (www.virtualmanikin.com ) realized by
the Cult3D technology (www.cult3d.com ) used for the
single-user exercitation; the Manikin speaks in order to
allow the evaluation of the GCS – Verbal.
Besides the Vital Signs that the user has to evaluate
just looking at the Manikin, other information are then
shown as numeric data.
Other kind of visualisation include the so-called “non
verbal communication”: we isolated four main useful
gestures, such as a “finger pointing to something”, a “no
way” gesture, a “yes” gesture and an “I’m here” gesture.
Visualisation made within a Virtual Collaborative
Environment is useful to learn how to react to hostile
conditions or environments and also to understand the
interfacing problems with the other game figures (a trivial
question: if the helpers, physicians and nurses, are dressed
in the same way, how will it then be possible to
understand who the doctor is? This is one of the problems

the managing of an entire metropolitan area carried out by
multiple users (macro-simulation) [10] with a strong
logistical approach (“command-control” kind) could be
carried out by allowing that the patients be sent out by the
e-DISTRICT CiPro virtual simulator AMP and be
assigned - through a virtual EMS – to the simulated
hospitals. Both the e-DISTRICT CiPro and HDPnetS

(a)

(b)

Figure 7: “I’m here” (a); “go there” (b)
of correctly reading the scenario, especially in the case of
aid operations carried out in foreign countries). The limits
of this kind of representation start to become visible when
the main task is to manage sheer logistical aspects on a
vast area, as may be the case in the metropolitan area of a
big town, with its hospital and infrastructures. During the
real scale drill performed within the VI version of the
European
Master
in
Disaster
Medicine
(www.dismedmaster.com ), a II level Master Degree
offered by the Università del Piemonte Orientale and the
Vrije Universiteit Brussel in collaboration with world
leading universities, the patients were played by medical
students. These were able to learn how a patient suffering
from a specific pathology really appears.
Nevertheless there was also the need to simulate the
in-Hospital phase. The solution was found and it
consisted in using a software programme for micro- and
macro-simulation in the event of disaster, HDPnetS. The
patients/students, after having been stabilized, were
transported to a hangar that symbolized “all the
wards/hospitals” [9]. Here a small intranet was installed
where the HDPnetS software was running. Thank to this
software it was possible to simulate the hospitalization of
the patients and to control the state of the operating
theatres and the state of the intensive therapies. In this
way the general level of the simulation was very much
improved. (see Figure 8 and Figure 9).
If the patients involved in a drill are volunteers who
try to do their best to simulate the signs of some specific
pathologies in their possible evolution, the e-DISTRICT
CiPro patients are computerized algorithms that change
state according to the treatment they receive, the time
elapsed or according to the appropriateness of their
transfer. Each state of a each individual patient contains
all the needed vital parameters and “gates” necessary to
change to a less or more stable state.
A computer simulation that can satisfy both the aspects of
a simulation taking place in and outside the hospital and

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 8: A real drill (a),(b) and HDPnets ® (c),(d)
could share the same patient’s library since in both
systems, in fact these are represented through similar
finite state automata.

Figure 9: “macro-simulation” with a Mass Casualty Incident
(MCI) happening in a metropolitan area and involving
Hospitals and facilities, performed with HDPnets ®.
Finally an essential part of the system is the
simulation log which can be used off-line to evaluate the
performance of the students both for evaluation purposes

and for a debriefing phase where the actions performed
can be replayed and discussed in the “virtual classroom”
so those students can learn from their errors. This is the
part that most pertains to the cultural education rather
than the pure training aspect.

5

References

[1]

Eurpean Distance Training Interacrive and Collaborative
Tools for the Civil Protection (e-DISTRICT CiPro),
Abstract Document Progress 1, 2005, edited by Consorzio
Scuola
Comunità
Impresa,
Novara
(IT),
http://www.edcipro.org/download/Abstract_Report01.pdf
, last accessed 19th April 2007
START triage, ED Manag. 1996 Sep;8(9):103-4
D’Antonio P., Nurses in war, The Lancet 2002; 360:s7-s8
Active
World
Education,
http://www.activeworlds.com/edu/awedu_participants.asp

Conclusions

A MEDLINE/PubMed search (official Medical
Literature [11] ) with the keywords “Disaster Medicine”
AND “Education” AND “Europe” only returns three
articles written in the past four years world wide, while
the fourth entry dates back to 1995. Disaster Medicine
Education at University level is, in Europe, a matter still
debated and no unified Academic rules seem to have been
established about this Subject (de Boer, 1995 [12],
Grunfeld, 1996 [13] ) . Some Authors (Cummings and
Della Corte, 2006 [14] ) made a sistematic review about
Medical Education (under and post-graduate) in Disaster
Medicine for physicians in the time-frame 1985-2006 and
ranked as “good” 54 articles worldwide, 25 of them
scored as “weak”, 25 as “moderate” and only four as
“strong”, the latter being published after Semptember 11,
2001. They conclude that the body of knowledge in
official medical literature about this subject is limited
before September 11, 2001 and improved since then. The
main contribution of the e-DISTRICT CiPro is the aim of
creating and promoting a framework for Education and
Training in this field. As far as the 3D Simulator is
concerned, it is one of the ‘bricks’ of this Project. In the
next future we are planning to test in detail its
effectiveness both from a usability point of view and from
a properly Educational one. A usability issue already
recognised is the non-effectiveness of textual chat
communication (we are planning to use real walkie-talkie
to allow a simpler and more natural way to speak).
Further developments could include the creation of an
exchange layer for the connection of the 3D Simulator to
a in-Hospital simulator, and the improvement of the
immersivity, for example, using one or more
interconnected CAVEs [15]). It could also be useful to
study the determinants of realism when planning a realsize drill.

6

7

Acknowledgements

3D graphics by F. Calignano (Politecnico di Torino,
Italy); 3D Simulator scripting, and web-based application
by A. Livio Beccaria (Università del Piemonte Orientale
“A. Avogadro”, Italy). Thanks to A. Forni, P. Maccari, A.
Varallo of CSCI (Italy) for reviewing this paper.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[2]
[3]
[4]

, last accessed 19th April 2007

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]

Dickey M, 3D Virtual Worlds and Learning: An Analysis
of the Impact of Design Affordances and Limitations in
Active Worlds, blaxxun interactive, and OnLive!
Traveler; and A Study of the Implementation of Active
Worlds for Formal and Informal Education, Dissertation
paper presented at Ohio University, 1999
Marchiraju R, 2003, Do I Really See a Bone?,
Proceedings of the 14th IEEE Visualization 2003 (Vis’03)
La Mura F et al, 2006, Esercitazioni 3D al computer e
scenari simulati di medicina d’emergenza e delle
catastrofi: il ruolo del fotorealismo, Min Anestesiol, Vol.
72 N. 10
Gribaudo M, La Mura F, “CityCarAccident 0.3”,
Settembre 2005, Gioco 3D al computer per la
rappresentazione e gestione di un paziente traumatizzato,
3rd Mediterranean Emergency Medicine Congress, Nizza
(FR)
Colombo D et al, 2006, POWER ECE (Exercise Creator
and Evaluator). Uno strumento per progettare, realizzare e
valutare una simulazione di maxi-emergenza tipo
functional exercise, Min Anestesiol, Vol. 72 N. 10.
La Mura F et al, 2006, Hospital Disaster Preparedness
Networked Simulator (HDPnetS) for research and training
in Disaster Medicine, Min Anestesiol, Vol. 72 N. 10.
United States National Library of Medicine, National
Institute
of
Health,
MEDLINE/PubMed,
http://pubmed.gov , last accessed 19th April 2007
de Boer J, An Introduction to Disaster Medicine in
Europe, J Emerg Med, 1995 Mar-Apr; 13(2): 211-6
Grunfeld A, Disaster Medicine in Europe, J Emerg Med,
1996 Jan-Feb;14(1):98
Cummings GE, Della Corte F, Cummings GG, Disasterr
medicine education for physicians: a sistematic review,
International Journal of Disaster Medicine, 2006, 4:3,
125-136
CAVE (recursive acronym), Cave Automatic Virtual
Environment,
Wikipedia,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cave_Automatic_Virtual_En
vironment , last accessed 19th April 2007

