Displaying LiDAR Data for Interactive Web-Based Modelling of the Environment
John Counsell, Steve Smith
University of the West of England, Bristol
{John.Counsell@uwe.ac.uk, Gostudio@BtInternet.com}
Abstract
The increasing commercial availability of highly
accurate LiDAR scanning offers remote sensed data
accurate enough for generalized and distant views of the
environment. From this data, bare earth digital terrain
models (DTMs) can be processed semi-automatically,
then draped with aerial imagery. The paper describes an
approach developed in the VEPs project that switches on
the LiDAR data for trees and buildings removed from the
DTM in the 3D Scene. This data can then be used to
visually judge the appropriate height and form of
buildings and trees. A set of web-based interactive tools
have been developed to enable users to freely adjust the
scale and mass of structures and vegetation to match the
selected point cloud area, substantially improving the
quality of presence and accuracy of the resulting model.
Issues are raised in obtaining equally accurate data of
what is proposed from Planners and Developers.

1: Introduction
The increasing commercial availability of highly
accurate LiDAR scanning offers remote sensed data
accurate enough for generalized and distant views of the
environment. From this data bare earth digital terrain
models (DTMs) can be processed semi-automatically,
then draped with aerial imagery. The automation process
was described in Richman et al 2005 ‘Remote Sensing,
LIDAR, automated data capture and the VEPS project’
[1]. This paper describes an approach developed in the
VEPs project [2] that switches on the LiDAR data for
trees and buildings removed from the DTM in the 3D
Scene. This data can then be used to visually judge the
appropriate height and form of buildings and trees. A set
of web-based interactive tools have been developed to
enable users to freely adjust the scale and mass of
modelled vegetation and building to match the selected
point cloud area, substantially improving the quality of
presence and accuracy of the resulting model. Use of
these tools by the public was discussed in our paper
‘Overcoming some of the issues in maintaining large
urban area 3D models via a web browser’. [3] However
significant difficulties have been found in obtaining
adequately accurate digital data of what is proposed from

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Planners and Developers. Use of the VEPs tools to
explore and set the bounds of acceptability is discussed.

2: The VEPs Project
VEPs, the ‘Virtual Environmental Planning
System’, is an Interreg IIIB funded European project
focused on the North West Europe region. The project
and its goals were described in our paper in last year’s IV
conference [3].

2.1 Block Extrusion Models vs Credible Presence
The most widespread current use of LiDAR, in
England and Wales, is undertaken by the Environment
Agency (EAEW), primarily for flood analysis. In
practice it has been found that such analysis is effective
currently based on a grid at 2m centres, so although the
technology can deliver greater accuracy, the majority of
the coverage is captured and stored at the 2m level of
detail. Data is available for limited areas, such as
London, at significantly higher resolutions . However the
Intermap Nextmap commercial complete coverage of the
UK based on SAR (Radar) technology is currently in a
5m grid.
CityGML defines 4 levels of detail for City
Modelling.[4] The headings underlined on Levels of
Detail (LOD) below are summarised from the more
detailed description in ‘Appraisal of standards for 3D
City Models’.[5] The comments below each heading
relate to our current experience in evaluating both data
and tools in VEPs.
• LoD 0: Regional model (2.5D) contains only the
DTM with Texture or Orthophoto. (See Image 1)
This corresponds to the bare earth DTMs currently
generated by the EAEW and other agencies, with the
addition of a draped aerial photograph, obtainable at
either 6.25 or 12.5cm resolution in the UK from
commercial companies such as Getmapping,com.
• LoD 1: A simple city model where buildings are
modeled as blocks with flat roofs.
At the moment from either the 2m EAEW dataset or
the 5m SARs dataset this level of detail is not
obtainable, because the footprints cannot be defined

Image 1 VEPs Frome Bare Earth DTM LOD0

•

•

•

with sufficient accuracy. Freiburg university within
the VEPs project have achieved some success in
automating the extract of many building footprints
from Lidar data, and extruding it up to either the
averaged highest point contained within the
footprint, or to match the height of the highest point.
This tends to produce an exaggerated effect of mass
at street level, since the walls are generally higher
than they would be in reality.
LoD 2: A City model with roof shapes and textures
for buildings and terrain. Also Vegetation.
Freiburg University as mentioned above have also
had some success in automatically generating roof
morphology from the LiDAR dataset. However
there are many limitations due to occlusion by trees
and other overhanging or masking elements,
together with complications of contained courtyards,
which also apply to the automated footprint extract.
LoD 3: This LoD includes highly differentiated,
architectural models of buildings, Vegetation, and
street furniture.
Even the 25cm LiDAR Data is not likely to be able
to distinguish street furniture, overhanging balconies
and porches sufficiently to produce a credible model
at this level of detail at street level, without
reference to other data sources such as mapping and
photographs. Chimneys, dormers and other fine
details that are so significant in creating credible
urban skylines will be captured but not always more
than intermittently.
LoD 4: Model of the interior of buildings, which
includes constructive elements and openings such as
windows and doors.
Architectural modelling of building interiors may in
the future be extractable from Ground-based Laser
scanning, but columns, furniture, and low partitions
all currently cause problems for recognition and
classification. There are major problems still
remaining with automation of building form from

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Ground-based Laser scanning that have yet to be
resolved.[6]
Most available LiDAR data is not high enough
resolution to effectively identify and extract immediately
recognizable building form that conveys a credible sense
of presence at street level, including the roof profile(s) as
silhouetted against the sky. The issue therefore remains
as to what can be done in the meantime to make effective
use of the bare earth DTMs and simple building block
models that are increasingly available.
As discussed in our 2006 paper ‘Overcoming some
of the issues in maintaining large urban area 3D models
via a web browser’ a project goal is to simplify the
process and reduce the costs of creating and updating
large area environment modelling that conveys a credible
sense of presence and is acceptably up to date.[7] A
credible sense of presence in this context may be
measured by whether such a scene at street level would
be readily recognized by the majority of users, since this
is the viewpoint from which many planning based visual
impact judgements are to be made. While the
background buildings may still usefully be automatically
extruded up as blocks, it is held that the foreground
buildings will require more detail than much of the
available remote sensed data can currently provide for
automation. Foreground buildings that lack relief (such
as windows, doors, porches, gutters, downpipes and
other detail) are not usually found to convey credible
presence, although this can be achieved by applied
bitmaps rather than necessarily through modelling or
scanning.

Image2 ‘Layer’ Controls to toggle resolution

2.2 Web tools for new modelling
The VEPs project is focused on easing the task of
creating and comparing 3D modelling of what does not
exist, within an existing context. To this end both data
about the proposals and intent are required (discussed
later) and tools are needed that allow modelling to be
created in the context of the varying height of the DTM.
Since our presentation at IV2006 these tools have been
developed and refined in response to user feedback.
Skyline identified the need for and demonstrated the
use of point cloud data selectively switched on in an

interactive scene using their proprietary software in
2006. “The Point Cloud extension allows you to add and
edit a pre-processed point cloud model at any point in the
3D Terrain. These models are created from a list of
points in a 3D area that are collected by various 3D

scanners.” Skyline Software Systems Inc. 2006. [9]
Some exploration has also taken place of how best to
show point cloud data in the context of the VEPs ePlanner interactive web model for use in more accurately
visually checking or digitising heights, and this feature

Image 3 VEPs Frome LOD0 with LiDAR on (White Point Cloud) Oblique view

Image 4 VEPs Frome Plan View with Hi Res LiDAR (White Point Cloud)

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

has now started to be implemented. Thus although the
use of point cloud data for interactive modelling
guidance is not new as such, in this non-proprietary open
source context we believe it may be.
A library of CAD derived VRML components
(including complete buildings with bitmap surfaces and
groups of buildings as zip files) is in development that
can be positioned in the scene, and these can currently be
scaled, moved in any axis, and rotated. Other exploratory
modelling is created interactively using the developing
toolset through digitisation on the DTM. It deploys (one
of a possible number of) pre-defined parametric building
or other 3D objects via the ExternProto primitive. On
‘save’ the modified parameters (ExternProto object
reference and instance, perimeter, position, height with
face definitions including bitmap, colour, transparency)
are written to a PHP database locally. On ‘share’ this
data is written to the server.

Image 5 VEPs ePlanner Interactive Toolset

synchronous collaboration and discussion it is intended
to explore the use of real-time many to many video
conferencing in conjunction with desktop sharing using
the web based Marratech conferencing system [8]. Users,
whether the originator or other collaborators/’members
of the public’ with whom the originator has shared the
modelling, can interactively modify the elevational
height of a selected building and adjust the slope or form
of its roof. However currently in order to move the
building once created or change its scale its necessary to
save it as a VRML object and then re-import it.
Consequently proposed buildings derived from CAD and
provided by design consultancies or developers can also
be uploaded and viewed in the same context.
As also discussed in our 2006 paper [7]: users can
adjust the colour or transparency of a selected building,
change them to wireline, or add rectified images (perhaps
taken by digital camera or camera-phone) to a single
selected elevation or all elevations; There is perhaps a
presumption that photos of existing and perhaps nearby
buildings will provide the template elevations for the
proposed; However this does not preclude the use of
scanned or photographed sketch drawings for elevations,
which may in fact prove more effective at conveying the
‘uncertainty’ of the proposal and thus encouraging the
exploration of alternatives and a free debate.
A number of pilot sites where there is the possibility
of some planning controversy have been established,
although most are not progressed greatly yet beyond
LOD0. At present they consist of a DTM with draped
aerial imagery and vector mapping. The VEPs e-Planner
toolset has the capacity to provide two zones, an inner
neighbourhood where users can interact and model, and
an outer contextual zone that is interactively navigable
but ‘locked’. Within the interactive modelling zone
(which can be an entire neighbourhood or scene) users
can both digitise by tracing the aerial imagery or digitise
new buildings in context, in either plan or 3D view.
These together with the toolsets are beginning to undergo
user evaluation by a new partner Groundwork UK, who
have recently joined the VEPs consortium, as also have
the University of Tours, and the City of Stuttgart.

3: Digital Data about proposals

Image 6 interactively heighting to white LiDAR
Others can then read the data from the server, either
to view it, or to save it locally prior to modification or
extension, and then share it via the server again. That is
appropriate for asynchronous collaboration. For

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

In Australia and elsewhere it has become (if not
mandatory) normal to upload 3D digital models, so that
Planners may use them and visualise them in context,
leading to a city model that is thus kept both up to date,
forward looking, and useful.[10] In Germany on the
other hand such City Models are created from regular
survey and resurvey as the purview of the City
authorities. These models tend to be perhaps a little less
forward looking as a consequence. It is not surprising
thus that the CityGML initiative towards standardisation

originates in Germany, although a survey conducted by
the VEPS project has revealed that the majority of such
models are still LOD1.
There have been a number of initiatives in the UK
to place planning application information in the public
domain on line as part of a move to more transparent
government. The UK Central Government has now
started actively to seek ways to improve both the
planning process in general and public participation in
that process, through its recent e-Planning Blueprint,
published in August 2004 [11]. Initiatives since launched
include the national PARSOL (Planning and Regulatory
Services Online) project, a range of ‘Pathfinder’ projects
and the Implementing e-Government (IeG) initiative.
The main focus of these initiatives is to develop a set of
toolkits, standards and ‘demonstrator’ projects with the
aim of assisting planning authorities to implement ePlanning in forms that citizens will both comprehend and
use in their dealings with the councils. New online
planning portals are aimed at introducing partnership
working, bringing together planning, building control
and licensing services.
In several of the case study applications referred to
above it has proved difficult to obtain digital data that
shows the proposals, even in plan form. Despite the
initiatives referred to above the approach taken most of
the time to uploading planning applications to these new
portals is the digital equivalent of paper, often PDF
format, plans and elevations, but no 3D. In many
instances the documents clearly state that they are not to
scale. In others the scanning process has altered any
original scale that the plans might possess, and there is
not quality assurance to avoid dimensional shrinkage that
is different in different axes. In these cases it takes some
time and significant trial and error to rubber sheet stretch
the proposed plan to fit as an overlay on the existing.
Without this plan data it is difficult to model the
proposals or to fully address the visual and massing
implications, even with toolsets such as VEPs e-Planner
or traditional CAD.
So the question remains as to where this leaves
those who wish to comment on the emerging master plan
for an area or a specific proposal, and perhaps suggest
modifications or alternatives. The e-Planner tools have
been developed partly in response to this. The ability to
set a boundary only within which new buildings can be
digitised or existing buildings ‘modified’ or ‘deleted’
allows a focus to be kept on a specific redevelopment
site or area. Users can interactively sketch in new
buildings or download template buildings from libraries.
The system now allows those with administrator rights to
upload new layers and overlays into the scene over the
aerial photo. These can be the draped plan proposal, to
serve as a context for discussion and digitising and
debating new massing. It is however apparent that any

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

system analogous to CAD is likely to require some
conceptual grasp and understanding or skill in the user.
Evaluation to date suggests that most users can grasp the
tools fairly swiftly, but the groups from which those
users have been drawn has been selectively skewed to
those with interest in this field, and often some expertise.
The Groundwork evaluation is beginning to explore
whether a larger more random group of publicly
concerned citizens are likely to use these tools, or
whether it will be the task of facilitators to develop the
modelling, perhaps in interactive discussion with the
public.

4: Conclusion
This paper has described one approach that has been
developed in the VEPs project to switch on the Lidar
data for trees and buildings removed from the DTM in
the 3D Scene. That data can then be used to accurately
visually judge the appropriate height and form of
buildings and trees.
A set of web-based interactive tools have been
developed to enable users to freely adjust the scale and
mass of upward extrusions to match the selected point
cloud area, substantially improving the quality of
presence and accuracy of the resulting model.
Some of the issues of obtaining equally accurate
data from Planners and Developers of what is proposed
have been discussed. Alternative approaches to exploring
and setting the bounds of acceptability, if accurate data is
not available, have been explored, by empowering
citizens to take responsibility for the editing and
updating of their own neighbourhoods in 3D form and
proposing their own “what if” scenarios for their future
development.

5: Acknowledgements
The project work presented in this paper is cofinanced through the INTERREG IIIB North West
Europe programme.

6: References
[1]

[2]

Richman, A. Hamilton, A. Arayici, Y. Counsell, J.
Tkhelidze, B. (2005) ‘Remote Sensing, LIDAR,
automated data capture and the VEPS project’ in
proceedings of IV05 9th Intl Conference on Information
Visualisation London, edited by Banissi et al, published
by the IEEE Computer Soc. Los Alamitos California.
Virtual Environmental Planning system ,funded Dec
2004 to 2007, by INTERREG IIIB NWE-ENO (a
Community Initiative Programme funded by the

European
Regional
Development
Fund
www.nweurope.org ) www.veps3d.org
[3] Duhr,S, Bates-Brkljac, N. Counsell, J. 2005. ‘Public
Digital Collaboration in Planning’ in ' Cooperative
Design, Visualisation and Engineering' Ed. Professor Y
Luo, 'Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3675'
published by Springer-Verlag, Heidelburg, pp 186-193.
[4] CityGML url at http://www.citygml.org/#about
[5] Ewald K, Coors, V. 2005 : ‘Appraisal of standards for
3D City Models’ in proceedings of IV05 9th Intl
Conference on Information Visualisation London, edited
by Banissi et al, published by the IEEE Computer Soc.
Los Alamitos California.
[6] Arayici Y, Hamilton A, 2005 ‘Modelling 3D Scanned
Data to Visualise the Built Environment’ in proceedings
of IV05 9th Intl Conference on Information Visualisation
London, edited by Banissi et al, published by the IEEE
Computer Soc. Los Alamitos California.
[7] Counsell, J, Smith, S, Richman A 2006: ‘Overcoming
some of the issues in maintaining large urban area 3D
models via a web browser’ in proceedings of IV06 10th
Intl Conference on Information Visualisation London,
edited by Banissi et al, published by the IEEE Computer
Soc. Los Alamitos California.
[8] Marratech url at www.marratech.com
[9] Skyline Terrabuilder and Terraexplorer url at:
http://www.skylinesoft.com/corporate/technology/techno
logy_TerraExplorer-Extensions.asp
[10] Buccolo et al. (2001),Client Expectation of Virtual
Environments for Urban Design, Proceedings of IV2001
Information Visualisation International Conference,IEEE
2001, California, pp690-694
[11] ODPM: Office of the Deputy of Prime Minister, EPlanning Programme Blueprint, 2004 Available online
http://www.odpm.gov.uk/stellent/groups/odpm_planning
/documents/downloadable/odpm-plan_o30468.pdf

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

