Narrative based Topic Visualization for Chronological Data
Mina AKAISHI
RCAST
The University of Tokyo, Japan
akaishi@ai.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Yoshikiyo KATO
National Institute of
Information and Communications
Technology, Japan
ykato@nict.go.jp
Koichi HORI
RCAST
The University of Tokyo, Japan
hori@ai.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Ken SATOH
National Institute of Informatics
and Sokendai, Japan
ksatoh@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
This paper proposes several methods visualizing topics
in documents. (i) Word Colony represents the dependency
relationships among term occurrences in a target document. It helps users get an overview of a document. Using
Word Colony with pictures gives users a more intuitive impression. (ii) Topic Sequence is a concatenation of Word
Colonies for segmented documents. It shows plots as a
story’s topic transitions. (iii) Topic Matrix represents relations among topics based on latent contexts within a collection of documents. Several visualization techniques enable
users to visualize topics in a document in different ways. It
gives variations of viewpoint and triggers the creative imagination.

1

Introduction

Vast amounts of information are currently being accumulated at an accelerating pace in many fields. As a result,
huge numbers of documents are being stored. However, it
is difficult to quickly grasp their content. Support of users’
intuitive access to large amounts of information is urgently
needed.
Information visualization systems enable users to find
patterns, relationships, and structures in data and may help
users gain knowledge or confirm hypotheses.
There are several techniques that provide overview of a
large set of documents. For example, ThemeRiver[4] provides users with a macro-view of thematic changes in a corpus of documents over a serial dimension. It is designed
to facilitate the identification of trends, patterns, and unexpected occurrence or non-occurrence of themes or topics.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Timeline[1] is a DHTML-based AJAX widget for visualizing time-based events. Those give one aspect of a target
document set. However, to support user’s creativity, it is required to change user’s view point dynamically for finding
unexpected relationships among data.
In this paper, we propose Word Colony, Topic Sequence
and Topic Matrix which show topics in documents based
on narrativity. They also help users interpret a story from
various view-points.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the notion of Narrative Navigator and
its framework. In Section 3, we present Word Colony and
examples of its implementation. In Section 4, we explain
Topic Sequence and Topic Matrix. Finally, in Section 5, we
make some concluding remarks.

2

Narrative Navigator

Narrative Navigator is a framework for accessing information based on the narrative structure model, which is introduced in section 2.1. The Narrative Navigator framework
is explained in section 2.2.

2.1

Narrative Structure Model

Table 1 lists the narrative components discussed in this
paper. The most basic element in a narrative is a character.
An event occurs through the interaction of a set of characters. A scene consists of a chunk of events. A story consists
of a sequence of scenes. A world model is made up of a set
of stories.
We map the narrative components onto elements of documents. A character is mapped onto a term in a document.

Table 1. Mapping of Narrative Components
onto Text Elements
world model
story
scene
event
character

set of stories
sequence of scenes
chunk of sentence
set of terms (ex. sentences)
term

An event is mapped onto a set of terms in a sentence. Then,
a chunk of events is regarded as a scene and a sequence of
scenes is regarded as a story. As a result, a world model is
defined by a set of documents.
It is important that the conditions among characters are
defined in the context of the application domain. In this
paper, we focus on the notion of a term dependency and
term attractiveness. These are described in detail in section
3.1.

2.2

Narrative Navigator Framework

Figure 1 shows a narrative navigator framework
(NANA). It consists of a decomposition unit and a composition unit. A set of stories is stored in a database by a
decomposition unit. In the database, each story is divided
into scenes, forming a world model. Appropriate scenes are
selected and used by the composition unit to compose a new
story.
When a user accesses the information, NANA provides
the results as a story. The story is presented in various ways.
The visualization methods by which it is presented are described in the following sections.

3

Visualization of Topics

in a variety of ways. Term dependency and term attractiveness are regarded as the cohesion between terms in a document. These notions form the basis of NANA. We define
these two notions as follows.
The dependence of a term t on a term t′ in a document
d, denoted by tdd (t, t′ ), is given by conditional probability
as follows.
tdd (t, t′ ) =

sentencesd (t, t′ )
,
sentencesd (t)

(1)

where sentencesd (t, t′ ) is the number of sentences that
includes the terms t and t′ in the document d, and
sentencesd (t) is the number of sentences that includes the
term t in the document d.
Attractiveness of term t is the sum of dependency of any
term t′′ in a document on the term t. It is calculated as
follows:
tdd (t′′ , t)

attrd (t) =

(2)

t′′ ∈T

Term attractiveness is regarded as popularity of the term.

3.2

Word Colony

In this paper, we regard term dependency as cohesion
of terms in a document. We focus on the characteristics of
the dependence of occurrence among terms, which can be
divided into three groups. The first is the group of interdependent terms that appear near each other in a document.
The second group is dependent terms. One term depends on
another but not the reverse. The last group is independent
terms.
Let us assume that term t is given. Based on tdd (t, t′ ),
any other term t′ is grouped into the following types.
1. Interdependent terms

To help users’ quickly access information, NANA provides a text visualization function, transforming text into
Word Colony, which visualizes the dependency relationships among terms as a graph. Text has a rich structure in
which sentences are grouped and related to one another in
a variety of ways. Each sentence consists of terms. Word
Colony[2] visualizes the relationship among term dependencies, creating what is regarded as a visual abstract of
a document.
In this section, we introduce two basic notions, term dependency and term attractiveness, which are the basis of
Word Colony.

3.1

Term Dependency and Term Attractiveness

In this paper, we treat a sentence as a set of terms. Sentences in a document are grouped and related to one another

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

If tdd (t, t′ ) ≥ δ and tdd (t′ , t) ≥ δ, then term t and
t′ are interdependent terms. These are closely relevant
terms in the context of the original document. Such
terms taken together vaguely suggest some notion.
2. Dependent terms
If tdd (t, t′ ) > σ ≥ µ ≥ tdd (t′ , t), then term t depends
on term t′ . Term t emphasizes one aspect of terms t′
given the context.
3. Independent terms
If tdd (t, t′ ) and tdd (t′ , t) do not satisfy the previous
conditions, then terms t and t′ are independent terms.
Interdependent terms are very strongly related to each
other. It is easy to guess their relations. While dependent terms suggest associable relations between main terms

New Document

Original Documents

Query

Narrative Navigator
Visualization Unit
Text

Word Colony

Text Segmentation Unit

Text Concatenation Unit

document

sequence of segments

segments

segments

decomposition
rules

composition
rules

Database

Figure 1. Framework of Narrative Navigator.
and subordinate terms, it can be said that the main terms
are the important words that are surrounded by subordinate terms, suggesting various subtle meanings of the topic
words. There are also independent terms.
Important topic terms, which are surrounded by dependent terms, provide an outline of a document’s content, enabling visualization of such relationships.
The dependency relationship among terms forms a directed graph, called Word Colony. In Word Colony, interdependent terms are embedded into the same node. The
strength of term dependence is mapped onto the distance
between nodes of terms, and term attractiveness is mapped
onto the size of node. To visualize this relationship, we use
a spring model graph, which is a visual overview of a document.
Figure 2 shows an example of Word Colony. This document is a chronological event data concerning ”Yoritomo
MINAMOTO”, who was a famous Japanese shogun of the
12th century. Word Colony shows dependency relationships
among the terms in the document. Many nodes surround the
biggest node, which is labeled ”Yoritomo”. These nodes are
regarded as a visualization of human relations at that time
from the viewpoint of Yoritomo.

3.3

Word Colony with Pictures

The Word Colony in figure 3 is the same Word Colony
as the in figure 2. The table in the upper right of figure
3 defines a mapping of terms onto pictures. According to
this mapping table, the system visualizes a word node as
a picture. For example, the biggest node at the center of

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

figure 2 is visualized as the biggest picture node at the center
of figure 3. It attracts a user’s interest and gives different
visions of the same document.
Figure 4 is an overview of Yoshitsune’s life as visualized
by Word Colony. It shows that the distance between Yoshitsune and his elder brother Yoritomo is shorter than the distance between Yoshitsune and his right-hand man Benkei or
his lover Shizuka. Moreover, the distance between Yoshitsune and Yoritomo is shorter than the distance between the
two in figure 3.

3.4

Word Colony without Most Attractive Word

Figure 3 represents Word Colony for all events that are
extracted by the keyword ”Yoritomo”. It shows relations
among people of those days from the viewpoint of Yoritomo. However there are several relations hidden behind
Yoritomo’s term attractiveness. To visualize such hidden relations, the system eliminates the most attractive word and
calculates Word Colony again.
Figure 5 shows the result, that is, the relation among the
people around Yoritomo. This is regarded as the environment of Yoritomo’s life. This figure indicates that the most
important person in Yoritomo’s life is Yoshitsune, one of
Yoritomo’s younger brothers.
Figure 6 is Word Colony calculated without ”Yoshitsune”. Yoritomo is conspicuous in figure 6. In figure 5,
in contrast, nodes become entangled. Yoshitsune is not the
center of this Word Colony. It can be interpreted that Yoritomo was the most influential person for Yoshitsune even

Chronological Table
Mapping Table
Yoritomo

Chronological Table
Yoshitsune
Shizuka
…
…

Yoritomo

Yoritomo

Yoshitsune

Word Colony

Yoshitsune

Figure 2. Word Colony.
though Yoshitsune was one of the important persons for
Yoritomo.

4

Figure 3. Word Colony with Pictures.

Visualization of Topic Flows

NANA represents the content of a document as a Topic
Sequence and Topic Matrix. Topic Sequence is regarded as
the graphical plot of a document and Topic Matrix represents the relationships among several topic changes. They
support users’ efforts to find desired parts of documents and
to guess the context (plot) of the document. This section describes the method of dividing a text into chunks, which is
a necessary first step in developing this function.

4.1

Word Colony

Yoritomo
Benkei
Shizuka

Text Segmentation Based on Topic Sequence
Analysis
Yoshitsune

Topic sequence analysis detects topic changes in a text
by looking at variations in term attractiveness and segments
the original text into smaller pieces based on the detected
topic change points. Given a document as a set of sentences
D = {si }, we define the subset of D as Di = {sk |k =

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Word Colony

Figure 4. Overview of Yoshitsune’s Life.

Yoshitsune
Word Colony

Figure 5. Overview of Yoritomo’s Life Environment.

1 · · · i} ⊂ D where i ≥ 1. Term attractiveness attri (t) is
computed for each Di , and for each t ∈ T . Topic change
points are identified by looking at variations in attri (t) as i
increases. Detection of topic change is based on the attractiveness ranking of terms. If the attractiveness of the top n
terms in the ranking do not change for f consecutive sentences, then we assume the topic have changed at the first
sentence of such sequence. More formally, for each term
tl of the top n terms in the attractiveness ranking for Dm ,
if attrm (tl ) = attrm+1 (tl ) = · · · = attrm+f −1 (tl ), so
we assume i = m to be the point where the topic changed.
Here, n and f are the parameters of the topic change detection algorithm and are called top and f lat, respectively.
If top is set larger, the number of terms to be observed
increases accordingly, increasing the probability that topic
change will be detected. f lat indicates how long we must
wait until the topic can be regarded as stabilized. The higher
the f lat is set, the lower the probability of topic change becomes.
There are other text segmentation techniques. However
the evaluation of text segmentation techniques is a difficult
problem and comparison of text segmentation techniques is
beyond the scope of this paper. (See [3], [5], [6]).

4.2

Yoritomo

Benkei

Shizuka

Word Colony

Figure 6. Overview of Yoshitsune’s Life Environment.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Topic Sequence

Figure 7 shows the Topic Sequence of the same document as shown in figure, 2, 3 and 5. The document is first
segmented by the text segmentation unit of NANA. Then
each segmented text is visualized by Word Colony. Topic
Sequence is formed by the concatenation of such Word
Colonies. Topic Sequence provides more detailed information about the plot of the original document.
In figure 7, time flows from upper left to lower right. By
coming down in time, people come together to Yoritomo.
Yoshitsune, who is Yoritomo’s younger brother, is ranked
first, in the central segment of Yoritomo’s life.
Figure 8 is a plot of Yoshitsune’s life visualized as Topic
Sequence. In this case, Yoritomo appears in several segments of Yoshitsune’s life.
It can be interpreted that Yoshitsune played the important role at one period of Yoritomo’s life, while Yoritomo
occupied a important position in whole life of Yoshitsune.

4.3

Topic Matrix

Topic Matirx provides a visualization of topic change
over time based on latent contexts within a collection of
documents. Figure 9 shows an example of Topic Matrix.
When a user asks a query by specifying a context keyword,
a system returns a sequence of icons that corresponds to
segments. All segments include the context keyword. For
example, in figure 9, the first line of the icon sequence

t

Yoritomo
Yoshitsune
Masako
Shizuka

t

Yoshitsune

Topic Matrix

Figure 9. Interactions between Yoritomo and
Yoshitsune’s Lives.

Topic Sequence

Figure 7. Course of Yoritomo’s Life.

Yoritomo

t

Yoritomo

Yoritomo

presents embedded stories’ plots based on latent contexts in
a collection of documents. These visualizations are based
on the notions of term dependency and term attractiveness.
In future work, we plan to apply these methods to another domain’s document collections and evaluate the effectiveness of the system.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Mr. Toshiyuki Kikuchi (NorthGrid
Corporation, Japan) for his constructive comments and
technical support.

Yoritomo

References
Topic Sequence

[1] Timeline: http://simile.mit.edu/timeline/.
Figure 8. Course of Yoshitsune’s Life.
is created by asking which keyword is Yoritomo. In the
same way, the following icon sequences are created by the
context keyword Yoshitsune, who is Yoritomo’s younger
brother, Masako who is Yoritomo’s wife, and Shizuka who
is Yoshitsune’s lover. Each icon can be transformed into
Word Colony. This enables creation of Topic Matrix, which
shows cross relationships based on latent contexts in a document set.

5

Conclusion

We proposed several methods of visualizing topics based
on the narrative structure of a document. Word Colony
works as a visual abstract of whole or a part of document. The concatenation of Word Colonies forms a Topic
Sequence which shows the plot of a document. Topic Matrix

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[2] M. Akaishi, K. Satoh, and Y. Tanaka. An associative information retrieval based on the dependency of term cooccurrence. In Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence,
Volume 3245, pages 195–206, 2004.
[3] D. Beeferman, A. Berger, and J. Latterty. Statistical
models for text segmentation. In Machine Learning
34(1-3), pages 177–210, 1999.
[4] S. Havre, B. Hetzler, and L. Nowell. Themeriver: Visualizing theme changes over time. In Proc. of IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization, 2000.
[5] M. Hearst. Texttiling: Segmenting text into multiparagraph subtopic passages. In Computational Linguistics 23(1), pages 33–64, 1997.
[6] I. Mani. Automatic Summarization. John Benjamins
Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 2001.

