Without Knowledge Visualization? Proposing a Deconstructivist Approach to
Metaphor, Meaning and Perception
Stefan Bertschi
University of Zurich
stefan.bertschi@loginb.com
Abstract
This paper is designed to examine whether metaphor, meaning and perception are sufficiently dealt
with in knowledge visualization. This culminates in the
following hypothesis: Because knowledge visualization
is a process of construction and reconstruction, the
only reasonable approach to evaluate its mechanisms
and effectiveness has to be deconstructivist. Such an
approach is introduced and examined, leading to primary conclusions and an outlook on a theoretical
foundation of an upcoming ‘scientific discipline’.

1. Introduction
At the first symposium on knowledge visualization
(IV’05) Noah Bubenhofer and I presented a paper on
‘linguistic learning’ as a new conceptual focus [1]. We
examined the metaphorical face of knowledge visualization and applied initial criticism on a missing theoretical foundation. Thereby, the normative structures in
language and visualization, their linguistic coinage,
came to the fore. Knowledge is constantly being reconstructed through communication and the use of existing
structures and patterns. Thus, one does not have to verbalize and visualize knowledge assets every time
anew, but one can refer to antecedent constructions.
At IV’05, we came to the conclusion that knowledge visualization “cannot be more than a mirror image of linguistic (or idiomatic) coinage, which in turn
is a mirror image of culture and [...] context.” [1, p.
388] Hence, to a certain extent we criticised the overhasty and little reflected foundation of a ‘discipline’
from within. This previous ‘constructivist’ approach
introduced the observation that “language and culture
shape metaphors applied in visualization” [2].
After investigating the basic principles of knowledge visualization and exploring the use of metaphors
[1], it would seem it is about time to combine these
two ‘vistas’ and to take a ‘tertia vista’: a first attempt to

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

highlight what would have to be constructed and reconstructed in knowledge visualization. In line with the
construction and reconstruction of knowledge, it seems
promising to introduce a new access to its visualization. In section 2, I shall introduce a deconstructivist
approach.
Knowledge visualization aims at augmenting communication via graphic means that mediate knowledge
through metaphors. Following the ‘tertia vista’ in section 3, I rejoin the debate on metaphor in knowledge
visualization in section 4. In the penultimate section, I
argue that semiotization and symbolization are plausible ways to integrate the ‘tertia vista’ and metaphor: A
functional perception is dependent on the intended
meaning of visualization. Knowledge visualization
needs an underlying theoretical approach before it is
“time to establish visualization science as a scientific
discipline” [4]. Finally, I present the major conclusions
and an outlook that can be drawn from this analysis.

2. Semiology and deconstruction
Whereas the previous paper was aimed at giving
some thought to a “semiology of the communication of
knowledge” [1, p. 388], this paper resumes this train of
thought. ‘Linguistic learning’ already pointed in a direction predetermined by the so-called ‘linguistic turn’,
a paradigmatic turn based on “the view that philosophical problems are problems which may be solved (or
dissolved) either by reforming language, or by understanding more about the language we presently use.”
[5, p. 3] These problems particularly refer to the question about the ‘conditions of the possibility’ of knowledge and have effects not limited to philosophy.
In the linguistic turn, the question ‘What is (an) X?’
was replaced by ‘What is the meaning of ‘X’?’ (i.e.,
discovering the nature of ‘X’) and subsequently by
‘How do we (or should we) use the word ‘X’?’ (e.g., to
improve and sustain the transfer of knowledge) [5, p.
4]. Finally, in discourse linguistics this would lead to
the question: What does one have to know in order to

know (to be aware of) the use of ‘X’? Hence, “we cannot investigate […] the concept of X, except by investigating our use of words” [5, p. 12]. The ‘linguistic
turn’ questions the idea of language as a transparent
medium for the perception and communication of reality. Language is seen as a condition of thinking which
cannot be deceived, i.e., all human knowledge is structured by language; reality beyond language is not existent or at least unattainable [6, p. 371].
The problem of language as a medium and a carrier
of meaning is reflected in ‘semiology’, the study of the
function of signs and symbols in communication [13,
p. 95 f.; cf. 3, p. 34]. It is suspected that knowledge
visualization is effected by this problem. Therefore, a
convergence seems fruitful: Both try to describe ‘reality’; both engage in linguistic reference, “the nonverbal ‘outside’ to which language refers, by which it
is conditioned and upon which it acts.” [7, p. 27] The
following definition sheds new light on this particular
reference: “Semiology, as opposed to semantics, is the
science or study of signs as signifiers; it does not ask
what words mean but how they mean.” [7, p. 28, my
italics] In his definition, Paul de Man conceives ‘semiology’ rather as a kind of deconstructive reading. Applied to the present context, the interest in knowledge
visualization does not merely lay on what is said but on
how (and additionally why) it is said and how and why
visualizations mean something.
In a critical view of knowledge visualization, one
may assume that its ‘problem determination’ and
‘problem solving’ are situated on the side of content
and not reflection (theory). The present approach does
not raise the question what visual representations mean
but how and why they mean. Therefore, “[t]he demystifying power of semiology” seems to be a suitable approach because it “explodes the myth of semantic correspondence between sign and referent” [7, p. 28]. It
only remains what is called ‘deconstruction’.
In order to understand the idea a sign conveys, it is
to be interpreted. This is necessary because “the sign is
not the thing but a meaning derived from the thing by a
process here called representation”; “[t]he interpretation of the sign is not […] a meaning but [reference to]
another sign” [7, p. 29]. In this poststructuralist paradigm conjoins the recourse to the linguistic turn [6, p.
523]. Poststructuralism develops its specific theories
out of a rigorous semiotization of the world. Thereby,
deconstruction is a “subversive principle of the approach to texts ‘from within’” [6, p. 101]; deconstruction is theory and practice of poststructuralist philosophy and literary criticism. Its principle is mindful of
criticising the little reflected foundation of knowledge
visualization ‘from within’.
Broadly defined, deconstruction is a type of reading
texts, of revealing the underlying circumstances and

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

contexts in which they are written and received. The
deconstruction of a text proceeds “by the careful teasing out of warring forces of signification within the
text itself. […] [It] is a reading which analyzes the
specificity of a text’s critical difference from itself.” [8,
p. 3] Thereby, deconstruction investigates “the tension
between modes of signification, as between the performative and constative dimensions of language.” [9,
p. 122] As a result, every deconstructivist approach can
be seen as some kind of depiction or visualization, and
every visualization should be seen from such a perspective.

3. Knowledge visualization: tertia vista
The “new research focus” (or “field” or “area” [cf.
3, p. 14]) of knowledge visualization aims at depicting
“how complementary visual representations can be
used to improve the transfer of knowledge in organizations.” [3, p. 2] Examples of representations are images, objects, interactive visualizations or stories. The
following hypothesis emanated from the ‘prima vista’
applied in [1, p. 384]: Knowledge visualizations “aim
particularly at portraying the reconstruction of patterns”. In the following, we take a ‘tertia vista’ by analyzing how these patterns are being reconstructed.
One important aspect is noted right at the beginning
of the first, major scholarly work on knowledge visualization: “In contrast to information, which is explicit,
knowledge has to be re-constructed by each individual.
This process happens through communication and interaction with explicit information – verbal or visual.”
[3, p. 12, my italics] In his thesis, Remo Burkhard
states “the main need […] is to create a theoretical
basis for the new research field Knowledge Visualization.” [3, p. 15, my italics] Considering its parent disciplines, he senses a “need for the transfer of insights”
in information visualization [3, p. 16] and a “need to
care for the recipient” in visual communication [3, p.
17]. It should be noted that knowledge visualization yet
seems to be closer to ‘visual communication’ than to
‘information visualization’. Because “there is a need to
complement verbal representations with visual representations”, novel methods are seen in “the use of visual metaphors to transfer and remember complex concepts, or visual storytelling to disseminate knowledge.”
[3, p. 17] However, to integrate the perspective of the
recipient is important for both (or all three) disciplines,
but it is not sufficiently leveraged in any of them.
A main observation of constructivism is that
“knowledge is actively constructed or re-constructed
by each individual. And individuals need to accord
meaning to knowledge instead of just accumulating
facts.” [3, p. 25] Furthermore, “collaboration is important for social negotiation on meaning, for the testing

of ideas, and the exchange and discussion of different
perspectives.” However, everyone who wants to
“transfer knowledge to one or more individuals, with
similar or different backgrounds” [3, p. 31] has to be
aware that “visualizations need to be customized […]
in a way that the recipient can re-construct knowledge
as intended by the sender” [3, p. 54]. To allow this
reconstruction, ‘knowledge communication’ should not
only transfer facts, to answer questions like ‘what?’ but
transfer insights, to answer questions like ‘why?’ and
‘how?’ The latter questions lead on to perception as “a
set of processes by which we recognize, organize, and
make sense of stimuli in our environment.” [3, p. 40]
Because of its focus on content rather than theory,
these aspects of constructivism and perception are only
insufficiently addressed in knowledge visualization.
Furthermore, Burkhard aims “to make new contributions by establishing the new field Knowledge Visualization in the context of business knowledge management.” [3, p. 52] This focus is too restrictive, as
there is more potential in the construction and reconstruction of knowledge or so-called ‘knowledge visualization’. Burkhard’s contributions include other aspects, like the risks of visualization, e.g., “reality could
be distorted through [misinformation and] misinterpretations” or merely by over-simplification [3, p. 116].
However, it is not intended to address each of them in
isolation. Instead I rejoin and extend the previous debate on metaphors.

4. The concept of metaphor: a rejoinder
In his thesis [3], Burkhard uses the term ‘metaphor’
62 times, but he does not sufficiently explain what is
meant, let alone tailor this figure of speech to knowledge visualization. For instance, in order to introduce
the term ‘metaphor’ [3, p. 62] he refers to yet another
incomplete explanation of this particular figure of
speech in knowledge visualization [cf. 18]. Burkhard
introduces the so-called ‘tube map’ metaphor as the
most prominent example [3, pp. 79-84], but does not
leverage its potential of being used as a ‘case study’ to
illustrate the basic functionality of metaphor in knowledge visualization. Another example would be the
reference to ‘mental images’ and symbolism [3, pp.
105-107] without any further explanation of these concepts relevant to the use of metaphors.
In his discussion of the cognitive benefits of visual
representations, Burkhard states: “Visual imagery […]
suggests that visual recall is more efficient than verbal
recall. […] [I]t is clear that humans have a natural ability to use images” because they “think in images, and
accordingly, can more easily remember by the use of
images.” [3, p. 104] Apart from mentioning the benefits for recall and understanding of information, this

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

important and legitimating aspect for visualization is
not further elaborated, let alone sufficiently connected
to metaphor.
It is fair to say that some basic concepts are mentioned in knowledge visualization [cf. 3] and that the
use of ‘visual metaphors’ is prominent [cf. 18]. However, a solid introduction and critical discussion of
‘metaphor’ is missing to this day. I shall not elaborate
in further detail on this, but instead refer to the criticism brought forward in [1, p. 386].

4.1. What is a metaphor?
Common definitions of metaphor are: “metaphor is
that figure of speech whereby we speak about one
thing in terms which are seen to be suggestive of another” [10, p. 15, my italics], and “metaphor is seeing
something from the viewpoint of something else” [11,
p. 170, my italics]. Although reflecting Aristotle’s
definition of metaphor [cf. 12, p. 4], each takes a different perspective (i.e., sender versus recipient). According to Merriam-Webster, a metaphor is “a figure of
speech in which a word or phrase literally denoting one
kind of object or idea is used in place of another to
suggest a likeness or analogy between them”. Compared to the previous definitions, the latter is mediating
between sender and recipient and focuses on the act of
using metaphors.
Only since the mid-18th century and Giambattista
Vico’s analyses, the view appeared “that metaphor
characterizes human thought and language in a truly
fundamental way” [12, p. 3]. In the early 1980s, it was
pointed to the impossibility of non-metaphorical
thought because metaphoricity of language is total [1,
p. 384]. In the early 1990s, scholars began “investigating the possibility that metaphor is not only a form of
speech, but more fundamentally a form of thought”,
playing “a fundamental role in the acquisition and extension of knowledge” [12, pp. 1, 3]. In this regard, it
could be stated that “[a]ll knowledge is ultimately
rooted in metaphorical (or analogical) modes of perception and thought.” [12, p. 2] Today, the view that
human categories of understanding are metaphorical in
nature and function is widely accepted: “Through a
metaphor, one is not simply conveying facts but enriches the communication with imagery. A metaphor
stimulates the mind to imagine.” [13, p. 92] Of foremost importance is the “conception of metaphor as the
fountain of meaning and truth” [14], playing a foundational role in human understanding. It was, for instance, Friedrich Nietzsche who claimed that the metaphor plays a central role in the way we make sense of
the world. By “providing a way of imposing or discovering structure” [14], metaphors reveal how our language is related to the world.

4.2. The problem of metaphor in knowledge
visualization
It is essential to understand “how a metaphorical
use or interpretation of language can convey a kind of
information, or bear cognitive significance, above and
beyond what we might all agree is what it says” [15, p.
188]. The following quote depicts the problematic
characteristic of this setting: “The information or
knowledge or cognitive content […] communicated by
a metaphor is at least in part a function of the specifically metaphorical mode by which the utterance is interpreted.” [15, p. 192] First, the quote points to an
uncertainty in terminology; shall we say information or
knowledge or cognitive content? Second, metaphors
point to the strong interpretational interrelation of intention and perception. Third, the quote points to the
communicational ability and capability, i.e., to communication as the lowest common denominator. As
already outlined in [1], “metaphorical interpretations
are highly dependent on and sensitive to their contexts
of utterance.” [15, p. 194]
Additionally, metaphors “admit endless or at least
open-ended interpretations; what they mean or communicate is never antecedently fixed.” [15, p. 205]
This certainly leads to problems because it is difficult
to grasp “the context in which we are supposed to interpret the metaphor.” [15, p. 207] For instance, this
can be due to remote or culturally distant contexts not
sufficiently discovered or a multiplicity of possible sets
of presuppositions, making it difficult to know the
relevant presupposition.
Regarding its metaphoricity, it was contended that
pictorial and linguistic visualization is one and the
same [1, p. 384]; they represent two sides of the same
coin as they are complementary parts of communication [3, p. 103]. Eventually, there is a significant difference between pictures (i.e., depictive presentations)
and linguistic descriptions: “presentations display
rather than describe the information, or content, they
convey.” [15, p. 200] In short: “A picture is not worth
a thousand words, or any other number. Words are the
wrong currency to exchange for a picture” [Davidson
in 15, p. 220]. This leads to the following questions:
Which meaning do people apply to what they ‘see’ and
discover? What are they told to ‘see’? How is intersubjective meaning possible? Does knowledge visualization merely denote a necessity for the metaphorical
mapping of knowledge?
This metaphorical character is obvious because
knowledge visualization “works with an unobtrusive
‘pie chart’ or a more complex ‘tube map’ which can be
exhausted of its metaphoricity” [1, p. 384]. It was noticed that “the medium of knowledge visualization is in
most cases a metaphor” [1, p. 385], but even metaphors

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

cannot ensure that meaning is transferred identically to
all recipients. A possible answer would be to choose
“the most promising [visualization] type to transfer
knowledge to the specific stakeholder” and to ensure
effective communication [3, p. 112]. However, this
multiplicity of ‘dependent perceptional offers’ is pointing to knowledge visualization’s shortcomings in addressing metaphors. The fact that “knowledge must be
recreated in the mind of the receiver, which depends on
the recipient’s cognitive capacity to process the incoming stimuli” [3, p. 113] and which is not yet sufficiently reflected on, is pointing in the same direction.
There is other evidence to be found at the intersection of metaphor and picture. The idea, metaphors are
like pictures, highlights “a pictorial dimension that
distinguishes the character of a metaphor from that of
non-metaphorical expressions.” [15, p. 220] Therefore,
“[w]hat makes a metaphor pictorial […] lies in its
mode of symbolization”, i.e., “the system or schema in
which it functions is […] not finitely differentiated”
[15, p. 221, my italics]. Because the cognitive significance of a metaphor depends on its schema, and metaphorical interpretation is “non-finite”, knowledge visualization is affected and lacks “the means to express
that knowledge in a finitely differentiated symbol
scheme” [15, p. 222, my italics]. This calls for a deconstructivist approach and for finding a solution to
this dilemma.

5. The social meaning of perception
Not only business knowledge management, the
self-appointed focus of knowledge visualization, depends on awareness, perception and the recognition of
meaning. How is something done and why? Is it able to
fulfil its objectives? These questions apply to most
aspects of human life. In this particular context the
meaning (and ‘meaning-making’) of knowledge visualization would ask for an extensive sociological reconsideration. To constitute a meaningful practice
within the transfer of knowledge, a pursuit of meaning
seems inevitable. The constructivist approach introduced in [1] was mainly about social construction:
“People think in pictures, so knowledge must be recreated in the mind of the receiver.” [2] We made clear
that “[m]odes of thought can be adequately understood
if their social origins are familiar and the pictures are
defined by language used in a specific culture at a specific time.” [2; cf. 1, p. 385]
A relevant general finding of ‘cognitive constructivism’ is “that subjects actively construct their experience.” [16, p. 6] It is crucial to acknowledge and theoretically incorporate that the receiver is not merely a
passive recipient of environmental information but
participates in the structuring of external reality. In

review, this “implies the semiotization of meaning, that
is, its revision as a complex subjective construction
[…] which is permanently modified in communicative
use.” [16, p. 20] Knowledge visualization demonstrates
a slight awareness for the interpretational process of
meaning: “People acquire knowledge in a complex
process where prior experience and several other factors have major influences on the process of constructing meaning.” [3, p. 121, my italics] Because knowledge is a socially mediated product, perception
demands our undivided attention. The deconstructivist
approach is used to see meaning as a social construction, and the sociology of knowledge analyzes the social construction of reality, again leading to the necessity to include sociological reflection in knowledge
visualization. It is rather important to understand the
subjective meaning of people’s experiences [cf. 1, p.
385], especially for a research area which has ‘meaning’ as its main currency.
Social construction is ‘meaning production’ and relates to the “symbolic structuring of meaning and the
generation of symbolic orders” [17, p. 2]. This symbolic ordering emerges from social processes of interaction and practices of representation (mainly through
language use), and is closely connected to metaphor
because “the formal representation of social reality, as
with other realities, is through and through metaphoric.” [11, p. 170] Hence, it is necessary to study the
practices by which we ‘construct’ and perceive the
world (i.e., our conception of reality) and facilitate
these insights to assess the basis of knowledge visualization and to build sound theoretical concepts. A deconstructivist approach – building on a ‘tertia vista’
and the debate on ‘metaphor’ – is offered as a starting
point for such an endeavour. Once again, the point is
not what is constructed and reconstructed, but how
(and why) these meanings are constructed and reconstructed.

6. Conclusion
Even though I followed a critical approach, it leads
to the conclusion that there should not be a ‘without
knowledge visualization’. In contrary, this research
area not only has the potential to solve “the predominant problems in organizations”, i.e., to communicate
complex contents to diverse audiences [3, p. 131], but
to pose important problems related to this communication. Knowledge visualization “aims to improve the
transfer and the creation of knowledge” by giving people “richer means to express what they know” [3, p.
135], but the research area would need an improved
theoretical foundation of metaphor, meaning and perception to be able to do so.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

To mention the importance of the recipient [3, pp.
17, 54, 135] is not sufficient as long as there is no
sound theoretical basis to include this aspect. It is fair
to say that a more thorough analysis of the use of
metaphor, meaning and perception in knowledge visualization and its contribution would be appropriate.
Considering the foundation of knowledge visualization
as a ‘scientific discipline’, building a “big picture and
mutual agendas” [4, p.189], this seems more than necessary. There is another reason for this necessity; the
assumption that visualizations will lose their character
as static objects in a familiar sender-recipient setting
and foster to “establish an iterative, collaborative process where the visualization (and new knowledge) is
dynamically co-created.” [3, p. 140] A deconstructivist
approach may facilitate the design as well as the
evaluation of knowledge visualization tasks. In this
paper I presented first steps toward such an approach.
The main research questions, originated in this paper but left open, concern; first, from a ‘linguistic perspective’, the supposition of the interrelation of narrative and story(telling) in metaphors and beyond,
second, from a ‘(de)constructivist perspective’, the
specification of the ‘meaning of meaning’ (i.e., ‘meaning-making’, and the ‘understanding of understanding’
including social and cultural knowledge), third, from a
‘social perspective’, the power of ontology and the
primacy of representation as an explanatory concept,
and fourth, the supposition of the necessary connection
between these three concepts, ranging from concrete to
abstract levels or more generally: the perception of
visualized reality shaped by the dichotomy of subjectivity and objectivity.
Finally, I conclude that metaphor, meaning and
perception are not sufficiently elaborated in knowledge
visualization. To provide necessary enhancements
these would need to be composed in an ampler scholarly format. The preliminary findings indicate that it
makes sense to visualize knowledge, but the question
remains whether it is the time to establish such a research area as a ‘scientific discipline’. The answer
would be: certainly not as long as the deficits mentioned prevail.

Acknowledgements
I should like to thank Noah Bubenhofer and the
three anonymous reviewers for valuable comments on
earlier drafts of this paper.

References
[1]

Stefan Bertschi and Noah Bubenhofer. Linguistic
Learning: A New Conceptual Focus in Knowledge
Visualization. In Ninth International Conference on In-

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

formation Visualisation (IV’05). London. July 2005.
IEEE Computer Society Press. 383-389.
Anna Ursyn and Ebad Banissi. Information Visualization (IV): Notes about the 9th IV’05 International Conference, London, England. In Body, Space & Technology 6. 2006. http://people.brunel.ac.uk/bst/vol06/
annaursyn/ (Retrieved on January 5, 2007).
Remo Burkhard. Knowledge Visualization: The Use of
Complementary Visual Representations for the Transfer of Knowledge – A Model, a Framework, and Four
New Approaches. D.Sc. thesis. Swiss Federal Institute
of Technology (ETH Zurich). 2005.
Remo Burkhard. Is it Now Time to Establish Visualization Science as a Scientific Discipline? In Tenth International Conference on Information Visualisation
(IV’06). London. July 2006. IEEE Computer Society
Press. 189-194.
Richard Rorty. Metaphilosophical Difficulties of Linguistic Philosophy. In The Linguistic Turn: Recent Essays in Philosophical Method. Richard Rorty, Ed. Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 1967. 1-39.
Ansgar Nünning, Ed. Metzler Lexikon Literatur- und
Kulturtheorie. 2nd ed. Stuttgart, Metzler. 2001.
Paul de Man. Semiology and Rhetoric. In Diacritics 3
(3). 1973. 27-33.
Barbara Johnson. The Critical Difference. In Diacritics
8 (2). 1978. 2-9.
Jonathan Culler. Literary Theory: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1997.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[10] Janet Martin Soskice. Metaphor and Religious Language. Oxford, Clarendon Press. 1985.
[11] Richard H. Brown. Social Theory as Metaphor: On the
Logic of Discovery for the Sciences of Conduct. In
Theory and Society 3 (2). 1976. 169-197.
[12] David E. Leary. Psyche’s Muse: The Role of Metaphor
in the History of Psychology. In Metaphors in the History of Psychology. David E. Leary, Ed. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press. 1990. 1-78.
[13] Jason Maratos. The Power of Myth as Metaphor. In
Group Analysis 39 (1). 2006. 87-99.
[14] William Grey. Metaphor and Meaning. In Minerva: An
Internet Journal of Philosophy 4. 2000. http://www.ul.
ie/~philos/vol4/metaphor.html (Retrieved on January
4, 2007).
[15] Josef Stern. Knowledge by Metaphor. In Midwest
Studies in Philosophy 25. 2001. 187-226.
[16] Carlos Cornejo. Who Says What the Words Say? The
Problem of Linguistic Meaning in Psychology. In Theory & Psychology 14 (1). 2004. 5-28.
[17] Reiner Keller. Analysing Discourse: An Approach
from the Sociology of Knowledge. In Forum: Qualitative
Social
Research
6
(3).
2005.
http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqs-texte/3-05/053-32-e.pdf (Retrieved on January 13, 2007).
[18] Martin J. Eppler. The Image of Insight: The Use of
Visual Metaphors in the Communication of Knowledge. In Journal of Universal Computer Science: Proceedings of I-KNOW‘03. Graz. July 2003. 81-88.

