There is More to Color Scales than Meets the Eye:
A Review on the Use of Color in Visualization
Samuel Silva, Joaquim Madeira, Beatriz Sousa Santos
IEETA/DETI – University of Aveiro, Portugal
sss@ieeta.pt, jmadeira@det.ua.pt, bss@det.ua.pt
Abstract
The appropriate use of color in Visualization is a very
important subject. The choice of the proper color scale to
use with a particular data set is not just a matter of choosing the prettiest representation. Throughout the years researchers have studied this subject and managed to propose guidelines which help users along the process of color
scale selection. This article presents a brief overview on
the subject focusing on the desired properties for color
scales, the guidelines that should drive their choice, the
advantages of applying those guidelines, the experimental
research work on the field, and the tools proposed to help
non-expert users.
Keywords—Color, Color mapping, Survey.

1 Introduction
Visualization [4] is concerned with representing, manipulating and exploring data and information graphically
in such a way as to gain understanding and insight into it,
i.e., mapping of data to a visual form that supports human
interaction in a workspace for visual sense making [5].
Very often, data is mapped onto a Visual Structure [5]
by using color mapping. This is a very important visualization technique, but the choice of the proper color scale to
use with a particular data set is not just a matter of choosing
the prettiest representation. Trying to attain user satisfaction (building colorful visualizations) practitioners are led
to use color without asking if the information they want to
depict is still clearly understood.
Throughout the years researchers have studied this subject and managed to propose some guidelines which help
users along the process of color scale selection according,
for example, to the type of data and task to be performed.
Nevertheless, these guidelines are still not used in a daily
basis by visualization builders and some well documented
problems are still ignored by the Visualization community [2].
A brief overview on the subject of color usage in Visualization is presented, providing information about what is
involved, and what has already been done, hopefully en-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

couraging researchers to seek new solutions, evaluate the
use of color in their visualizations and share their experience, thus contributing to a deeper knowledge on the subject.
This overview will be focusing on the desired properties for color scales, the guidelines that should drive their
choice, the advantages of applying those guidelines, the
experimental research work on the field, and the tools proposed to help non-expert users.

2 Desired Properties for Color Scales
Having
a
sequence
of
numerical
values
{v1 ≤ v2 ... ≤ vN } represented by colors {c1 , c2 , ..., cN },
respectively, it is possible to identify the following desirable properties [14] [27] for a color scale:
Order – The colors chosen to represent the values must
be perceived as having the same order as the values, i.e., if
the values are ordered, the colors chosen to represent them
must also seem ordered. An example can be the representation of a temperature scale by using the notions of cold
and warm colors and their proportional mixtures in order
to obtain a scale from cold to hot temperatures.
It is important to note the special case of nominal data
[22]: objects should be distinguishably different but, since
they are not ordered, there should be no perceptual ordering in the representation.
Uniformity and Representative Distance – The color
representation of two values should convey the distance between them and colors representing values which equally
differ from each other should also seem equally different. Beyond that, it is required that clearly separated values must be represented by distinguishable colors and that
close values must be represented by colors perceived to be
closer. This is what Trumbo [27] calls the Separation Principle.
When representing flow information, for example, complementary colors can be used to represent flows in opposite directions and similar colors (with slight differences)
to represent flows in the same direction. Levkowitz et al.
[14] identify analogous principles proposed by Pizer et al.
[16] (Associability) and Robertson et al. [20] (Separation).

Boundaries – If there are no boundaries on the represented numerical data the color scale should not create this
effect, i.e., the color scale must be able to represent continuous scales.
Rows and Columns Principle – This is one of the
principles proposed by Trumbo [27] which applies only
to bivariate information. This principle says that if it is
important to preserve univariate information then the display parameters must not obscure one another, i.e., rows or
columns having a constant value of one variable must have
constant hue, saturation, or brightness. For example, using
two display primaries (e.g., red and green) goes against this
principle.
Diagonal Principle – The second principle proposed by
Trumbo, which only applies to bivariate information, says
that if the detection of positive association of variables is a
goal, the displayed colors must be easily identified as belonging to one of three classes: the ones near to the minor
diagonal, the one above it, and the ones below. This could
be accomplished with the major diagonal made up of grays,
elements of maximum saturation, or constant hue. A hue
and brightness scheme violates the Diagonal principle [22].

3 Univariate Color Scales
Univariate color scales map the value of a single scalar
variable to a color representing that value. There are two
kinds of color scales: the ones in which adjacent colors are
similar to one another, forming a continuous path through
a color space, and the ones that contain discontinuities, i.e.,
locations where adjacent colors are not similar at all. The
color scales that will be briefly presented next (according
to a survey presented in [17]) are continuous color scales.

3.1

Color Model Components

Gray scale – This color scale (see Fig. 1) maps the
value of a scalar to brightness. In general, black represents
the lowest value and white represents the highest, while
shades of gray represent the values in between. This might
happen differently, with users that are more acquainted
with printed data preferring a scale where an increasing
value is represented by an increasing amount of ink, thus
mapping the lowest value to white and the highest to black.
The efficiency of this color scale is enhanced due to the
effectiveness of the human visual system at making judgments about shape from brightness variation which makes
it suitable for tasks where understanding qualitative shape
and pattern information is needed. This color scale exhibits
a natural perceptual order (in brightness steps) and has a
visual zero value (normally black).
The problems with this color scale arise from the fact
that it has a limited number of distinguishable display values and a limited contrast between different levels, turning
it less suited for tasks involving quantitative measures.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Saturation scale – In this color scale the value of a
scalar is mapped to colors of increasing saturation, maintaining a constant hue. High values are emphasized over
low values. Its main weakness is that it provides a limited
number of distinguishable levels.
Spectrum scale – Also known as a rainbow scale, it is
formed by holding saturation and brightness constant while
letting hue vary through its entire range. It follows the colors of the rainbow: first red, then orange, yellow, green,
blue and violet. One of the problems that can arise with
this scale is that some users see no intuitive ordering in the
hues.
Normally, spectrum scales start at red and go through
increasing wavelengths until violet. This can be an advantage for users having knowledge of the progression of visible light wavelengths. It may, however, present a problem
due to the fact that the colors at the beginning and end of
the scale (red and violet) are too close. So, it is usual to
use this color scale limited to the red-blue range (see Fig.
1) which allows a better differentiation of the extremes.
Another potential disadvantage of this color scale is that
yellow (a very striking color) is in the middle of the scale.
This can be a problem if one is interested in depicting extreme values since attention may be driven to the yellow
areas.
Also, there are perceptual discontinuities along the scale
which can lead, for example, to the perception of boundaries where none exist.
Although these problems and many others are described
in the literature [23], the rainbow color scale is still the
most used color scale in Visualization [2].

3.2 Redundant Color Scales
Using multiple display parameters to represent data may
have the following advantages [17]:
• Each display parameter may convey a particular type
of information better than any other (e.g., brightness to convey shape, hue for more accurately distinguishable display levels);
• Multiple display parameters may help overcome visual deficiencies. If one of the parameters becomes
ambiguous due to a visual deficiency, another may
compensate (e.g., use redundant hue and brightness);
• Multiple display parameters reinforce each other
making, for example, areas with differing values
more visually different;
Ware [29] confirmed experimentally the utility of redundant color scales, leading to a suggestion that a color
scale which varies in both luminance and hue can be used
to accurately represent both metric and surface properties.
Some examples are:

Figure 1: From left to right: grayscale, rainbow, heated-object, and linearized optimal color scales applied to a data set.
• Redundant model components – A straightforward
redundant scale can be built by mapping data values
to both hue and brightness. This kind of scale has
the advantage of being suitable for use by someone
with dichromatic color deficiency.
• Heated-object scale – This scale represents a compromise between the gray scale and the spectrum
scale. It goes from black to white passing through
orange and yellow. This color scale has a stronger
perceived natural ordering than the rainbow scale,
since it has a monotonic increase in brightness (see
Fig. 1).
• Linearized optimal color scales – This color scale
was introduced by Levkowitz et al. [14] to describe
a scale which maximizes the number of JNDs (just
noticeable differences) while preserving a natural order (see Fig. 1).

3.3

Double-Ended Color Scales

This kind of scale is created by joining two monotonically increasing scales at a common end point. For example, one can join a scale from gray to red and a scale from
gray to blue building a scale from red to gray to blue. With
such scales it is possible to visually represent high, low
and middle values clearly, since they exhibit three distinct
groups of colors.

4 Multivariate Color Scales
In a multivariate color scale two or more data variables
are mapped to a single color representing them. This is
the same principle as the one used with redundant scales,
but now each display parameter is related with a different
variable.
Working with the RGB color model it is possible to
map a variable into each one of its components thus creating a multivariate color scale. For example, Landsat
“false color” images are commonly produced by representing three multispectral scanner bands with levels of red,
green and blue [19]. The result is that if the represented
bands are highly correlated, then the image will be composed of shades of gray as the three components will have

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

close values. This scheme has the advantage that the extremes of the variable range (black, red, green, blue) are
easily detectable.
A problem occurs when one needs to decompose the
shown colors in their components. How can we detect similarities between areas that have the same value for two
components but differ on the third?
An analogous scheme can be obtained using, for example, the HLS color model. For more details on the possible
approaches see [17].

5 Color Scale Selection: Some Guidelines
Next, some important issues to have in mind when selecting a color scale are presented.

5.1 Data Type
When designing a visualization (picking a color scale)
care must be taken in order that the most striking features
of the image reflect the most important features of the data.
If a representation catches user’s attention with unimportant features of the data, this may cause more interesting
features to be missed [17]. Bright colors, sharp boundaries, or high saturation areas will most likely catch user’s
attention. So, it is important to consider the data that will
be represented and its type, and know what it is more important: for example, to call attention to middle values or
to positive/negative deviations from a zero (threshold).
It is possible to distinguish between four types of data
[25]:
Nominal Data – For nominal data no mathematical operations are possible, since the value assigned to a particular measurement represents a label or identifier. An example is the categorization of different lung diseases with
numerical labels 1, 2, 3 and 4: no mathematical operation
is meaningful on these data. As noted above, the used representation for this kind of data should not implicitly order
it.
Ordinal Data – With ordinal data, values are assigned
to measurements (for example) but no assumption is made
about the spacing in between the measurements, i.e., there
can exist a numbering of 1, 2, 3 and 4 but the distance between element 1 and 2 cannot be assumed to be equal to the

distance between 3 and 4. Ordinal data is inherently discrete [24]. The used representation should allow discrimination between objects and the perception of their relative
order.
Interval Data – In interval data, the numerically equal
distances between values are assumed to be actually equal.
This kind of data is commonly a result of a experimental measure such as temperature, rainfall, etc. The used
representation should account for this: equal steps in data
values should correspond to equally perceived magnitude
in the representation.
Ratio Data – On ratio data, ratios between values are
assumed to be equal and values increase/decrease monotonically about a true zero or threshold. This characteristic
should be preserved in the representation. An example is
the absolute temperature measured in kelvins.

5.2

Spatial Frequency

An important issue to consider when choosing a color
scale is human spatial vision. The luminance and saturation mechanisms in human vision represent an important
role in spatial sensivity, but they have different characteristics. The human visual system accurately processes highresolution images, or data which varies rapidly over an
area, if that spatial variation is represented as a variation in
luminance, i.e., the luminance channels are responsible for
processing high spatial frequency information. This means
that when representing data with a high spatial frequency it
is a good idea to use a color scale which provides a strong
luminance variation across the data range. On the other
hand, the saturation mechanisms in human vision are more
sensitive to low spatial frequency variations. This kind of
effects is illustrated in Fig. 2. On the top row a frequency
modulated grating beginning at one cycle per image and increasing in spatial frequency is presented (the corresponding waveform is presented on the first column). The variation is represented using a saturation varying color scale
(on the center) and a luminance-varying color scale (on
the right). Notice how the saturation-variation color scale
makes the sinusoidal variation more visible, at the low frequency end of the spectrum, than the luminance-varying
color scale. On the bottom row the opposite thing happens:
with the saturation-varying color scale (on the center) you
can only observe the first few cycles of the frequency modulated grating, observing twice as many when using the
luminance-varying color scale (on the right). Looking, for
example, at interval and ratio-data, both luminance and saturation varying color scales can produce the effect of having equal steps in data to be represented by equally perceived steps on the color scale, but the first will most certainly be more adequate to high spatial frequency data variations while the second will be more suited for low spatial
frequency variations.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

5.3 Task/Goals
The goal of a specific visualization is very important
when choosing a color scale. Tasks which require the judgment of metric quantities in the data tend to work better
with color scales which do not vary monotonically in the
opponent color channels (brightness, red-green, yellowblue). On the other hand, tasks involving qualitative judgments about value distribution shape are better served with
color scales varying systematically in brightness, allowing
our visual system to employ familiar shape-from-shading
mechanisms [17].
An early study by Tedford et al. [26] found a significant
color-size effect leading to a conclusion that warm colors
like red, orange and yellow appear larger than cool colors
like green.
In another study, by Cleveland et al. [6], users were
asked to judge, on a map with equal colored areas in red
and green, which one was the largest: the average observers considered the red areas where larger. The obtained
results suggest also that the color-size effect grows stronger
for very saturated colors, which indicates that these colors
might not be the better choice for tasks where the user is
expected to make judgments about size. Considering the
kind of task to perform, the color scale can be designed accordingly. Next, examples for segmentation and highlight
tasks are presented [22].
Color Scales for Segmentation Tasks – Some of the
rules used to create isomorphic color scales for ratio and
interval data are also useful in creating maps for segmented
data. In high spatial frequency data, luminance can be
used to convey monotonicity; in low spatial frequency data
monotonicity can be conveyed through the saturation component.
In creating a segmented color scale it is necessary that
the segments be each discriminably different from one another. This will limit the number of steps which can be
represented. Bergman et al. [1] state that a higher number of steps can be more effectively discriminated for low
spatial frequency data than for high.
An issue to have in mind when dealing with ratio data
(represented by a segmented map), where the zero value is
semantically important, is that it is probably a good idea to
have an even number of steps (with a transition at the zero
level).
On Fig. 3, on the left side, a five-level segmented color
scale is used and, on the right side, a ten-level segmented
color scale is used. They are applied to low spatial frequency data (top) and high spatial frequency data (bottom). For the low spatial frequency data (top row), having additional levels provides additional information. For
this particular case, additional features of the earth’s magnetic field are revealed (notice the southern hemisphere).

Figure 2: Two frequency modulated gratings represented using a saturation varying color scale (center) and a luminance
varying color scale (right) [24].

Figure 3: Segmented color scales applied to low (top row) and high (bottom row) spatial frequency data [22].
On the contrary, on the bottom row, showing high spatial
frequency cloud fraction observations, additional features
are not revealed by increasing the number of color scale
steps.
Color Scales for Highlight Tasks – The principles
which should guide the selection of a color scale for highlighting particular features in the data can be found, for
example, in Julesz [11].
Using these principles it is possible to design color
scales which draw attention to a particular range in the
data. When dealing with high spatial frequency data, for
example, a possible approach can be that of using varying
saturation to represent the information (maintaining constant luminance) while modifying the hue in the regions
needing to be highlighted.

while in another they may be placed at the high end (in
order of increasing frequency) [17]. So, paying attention
to area conventions may turn the process of designing the
color scale easier and help avoid unintentional breaks with
viewer expectations.
Another issue is the way color tends to have strong cultural connotations varying from culture to culture. Following these conventions it is possible, for example, to reduce
the cognitive load on the viewer or use connotations that
suggest natural linkings between a variable or a variable
value and the color used to represent it. For example, for
an USA audience the color green is connected/associated
with the color of money; a natural connotation, when visualizing temperatures can be that of high temperatures represented in red and low temperatures in blue.

5.4

5.5 Visualization Type

Audience and Cultural Connotations

It is important to have information about the target audience of a visualization as it can give some clues for the
color scale design. For example, conventions in one application area might place blue/violet colors of a spectrum
scale at the low end (in order of increasing wavelength)

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

It is important to consider the whole visualization during the process of color scale design for the individual
elements. For example, three-dimensional visualizations
have different constraints than those imposed by twodimensional visualizations. A good example of the prob-

lems that can occur is related with shading: users use shading cues to judge the 3D shape of a representation object (e.g., an isosurface); a brightness varying color scale
might interfere with the brightness values resulting from
the shading calculations. Nonetheless a brightness varying
scale may be used in planar objects on a 3D scene. Another
issue might arise from the requirement of displaying multiple variables in the same visualization. The used color
scales should not generally overlap, with the representation for each variable interfering with the others as little as
possible.

pattern is then composed by the images on Fig. 4 which
also include a reverse image. Next, they replace black with
a shade of gray and white with a color. According to the
luminance of the colored region, in comparison with the
luminance of the chosen gray, one of the faces will appear
positive and the other negative. For example, on Fig. 4 the
left face is positive.

6 Learning Through Experimentation
In order to apply theoretical principles coming from
other areas (such as psychophysics), verify the applicability of new principles, and find clues for the definition
of new ones, many researchers have been conducting user
studies [13].
Human color vision, a subject well studied (for more
than a century now), provides strong clues for using color
in visualization. However, the choice of colors for a particular task is more difficult, as it is far more complex, than
the simple displays used by the experimental psychologists. So, experiments are necessary to fill the gap between
theory and practice [13]. The main goal is to use well established theories to build design guidelines and then use
an experiment to validate the guidelines in an applied setting.
The work of Rogowitz et al. [21] presents a method
which uses visual judgments to perceptually evaluate color
scales. Since the literature points out that color scales
which monotonically increase in luminance are good candidates for representing the magnitude of continuous data,
the proposed method was designed to identify scales that
include a monotonic luminance component.
The obtained results show that the proposed method
might function as a quick procedure for identifying color
scales with monotonically increasing luminance, with the
advantage that it does not require display calibration or
lengthy psychophysical procedures.
The work of Kindlmann et al. [12] is similar to the
one presented by Rogowitz et al. [21]. They address the
problem of color scale luminance control by proposing a
novel technique for luminance matching. Their technique,
given a fixed reference color, and a test color with brightness varied by the user, allows matching the luminance of
both. They use images of faces in their experiment since
they want to take advantage of the human characteristic of
being good at recognizing faces, due to brain circuitry dedicated to this process [7].
Their method starts by a black-and-white thresholded
image of a human face where the areas where shadows
were are black and the areas directly lit are white. The test

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 4: Double face images [12].
So, to match the luminance between the two regions it
is only necessary to adjust the intensity of the gray or color
region until the point where none of the faces appears positive or negative.
The authors claim their method provides very good results and enables the creation of color scales, with any predetermined pattern of luminance, in devices (e.g., monitors) which are not calibrated.
Other examples are the work of Ware [29], which leads
to some rules guiding the process of color scale construction; of Healey [9], which presents a technique for effectively choosing multiple colors for use during data visualization; and of Montag [15], where the performance in
judging values in univariate maps encoded using five different color scales is tested.

7 Auxiliary Tools and Methods
During the past few years some efforts have been made
in order to provide users (in particular non-experts) with
tools and methods which allow to select an appropriate
color scale for their particular visualization purpose.
Rheingans et al. [18] propose a tool which allows the
exploration of data sets by interactively manipulating the
color scale. On the upper left of the screen appears the image space which shows the currently selected color scale
applied to the data. In the center of the screen a 3D color
space appears and a curve, within it, shows the path defining the sequence of colors composing the color scale. As
the path in the 3D color space is modified, the image is
dynamically changed accordingly.
Bergman et al. [1] present a tool called PRAVDAColor
which focuses on helping users to select color scales. With
that purpose, they have built a library of color scales and

defined a set of perceptual rules in order to select appropriate maps according to the structure of the data and visualization goal. They presented a taxonomy for color scale
selection which guides their work. With PRAVDAColor
the user is presented with a set of color scales judged appropriate to the data set (based essentially on the data spatial frequency, but also on the presence/absence of a zero
crossing in order to distinguish between ratio and interval
data) and task. At first, one of those color scales is automatically applied to the data in order to produce a first
representation and then the user can freely apply any other
of the available color scales to the data. It is also possible
to control the way the color scale is mapped onto the data
by defining to which colors the data minimum, maximum
and midpoint values will be mapped.
ColorBrewer [3], a tool developed using Macromedia’s
Flash 5.0, is not exactly a tool to create color scales or directly decide the better color scale for a data set. Instead,
it provides an environment and a set of color scales to help
users choose the best color options for maps.
The process starts by the definition of the number of
data classes the user wants to represent. Then, he chooses
the type of “legend”: sequential, diverging or qualitative. After that, some legends are presented using different color schemes and the user can choose among them.
An example map is then colored according to the user’s
choice. It is possible to modify several map parameters:
activate/deactivate a road network; activate/deactivate city
symbols; activate/deactivate region borders; zoom; and
modify the color in which each of these parameters appear.
This is allowed because the robustness of a color scale depends on what else goes on the map.

user on a given monitor is experimentally measured and
then, based on those results, the color scale is modified in
order to turn it as uniform as possible. Figure 5 shows an
original measured perception function and the perception
function measured for a normalized rainbow color scale.
Notice how the new color scale presents a flatter perception function.

Figure 6: Left, standard rainbow color scale applied to a
topographic data; right, a normalized rainbow color scale
applied to the same data [8].
Figure 6 shows, on the left, a standard rainbow color
scale applied to a topographic data set and, on the right,
the same data set colored with the obtained normalized
rainbow color scale. It is possible to see more detail in
the image on the right, specially in the blue region and a
reduction of the area of the green region.
Other examples are the works of Hyun [10], which deals
with the creation and usage of non-linear color scales, and
of Ventura et al. [28], which deals with the problem of
ordered/unordered color scales and their generation in a
device-independent color space through a computer-aided
color coding system based on fundamental principles of
human vision.

8 Conclusion

Figure 5: Measured perception function for a rainbow
color scale and for a normalized rainbow color scale [8].
The work of Gresh [8] presents an algorithm which,
given a particular color scale, transforms it in one that is
more perceptually uniform, i.e., equal steps in data values
are equally perceived. The perception function for a given

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The survey presented in this article intends to provide an
overview on the relevant work carried out towards a more
detailed knowledge (and subsequent more informed usage) on color scales. Throughout the years several authors
have provided the community with some guidelines and
tools which may help users to understand the advantages
and disadvantages of using particular color scales to build
representations of their data sets. But, even though these
guidelines and tools exist, they are not used systematically
by practitioners. In fact, one of the most problematic color
scales known (the rainbow color scale) is still the most used
in visualization tools [2].
Therefore, the research community must engage a more
systematic approach to this very important subject in Visualization, allowing for proper validation of results among

researchers, hopefully enabling a clearer understanding of
its importance.
With this short survey we hope to have contributed with
a step forward towards that goal.

9

Acknowledgements

The first author would like to thank the research unit
127/94 IEETA, of the University of Aveiro, for the grant
that supports his work.

References
[1] L. D. Bergman, B. E. Rogowitz, and L. A. Treimish.
A rule-based tool for assisting color map selection. In
Proc. IEEE Visualization ’95, pages 118–125, 1995.
[2] D. Borland and R. Taylor. Rainbow color map (still)
considered harmful. IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications, 27(2):14–17, 2007.
[3] C.
A.
Brewer.
C OLOR B REWER.
http://www.ColorBrewer.org, online Jan 2007.
[4] K. Brodlie, L. Carpenter, R. Earnshaw, J. Gallop,
R. Hubbold, A. Mumford, C. Osland, and P. Quarendon. Scientific Visualization, Techniques and Applications. Springer, 1992.
[5] S. Card, J. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman. Readings
in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think.
Morgan Kauffman Publishers, 1999.
[6] W. S. Cleveland and R. McGill. A color-caused optical illusion on a statistical graph. The American
Statistician, 37(2):101–105, 1983.
[7] R. Gregory. Eye and Brain, The Psychology of Seeing. Oxford University Press, 5th edition, 1998.
[8] D. Gresh.
Self-corrected perceptual colormaps.
http:// www.research.ibm.com/people/g/donnagresh/colormaps.pdf, online Jan. 2007.
[9] C. Healey. Choosing effective colours for data visualization. In Proc. IEEE Visualization ’96, pages
263–270, 1996.
[10] Y. Hyun. Nonlinear color scales for interactive exploration. http://www.caida.org/ youngh/colorscales/nonlinear.html, online Jan. 2007, 2001.
[11] B. T. Julesz. The elements of texture perception, and
their interactions. Nature, 290(12):91–97, 1981.
[12] G. Kindlmann, E. Reinhard, and S. Creem. Facebased luminance matching for perceptual colormap
generation. In Proc. 13th IEEE Visualization 2002,
2002.
[13] R. Kosara, C. Healey, V. Interrante, D. Laidlaw, and
C. Ware. Visualization viewpoints – user studies:
Why, how, and when? IEEE Computer Graphics &
Applications, 23(4):20–25, 2003.
[14] H. Levkowitz and G. Herman. Color scales for image data. IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications,
12(1):72–80, 1992.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[15] E. D. Montag. The use of color in multidimensional
graphical information display. In Proc. IS&T/SID 7th
Color Imaging Conference, pages 222–226, 1999.
[16] S. M. Pizer, J. B. Zimmerman, and R. E. Johnston.
Contrast transmission in medical image display. In
Proc. 1st Int. Symp. Medical Imaging and Interpretation, pages 2–9, 1982.
[17] P. Rheingans. Task-based color scale design. In
Proc. SPIE - 28th AIPR Workshop: 3D Visualization
for Data Exploration and Decision Making, volume
3905, pages 35–43, 2000.
[18] P. Rheingans and B. Tebbs. A tool for dynamic explorations of color mappings. ACM Computer Graphics,
24(2):145–146, 1990.
[19] P. K. Robertson. Visualizing color gamuts: A user interface for the effective use of perceptual color spaces
in data displays. IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications, 8(5):50–63, 1988.
[20] P. K. Robertson and J. F. O’Callaghan. The generation of color sequences for univariate and bivariate
mapping. IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications,
6(2):24–32, 1986.
[21] B. Rogowitz and A. D. Kalvin. The “Which Blair
Project”: A quick visual method for evaluating perceptual color maps. In Proc. IEEE Visualization ’01,
pages 21–26, 2001.
[22] B. Rogowitz and L. Treinish. How not to lie with
visualization. Computers in Physics, 10(3):268–273,
1996.
[23] B. Rogowitz and L. Treinish. Data visualization: The
end of the rainbow. IEEE Spectrum, 35(12):52–59,
1998.
[24] B. Rogowitz and L. Treinish. Why should engineers and scientists be worried about color?
http://www.research.ibm.com/people/l/lloydt/color/
color.htm, online Jan. 2007.
[25] R. Spence. Information Visualization. Addison Wesley, 2000.
[26] W. H. Tedford, S. L. Berquist, and W. E. Flynn. The
size-color illusion. The Journal of General Psychology, 97:145–150, 1977.
[27] B. Trumbo. Theory for coloring bivariate statistical maps. The American Statistician, 35(4):220–226,
1981.
[28] A. Ventura and R. Schettini. Computer-aided color
coding for data display. In Proc. 11t h IAPR Int.
Conf. on Pattern Recognition, volume 3, pages 29–
32, 1992.
[29] C. Ware. Color sequences for univariate maps: Theory, experiments, and principles. IEEE Computer
Graphics & Applications, 8(5):41–49, 1988.

