Exploring Cyber Physical Data Streams Using Radial Pixel Visualizations
M.Hao1, M.Marwah1, S.Mittelstadt2, H.Janetzko2, D.Keim2, U.Dayal1, C.Bash1, C.Felix1, C.Patel1, M.Hsu1, Y.Chen1
1

Hewlett-Packard Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA

2

University of Konstanz, Germany

Figure 1: This figure shows Radial Pixel Visualization (RPV) of rows of racks and hot/cold aisles in a 500 kilowatt data center over the
past 24 hours in real-time. Each rack has a pair of RPV’s depicting data from 5 inlet/outlet temperature sensors which should always be
below a threshold and usually also maintain an ascending sequence, that is, T1<T2<T3<T4<T5, where T1 is closest to the floor. Each
measurement is represented by a pixel cell. Color depicts temperature using the standard data center color map from low (purple) to high
(red). By correlating thermal alarms and their physical locations and by looking at temperature patterns in the recent past, administrators
are able to quickly identify problems (e.g., Rack F7 has out of sequence sensor: T3>T4) and find the root causes of those alarms.

ABSTRACT
Cyber physical systems (CPS), such as smart buildings and data
centers, are richly instrumented systems composed of tightly
coupled computational and physical elements that generate large
amounts of data. To explore CPS data and obtain actionable
insights, we construct a Radial Pixel Visualization (RPV) system,
which uses multiple concentric rings to show the data in a
compact circular layout of small polygons (pixel cells), each of
which represents an individual data value. RPV provides an
effective visual representation of locality and periodicity of the
high volume, multivariate data streams, and seamlessly combines
them with the results of an automated analysis. In the outermost
ring the results of correlation analysis and peak point detection are
highlighted. Our explorations demonstrates how RPV can help
administrators to identify periodic thermal hot spots, understand
data center energy consumption, and optimize IT workload.
Keywords: Radial pixel visualization, cyber physical system,
correlations, peaks, time-series data.
Index Terms: 1.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image
Generation – Display Algorithms; H.5.0 [Information Systems]:
Information Interfaces and Presentation – General.

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

1

MOTIVATION
Cyber physical systems (CPS) [1] are systems which are
characterized by a tight coupling between computational and
physical infrastructures. Examples of such systems include smart
buildings, data centers, smart electric grids, etc. As illustrated in
Figure 1, data center administrators are interested exploiting this
data in real-time to identify thermal problems, infer the root
causes of anomalies, determine under- or over-utilized resources,
etc. Specifically, relevant questions include: Are temperature
alarms that originate from different servers related? Are the
alarms from servers in close physical proximity due to the same
underlying causes?
2 OUR APPROACH AND CONTRIBUTIONS
To meet CPS challenges, we propose a radial pixel visualization
which enables the visualization of large amounts of spatiotemporal sensor data. The basic idea is to visualize a data stream
in multiple concentric rings to represent a single measurement in a
time interval. The pixel cells (measurement values) are aligned by
time across different rings which allow an easy detection of
patterns and anomalies. They are also accessible to the user for
query and drilldown. For example, in Figure 1, administrators are
able to adjust the vent tile to fix the thermal problem, when they
discover that multiple alarms are in fact co-located around rack
F7. Furthermore, the results of correlation and peak detection are
highlighted in the outermost rings to help users to quickly identify
the important information in large data streams (see Figure 2).
These unique features do not exist in today’s radial visualizations
[2] but are important for many CPS applications.

225

3 VISUAL EXPLORATION
3.1 Thermal State Analysis
In this application scenario, we
compute the average of all pair-wise
correlation-results shown by brightness
in the outermost ring with variables in
inner rings (e.g., server utilization with
CPU temperature). In Figure 2, CPU
temperatures (OC) are high in two
different time intervals (around 3 am
and 1 pm). When observing only the
temperature ring, the root cause of the
high temperature would remain
unclear.
By plotting the ambient
temperature and server utilization in
Figure 2, it becomes evident that the
first increase in CPU temperatures at
3am is related to a period of high
ambient temperature while the second
increase at 1 pm is related to high
server utilization. With this knowledge,
administrators are able to manage their
resource consumption effectively.
For thermal state analysis, peak
points are also significant. Peaks in
temperatures could reduce hardware
reliability. We can use the outermost
ring to show the significant peaks in
the corresponding time intervals
instead of showing correlations.

Figure 2: Daily Thermal State Analysis
(3 rings show: Server, CPU, Amb. Temp)

Figure 3: Building 3 has flat energy consumption (Solar)
(Each ring shows one day consumption, 9/1-9/3)

3.2 Building Energy
Consumption Characterization
Figure 3 shows the power
consumption of three buildings at an
urban campus over three days. The
daily usage patterns are easy to see for
Buildings 1 and 2. As expected,
consumption is high during the
Figure 4: Use RPV to visually validate the benefits of rescheduling the non-critical IT workload (KW)
working hours (9 am to 6 pm).
have applied the RPV idea to real data sets from data centers and
Building 3’s consumption is flat, due to the presence of solar
smart buildings. The resulting Redial Pixel Visualizations provide
panels that offset part of the demand during the day. The
significantly more information than radial visualizations without
visualizations allow administrators to compare usage patterns
using pixel cells. Our explorations also indicate that RPV is more
between buildings, validate the impact of solar panels under
intuitive to visualize a continuous periodic daily pattern using
different weather conditions (e.g. sunny, cloudy), etc.
radial coordinates than using Cartesian coordinates as shown in
Figure 5.
3.3 IT Workload Optimization
Figure 4 shows attributes pertaining to IT workload and cooling
power in a data center over a 24-hour period. Administrators are
able to use RPV to visualize the power consumption differences
and reschedule the non-critical IT workload in the daytime to use
the solar supply. While before optimization, the non-critical
workload was spread throughout the day in Figure 4(A), after
optimization, it is concentrated during the period of solar panel
power generation (supply) as shown in Figure 4(B). The
visualization confirms the benefits of rescheduling the workload
and reducing the overall daily cooling power consumption.
4

EVALUATION AND CONCLUSION
In this poster, we presented RPV, a new approach for
visualizing large amounts of multi-attribute sensor data. Our
approach combines a pixel cell based radial visualization with
efficient and effective knowledge discovery techniques (e.g.,
correlation analysis and peak point detection). RPV maps each
data point to one pixel cell in the ring and displays their
correlations between multiple rings and their peak points. We

226

(A) Shows a split period pattern (B) Shows an entire period pattern
Figure 5: Cartesian coordinates versus RPV in a data center (4/1-4/8)
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

R. H. Campbell, et al: Cyber-Physical Systems: position paper: CPS
Environments. University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. 2012.
S. Diehl, et al.: Uncovering Strength and Weaknesses of Radial
Visualizations – an Empirical Approach. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphs. November/December 2010.

