SocialNetSense: Supporting Sensemaking of Social and Structural
Features in Networks with Interactive Visualization
Liang Gou*, Xiaolong (Luke) Zhang**

Airong Luo†, Patricia F. Anderson‡

The Pennsylvania State University

ABSTRACT
Increasingly, social network datasets contain social attribute
information about actors and their relationship. Analyzing such
network with social attributes requires making sense of not only
its structural features, but also the relationship between social
features in attributes and network structures. Existing social
network analysis tools are usually weak in supporting complex
analytical tasks involving both structural and social features, and
often overlook users’ needs for sensemaking tools that help to
gather, synthesize, and organize information of these features. To
address these challenges, we propose a sensemaking framework
of social-network visual analytics in this paper. This framework
considers both bottom-up processes, which are about constructing
new understandings based on collected information, and top-down
processes, which concern using prior knowledge to guide
information collection, in analyzing social networks from both
social and structural perspectives. The framework also emphasizes
the externalization of sensemaking processes through interactive
visualization. Guided by the framework, we develop a system,
SocialNetSense, to support the sensemaking in visual analytics of
social networks with social attributes. The example of using our
system to analyze a scholar collaboration network shows that our
approach can help users gain insight into social networks both
structurally and socially, and enhance their process awareness in
visual analytics.
Keywords: Social network, visualization, sensemaking, visual
analytics, SocialNetSense.
Index Terms: E.1 [Data Structures]: Graphs and Networks H.1.2
[User/Machine Systems]: Human Information Processing – Visual
Analytics; I.6.9 [Visualization]: Information Visualization.
1

INTRODUCTION

Nowadays, social networks are no longer just about a set of links
connecting anonymous nodes, and often contain social attributes
of actors and their relationships. Such attribute information as
actors’ social hierarchy often has significant social implications
[6]. In this type of social networks, a person represented as a
network node can act both as an individual interacting with other
individuals, and as part of a social group connecting with other
groups. To make sense complex social networks, we need to
consider both network patterns exhibited through the social
networks and social structures hidden in the attributes. For
instance, in a scholar collaboration network, a scholar has an
* lug129@ist.psu.edu
** lzhang@ist.psu.edu
† airongl@umich.edu
‡ pfa@umich.edu
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2012
October 14 - 19, Seattle, WA, USA
978-1-4673-4753-2/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

University of Michigan

affiliation hierarchy consisting of department, university and
country, and thus her activities can be investigated at different
social levels in the hierarchy, from individual activities to crossdepartment efforts to international collaborations. Having such
information about her collaborations at different social levels
could help us better understand how her collaborations have been
shaped by her multi-level social affiliations, and how her social
status may be influenced by her collaborations.
More importantly, to achieve such understanding, we may also
need to go through a series of sensemaking activities, such as
exploring and searching collaboration patterns among different
social actors and metrics about these collaborations, collecting the
social and structural features of interest, organizing them and
adding our annotations. These synthesized information forms our
understanding of social networks. Furthermore, as the information
we gather is accumulated, we might also revise and reconstruct
our understanding about the network patterns if we find some
conflict information.
However, current methods for social network analysis are often
weak in supporting the sensemaking of social networks from both
network and social perspectives. Most visual analytics systems
only offer analysis of network structures and visualization of these
structures, but lack the capabilities to help people interactively
explore social networks based on social attributes of a social
network. Our recent work, TreeNetViz [15], enables users to
exam the hybrid patterns of social and structural features in social
networks. However, these tools offer analytical and statistical
tools that can produce overwhelming visual outputs, but often
overlook users’ needs for sensemaking tools that help to gather,
synthesize, and organize social, structural and hybrid features of
social networks and then construct and revise their mental
representations of network data. They also have limited supports
for the process of building users’ representation, such as where
users gather useful information, how users synthesize the
information and how they revise their understanding.
In this paper, we present our research work to address these
issues. We propose a framework on sensemaking of social
networks with an emphasis on integration of network and social
attributes to understand social networks structurally and socially.
This framework considers both bottom-up processes, which are
about constructing understanding of data based on collected
information, and top-down processes, which concern using prior
knowledge to guide information collection, in analyzing social
networks with social attributes, and emphasizes the importance of
the externalization of sensemaking processing to visual analytics
of social networks. We introduce a system, SocialNetSense, built
on the framework to support social network sensemaking
activities with interactive visualization, and present a use scenario
on how the system helps users understand a scholar collaboration
network with social hierarchy information.
2

RELATED WORK

In this section, we review related work from four perspectives:
sensemaking theories, visualization for social network
sensemaking, visualization of social network with attributes, and

133

process manage of visual analytics.
2.1 Sensemaking: Theories and Visualization Support
Sensemaking is a process to successively build and refine
representations and fit data with representations to meet the
requirements of a task [40]. Generally, sensemaking models fall
into two categories: top-down approaches that start with known
representations, and then explore data guided by the
representations [39][40], and bottom-up approaches that first
explore data and then construct presentations of data based on
relevant information collected [4]. These two approaches often
work together in the process of sensemaking, and therefore some
hybrid models have been proposed to integrate them [26] [37].
Visualization has been used to support various sensemaking
activities. Some visualization systems are proposed to support
general sensemaking. Chi et al. [9] visualize a spreadsheet to help
the sensemaking of the evolution of web sites. Jigsaw [44] uses
visualization tools to identify key information entities and their
relationships in support of the sensemaking of a large collection of
text documents. CzSaw [24] supports iterative analysis of
document collection with editable and re-playable history
navigation. Sandbox [46] enables users to search, collect, organize
and marshal evidences to make sense documents in a visual space.
To help scholars to make sense of literature, CiteSense [48]
provides an integrated visualization environment to support
literature search, selection, organization and comprehension.
These visualization systems show some features that are
important to sensemaking activities. These features include
searching, collecting, organizing relevant information, linking
concepts, creating and modifying representations, and tracking the
sensmeaking progress. However, they were designed to support
sensemaking of general types of data, such as documents and web
sites, and cannot be applied for social network sensemaking.
2.2 Social Network Sensemaking with Visualization
Sensemaking activities of social networks involve network
exploration and representation creation. Visualization tools are
designed to support these two types of sensemaking activities.
To support network exploration, most social network
visualization tools support network analysis, visualization and
interactions. These tools can be classified into two categories:
toolkit-oriented and application-oriented. Toolkit-oriented designs
mainly focus on the general layout of networks but their support
for social network analysis and user interaction is usually limited.
Tools like Prefuse [18] and JUNG [34] provide different layout
algorithms, and serve as libraries to build customized graph
visualization tools. Some tools, such as Pajek [1] and Visone [5],
are designed for researchers to conduct traditional social network
analysis with rich analysis functions, such as identifying
important actors and actor roles, but their support for visualization
and user interaction is weak. Application-oriented tools like
Vizster [17], MatrixExplorer [21], NodTrix [22], and NetLens
[25] support user exploration of and interaction with social
networks, but the exploration tasks they support are very specific,
not broad enough for complex sensemaking activities.
Sensemaking of social networks involves helping users build
representations with an iterative process in both bottom-up and
top-down fashions. Some visualization systems partially support
this process. For example, SocialAction [35] allows iteratively
ranking and filtering nodes; SYF [36] can guide domain experts to
explore network data; and Shrinivasan and van Wijk [43]
designed a system to support the analytic process for general
information visualization. However, few visualization tools
integrate both top-down and bottom-up approaches to support
sensemaking of social networks.
In sum, most tools mentioned above are often weak in

134

supporting the sensemaking of social networks from both network
and social perspectives. Most studies emphasize network
structures, or only employ attributes to filter, sort, or group actors.
Few can help users analyze the impacts of social attributes on
structural patterns of social networks, such as examining the
network features (e.g., size, degree, importance, etc) from social
perspectives. Also, these system only offer a number of analysis
and statistical tools that can produce overwhelming visual outputs,
but cannot help user synthesize related analysis results to build up
representations of networks. Few can support the management of
analysis process.
2.3 Visualization of Social Network with Attributes
Visualization of social networks with social attributes often
requires revealing network patterns over social attributes, such as
identifying important actors with a specific attribute, their
connections, and relevant social attributes (e.g. affiliation). Some
designs used multivariate graph visualization to present a graph
with attribute data of nodes or edges, and some leveraged
hierarchical social attributes to exam network patterns at different
levels.
Multivariate graph visualization largely focuses on network
clustering and aggregation based on the attributes. Some
techniques emphasize the layout of the graph based on the
multivariate data, such as multivariate state transition graphs [38]
and other techniques consider user interaction and navigation,
including PivotGraph [30], which aggregates and places nodes on
a grid of two dimensions of attributes specified by users; Semantic
substrates [42], which organizes network nodes based on userdefined regions of attributes,, and GraphDice [3], which uses a
plot matrix to present node-link plots for every combination of
attributes of actors and edges in a social. Other tools abstract data
attributes with network schemas to help users to explore data. For
example, OntoVis [41] visualizes networks with an ontologybased schema and Ploceus [29] enables users to construct network
semantics of multivariate tabular data and conduct multidimensional and multi-level analysis with semantics. However, in
these systems, attribute information used in building hierarchy is
either hidden in network structures or not explicitly available for
users to interact and explore.
Some methods have been proposed to visualize network
patterns over hierarchical social attributes by integrating both
network and tree. Several approaches directly add network
connections layered over treemaps [12] [32]. Along this direction,
some efforts have been made to reduce edge crossings or node
occlusion [7] and to avoid edge cluttering [10]. However, these
designs largely focus representing networks with attributes at a
single social level. Recently, researchers have explored designs to
combine both social attributes and networks in support of user
interaction with and exploration of network patterns at different
levels of social aggregation [15] [45].
2.4 Process Management of Visual Analytics
Process management is an important component in visual
analytics. It focuses on users’ reasoning process in interacting
with various visualizations. It captures, records and regenerates
user interactions and helps users keep track of the development of
their representations about data. The work of process management
of visual analytics can be organized around two tasks:
visualization exploration and representation creation.
Most research of process management of visual analytics
focuses on visualization exploration. It captures users’ interactions
with visualization and stores them with different models to
regenerate visualization results. Tools falling in this category
usually provide simply undo and redo operations to navigate a

series of interaction history [31]. However, a linear model of redo
and undo is insufficient to manage complex exploration process.
Researchers proposed some models of process management based
on state and action of visualization [19]. Kreuseler et al. [27] use
dependences of state transitions and a history tree manage a visual
mining process. Jankun-Kelly et al. [23] propose a model to
capture, share and reuse user interactions in visualization
exploration with a parameter set, and transformation of the
parameter set. Heer et al. [19] design graphical history tools for
Tableau to record and visualize interaction histories. Some
designs capture transitions of visualization states with scripts of
actions. VisTrails [2] uses a script-like visual language to record
and execute pipelines of scientific visualization. Czsaw [24] uses
a similar approach to record a document analysis process.
However, few studies provide the process management of
users’ representation generation process. While some works use
various semantic annotations to history of interactions with
visualization, such as tagging [43], bookmarking [19][20] and text
annotating [16], supporting the history manage of users’
understanding generation, such as collecting and organizing
evidence, composing and modifying arguments, creating links
among different elements is still limited. Part of our work reported
in this paper is about a process management model of users’
representation building in social network sensemaking.
3

A FRAMEWORK OF SOCIAL NETWORK SENSEMAKING

We first present a sensemaking framework of social network with
social attributes as shown in Figure 1. It involves three parts of
social network data, network exploring loop and representation
building loop. In this framework, social network data with
attribute information are first processed and reorganized into
different structures and visual representations with emphasize on
social features, network features and hybrid features. The data
processing, including data modeling and network aggregating, is
discussed in section 3.1 and section 3.2.

Figure 1: A framework of social network sensemaking with
visualization.

Sensemaking activities go through two loops in our framework:
a network exploring loop and a representation building loop. In
the network exploring loop, users seek desirable information by
exploring three features of network data, including social features,
network features and hybrid features, according to a task and
existing knowledge. The social features are derived social
attributes of actors in a network, such as hierarchical affiliation
information of department, college and university. Network
features emphasize on structural information, such as importance
of nodes and links, network cliques, and other network properties.
Hybrid features show the impact of social attributes over network
structure, and focus on the aggregated network patterns among
actors from different attributes, such as the collaboration patterns
among one university with other departments in a scholar

collaboration network. The three features are related and various
metrics (such as degree, betweenness and closeness), plots (such
as degree distribution) and visualization tools can help users to
explore these features.
The two loops can interact with each other and form an outer
loop of bottom-up and top-down processes. In the top-down
process, users can use the representations they have to guide their
further search in the exploring loop to look for new evidences. In
the bottom-up process, users actually collect information of
interest as evidences to support or revise their representation. The
evidences are gathered and used in the representation building
loop. As the evidences are accumulated, representations can be
modified and even re-constructed.
The sensemaking process of two inner loops with the outer
loop indicates the trajectory of moving from a state of non-sense
to a state of sense. Operations in both network exploration and
representation building loops are important to help users to
understand their sensemaking process. The intermediate analysis
results are important to understand the process because users often
revisit an intermediate stage during the sensemaking process.
These states should be stored in an automatical fashion or upon a
user’s demand. Thus, a process management is usually provided
in the sensemaking activity to enhance the awareness of their
sensemaking process and help users track their analysis trajectory.
The process management mechanism is discussed in Section 3.3.
The framework captures key analysis behaviors and process of
users to make sense of social network with attributes. In the
following section, we use the framework to guide our design of
data model of social network with attributes, multiscale and crossscale aggregation, process management and functions of our
visualization system.
3.1 Data Model of Social Networks with Attributes
In this section, we introduce a graph model to represent a social
network with attributes. The social attributes may include
information with different social entities, such as department,
university in a scientific collaboration network. In this sense, this
type of network is a special case of a multimodal graph, in which
the nodes and edges have different modes, or types [13]. Here we
define the network of interest as follows.
Suppose we have a social network, N = (VN, EN), where VN, are
social actors (nodes) and EN are social relations (edges), and each
node has m attributes. Some attributes may have hierarchical
levels. For example, the social affiliation attribute of an actor in a
research collaboration network can be described at the levels of
individual, university, and country. Therefore, we can denote a
hierarchical attribute as a tree structure, Ti= (VTi, ETi), where VTi
are tree nodes derived from the ith attribute and ETi are tree edges
indicating parent-child relations. Note that even if an attribute
only have one level of element, we can construct a two-level
hierarchy by introducing a dummy root node.
To analyze a social network with social hierarchical attributes,
we use a TreeNet graph model [15], a compound graph consisting
of two sub-graphs: one tree structure and one network. A TreeNet
graph, TrNi, can be written as:
TrNi= (Ti, N,ρ),
where ρ is a function to map tree leaf nodes to network nodes:
ρ(nTi)→ nN, nTi ∈ VTiL, nN ∈ VN, and VTiL is the set of leaf nodes in
the tree Ti. The TreeNet graph model is used to aggregate network
at different levels of attribute, as discussed in next section.
3.2 Multiscale and Cross-scale Aggregation of Social
Networks with Attributes
A TreeNet compound graph can help the understanding of the
hybrid features of social and structural patterns in social networks.

135

In this case, we can have both multiscale and cross-scale
relationships among social entities. The concepts of multiscale
and cross-scale relationships are similar to within-mode and
between-mode edges in a multimodal graph context. Multiscale
relationships are the ones between entities from the same level,
such as between individual and individual, or between university
and university. Cross-scale relationships refer to those links
between entities from different levels, such as between individual
and university, between individual and country, or between
university and country. The detailed algorithms of multiscale and
cross-scale aggregation can be found in [15].
An example of network aggregation is shown in Figure 2.
Suppose we have a co-authoring network shown in Figure 2a, in
which each node is an author and there is a link between two
authors if they co-author at least one paper. Each author has an
affiliation attribute of department and college, which can be
represented as a tree shown in Figure 2b (we assume each author
only has a single affiliation). For example, author 0 is from
department D in college A. Thus, if we are only interested in the
nodes specified by a cutline CL shown in Figure 2d, we can
collapse nodes A and D, and expand node E and F to show the
author nodes under them. In this way, we actually aggregate the
nodes in college A and department D and also aggregate the edges
of authors under A and D but connecting with other nodes. For
example, two edges e(0, 3) and e(1, 3) are aggregated into an edge
e(A, 3). Therefore, we can have an aggregated network view
shown in Figure 2c which spans three levels of college,
department and individual author.

visualizations with records of the intermediate representation.
Thus, our process management mechanism is mainly targeted to
supporting users’ representation building process.
We use a hybrid model with state and action of visualization by
following the history management paradigm suggested by Heer
[19]. Our hybrid model (shown in Figure 3) uses a tree structure
to manage states and actions. It records all user actions to build up
their representations, but only caches critical states of the
representation developing. A state, Si, is a stored configuration of
a user’s current representation of visualizations, charts, notes,
groups and so on. A critical state is either an initial state (Sc0 in
Figure 3) or a branching state (Sc2 in Figure 3). A state becomes a
branching state when a user returns to this state and this state is
transformed to a new state by another action. A cached branching
state is useful to reduce the number of actions to be reversed when
a user wants to jump to a specific state. For example, if the system
is currently in state S21 and a user wants to go to S22, the model
only needs to retrieve the cached branching state Sc2 and execute
action A4 to achieve this.

Figure 3: A hybrid history management model of states (Si) and
actions (Aj). It only caches the initial state (Sc0) and a
branching state (Sc2). Sc2 is a branching state because the
system is reversed from state S21 and is transformed into
state S22 by a new action A4. States S1 and Sc2 can be
grouped into state Sc3, which also can be ungrouped.
Table 1. Actions included in our hybrid history management model.

Visual Insight Actions

Knowledge Insight
Actions

Meta
Actions

Gather Visualization
Create/Edit/Remove Note
Resize
Gather Plot
Link/Unlink Elements
Move
Gather Node/Edge Metrics Group/Ungroup Elements

Figure 2: A Network aggregation example in a TreeNet Graph.

3.3 Process Management of Sensemaking with
Visualization
Process management of sensemaking helps users keep track of
their reasoning process with interactions of visualization. It
involves interactions of both visualization exploration and
representation creation. In this paper, we emphasizes on users’
representation building process. We argue that interactions of
visualization exploration are too complicated and these
interactions alone are not sufficient to help users to make sense
the dataset. It is more important to capture the process of
representation developing, because users should know how and
from where they develop their current understanding of data of
interest. Furthermore, study shows that relationships in data can
be recoverable through manual inspection [11]. Users can revisit
an intermediate representation and manually regenerate

136

An action, Aj, is a meaningful and atomic operation by a user to
create their understanding of visualization. Each action connects
two states and is a transition among two states. The actions used
in our model are shown in Table 1 by following a taxonomy
schema proposed by Gotz and Zhou [14]. A series of actions can
be easily merged and unmerged in the hybrid model. In Figure 3,
the two states S1 and Sc2 are grouped into a new branching state
Sc3, so that two actions A1 and A2 are merged. This is helpful
when users want to simplify process by merging multiple actions
into a single meaningful action when a history tree becomes
complicated.
4

SOCIALNETSENSE: A VISUALIZATION SYSTEM
SOCIAL NETWORK SENSEMAKING

TO

SUPPORT

Guided by the sensemaking framework of social-network visual
analytics, a new visualization system should support:
• social features exploration to help users to understand social
structures embodied in attributes of actors, such as a
hierarchical organization structure of an individual, the peers
sharing similar social status of an individual.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4: Network Exploring Space (NES) in SocialNetSense: (a) Coordinated node-link views, including a network visualization (Panel 1-1), a
tree visualization (Panel 1-2) to show the social hierarchy of actors, a network overview panel (Panel 1-3) to support quick navigation,
and a control panel (Panel 2) with a set of analytical tools of different aggregation metrics, analytic plots and so on; (b) A TreeNetViz view
to reveal hybrid features of network patterns over a social hierarchy.

• network features exploration and analysis to help users to
find important and peripheral nodes, critical edges and
closely connected clusters, and exploration should be
supported with different visual representations so that users
can triangulate their understanding of network patterns with
different views;
• hybrid features exploration of a network over a social
attribute to help users understand aggregated network
patterns at the same and different levels of a social attribute.
• representation building-up to allow users to collect
visualizations of subgraphs, plots, metrics, group them, add
notes to create and modify their understanding of data;
• process management to enhance users’ awareness of analytic
process by capturing, storing users’ interactions which form
their representations, visualizing their action history, and
enabling users to return to a specific intermediate
representation.
With these requirements, we design and implement
SocialNetSense to support sensemaking activities of social
network with attributes from both social and structural
perspectives. In this section, we present the visualization and
interaction design of SocialNetSense, including three main
components: a Network Exploring Space (NES), a Representation
Building Space (RBS) and a process view.
4.1 Network Exploring Space (NES)
The interface of Network Exploring Space (NES) is shown in
Figure 4a. It includes two main panels: a visualization view (Panel
1) showing social networks along with hierarchical social
structures, and a control panel (Panel 2) offering a set of analytical
tools, such as different aggregation metrics, analytic plots and
searching. The tool bar above Panel 1 includes view manipulation
tools, such as zooming, panning and layouting.
Our tools support multiple forms of visual representations of
social networks to help users to explore social, network and
hybrid features. A traditional node-link style to view a network, as
shown in Panel 1 in Figure 4a, is provided to present social

Figure 5: The collaboration patterns of department under Medical
School after semantic zooming in a node-link view.

features and network features of the data, and a TreeNetViz view
(Figure 4b) to see the hybrid features of how a social network is
coupled with social structures of its actors. Different views offer
users insight into network and social features from different
perspectives. The node-link network view is intuitive and easy to
identity highly-connected nodes, but requires extra cognitive
efforts to connect network features with a social hierarchy.
TreeNetViz view integrates network and the tree structure in a
single view and offers easy aggregation and dis-aggregation
operations to understand social ties at different levels of social
aggregation.
4.1.1 Coordinated Node-link Views
The node-link view includes three view panels, shown in the
panel 1 of Figure 4a: a network view panel as the primary
workspace for network visualization (Panel 1-1), a tree view panel
(Panel 1-2) to show the social hierarchical features of actors, and a
network overview panel (Panel 1-3) to support quick navigation.
General zooming and panning are provided for the tree view

137

and network view. The two panels are also resizable to offer user
more flexibility to exam both network and tree structures.
Furthermore, semantic zooming is also provided to explore a
network structure at different social scale. Users can also specify a
set of nodes as focused nodes which are affected by semantic
zooming while other nodes are fixed to their current scales. Users
can select them by clicking those nodes with the CTRL key down.
This generates a cross-scale view. For example, in the Panel 1-1
of Figure 4a, we can see the overall network patterns of
collaboration at the level of school. After semantic zooming in the
node of Medical School, we can have a view shown in Figure 5,
which indicates the collaboration patterns of departments under
the node of Medical School in details.
Three view panels facilitate navigation and interaction with
hierarchical aggregated networks. The primary network view and
the tree view are coupled together to support user navigation.
When users zoom in a non-leaf node to show the child nodes
directly under it, the tree view is simultaneously expanded to
display its child nodes. Similarly, when zooming out to a more
abstract scale, users see the tree view collapses to a level at which
all the child nodes are hidden under their parent node. In addition,
node selection is synchronized in two views. When users select a
node in the network view, the corresponding node in the tree view
is also highlighted.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6: Two examples of evidence collection widgets in NES:
(a) collecting a subtree; (b) collecting a degree distribution
plot.

The overview in Panel 1-3 of Figure 4a uses a rectangle to
represent the location and size of the current network view. When
users manipulate the network view through panning or zooming,
the location and size of the rectangle will be updated
automatically. Users can directly resize or change the location of
the rectangle in the overview to achieve quick navigation in the
network view.
4.1.2 TreeNetViz View
We include a novel visualization technique, TreeNetViz [15]
(shown in Figure 4b), to reveal hybrid features of network
patterns over a social hierarchy. This visualization technique
supports interactive aggregation of a network based on the
attributes of a tree structure, and allows users to explore
multiscale and cross-scale relationships among different social
entities (e.g., individuals, groups, and organizations) in a single
view. TreeNetViz uses a Radial, Space-Filling (RSF) method to
represent a tree structure, a circle layout show a network and edge
bundling to avoid visual cluttering. Besides interactions of
multiscale and cross-scale exploration, it also supports egonetwork view to show direct neighbors and their links. For
example, in Figure 4b, the nodes of schools, such as Medical
School and School of Public Health are assigned along a circle.
The child nodes are assigned to the sub-arc of their parent node.
We can see there are some department nodes under the School of
Public Health. In this way, we see the network patterns among the
departments under School of Public Health with other schools.
Users can expand and collapse node sectors by double clicking, or
resize the size of node sectors with a mouse wheel. The details of
this visualization can be found in [15].
4.1.3 Evidence Collection in NES
In NES, we offer users handy tools to collect evidence of interest
to build up their own understanding during their exploration. One
important task in the bottom-up process of sensemaking is to
search information of interest during exploration and collect them

(a)

(b)

/

Gather
Subgraph/TreeNetViz
Gather Plot
Gather Node Info
Gather Edge Info
Link/Unlink Elements

Create/Edit Note
Ungroup
Group
Move
Resize

(c)
Figure 7: Representation Building Space (RBS): Panel 1 is the main working space;
Panel 2 is the process view; Panel 3 lists the elements in the working space; and
Toolbar and Popup menu provide tools of representation building, such as add
note, group/ungroup elements and link element.

138

Figure 8: View of process management: (a) a popup
menu to group two actions of “add note” and
“move”; (b) the grouping result of (a); (c) icons
of major actions used in the process view.

as evidences to support or revise their representations. In NES,
there are various collectable sources of information, including
node-link views of sub-tree and sub-network, a TreeNetView of
network, plots of various metrics (e.g. a degree distribution plot),
node/cluster information (description, metrics of size, degree,
betweenness, closeness) and edge information (description such as
paper information in a co-authoring social network, metrics of
betweenness and weight). Users can right click on information
source of interest to popup a collecting widget and then copy it
into Representation Building Space (RBS). Figure 6 shows two
examples of evidence collection widgets in NES. Figure 6a shows
that using a pop-up menu to copy a sub-tree into RBS and Figure
6b shows copying a degree distribution plot into RBS.
4.2 Representation Building Space (RBS)
A Representation Building Space (RBS) allows users to organize
the evidences collected from the NES, establish relations among
them, take notes and create representations. Figure 7 shows the
user interface of RBS. The interface includes three main panels: a
working space (Panel 1), a process view (Panel 2) and an element
list view (Panel 3). In the working space, users can save visual
structures (such as visualizations from the node-link view and the
TreeNetViz view), network metrics(such as size, degree,
betweenness and closeness) and plots from the NES into this
space, organize (group/ungroup) them, add notes, create
connections among them and build representation in a bottom-top
way. Also, users can use generated representations to guide
evidence collections in the NES, such as deciding which tree
nodes should be visible to generate a new aggregated view on a
social network. This is a top-down process.
This space can be manipulated by general edit and view control
tools like redo, undo, zooming, panning, and so on. Annotation
tools are provided to help users to form their understanding of the
collected network information. Notes, connections and groups can
be added on visual structures in the working space by various
tools (Toolbar and Popup menu 4 in Figure 7). Panel 3 lists the
elements in the working space, including tree hierarchies,
aggregated networks, statistics plots, notes and connections. Users
can conduct a search of these elements in Panel 3.
4.3 Process View
A process view (Panel 2 in Figure 7 and Figure 8) realizes the
process management model discussed in Section 3.3. Evidence
collection and representation building-up actions (shown in Table
1) are captured, recorded and visualized in this view. This view
visualizes an overview of sensemaking activity history with a leftto-right tree layout (Figure 8a and 8b). The visualization is a little
different from the model shown in Figure 3: nodes indicate
actions and links means the sequences of actions. The concept of
state is implicit in this visualization. We use snapshots of
representation space with timestamp at branching nodes where
users have different paths of representation building actions. Thus
a snapshot can provide an anchor point to remind users the
intermediate representation of analysis results in navigating the
whole analytic process. A selected node indicates the state at
which users’ current representation view is. We use different
icons to represent actions shown in Table 1, and the icons’
meaning is shown in Figure 8c. When users hover mouse over an
action node, it also shows details of its action type and the time
when it was executed.
We provide handy interactions in this view to help users
navigate in a process of representation building. First, the process
view is zoomable: users can zoom into to check details of
operations and visual structures, or zoom out to see the whole
trace of sensemaking activities. Furthermore, users can revisit any

intermediate representation in an analysis process by double
clicking a tree node which is not the current state. The system will
locate the nearest branching node and retrieve the cached state of
that branching node, and then execute the actions from the
branching node to the selected node. In addition, users can select a
series of actions and use a popup widget to group them. The
grouped actions can be also ungroup. For example, Figure 8 (a)
shows the popup menu to group two actions of “add note” and
“move”, and Figure 8 (b) shows the grouped result.
5

USE SCENARIO: MAKE SENSE OF A CO-AUTHORING SOCIAL
NETWORK OF MDELINE WITH SOCIALNETSENSE

In this section, we present a scenario using SocialNetSense to
analyze a co-author network of diabetes researchers at University
M and we want to use this system to help us make sense the
collaboration patterns among these researchers. We select
diabetes researchers as an example because they are from diverse
background including chemistry engineering, public health, life
science and biomedical research.
The dataset includes 847 authors and 2,498 co-author
relationships on 614 papers (two authors are considered to have a
link if they co-author on at least one paper). In this example, we
focus on the influence of affiliation attribute of authors over a
network structure and thus we use two levels of affiliation: college
and department. In the dataset, we identified 10 college-level
nodes and 90 department-level nodes. A school and a research
centre are also treated as college-level actors. Detailed
information of the dataset can be found in [15].
This use scenario aims at understanding how SocialNetSense
supports users’ sensemaking of the patterns of co-authoring
collaboration across organizational boundaries. Specifically, we
are interested in sensemaking activities to crystalize users’
understanding about the social network with affiliation attributes
occurring in SocialNetSense, such as:
• How do different visualizations and metrics help users form
their understanding about collaboration patterns vary across
departments and colleges?
• How are users supported to identify those researchers acting
as “boundary liaison” to connect different departments and
colleges?
• How does the process view support users to revise their
understanding during the sensemaking process?
5.1 Sensemaking of Multiscale and Cross-scale
Network Patterns
SocialNetSense can help a user to build her understanding of the
collaboration patterns of the diabetes researcher network, such as
the power and status of social actors and collaborations, at three
different levels of colleges, department and individuals. Figure 8
shows an example of a representation of the main network pattern
at the level of college composed by a user in the NES.
Let us take a look at how the user got this representation. First,
the user explore the network in NES with the node-link diagram
view found there are three dominant colleges of “Medical
School”, “LSA” (Literature, Science and the Arts) and “Public
Health” at the level of college (shown in Panel 1-1 in Figure 4a).
Node size represents the number of researchers in a group and
edge thickness shows the collaboration strength between two
groups. The user believed this pattern is important and thus copies
the subgraph of three colleges into RBS with an evidence
collection tool shown in Figure 6a and grouped them with a popup
tool shown in Figure 7-4. This group is shown in Figure 9-1.
Then, the user also collected metrics of degree for the three nodes
and the metrics were saved as text boxes (2a, 2b and 2c in Figure
9). The users also linked the metric information to the node by

139

dragging the text box to the related node. A degree distribution
plot was also saved with a tool shown in Figure 6b and linked to
“Medical School” as shown in Figure 9-3. Figure 9-4 shows the
gathered information about the papers which are co-authored
between “LSA” and “Public Health”. All information was
grouped with a note shown in Figure 9-5.

her tasks.
5.2 Sensemaking of “Boundary Liaison”
SocialNetSense also supports a user to make sense of the network
with affiliation to identify important actors acting as “boundary
liaison” to connect different departments or colleges. When a user
examined the network patterns at college level (shown in Panel 11 in Figure 4a), she found that “Medical School (MS)” is not
directly connected with “School of Kinesiology (SK)” and they
are linked via “School of Public Health (SPH)”. She gathered the
subgraph of the three nodes in to RBS and takes a note of path
“MS--SPH--SK” (Figure 11-1). Then, she wondered which
department under “SPH” collects the two schools of “MS” and
“SK”. Thus, she went back NES and used a TreeNetViz view to
expand SPH to the level of department, and found it is “Hlth
Behaviour & Hlth ED Dept (HBHED)” connecting MS and SK at
the department level. She gathered and saved this information
with a note in RBS (Figure 11-2). Similarly, she finally identified
the “Auth525” is the boundary liaison connecting the two schools
of “MS” and “SK” (Figure 11-3). Using SocialNetSense, the user
created her understanding of the roles of boundary liaison at
different levels. With this representation, she can further examine
network metrics of these critical actors.

Figure 9: A user’s representation of the main network patterns at
the level of college.

Figure 11: A representation of boundary liaisons connecting
“Medical School (MS)” and “School of Public Health (SPH)”.
Figure 10: A user’s representation of both the main network
patterns at the level of college and cross-scale patterns
among the department in LSA with other colleges.

SocialNetSense also supports a user to make sense cross-scale
network patterns. By referring to the representation in Figure 9,
the user went back to NES and continued gathering more
information to understand cross-scale patterns among the
departments in “LSA” with other colleges. To simplify the
representation, the user first grouped node and edge information
into a folder shown in Figure 10-2. Then, in the node-link diagram
view, she used semantic zoom and get the details of the network
patterns under college of “LSA” shown in Figure 10-3. The user
collected these patterns, saved and grouped them in RBS. To
show the cross-scale network patterns among “LSA” and other
colleges, the user went back to NES and opened a TreeNetViz
view. She also gathered a TreeNetViz view with an expended
sector of “LSA” shown as Figure 10-4 into the representation.
Finally, as shown in Figure 10 the user built her understanding of
both the main network patterns at the level of college and crossscale patterns among the departments in LSA with other colleges.
The user could continue revising this representation according to

140

5.3 Representation Revising with Process View
The process view of SocialNetSense visualizes users’ interactions
with representation space and helps users understand the
representation building process. It also helps users to navigate in a
process and revisit intermediate analysis results. Figure 12 shows
the representation building process of the example in Figure 11.
We can see that the user did not follow a linear analysis process to
get the final representation. After the user found the path of “MS-SPH--SK” (Figure 11-1), there is an important change of analysis
strategy which is shown at the branching node of Figure 12-1.
With a close look at this branching node, we find that the user first
tried to use a node-link view to examine which department in
“SPH” connects “MS” and “SK”. This is shown in the lower
subtree of the process path in Figure 12. The action in Figure 12-2
is gathering a subgraph with a node-link view into RBS. The
subgraph, shown in Figure 12-3, was generated by using semantic
zooming with the focused node of “SPH”. We can see the
collaboration details under the node of “SPH” in this subgraph,
but it is not very helpful for the user to identity the boundary
liaison in the school of “SPH”.

Figure 12: The process view of the representation building-up
process in Figure 11.

Therefore, the user abandoned the strategy of node-link view by
returning to the state of branching node (Figure 12-1) and started
to use a TreeNetViz view to search the liaison actor between
“MS” and “SK” in the school of “SPH”. The new strategy is
shown in the upper subtree of the process in Figure 12, which
helps her to reach the final representation. We can see icons of
TreeNetViz view in this branch of analysis process.
We can also see that some actions are grouped together here to
simplify the analysis process in this view. For example, Figure
12-3 shows an expanded action group and Figure 12-4 shows a
collapsed action group. The user can easily return to any
intermediate analysis result in two different paths of strategy by
double clicking the action nodes in this view.
The use scenario shows that SocialNetSense allows users to
make sense of social network from both structural and social
perspectives. With SocialNetSense, users can examine
collaboration patterns of social entities at multiple and cross
levels. It provides users sensemaking tools to gather, synthesize,
and organize various visualization and metrics to create their own
understanding about network data. The process view enables
users to examine the whole analysis process and revisit
intermediate analysis results. We can see that SocialNetSense
provides a start point to have a general understanding of the
dataset. With this understanding, researchers can further answer
some complicated questions such as how the main patterns of
network are formed, what resources the boundary liaisons have in
collaborative projects, and how we can help research seek
potential collaborators.
6

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

In this paper, we presented a framework for the sensemaking of
social networks with social attributes from both social, structure
and hybrid perspectives. This framework is built upon
sensemaking theories and integrates both data-driven and
representation-driven approaches, and emphasizes interactions
between them. We introduced a prototype system,
SocialNetSense, to support a two-way process of social network
sensemaking activities, including exploring and examining
network patterns with node-link views and a TreeNetViz view,
and gathering various visualizations, metrics information and
plots, organizing them, adding notes to create user representation
of social network with attributes. We also presented a use
scenario utilizing our system to make sense of a co-authoring
social network and show its potentials to help users crystalize
their understanding of social networks from both structural and
social perspectives.
The contributions of this work fall into two categories:
theoretical and practical implications for visual analytics of social
networks. On one hand, we propose a sensemaking framework for

visual analytics of social networks with attributes. This
framework integrating both top-down and bottom-up processes
can be applied to visual analytics of general social networks. Two
aspects with the sensemaking approach to general social network
visual analytics are: 1) to enable users to explore social networks
from different perspectives and 2) to allow users to collect,
organize and synthesize information of interest to build their
understanding. On the other hand, we present a visual analytic
system for social network. With using the system, we can validate
and revise our sensemaking framework, and then derive design
implications for other visual analytic systems of social networks.
Another interesting issue in this work is generalization of the
design of Representation Building Space. We already see some
similar design for different sensemaking tasks, such as CzSaw
[24], Sandbox [46] and CiteSense [48]. Theoretically, we can
have some common sensemaking activities which should be
supported to help users to build their understanding, such as
collecting, organizing, synthesizing and annotating information.
Practically, it is difficult to have a general technical mechanism to
support this representation building because of the speciality of
domain tasks. However, we might develop a technical mechanism
for visual analytics of social networks by incorporating commonly
used visualization of network, such as node-link view, matrix
view and circular view.
The research has some limits. First, our approach may not
perform well in dealing with data with incomplete attribute data.
If the attributes of some key nodes are missing, it becomes
difficult to construct aggregated networks and to support
exploring social duality. Secondly, the process management
module currently only captures, stores and executes the
interactions occurring in representation spaces. Although we
argue that it is more important to capture the process of
representation development, history of interactions during
visualization exploration are also helpful to automatically
regenerate visualizations of interest.
We will extend our work in three directions. First, we will
develop methods to help create social networks by integrating
various information sources (e.g., organization directories,
research paper repositories). Secondly, we will extend our process
management module to capture interactions during visualization
exploration. Thus, our system can automatically regenerate
visualizations used in users’ representation. We also plan to
provide handy tools to import and export the representation users
built during the sensemaking process. Finally, we will deploy the
system into fields and work with domain experts to collect data
about how they use our system to support their sensemaking
activities. We can analyze the usage data to evaluate our
sensemaking framework and improve the system.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

Batagelj, V., & Mrvar, A. (2005). PAJEK: Program for Analysis and
Visualization of Large Networks. Ljubljana, Slovenia: University of
Ljubljana.
Bavoil, L., Callahan, S., Crossno, P., Freire, J., Scheidegger, C.,
Silva, C., & Vo, H. (2005). Vistrails: Enabling Interactive MultipleView Visualizations. In Proc. of InfoVis’05, pp. 135-142.
Bezerianos, A., Chevalier, F., Dragicevic, P., Elmqvist, N. & Fekete,
J. D. (2010). GraphDice: A System for Exploring Multivariate Social
Networks. Computer Graphics Forum, 29(3), pp. 863-872.
Bodnar, J. (2005). Making Sense of Massive Data by Hypothesis
Testing. International Conference on Intelligence Analysis, pp. 2-4.
Brandes, U., & Wagner, D. (2003). Visone: Analysis and
Visualization of Social Networks. Graph Drawing Software.
Springer, Berlin, pp. 321-340.

141

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

142

Breiger, R. (1974). The Duality of Persons and Groups. Social
Forces, 53, pp. 181-190.
Burch, M. & Diehl, S. (2008), TimeRadarTrees: Visualizing
Dynamic Compound Digraphs. Computer Graphics Forum, 27, pp.
823–830.
Card, S.K., J. D. Mackinlay, & B. Shneiderman, (Eds.) Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc. 1999.
Chi, E. H., & Card, S. K. (1999). Sensemaking of Evolving Web
Sites Using Visualization Spreadsheets. In Proc. of InfoVis'99, pp.
18-26.
Holten, D. (2006). Hierarchical Edge Bundles: Visualization of
Adjacency Relations in Hierarchical Data. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12, pp. 741-748.
Dou, W., Jeong, D.H., Stukes, F., Ribarsky, W., Lipford, H.R., &
Chang, R. (2009). Recovering Reasoning Process from User
Interactions. IEEE CGA, 29(3), pp. 52-61.
Fekete, J.-D., Wang, D., Dang, N., Aris, A. & Plaisant, C. (2003).
Overlaying Graph Links on Treemaps. In Proc.of InfoVis’03, Poster
Compendium, pp. 82–83.
Ghani, S., Elmqvist, N., & Ebert, D. S. (2012). MultiNode-Explorer:
A Visual Analytics Framework for GeneratingWeb-based
Multimodal Graph Visualizations. . In Proc. of EuroVA'12, pp. 6771.
Gotz, D. and Zhou, M. Characterizing Users’ Visual Analytic
Activity for Insight Provenance. In Proc. of VAST’08, pp. 123-130.
Gou, L. & Zhang, X. L. (2011). TreeNetViz: Revealing Patterns of
Networks over Tree Structures. IEEE TVCG/InfoVis’11, 17(12), pp.
2449-2458.
Groth, D. P. & Streefkerk, K. (2006). Provenance and Annotation for
Visual Exploration Systems. IEEE TVCG, 12(6), pp. 1500-1510.
Heer, J., & Boyd, D. (2005). Vizster: Visualizing Online Social
Networks. In Proc. of InfoVis’05, pp. 33-40.
Heer, J., Card, S. K., & Landay, J. A. (2005). Prefuse: A Toolkit for
Interactive Information Visualization. In Proc. of ACM CHI’05, pp.
421-430.
Heer, J., Mackinlay, J., Stolte, C. &
Agrawala, M.
(2008).
Graphical Histories for Visualization: Supporting Analysis,
communication, and evaluation. IEEE TVCG, 16(4), pp. 1189-1196.
Heer, J., Viégas, F.B. & Wattenberg, M. (2007). Voyagers and
Voyeurs: Supporting Asynchronous Collaborative Information
Visualization. In Proc. ACM CHI’07, pp.1029-1038.
Henry, N. & Fekete, J. D. (2006). MatrixExplorer: a DualRepresentation System to Explore Social Networks. IEEE TVCG,
12(5), pp. 677-684.
Henry, N., Fekete, J. D. & McGuffin. M. J. (2007). NodeTrix: a
Hybrid Visualization of Social Networks. IEEE TVCG, 13(6), pp.
1302-1309.
Jankun-Kelly, T.J., Ma, K.L. & Gertz, M. (2007). A Model and
Framework for Visualization Exploration. IEEE TVCG, 13(2), pp.
357-369.
Kadivar, N., Chen, V., Dunsmuir, D., Lee, E., Qian, C., Dill, J., et al.
(2009). Capturing and Supporting the Analysis Process. In Proc. of
VAST '09, pp. 131-138.
Kang, H., Plaisant, C., Lee, B., & Bederson, B. B. (2007). NetLens:
Iterative Exploration of Content-Actor Network Data. Information
Visualization, 6(1), pp. 18-31.
Klein, G., Moon, B., & Hoffman, R. R. (2006). Making Sense of
Sensemaking 2: A Macrocognitive Model. IEEE Intelligent Systems,
21(5), pp. 88-92.
Kreuseler, M., Nocke, T. & Schumann, H. (2004). A History
Mechanism for Visual Data Mining. In Proc. of InfoVis’04, pp. 4956.
Larkin, J., & Simon, H. (1987). Why a Diagram is (Sometimes)
Worth Ten Thousand Words. Cognitive Science, 11(1), pp. 65-100.

[29] Liu, Z., Navathe, S. B., & Stasko, J. T.(2011). Network-based Visual
Analysis of Tabular Data. In Proc. of VAST’11, pp. 39-48.
[30] Martin, W. (2006). Visual Exploration of Multivariate Graphs. In
Proc. of ACM CHI '06, pp. 811-819.
[31] Meng,C., Yasue, M., Imamiya, A. & Mao, X. (1998). Visualizing
Histories for Selective Undo and Redo. In Proc. 3rd Asia Pacific
Computer Human Interaction, 1998. pp. 459-464.
[32] Neumann, P., Schlechtweg, S. & M. S. T.(2005). ArcTrees:
Visualizing Relations in Hierarchical Data. In Proc. of EuroVis’05),
pp. 53–60.
[33] Norman, D. (1993). Things That Make Us Smart: Defending Human
Attributes in the Age of the Machine: Basic Books.
[34] O’Madadhain, J., Fisher, D., Smyth, P., White, S., & Boey, Y. B.
(2005). Analysis and Visualization of Network Data Using JUNG.
Journal of Statistical Software, pp. 1-35.
[35] Perer, A., & Shneiderman, B. (2008). Integrating Statistics and
Visualization: Case Studies of Gaining Clarity during Exploratory
Data Analysis. In Proc. of ACM CHI’08, pp. 265-274.
[36] Perer, A., & Shneiderman, B. (2008). Systematic Yet Flexible
Discovery: Guiding Domain Experts through Exploratory Data
Analysis. In Proc. of IUI '08, pp. 109-118.
[37] Pirolli, P., & Card, S. (2005). The Sensemaking Process and
Leverage Points for Analyst Technology as Identified through
Cognitive Task Analysis. 2005 International Conference on
Intelligence Analysis.
[38] Pretorius, A. J., & Wijk, J. J. V. (2006). Visual Analysis of
Multivariate State Transition Graphs. IEEE TVCG, 12(5), pp. 685692.
[39] Qu, Y., & Furnas, G. W. (2005). Sources of Structure in
Sensemaking. In Proc. of ACM CHI '05, pp. 1989-1992.
[40] Russell, D. M., Stefik, M. J., Pirolli, P., & Card, S. K. (1993). The
Cost Structure of Sensemaking. In Proc. of ACM INTERACT '93 and
CHI '93, pp. 269–276.
[41] Shen, Z., Ma, K. L., & Eliassi-Rad, T. (2006). Visual Analysis of
Large Heterogeneous Social Networks by Semantic and Structural
Abstraction. IEEE TVCG, 12(6), pp. 1427-1439.
[42] Shneiderman, B., & Aris, A. (2006). Network Visualization by
Semantic Substrates. IEEE TVCG, 12(5), pp. 733-740.
[43] Shrinivasan, Y. B. & van Wijk J. J. (2008). Support the Analytical
Reasoning Process in Information Visualization. In Proc. of ACM
CHI'08, pp. 1237-1246.
[44] Stasko, J., Görg, C. & Liu, Z., (2008). Jigsaw: Supporting
Investigative Analysis through Interactive Visualization. Information
Visualization, 7(2), pp. 118-132.
[45] van Ham, F., H.-J. Schulz & Dimicco, M. J. (2009). Honeycomb:
Visual Analysis of Large Scale Social Networks. In Proc. of
INTERACT '09, pp. 429-442.
[46] Wright, W., Schroh, D., Proulx, P., Skaburskis, A. W., & Cort, B.
(2006).The Sandbox for Analysis: Concepts and Evaluation. In Proc.
of ACM CHI’06, pp. 801-810.
[47] Zhang, J., & Norman, D. A. (1994). Representations in Distributed
Cognitive Tasks. Cognitive Science, 18, pp. 87-122.
[48] Zhang, X., Qu, Y., Giles, L. C., & Song, P. (2008). CiteSense:
Supporting Sensemaking of Research Literature. In Proc. of ACM
CHI '08, pp. 677-680.

