Exploring Geo-Temporal Differences Using GTdiff
Orland Hoeber∗

Garnett Wilson†

Simon Harding‡

Department of Computer Science
Memorial University

Department of Computer Science
Memorial University

Department of Computer Science
Memorial University

Rene´ Enguehard§

Rodolphe Devillers¶

Department of Geography
Memorial University

A BSTRACT
Many data sets exist that contain both geospatial and temporal elements, in addition to the core data that requires analysis. Within
such data sets, it can be difficult to determine how the data have
changed over spatial and temporal ranges. In this design study we
present a system for dynamically exploring geo-temporal changes
in the data. GTdiff provides a visual approach to representing differences in the data within user-defined spatial and temporal limits,
illustrating when and where increases and/or decreases have occurred. The system makes extensive use of spatial and temporal
filtering and binning, geo-visualization, colour encoding, and multiple coordinated views. It is highly interactive, supporting knowledge discovery through exploration and analysis of the data. A case
study is presented illustrating the benefits of using GTdiff to analyze the changes in the catch data of the cod fisheries off the coast
of Newfoundland, Canada from 1948 to 2006.
Index Terms: H.5.2 [Information Systems]: Information Interfaces and Presentation—User Interfaces; J.2 [Computer Applications]: Physical Sciences and Engineering—Earth and Atmospheric Sciences
1 I NTRODUCTION
Visualizing and exploring data that include significant geospatial
and temporal aspects can be challenging. Often, the complexities
in the data lead to visual approaches that are either incomplete or
overly complex. The focus of this research is to provide support
for a specific type of analysis of such data: examining changes over
space and time.
The processes for visually representing one or more data sets
on a map are well-known [4]. However, many such approaches
make it difficult for users to make meaningful comparisons between
multiple data sets. While significant features in the data sets may be
readily identified, more subtle elements may be undetectable. Even
for complex geo-visualization methods that include a high degree
of interactivity or animation, this problem remains.
Our goal in this research is to take advantage of the human vision
system and interactive exploration to show when and where the data
are changing through geo-temporal differences. By representing the
differences (i.e., the regions of increase and/or decrease) in userdefined spatial and temporal bins, changes across space and time
may be identified and examined. The goal is not to just provide
a single view of the data that can give users the answers they are
seeking, but instead to support their knowledge discovery activities
through exploration and analysis of the data.
∗ e-mail:hoeber@cs.mun.ca
† e-mail:gwilson@cs.mun.ca
‡ e-mail:simonh@cs.mun.ca
§ e-mail:
¶ e-mail:

rene@computer.org
rdeville@mun.ca

IEEE Pacific Visualisation Symposium 2011
1 - 4 March, Hong Kong, China
978-1-61284-934-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

Department of Geography
Memorial University

To address this problem domain, a geo-visual analytics tool
(called GTdiff) was developed to enable users to explore the geotemporal differences in the data through an intuitive and interactive
interface. The data can easily be filtered both spatially and temporally, allowing users to focus their attention on a manageable range.
Visual representations of differences in the data allow interesting
features to be readily identified and explored further in a knowledge discovery process.
The features of GTdiff are presented in this paper as a design
study. We outline aspects of geo-temporal data that make this topic
interesting and challenging, and explain our design decisions for
visually encoding the data and supporting interactive exploration.
A small case study performed with an expert user illustrates the
benefits that the approach can have in finding interesting features in
the data.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sections 2
and 3 provide a brief overview of work related to geo-temporal visualization, along with a collection of visualization and interaction
principles that guided this research. An outline of the features and
implementation details of GTdiff are provided in Section 4. A case
study describing how GTdiff can be used in an exploratory process
is described in Section 5. The paper concludes with a summary of
the contributions and an outline of future work in Section 6.
2

R ELATED W ORK

While geo-temporal data sets can be very rich, there are often complexities associated with working with them [23, 37]. Nevertheless, their use can add value to application domains including route
tracking [35], correlating ocean vessel movements with weather
forecasts [24], and identifying behaviours [8]. As a result of the
wide-ranging applicability, there is a wealth of research literature
that explores the use of geo-temporal data, with a strong focus on
practical applications.
Although geo-temporal data can take multiple forms of varying
complexity, the type of data we focus on analyzing in this research
is point-sample data that includes latitude, longitude, and time elements. Commonly these data contain not only spatial and temporal
aspects, but also other meaningful attributes that are of interest to a
particular domain. The usefulness of a data set is not that it contains
a particular point in space and time, but that it contains some other
information that is linked to that point.
Without considering temporal aspects of the data, the visual representation of geospatial data (i.e., geo-visualization) is a very active field of study [4]. The recent increase in interest can be partially
attributed to the popularization of geospatial technologies (e.g., GIS
and Google Earth), an increase in the amount of data being generated by various organizations, an interest in doing something intelligent with this data, and the democratization of geospatial data
[15]. Much work has been devoted to both processing [9] and representing [4] geospatial data, using a multitude of techniques. The
use of geo-visualization to enhance the knowledge discovery and
decision-making activities of users has also been explored in the
development of systems that support geo-visual analytics [3, 20]
and exploratory data analysis [2].

139

Some of the more notable approaches to the visual representation
of geospatial data include valuable interactive techniques for manipulating and exploring the data. These include the use of multiple
coordinated views [14], filtering [13], highlighting [14], details-ondemand [5], pan and zoom [24], and animation [17].
Considering again the temporal aspects of the data, a classic approach for representing geo-temporal data is the space-time-cube
[16, 22]. In this method, time is placed perpendicular to 2D space in
a three-dimensional cube. This results in changes in time being represented as lines with varying slopes moving from the origin to the
destination of the change. This kind of representation is still used
in much of today’s research and has remained largely unchanged
since its original inception.
Other recent work of note is that of Maciejewski et al. [27, 26].
They created a comprehensive system designed to find data aberrations (or “hotspots”). They examined the application of the system
to a number of domains, including crime and syndromic surveillance. Their system implements a geo-temporal view with pan and
zoom controls. Time series are shown as line plots, with regions
and points of the time series used to interactively control the main
geospatial temporal window. Interactive temporal tools in a separate menu include filter and aggregation control. Users can identify
hotspots using heat maps and temporal contours. The exploration
of the data is enhanced with interactive control of the colour scale
and binning functions.
In the work of Lundblad et al. [24], ship routes and weather
forecast data are represented in a single unified interface. Users
can investigate the relationships in the data using linked interactions, highlighting, smooth zooming capabilities, and filtering of
data. The goal of this work was to allow for the easy identification
of situations where ships may become exposed to severe weather
conditions.
In other work by Maciejewski et al. [28], the LAHVA system
examined the pet and human health data sets for disease surveillance. The system is similar to the more recent work in that it also
combined spatial exploration with history controls and time sliders.
Pan and Mitra’s FemaRepViz system [31] allowed users to examine
the spatial placement of emergency reports as they chose particular
time periods. The reports were dynamically placed at specific locations based on their textual contents.
Work by Aeschliman et al. [1] used colour to visually encode
the collective movement patterns of shoppers within a retail setting
using DVisRFID. The intensity of the colour represents the relative
popularity of the location, and the hue of the colour represents the
direction in which the people move through the location. Although
their usability tests were positive, this use of colour may be difficult
to visually decode when the movement is not in one of the cardinal
directions (which are mapped to the colours red, green, yellow, and
blue).
Although these representations address various issues associated with geo-temporal data (e.g., representing position using spatial data, showing high-dimensional data simultaneously with spatial position, visually identifying outliers), they do not directly address the issue of representing such data to show the differences or
changes over time. It is this aspect of geo-visual analytics that we
address in this paper. In particular, GTdiff provides a visual representation that highlights the temporal differences of numeric data
at the same spatial locations, allowing users to discover where and
when changes have occurred.
3

V ISUAL R EPRESENTATION

OF

DATA

While the set of methods for visually representing data is broad, it
is well understood that the effectiveness of a method for encoding a
particular attribute of a data set is influenced by its type [10, 12, 29].
For example, the use of colour can be very effective to represent categorical information, but is less effective for representing numeri-

140

cal data. To complicate matters further, once a particular method is
chosen to visually encode an attribute of the data, it can be difficult
to re-use it without causing confusion or misinterpretation. As a result, while there are many different data encoding choices available
from which the visualization designer may choose, the resulting visualization systems often make use of both optimal and sub-optimal
choices.
When the data sets include spatial attributes that are fundamentally important to understanding the data, the choices for visually
encoding the remaining attributes are further constrained. That is,
since it is logical to represent the spatial attributes of the data spatially, this visual feature can no longer be used to represent other
aspects of the data. For example, in geo-visualization, the data attributes are visually represented at their appropriate locations on
a map. Since the spatial location is being used, how the data are
represented at that location must be chosen from the other visual
encoding methods.
In addition to this restriction of choice for visual encoding, geovisualization introduces further complexities that must be addressed
[25]. The task of understanding geospatial data requires that users
assimilate two different sets of data attributes: that which is being visually represented, and the representation of the geographic
space. Providing the geographic context in a way that does not
overpower the visual representation of the data can be challenging,
and is often dependant on the tasks and analyses the users need to
perform.
While the use of visual encoding features such as position,
length, angle, area, and shape are well understood, colour hue and
intensity are often misused [34]. Evidence of this can be found
not only within the public domain, but also commercial products,
and even the academic literature. As such, colour theory warrants
further discussion within the context of the visual representation of
data.
The opponent process theory of colour [18, 36] suggests that the
human perception of colour is best described by arranging six elementary colours on three channels: black-white, red-green, and
yellow-blue. This theory provides guidance in the selection of
colour to visually encode data, including the labelling of categorical
information (e.g., choosing colours that are at the extremes of the
colour channels) the use of perceptually ordered colour scales (e.g.,
varying the colour monotonically on one or more colour channels),
and the representation of data that has a true zero value (e.g., using a
neutral colour for zero, and diverging colours on one or more colour
channels to represent positive and negative values). Specific advice
regarding the use of colour scales in geo-visualization is provided
by ColorBrewer [11].
Interaction is an important aspect of modern visualization systems [32, 36]. The ability to manipulate the visual representation
through interactive features such as filtering, brushing, and focusing are fundamentally important. Such interactive features enable
users to explore the data and manage the visual complexity, as they
seek to gain insight and knowledge from the data.
When data sets are highly complex and multi-variate, a common
technique for dealing with the resulting visual complexity is to use
multiple coordinated views of the data. Providing multiple views
of a single conceptual entity can not only enhance the understanding of the data, but can also reduce the cognitive overhead associated with interpreting complex data [7]. The keys to using multiple
views effectively are to ensure that selection, manipulations, and
changes made in one view are made apparent in the other views.
4

GT DIFF P ROTOTYPE D ESIGN

The primary goal in the creation of GTdiff was to support data
analysts in exploring and understanding how geospatial data sets
change over time. The system was implemented as a Java application, using a virtual globe generated by World Wind [30] for the

Figure 1: The main visual components of GTdiff include a temporal view (top portion of the left screenshot), a difference view (bottom portion of
the left screenshot) and a geospatial view (right screenshot). The data shown is from the cod fisheries off the coast of Newfoundland, Canada.
The data is filtered to a 25-year timeframe, divided into 5-year temporal bins. The yellow-blue colour encoding represents the data in the temporal
bins; the sizes of the spheres are proportional to the mass of the catch at each location; the red-green colour encoding represents the changes
in the difference graphs.

framework upon which the core geo-visual representations are layered. The design of the visual and interactive features were strongly
influenced by the aspects of visually representing data described in
the previous section. The interface of GTdiff includes three primary visual elements: the temporal view, the difference view, and
the geospatial view (see Figure 1). Although the methods used to
visually represent where and when the data are changing have been
previously presented [19], here we focus on how these views and
their associated features are tightly integrated, providing support
for the interactive exploration of the data.
4.1

Temporal View

The key interactive feature that the temporal view provides is the
ability for users to filter the data temporally, aggregating what remains into a user-specified number of equal length temporal bins.
For example, a user may wish to filter the data set to only include
a five-year timeframe, and then group the data into five one-year
bins. Alternately, a user may be interested in twelve years of data,
grouped into six two-year bins. Since the goal of GTdiff is to allow
users to understand how the data are changing over time, it is necessary to aggregate the data into manageable units of time. As will
be shown in the description of the difference view, doing so allows
GTdiff to clearly illustrate changes that have occurred between the
temporal bins.
A perceptually ordered colour scale of mid-level brightness on
the yellow-blue colour channel is provided within the temporal filter. This colour scale is used to label the data in the temporal bins,
and provides a persistent visual legend to support users in the decoding process. For the set of temporal bins within the selected
temporal range, equally spaced colours are selected and assigned to
the bins in order. While the use of colour is not an optimal method
for visually differentiating the data contained in one temporal bin
from the data contained in another, few options remain for visually differentiating multiple data sets once the data is represented
spatially.

Each temporal bin is displayed side-by-side under the temporal
filter, using the colour encoding described above. These representations show a zoomed-out geospatial view of the data. Their purpose
is to support users in visual scanning and comparison activities, and
to allow users to select one or more temporal bins to investigate further within the geospatial view. The value of a specific attribute of
the data under investigation (e.g., product sales, biomass of fisheries catch data, green house gas production) is encoded as either
the area of a circle or the volume of a sphere, placed at the specific
location of the data point, using the colour assigned to the temporal
bin.
The choice as to whether the data is represented as 2D circles
or 3D spheres is user-configurable depending on the source of the
data. Matching the visual encoding as closely as possible to the
end-user’s understanding of the meaning of the data [33] can increase the ability of the user to understand and make sense of what
they are seeing. Since the data set used within this paper represents
the mass of fish caught at specific locations, representing this data
as 3D spheres is more logical from the user’s perspective than the
alternative of 2D circles.
Whether the data is represented as spheres or circles, the visual
encoding allows users to readily make comparisons between the numeric data at different locations and in different temporal bins. The
objects are rendered semi-transparently in order to address the occlusion problems that occur when a large object covers one or more
smaller objects at nearby locations. When the data is encoded using
spheres, a simple shading model enables the proper perception of
their 3D shapes.
4.2 Difference View
The difference view provides a visual representation of the difference between each pair of temporal bins in the form of a set of
difference graphs. The difference graphs are organized in an inverted pyramid, where the top layer shows the difference graphs for
neighbouring pairs of temporal bins, the second layer shows the difference graphs for pairs of temporal bins with a one-bin gap, and so

141

2340

Temporal View

30

50

bin
bi
n1

bin
b
n2

bin 2 - b
bin 1

bin 3

bin
n 3 - bi
bin
n2

bin
bin 4

bin 4 - bin 3

450

bin
biin 5

512

1252

bin 4 - bin
in 2

bin 4 - bin
in 1

bin
in 5 - bin
b 3

3417

802

0

bin 5 - bin 2
0

-3799

bin 5 - bin 1
Difference View

3799

(a) The raw approach adds the data in the spatial bins.
2340

30

50

Figure 2: The difference view provides a visual comparison of every
pair of temporal bins, arranged in an inverted pyramid.

on until the final layer shows the difference graph between the pair
of temporal bins at the extremes of the temporal range. As such,
every possible pair-wise comparison of temporal bins is shown simultaneously within the difference view (see Figure 2). This organization encodes the source data for each difference graph within
its spatial location within the inverted pyramid. In addition to being
able to see where and when the differences are occurring, the user
can also visually inspect and compare the raw data shown in the
corresponding temporal bins at the top of the inverted pyramid, a
method which is common in exploratory data analysis domains [2].
Since the goal of the difference graphs is to allow users to perceive how the data are changing between the temporal bins, spatial
binning is necessary. Without spatial binning, the only situation in
which showing the differences would have meaning is when data
points are at the exact same spatial location. For example, if there
are two data points at the same location with the same value, but in
two different temporal bins, then these will balance out and show
no change. However, if the two points are at slightly different locations, then it will look like there is a decrease at one location and
an increase at the other. Spatial binning groups data points that are
near one another to avoid this situation.
The current GTdiff prototype performs spatial binning by dividing the space over the geographic coordinate system (e.g., using
latitude/longitude). For each spatial bin, the difference between the
values in each pair of temporal bins is calculated. The maximum
of the absolute value of all of the differences is used as the extreme
value in a positive/negative scale. A divergent colour scale is used
to visually encode these differences within the visual representations of each spatial bin, following a method similar to that in [21]
. White represents a value of zero (no change), the degree of saturation of green is used to represent positive values, and the degree
of saturation of red is used to represent negative values. In order to
assist with decoding, a labelled legend is provided at the bottom of
the difference view.
When aggregating the data within the spatial bins, users may
choose to either combine the raw data, or first normalize the data.
The choice of whether to normalize the data depends on the domain in which the system is being used. If the data represents
complete and accurate information (e.g., the value of coffee sales
within a region) then calculating the total in the spatial bins using
the raw data is appropriate. However, if the data represents point

450

3467
134

1623

142

512

bin
n 5 - bin
bi 4
-3799

bin 3 - bin 1

3467
134

1623

512

-3417

1252

-1899.5

3417

802

0

0

512

3417

(b) The normalized approach averages the data in the spatial bins.
Figure 3: Examples of the spatial binning and associated colour encoding of the differences employed in GTdiff. Note that the numbers
listed within the figures represents the raw data at the associated
locations.

samples of physical phenomena (e.g., fisheries catch data, or population samples), then normalizing the data first is more accurate.
A simple example illustrating the spatial binning approach, and the
corresponding encoding of the differences using colour, is provided
in Figure 3. One can readily identify both the spatial regions and
magnitude of the changes.
Spatial binning introduces two potential issues. The first of these
is when there are significant data points near the boundaries of the
spatial bins. In this case, the data points may be split between the
spatial bins, making comparisons between pairs of temporal ranges
difficult. The second problem is when a spatial bin overlaps a location where it is not possible for data to exist (i.e., fisheries data
over land, population data over the ocean, etc.). In order to alleviate
these problems, GTdiff provides users with control over the resolution of the spatial binning. Examples of different resolutions can be
seen in Figure 4.
By visually scanning the collection of difference graphs within
the inverted pyramid, users can quickly and easily perceive significant changes in the data, both spatially and temporally. If users
wish to investigate a specific difference graph in more detail, it may
be selected and explored further in the geospatial view.

When selecting two or more temporal bins to be shown simultaneously in the geospatial view, the spheres are rendered using the
colour encoding associated with their source temporal bin. While
the semi-transparency of the spheres allows the user to see smaller
spheres that are embedded within larger ones, the side effect of using transparency is that the colour of a sphere that is encapsulated
within a larger sphere is affected, making the decoding of the colour
to the associated temporal bin difficult in some situations. The ambiguity of the temporal bin to which a particular sphere belongs can
be eliminated by interactively showing or hiding specific temporal
bins. Further, the underlying data can be inspected and examined
through focusing and brushing operations as needed.
The geospatial view only supports the selection of a single difference graph at one time, since the meaning of displaying multiple
difference graphs is not obvious. As with the viewing of the temporal bins, the goal is to allow users to analyze and explore the data
in greater spatial detail. As such, focusing and brushing operations
are also available when viewing a difference graph, allowing the
raw data to be inspected as needed.
The geospatial view also supports the spatial filtering of data
through pan and zoom operations. As the users manipulate the location and scale of the map, all other geospatial representations are
updated in both the temporal view (i.e., temporal bins) and the difference view (i.e., difference graphs). In this way, users can manipulate the map in the geospatial view, explore the features of the data
within the other views at the desired location and level of detail, and
then make further selections of temporal bins and difference graphs
in support of their knowledge discovery tasks.
5

C ASE S TUDY

In order to enable a discussion of the geo-visual analytic capabilities of GTdiff, a case study using historical data for the cod fisheries
off the coast of Newfoundland, Canada is presented. This case illustrates the value of providing data analysts a visual approach to
exploring how the data are changing over space and time.
5.1

Figure 4: Adjusting the resolution for the spatial binning results in difference graphs that range from coarse-grained to fine-grained comparisons of the data.

4.3

Geospatial View

The primary purpose of the geospatial view is to provide a detailed
visual representation of selected aspects of the data in the context of
their spatial location. As users explore the data in the temporal and
difference views, they may wish to investigate specific elements
further. One or more temporal bins may be selected in order to
conduct a detailed analysis of the data. Or a specific difference
graph may be selected for detailed inspection. In either case, the
data is layered over satellite imagery in order to provide users with
spatial awareness of the data.
In order to enhance the ability of users to perceive the foreground
data from the background contextual information, the system was
designed to ensure sufficient luminance contrast between the two.
The satellite imagery that makes up the background is darkened by
placing a semi-transparent layer over top of it. Bright colours were
chosen to represent the foreground information (i.e., the spheres
in the temporal bins or the squares in the difference graphs). As
such, the foreground information can be readily perceived as being
a separate layer placed over the background information.

Cod Fisheries in Newfoundland

Fisheries ecology and fisheries management require that domain
experts know not only where fish are located and in what quantity, but also understand complex biological processes that have a
strong spatial and temporal component. Part of this understanding
is reached by mapping fish species distribution and abundance, and
comparing it with the same data available for the previous years in
order to identify potential changes. This process is normally done
using static maps generated for separate years. Such a process limits the ability of fisheries experts to understand and build hypotheses
about complex phenomena as it does not allow an exploration of the
data that could help the expert to compare regions and years.
For this reason, the GTdiff prototype has been tested using an extensive fisheries data set that has both large spatial (about 1,000,000
km2 ) and temporal (1948-2006) extents. The data was compiled
from annual multi-species bottom trawl surveys conducted by Fisheries and Oceans Canada for the region of Newfoundland and
Labrador, Canada. This data set records information about a number of different species, but only one was used to test the prototype.
Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) is a species that offers the most data
and the longest temporal extent within the data set. Cod is also a
species that played a critical role in fisheries management in Eastern Canada as it used to be very abundant but collapsed and led to
a moratorium on cod fisheries in 1992-1993 that severely impacted
the local economy. The years preceding the collapse have been
documented by fisheries experts and showed interesting spatial and
temporal characteristics that could benefit from examination using
a system like GTdiff. The data set has a number of attributes, including the mass of cod caught by the survey vessels at various
locations and times.

143

Fisheries data also have inherent complexities that make them
interesting for this case study. Data collection followed a randomly
stratified sampling scheme which ensured a representative coverage of the study area, allowing robust statistical analyses. However,
point data are samples which are not always representative of the
phenomenon being observed, their number being limited by the resources that can be spent to collect the data (e.g. number of days
at sea to cover a given region). Specific point locations also change
from one year to the next, as the random sample of sites is done
separately each year. In addition, a number of problems can occur
during the data collection (e.g. ship engine failure, large number
of days with bad weather) that can lead to significant gaps in the
spatial coverage of the data that should not be interpreted as a lack
of fish.
5.2

Fisheries Analyst Tasks

Bottom trawl surveys such as the ones used for this case study
are mainly performed by the government in order to define quotas to be allocated for commercial fisheries in the next year (i.e.
the amount of fish from each species that can be fished in certain zones). Geospatial tools are still marginally used in day-today operations of fisheries analysts which mostly rely on statistics
and mathematical population models, usually aggregating data in
large spatial management units (e.g. NAFO Zones in the northwest Atlantic) and comparing the average catches with previous
years. However, geospatial tools are penetrating this field as space
is increasingly being recognized as a neglected component when
it comes to understanding processes regulating changes in fisheries
resources. Static maps representing the location and abundance of
catches (e.g. proportional symbols maps) are produced routinely in
order to look at spatial variations within management units. Comparing a map for one year and one for another year can provide an
insight into changes at given locations and sometimes into movement of fish populations or overexploitation of fish stocks. Analysts
also tend to aggregate and bin different years in order to compare
groups of years which can highlight long-term trends in the data.
The ability to analyze data both in space and time is important due
to the dynamic nature of the fisheries.
5.3

Using GTdiff for Data Exploration

GTdiff has been developed and tested in collaboration with an expert in fisheries data mapping and analysis. An attempt was made
to visualize the cod catch data before, during, and after the major
collapse of the cod stocks (1988 to 1993), as this period had significant changes over space and time that have been well documented
by biologists [6]. Different temporal blocks and grid sizes were
selected, allowing for the identification of visual patterns in the difference graphs that have been described in the fisheries literature.
The expert found the temporal-based analysis of the data valuable
in identifying this well-known pattern. However, further study is
needed to determine the benefits that GTdiff can provide for an analyst to discover new knowledge from within a geo-temporal data
set.
Figure 5 shows the temporal and difference views of the data
using five temporal bins in the 1988-1993 timeframe. Three difference graphs were quickly identified by the expert that show the
main steps that led to the cod moratorium. The difference graph
comparing 88-89 vs. 89-90 (see Figure 6(a)) shows a decrease in
the cod catches in some regions, and increases in others. In addition, there were significant decreases in some northern regions, and
significant increases in some northeastern regions. These decreases
continued to spread to the southeast, which can be identified in the
89-90 vs. 90-91 difference graph (see Figure 6(b)). At the same
time, a number of much higher catches were observed in the east
of the region, due to what has been described by biologists as the
hyper-aggregation of cod. This increased catch gave the impression

144

Figure 5: A view of the cod fisheries data over a five-year timeframe.
The catch data in each of the years is shown in the temporal bins
across the top. The expansion of the fisheries can be identified by
the green regions in the difference graphs; the subsequent depletion
of stocks can be identified by the red regions.

to the industry and some biologists that cod stocks were healthy
and led to an intense fishery in this region. The 90-91 vs. 91-92
difference graph (see Figure 6(c)) shows not only a depletion of the
stocks in the regions that had high catch rates in the previous years,
but also widespread reductions in most other regions as well. The
result of these reductions led to a decision to enact a moratorium
on cod fisheries in the summer of 1992. Viewing the data from the
extremes of the temporal range (see the bottom difference graph in
Figure 5), the effects of the depletion of the cod stocks can be seen.
5.4 Discussion
In the case study, the expert user was provided with a short training session and description of the meanings of each of the visual
representations. He was able to quickly filter the data spatially and
temporally using GTdiff, producing views of the collapse of the cod
fishery around Newfoundland. Even though the spatial and temporal parameters pertaining to the collapse were known by the expert,
users unfamiliar with the system could readily identify that a drop in
cod stocks had taken place during the time over which all data were
available (e.g., the 25 year timeframe in Figure 1 clearly shows a
severe decline in the data beginning in the early 1990s).
The expert selected a known five-year timeframe and chose to
produce five temporal bins, one corresponding to each year. Different granularities of spatial binning were then explored. While an
increased resolution of the difference graphs produced an indica-

(a) Difference graph for 88-89 vs. 89-90.

tion of the differences in catch data over a more precise region, the
expert opted to use lower to mid-range spatial bin resolutions. The
benefit in choosing the lower resolution was that broader, overarching changes became visible that were not evident with finer resolutions. He also found the ability to investigate specific difference
graphs using the geospatial view to be very useful in examining
the ecological events leading up to the cod moratorium. In particular, the higher catches associated with the hyper-aggregation of cod
were examined in great detail, as described in the previous section.
There is an important difference between how this data has been
explored in the past and how it was explored by the expert using GTdiff. As noted previously, traditional approaches to analysis would
be for the expert to generate multiple maps that illustrate the location and abundance of catches, and then make comparisons of this
data using these snapshots of the data. GTdiff provides support for
a more interactive and dynamic exploration of the data. Analysts
can adjust the spatial and temporal filtering and binning, identify
features of interest within the difference pyramid, and investigate
these in detail as necessary. As such, GTdiff does not just provide
snapshots of the data, but tools to analyze and explore the changing
aspects of the data over space and time.
While we examined the case study of the Newfoundland cod
fishery in particular, GTdiff may be a beneficial tool for exploring any data set involving a strong connection between geospatial
and temporal elements. From a general usage perspective, the system allows data analysts to focus on particular time periods in a
data set for a geospatial region by manipulating the geospatial view
and associated temporal view. They can quickly assess the changes
that have taken place over that period from longer to shorter time
intervals (difference view), and further examine these at an appropriate level of detail (geospatial view). Natural choices for GTdiff
application domains include population statistics (e.g., examining
the growth and decline of urban and rural areas), and business intelligence (e.g., studying consumer purchasing patterns or product
adoption rates), among many others.
6

(b) Difference graph for 89-90 vs. 90-91.

(c) Difference graph for 90-91 vs. 91-92.

Figure 6: The important difference graphs discovered in the case
study, shown in detail within the geospatial view.

C ONCLUSIONS

AND

F UTURE W ORK

In this paper, we present a geo-visual analytics system that supports an interactive exploration of changes in a data set through
geo-temporal differences. Spatial and temporal filtering allow data
analysts to easily focus on specific locations and timeframes of
interest. Visual representations of the data in both temporal bins
and difference graphs simultaneously show the raw data and how
it is growing or shrinking within spatial bins. Multiple coordinated
views support the analyst in examining the data from multiple different perspectives, focusing on interesting aspects of the data as
needed. At any time, the underlying data can be inspected in detail
through simple focusing and brushing operations.
A case study using data from the cod fisheries off the coast of
Newfoundland between 1948 - 2006 was conducted with an expert
user. The system was found to be useful for both exploring the data,
and for showing and explaining known phenomena. The expert
was able to quickly grasp the meaning of the visual representations,
the value of the specific features, and the methods for interactively
exploring the data.
Future work includes further refinement and enhancements of
the prototype implementation, and exploring methods for supporting the visual identification of more complex trends in the data.
User evaluations in a controlled laboratory setting are currently in
the planning stage, the goal of which are to measure the benefits
of the specific design choices in the creation of GTdiff. Field trials
with expert and novice users are also being planned, in order to gain
an understanding of how GTdiff can be used to explore, discover,
and explain both known and unknown phenomena.
This work was conducted as part of a larger project that focuses
on discovering and evaluating techniques to support geo-visual an-

145

alytics of capture fisheries statistical data. As such, portions of GTdiff may be integrated into future research prototypes developed
within this broader research domain.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thank Fisheries and Oceans Canada for making
available the data used in the case study. This work was supported
by a Strategic Projects Grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada held by the first and the last
authors.
R EFERENCES
[1] B. Aeschliman, B. Kim, and M. Burton. A visual analysis of spatiotemporal data associated with human movement. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, pages 400–403, 2009.
[2] G. Andrienko and N. Andrienko. Exploratory Analysis of Spatial and
Temporal Data - A Systematic Approach. Springer, 2005.
[3] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, P. Jankowski, D. Keim, M. J. Kraak,
A. MacEachren, and S. Wrobel. Geovisual analytics for spatial decision support: Setting the research agenda. International Journal of
Geographical Information Science, 21(8):839–857, 2007.
[4] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, and S. Wrobel. Visual analytics tools for
analysis of movement data. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter,
9(2):38–46, 2007.
[5] R. Arsenault, C. Ware, M. Plumlee, S. Martin, L. L. Whitcomb, D. Wiley, T. Gross, and Z. Bilgili. A system for visualizing time varying oceanographic 3D data. In Proceedings of the IEEE TECHNOOCEAN Conference, volume 2, pages 743–747, 2004.
[6] D. B. Atkinson, G. A. Rose, E. F. Murphy, and C. A. Bishop. Distribution changes and abundance of northern cod (gadus morhua), 19811993. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Science, 54(Suppl.
1):132–138, 1997.
[7] M. Q. W. Baldonado, A. Woodruff, and A. Kuchinsky. Guidelines for
using multiple views in information visualization. In Proceedings of
the ACM Advanced Visual Interfaces, pages 110–119, 2000.
[8] F. Bartumeus and J. Catalan. Optimal search behavior and classic
foraging theory. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical,
43:1–12, 2009.
[9] M. A. Bayir, M. Demirbas, and N. Eagle. Discovering spatiotemporal
mobility profiles of cellphone users. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on a World of Wireless, Mobile, and Multimedia
Networks, pages 1–9, 2009.
[10] J. Bertin. Semiology of Graphics. Translated by W. J. Berg. University
of Wisconsin Press, 1983.
[11] C. Brewer and M. Harrower. ColorBrewer 2.0: color advice for cartography. http://colorbrewer2.org/, 2010.
[12] W. S. Cleavland and R. McGill. Graphical perception: Theory, experimentation, and application of the development of graphical methods. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 79(387):531–
554, 1984.
[13] U. Dem˘sar, S. Fotheringham, and M. Charlton. Exploring the spatiotemporal dynamics of geographical processes with geographically
weighted regression and geovisual analytics. Information Visualization, 7(3):181–197, 2008.
[14] J. Dykes and D. M. Mountain. Seeking structure in records of
spatio-temporal behaviour: visualization issues, efforts and application. Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, 43(4):581–603,
2003.
[15] M. F. Goodchild. Towards a geography of geographic information
in a digital world. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems,
21(6):377–391, 1999.
[16] T. H¨agerstrand. What about people in regional science? Papers of the
Regional Science Association, 24:7–21, 1970.
[17] M. Harrower and S. Fabrikant. The role of map animation in geographic visualization. In M. Dodge, M. Turner, and M. McDerby,
editors, Geographic Visualization. Wiley and Sons, 2008.
[18] E. Hering. Outlines of a Theory of Light Sense (Grundz¨uge der Lehre
vom Lichtsinn, 1920). Harvard University Press, 1964.

146

[19] O. Hoeber, G. Wilson, S. Harding, R. Enguehard, and R. Devillers.
Visually representing geo-temporal differences. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pages
229–230, 2010.
[20] D. A. Keim, G. Andrienko, J.-D. Fekete, C. G¨org, J. Kohlhammer, and
G. Melanc¸on. Visual analytics: Definition, process, and challenges. In
A. Kerren, J. T. Stasko, J.-D. Fekete, and C. North, editors, Information Visualization: Human-Centered Issues and Perspectives, LNCS
4950, pages 154–175. Springer, 2008.
[21] D. A. Keim, T. Nietzschmann, N. Schelwies, J. Schneidewind,
T. Schreck, and H. Ziegler. A spectral visualization system for analyzing financial time series data. In Proceedings of Eurographics/IEEEVGTC Symposium on Visualization, pages 195–202, 2006.
[22] M. J. Kraak. The space-time cube revisited from a geovisualization
perspective. In Proceedings of the International Cartographic Conference, pages 1988–1995, 2003.
[23] M. P. Kwan. Interactive geovisualization of activity-travel patterns using three-dimensional geographical information systems: A methodological exploration with a large data set. Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies, 8(1-6):185–203, 2000.
[24] P. Lundblad, O. Eurenius, and T. Heldring. Interactive visualization of
weather and ship data. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Information Visualization, pages 379–386, 2009.
[25] A. MacEachren and M.-J. Kraak. Research challenges in geovisualization. Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 28(1):3–12,
2001.
[26] R. Maciejewski, S. Rudolph, R. Hafen, A. M. Abusalah, M. Yakout,
M. Ouzzani, W. S. Cleveland, S. J. Grannis, M. Wade, and D. S. Ebert.
Understanding syndromic hotspots–a visual analytics approach. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology, pages 35–42, Oct. 2008.
[27] R. Maciejewski, S. Rudolph, R. Hafen, A. M. Abusalah, M. Yakout,
M. Ouzzani, W. S. Cleveland, S. J. Grannis, M. Wade, and D. S.
Ebert. A visual analytics approach to understanding spatiotemporal
hotspots. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 16(2):205–220, 2009.
[28] R. Maciejewski, B. Tyner, Y. Jang, C. Zheng, R. Nehme, D. S. Ebert,
W. S.Cleveland, M. Ouzzani, S. J. Grannis, and L. T. Glickman.
Lahva: Linked animal-human health visual analytics. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology,
pages 27–34, Oct. 2008.
[29] J. Mackinlay. Automating the design of graphical presentations of
relational information. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 5(2):110–141,
1986.
[30] NASA. World Wind Java SDK. http://worldwind.arc.nasa.gov/java/,
2010.
[31] C.-C. Pan and P. Mitra. FemaRepViz: Automatic extraction and geotemporal visualization of fema national situation updates. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pages 11–18, Oct. 2007.
[32] R. Spence. Information Visualization. Prentice Hall, 2nd edition,
2007.
[33] M. Tory and T. M¨oller. Rethinking visualization: A high-level taxonomy. In Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, pages 151–158, 2004.
[34] E. Tufte. Envisioning Information. Graphics Press, 1990.
[35] U. D. Turdukulov, M. J. Kraak, and C. A. Blok. Designing a visual
environment for exploration of time series of remote sensing data: In
search of convective clouds. Computers & Graphics, 31(2):370–379,
2007.
[36] C. Ware. Information Visualization: Perception for Design. Morgan
Kaufmann, 2nd edition, 2004.
[37] J. Wood, J. Dykes, A. Slingsby, and K. Clarke. Interactive visual exploration of a large spatio-temporal dataset: Reflections on a geovisualization mashup. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 13(6):1176–1183, 2007.

