Keynote Address
New Approaches to Large Data Visualization
Kwan-Liu Ma
University of California, Davis

Abstract

Bio

Advanced computing and imaging technologies enable scientists to study natural and physical phenomena at unprecedented precision, resulting in an explosive growth of data.
Furthermore, the size of the collected information about
the Internet and mobile device users is expected to be even
greater, a daunting challenge we must address in order to
make sense and maximize utilization of all the available
information for decision making and knowledge discovery.
I will introduce a few new approaches to large data visualization for revealing hidden structures and gleaning insights
from large, complex data found in many areas of study.

Dr. Kwan-Liu Ma is a professor of computer science and the
chair of the Graduate Group in Computer Science (GGCS)
at the University of California, Davis. He leads the VIDI
(Visualization and Interface Design Innovation) research
group, and directs the DOE SciDAC Institute for Ultra-Scale
Visualization. His research spans the fields of visualization, computer graphics, and high-performance computing.
Professor Ma received his PhD in computer science from the
University of Utah in 1993. Before he joined UC Davis in
1999, he was with ICASE/NASA Langley Research Center
as a research scientist. Professor Ma is presently leading
a team of 30 researchers working on projects in large data
visualization, information visualization, visual interface
design, artistically inspired illustrations, video processing,
and volume visualization. He has received several awards
for his outstanding research accomplishments including the
prestigious PECASE award. Professor Ma has been actively
serving the research community by playing leading roles
in several professional activities including the Workshop
on Visualization for Cyber Security, the SC Workshop on
Ultra-Scale Visualization, the Eurographics Symposium on
Parallel Graphics and Visualization, the IEEE Visualization
Conference, and the IEEE Pacific Visualization Symposium.
Professor Ma also serves on the editorial boards of the IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications (CG&A), the IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
(TVCG), and the Journal of Computational Science and
Discovery.

xi

