Keynote Address
Immersive Exploration of Large Datasets
Arie Kaufman
State University of New York at Stony Brook

Abstract

Bio

Scientists, engineers and physicians are now confronted with
a fire hose of data. Immersive visualization environments
provide these users with a novel way of interacting and reasoning with large datasets. They allow them to utilize the
entirety of their visual bandwidth, effectively engulfing the
user in the data and enabling collaborative interaction. We
present a custom-built 5-wall Cave environment, called the
Immersive Cabin (IC). It is driven by a GPU cluster for both
computation and 3D stereo rendering. We also propose a
conformal deformation rendering pipeline for the visualization of datasets on partially-immersive platforms. Combined
with a range of interaction and navigation tools, our system
can support numerous interactive applications of large datasets. Several demonstrations include architectural visualization, urban planning, medical visualization, simulation and
rendering of physical phenomena, and entertainment.
Current visualization displays, however, have not kept
up with the explosive growth in data size and resolution,
which is beginning to match the resolution of the visuals
that surround us in daily life. To ameliorate this challenge,
we have developed a life-like, realistic immersion into the
petascale data to be explored, appropriately called The
RealityDeck. It is a one-of-a kind pioneering G-pixel immersive and collaborative display system – a unique assembly
of high-res display panels, GPU cluster, sensors, networking,
computer vision, and human-computer interaction technologies.

Arie Kaufman is a Distinguished Professor and Chairman of
the Computer Science Department, Director of the Center of
Visual Computing (CVC), and Chief Scientist of the Center
of Excellence in Wireless and Information Technology
(CEWIT) at the State University of New York at Stony
Brook (aka Stony Brook University). He has conducted
research for over 35 years in computer graphics and visualization and their applications, has published more than 300
refereed papers, books, and chapters, has delivered more
than 20 invited keynote/plenary talks, has been awarded/
filed more than 40 patents, and has been a principal/co-principal investigator on more than 100 research grants. He is a
Fellow of IEEE, a Fellow of ACM, and the recipient of the
IEEE Visualization Career Award (2005) as well as numerous other awards. He was the founding Editor-in-Chief
of the IEEE Transaction on Visualization and Computer
Graphics (TVCG), 1995-1998. He has been the co-founder/
papers co-chair of IEEE Visualization Conferences; Volume
Graphics Workshops, Eurographics/SIGGRAPH Graphics
Hardware Workshops, and ACM Volume Visualization
Symposia. He previously chaired and is currently a director of IEEE CS Technical Committee on Visualization and
Graphics. He received a PhD in Computer Science from the
Ben-Gurion University, Israel, in 1977. For more information, please visit: http://www.cs.sunysb.edu/~ari

x

