Multiple Foci Drill-Down through Tuple and Attribute Aggregation
Polyarchies in Tabular Data
Nathan Conklin, Sandeep Prabhakar, Chris North
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Blacksburg, VA 24061
{nconklin, sprabhak, north}@cs.vt.edu
http://infovis.cs.vt.edu/
Abstract
Information analysis often involves decomposing data
into sub-groups to allow for comparison and
identification of relationships. Breakdown Visualization
provides a mechanism to support this analysis through
user guided drill-down of polyarchical metadata. This
metadata describes multiple hierarchical structures for
organizing tuple aggregations and table attributes. This
structure is seen in financial data, organizational
structures, sport statistics, and other domains.
A
spreadsheet format enables comparison of visualizations
at any level of the hierarchy. Breakdown Visualization
allows users to drill-down a single hierarchy then pivot
into another hierarchy within the same view. It utilizes a
fix and move technique that allows users to select multiple
foci for drill-down.

1.

capitalization, product types, or financials. Each company
is a leaf node in each of these hierarchies. These multiple
aggregation hierarchies, intersecting at the leaf nodes,
define a financial market aggregation polyarchy (a special
case of polyarchy [9]).
We define a new problem, called tabular polyarchies, in
which tabular data contains aggregation polyarchies on
both its tuples and its attributes (see Figure 1):
• Tuple polyarchy: tuples are aggregated by grouping
the data based on categorical information.
• Attribute polyarchy: attributes are aggregated using
mathematical formulae similar to spreadsheets.

Introduction

In many domains, data analysts work to identify patterns
within large data sets and then attempt to discover events
that may have caused the pattern to occur. For example,
financial analysts attempt to identify key events that have
enabled a particular company to perform well. Similarly,
sports analysts attempt to identify causes for a team’s
success. Meanwhile, the competition continues to look
for weaknesses. Both financial and sports analysts need to
be able to drill-down through the data in an attempt to
identify behavior causalities.
Data aggregation is typically required to generate an
overview of very large data spaces [12]. The aggregation
provides a reduced data representation, allowing analysts
to identify patterns. They need to breakdown this
overview. An aggregation hierarchy divides data from a
superset into subsets. The parent node is the superset
(aggregated data) and the children nodes are the subsets
(subgroup details). Analysts drill-down from aggregated
overviews to details. By comparing the detailed subsets to
the overview, analysts can understand what factors affect
the overall behavior.
Most data sets can have multiple aggregation hierarchies
within them. For example, the financial market can be
decomposed hierarchically based on sector, geography,

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 1: Polyarchical structure on the company
tuples and ratio attributes of tabular financial data.
Furthermore, each data value typically is a time series,
adding a third dimension to the table. This organization is
common in many application domains. In the financial
analysis example, an analyst has the task of organizing the
data in an attempt to identify the behaviors that affect
company performance. This technique for financial
statement analysis is called DuPont Analysis [10].
Typically, the DuPont Analysis ratio tree (Figure 2) is
used to lead the analysis.

generated from the Standard & Poor’s classifications that
are provided as part of the COMPUSTAT database [4].
The ratio polyarchy utilizes ratios identified in DuPont
Analysis [10].

3.

Figure 2: DuPont ratio formula hierarchy used to
aggregate financial attributes.
The analyst starts by looking at the Return on Equity
(ROE) values for a company. They compare the value
over time to understand the direction the company is
headed. To understand which causalities affect the
behavior of the ROE, the user needs to drill-down through
the ratio hierarchy. By comparing children ratios to the
parent ratio, the analyst can identify which financial
indicators have the largest affect on the parent’s behavior.
It is important to identify the lowest level causalities
because they can drive management decisions and direct
the company’s planning.

2.

Related Work

Hierarchies are common information structures used when
organizing related items. Many visualization techniques
have evolved for visualizing and interacting with
hierarchies. Recent research examines multiple related
hierarchies.
Multi-trees [5], Time Tube [3], and
Taxonomy Visualization [6] each examine a different
class of multiple related hierarchies.
Polyarchy
Visualization [9] introduces a general polyarchy as
multiple intersecting hierarchies that share at least one
node. The visualization introduces the idea of a visual
pivot. From any node in a hierarchy, the user can pivot to
that node’s position in an intersecting hierarchy. This
allows the user to understand the multiple hierarchical
contexts of selected nodes.
TableLens [8], FOCUS [13], and others demonstrate the
natural advantages of the visual tabular format for
visualizing tabular data. Visualization Spreadsheet [2]
extends the tabular metaphor by expanding each cell into
a miniature visualization of a dataset. This enables the
visual comparison and manipulation of related datasets.

Breakdown Visualization

Breakdown Visualization allows for both column-based
formulae aggregation and row-based tuple aggregation. It
utilizes a polyarchical drill-down path to allow for deep
drill-down in either dimension. Breakdown Visualization
supports DuPont Analysis by enabling users to navigate
through the metadata polyarchies while the details are
displayed in a spreadsheet format (Figure 3). This format
allows the user to identify causal relationships by
comparing the overview to the details. Similarly, users
can evaluate alternatives by comparing multiple detail
views.

3.1.

Layout and Polyarchy Drill-Down

Breakdown Visualization uses the indented hierarchical
format to show the drill-down path. This hierarchy only
shows the drill-down path and bottom-level leaf nodes.
Nodes from the attribute polyarchy act as column
headings. They identify the attribute formulae that
determine the financial metric displayed in the column.
The formulae shown in Figure 2 are related to each other
because the parent ratio is derivable from its children
ratios. Similarly, the company polyarchy nodes act as row
headings. They identify the tuple-based groupings that
determine the values for each row. As a user drills down
through the hierarchy, they break down the aggregated
datasets into their subgroups. Heading color helps to
reveal hierarchy levels.
The spreadsheet layout allows for comparisons between
companies and ratios. Each cell provides a time series
visualization of the ratio value for the company over time.
Visualizations for aggregated tuples are generated by
visually overlaying the time series of each aggregated
company. Users can choose either a scatter plot, line
graph, or histogram. A TableLens format could be used
to visualize data that does not have the time series
dimension.

Some tools support visualization of aggregated tuples.
Visage [11] demonstrates the use of drill-down through
categorically aggregated tuples. Similarly, Polaris [14]
utilizes a PivotTable [7] approach, and various OLAP
tools provide similar support.

Breakdown Visualization allows the user to drill-down on
both dimensions of the table. The user selects the path to
traverse by clicking on the row or column heading and
selecting a drill-down path from a pop-up menu. Figure 3
demonstrates the pop-up menu and choice of drill-down
paths. As the user traverses deeper into the hierarchy, the
sibling nodes on earlier levels disappear to support scale
up. The drill-down path always remains in view.

Breakdown Visualization extends this work by supporting
drill-down through both tuple and attribute formulae
aggregation.
Breakdown Visualization combines
polyarchical drill-down with a spreadsheet format to
visually organize the data. The company polyarchy is

Breakdown Visualization allows drill-down across
hierarchies by allowing users to pivot into other
hierarchies. This pivot is similar to the PivotTable,
breaking down the current level based on the child nodes
defined in the new hierarchy (Figure 4). However, this

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

pivot is different than the visual pivot introduced by
Robertson, et. al. [9]. In Breakdown Visualization, the
new children are shown as the next level in the current
drill-down path.

each of these paths in order to determine the events that
are driving the behavior.
The fix and move technique allows the users to establish
multiple foci. The user selects a node to fix in either the
company or ratio polyarchy. They then drill down on a
different node while the drill-down hierarchy retains the
fixed node. He/she is then able to start a separate drilldown path by later selecting the fixed node for breakdown
as shown in Figure 5. This technique adds the capability
of multiple foci within the same drill-down hierarchy.

Figure 3: Breakdown Visualization showing an initial
drill-down in the tuple and attribute polyarchies.
Figure 4 shows the pivot from sector to geography within
the company polyarchy. The ability to pivot into separate
hierarchies allows the analyst to relate different aspects of
the data. For example, a financial analyst may traverse a
path similar to Figure 4 to determine if the recent
recession that affected the communications sector was
centralized within a specific geographic region.
Figure 5: Multiple foci drill-down in the tuple
polyarchy enables comparison across different drilldown paths.

Figure 4: Pivoting across aggregation hierarchies
allows the user to drill-down based on different
categorical values.

For each focal point, Breakdown Visualization maintains
the last drill-down location in each aggregation hierarchy.
This is demonstrated in Figure 4, where pivoting from the
‘South’ region in the geography hierarchy back into the
industry hierarchy resumes the drill-down by breaking
down the ‘Communications’ sector. This is important
because the current path previously drilled-down through
‘Communications’, filtering all other sectors, so starting
back at ‘All Industries’ would not make sense.

Support for coordinated brushing across the separate
views allows the user to identify and relate the patterns
between different cells [1]. As shown in Figure 3, when a
user selects multiple points colored lines are drawn that
connect the time series data allowing the user to identify
changes over time. Corresponding parent and children
rows highlight the same data points. This allows the user
to compare the tuple aggregated overviews with the
drilled down detail views. As points are selected, further
details are shown on demand in the detail window at the
bottom of the visualization.

3.2.

Multiple Foci Drill-Down Paths

It is common for analysts to need multiple focus points
within their drill-down path. Pattern identification may
indicate multiple children nodes showing a similar
behavior. The analyst needs to drill-down and compare

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 6: Drill-down in the attribute polyarchy allows
an analyst to identify factors affecting overall ROE.

Users can interactively explore the data through drilldown operations in each polyarchy. They can examine
several drill-down paths by fixing and unfixing nodes.
This allows them to discover deeper relationships by
splitting the analysis in multiple directions.

4.

Better visualization of the polyarchical structure is
needed. Integrating the polyarchical structure along with
the drill-down path may provide users with better
awareness when analyzing data. Breakdown Visualization
scales up to a few hundred cells on desktop displays.
However, trees with a high branching factor generate a
large number of cells and can make it difficult to interpret
the time series visualizations.
The polyarchical drill-down is a new approach for data
exploration. Further studies are needed to evaluate its
capabilities and differences when compared to visual
pivot tables.

Conclusion

Breakdown Visualization
contributions:
•

•

Thanks to Raman Kumar, Muthukumar Thirunavukkarasu,
Anusha Dandapani, and Ganesh Panchanathan for their
assistance and support.

Limitations and Future Work

Continued work is in progress to improve the capabilities
of the user interface. This includes allowing the user to
define the aggregation sequences that construct the tuple
aggregation polyarchy similar to the PivotTable. Support
is also needed to allow users to define customized
formulae during analysis. This may include the ability to
define formula by combining data primitives.

5.

Acknowledgements

introduces

the

following

Definition of the tabular polyarchies problem that
combines categorical tuple aggregation polyarchy and
attribute formulae aggregation polyarchy to organize
tabular data, and integrates a time series dimension.

References
1. Becker, R. and Cleveland, W. Brushing scatterplots.
Technometrics, 29(2), pp. 127-142, 1987.
2. Chi, E., Barry, P., Riedl, J., Konstan, J., A Spreadsheet
Approach to Information Visualization.
Proc. IEEE
Information Visualization, pp. 17-24, 1997.
3. Chi, E., Pitkow, J., Mackinlay, J., Pirolli, P., Gossweiler, R.,
and Card, S. Visualizing the evolution of web ecologies.
Proc. ACM SIGCHI, pp. 400-407, 1998.
4. COMPUSTAT
Industrial
Annual
database,
http://www.compustat.com/, Standard and Poor, 2001.
5. Furnas, G., and Zacks, J., Multitrees: Enriching and reusing
hierarchical structure. Proc. ACM SIGCHI, pp. 330-336,
1994.
6. Graham, M., Kennedy, J., and Hand, C., A comparison of
set-based and graph-based visualizations of overlapping
classification hierarchies. Proc. ACM AVI, pp. 41-50, 2000.
7. Microsoft Excel – User’s Guide, Microsoft, Redmond, WA,
1995.
8. Rao, R., and Card, S. The Table Lens: Merging Graphical
and Symbolic Representations in an Interactive
Focus+Context Visualization for Tabular Information. Proc
ACM SIGCHI, pp. 318-322, 1994.
9. Robertson, G., Cameron, K., Czerwinski, C., Robbins, D.,
Polyarchy Visualization: Visualizing Multiple Intersecting
Hierarchies. Proc. ACM SIGCHI, 2002.
10. Ross, S., Fundamentals of Corporate Finance, McGraw
Hill, 2000.

A user interface that integrates a spreadsheet layout
with polyarchy navigation of rows and columns.
Support for drill-down from overview to details along
with pivoting across hierarchies. A fix and move
technique allowing for multiple foci.

11. Roth, S., Lucas, P., Senn, J., Gomberg, C., Burks, M.,
Stroffolino, P., Kolojejchick, J., Dunmire, C., Visage: A user
interface environment for exploring information. Proc IEEE
Information Visualization, pp. 3-13, 1996.

Breakdown Visualization allows users to compare the
parent and children aggregates for both tuples and
attribute formulae. This provides users with the ability to
understand causal relationships that affect overall
behavior.

13. Spenke, M., Beilken, C., and Berlage, T. FOCUS: The
Interactive Table for Product Comparison and Selection.
Proc ACM UIST, 1996.

Breakdown Visualization can also be applied to tabular
polyarchy data that does not have the time-series
dimension by replacing the visualization spreadsheet with
a TableLens. It can be applied to several application
domains including financial analysis, organizational
structures, sports statistics, and other fields.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

12. Spence, R., Information Visualization, ACM Press, 2000.

14. Stolte, C., and Hanrahan, P., Polaris: A System for Query,
Analysis and Visualization of Multi-dimensional Relational
Databases. Proc IEEE Information Visualization, 2000.

