The Illusion of Perceived Metric 3D Structure
Mats Lind
Dept. of Information Science
Uppsala University
Uppsala, Sweden
mats.lind@dis.uu.se

Geoffrey P. Bingham
Dept. of Psychology
Indiana University
Bloomington, Indiana
gbingham@indiana.edu

Abstract
A large body of results on the characteristics of human
spatial vision suggests that space perception is distorted.
Recent studies indicate that the geometry of visual space
is best understood as Affine. If this is the case, it has far
reaching implications on how 3D visualizations can be
successfully employed. For instance, all attempts to build
visualization systems where users are expected to discover relations based on Euclidean distances or shapes
will be ineffective. Because visualization can, and sometimes do, employ all possible types of depth information
and because the results from vision research usually
concentrates on one or two such types, three experiments
were performed under near optimal viewing conditions.
The aim of the experiments was twofold: To test whether
the earlier findings generalize to optimal viewing
conditions and to get a sense of the size of the error under
such conditions. The results show that the findings do
generalize and that the errors are large. The implications
of these results for successful visualizations are discussed.

1. Introduction
When visualizing multi-dimensional information, the
human perceptual system sets a definite limit on the number of dimensions in a data set that can meaningfully be
shown. One obvious option is to explore the inherent 3D
nature of human perception and use a 3D spatial layout
for three important dimensions in the data. This is a standard approach used in numerous visualization toolkits and
programs. Research on human spatial vision, however,
suggests that the general usefulness of a 3D visual representation may be limited. For instance, space perception
researchers have sought the geometry which describes
visual space, that is, the geometry that describes the properties preserved over changes in perspective on the space
surrounding an observer [1], [2], [3], [12]. The general
results from these studies show that space perception is
distorted. Most recently, the distortion results have led
researchers to suggest that the geometry of visual space is
Affine [11], [9]. In Affine geometry, distances along the
same direction can be related to one another, but distances

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Camilla Forsell
Dept. of Information Science
Uppsala University
Uppsala, Sweden

along different directions cannot be related. The suggestion is that distance along the depth direction (that is, extending directly away from the eye) cannot be related
systematically to distance in a direction perpendicular to
the depth direction (that is, in the 'frontoparallel' plane).
For instance, if one were looking straight at a wall, the
distance to the wall could not be related to a distance extended along the wall itself. The results from the extensive literature of psychophysical studies support the Affine hypothesis. They consistently show distortions in
space perception (see [11] for a review of these results.).
This might seem puzzling: Our general impression as we
look around us is that we have a good sense of the 3D
Euclidean structure of the surroundings. One interpretation is that the tasks we are evolved to deal with simply
do not require us to make judgments of 3D Euclidean
structure. Reaching for something and grasping it, for instance, could be solved by on-line control, something that
does not require information about Euclidean structure.
All that is needed to start the reaching sensibly is a rough
estimate of the distance to the object of interest. Also,
non- intuitive results have appeared in other areas of perception research as, for instance, in the case of changeblindness [7].
From a visualization perspective, the lack of information about 3D Euclidean structure means that we can expect users to be unable to compare correctly components
of shapes extending in the simulated depth direction to
components in the frontoparallel plane. And, therefore,
we can often expect them to overlook relations in the data
that actually exist and are being presented. One remaining
issue, and the aim of this study, is to discover exactly how
bad Euclidean 3D perception is under optimal conditions,
that is, what are the smallest differences in 3D shape that
users can see in a well formed 3D visualization. The data
described above were produced in experiments aimed at
testing specific hypotheses about perception. Therefore,
the possible sources of 3D shape information, such as
shading, texture gradients, ego-motion and binocular stereo, were controlled or varied but never simultaneously
present. In the three experiments reported here we used
near optimal conditions: Real, structured objects on a
visible, structured support surface viewed under normal

lighting conditions and the observers were allowed to use
normal binocular vision and to move around within certain limits while judging the objects. The first experiment
was designed to investigate the size of the errors under
such near optimal conditions, the effect on errors of seeing objects under different visual angles and, finally, the
effect of different shapes. In the second experiment a
wider range of shapes was used and a pure 2D condition
was tested to facilitate a direct 2D/3D comparison with
respect to errors. The third experiment aimed at testing
the possible benefit of including comparison blocks in the
presented scene.

2. Experiment 1
The purpose of this experiment was, first, to get an estimate of the size of the errors made when judging 3D
shapes under near optimal conditions. Second, we tested
the effect of seeing the objects at different distances, and
thus under different visual angles. We hypothesized that
the errors would increase with the distance to the objects
even when the distances differed by relatively small
amounts. This would be predicted if the errors were
caused by variations in resolution of the optical image.

2.1 Method
Stimuli. Five elliptical cylinders were used, as illustrated in Figure 1. Elliptical cylinders were used because
their elliptical shape can be defined in a single measure,
the relation between the two axes of the ellipse. The cylinders were hardwood, painted flat black with phosphorescent dots. They were seen, one at a time, on a tabletop
placed at chin height for each subject. This means that the
top of each cylinder was seen very slightly from above.
Cylinders, having a flat top surface, contain more structure than general smooth objects and, as such, might yield
less error in shape judgments [5]. We used these shapes in
an attempt to obtain the best shape perception results that
we could. Allowing a slightly visible flat top produces a
visible planar contour. The angle between the line of
sight, when the top of a cylinder was fixated, and the vertical direction was approximately 86 degrees. The cylinders were all 6.7 cm wide, each with one of five different
depths: 3.6 cm, 4.6 cm, 5.6 cm, 6.7 cm and 7.5 cm,
yielding depth-to-width (dw-) ratios of 0.54, 0.69, 0.84,
1.0 and 1.12, respectively. Two viewing distances were
used: 85 cm and 130 cm. This variation yielded, apart
from the obvious distance and retinal size variations, two
different angles between the line of sight and the vertical
direction when the top of a cylinder was fixated. At 85 cm
this angle is approximately 85 degrees and at 130 cm it is
about 87 degrees. The two visual angles produced by

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

seeing the objects at the two different distances were 4.5
and 3 degrees of visual angle, respectively.

Figure 1. A schematic representation of the objects
used in Experiment 1.
Apparatus, task and viewing conditions. A computer
program was constructed that showed a black ellipse on a
white background. The ellipse size and shape could be
altered by means of keys on the keyboard. This program
was run on a laptop computer with a high resolution TFT
screen (1600 by 1200 pixels). The stimulus cylinders
were placed on a table adjusted such that its top surface
was at chin height for all subjects. The subjects sat some
40 cm away from the table. This gave room for a smaller
and lower table to be placed under the table carrying the
stimuli. On this smaller table a laptop computer was
placed and its screen oriented such that it was approximately perpendicular to each observers line of sight when
the observer was looking down at the screen. During each
trial the observers were allowed to move when viewing
the stimulus cylinder but only with their upper body.
Experimental design. The study was designed as a
four factor mixed factorial design with shapes (cylinders),
long or short viewing distance and replicates as withinsubject factors. The between subject factor was order of
presentation for the two viewing distances. Half of the
subjects started with the short distance and the other half
started with the larger distance. The subjects were randomly assigned to these groups. As mentioned above, five
shapes were used. Each subject saw these five shapes in
random order three times in each of the far/near conditions. A total of 30 shapes was judged by each subject
(5x3x2).
Observers. Eight observers, three male and five female, took part in the experiment. They were all students
at Uppsala University and aged between 21 and 30. All
subjects had normal or corrected to normal vision. They
received a small compensation for taking part in the experiment.
Procedure. As the observers entered the room no cylinders were visible. On the table where the stimuli later
were presented, a large piece of cardboard was standing
upright on a stand. The experimenter showed the response
apparatus to the observer explained the task and then the
experiment commenced. For each trial, the randomly se-

lected cylinder was placed behind the piece of cardboard,
the piece of was cardboard removed and the observer was
asked to produce on a computer screen a picture of the
stimulus as seen from above. No time limit was used.
When the observer indicated that she or he was satisfied
with the ellipse produced on the computer screen, the experimenter again placed the piece of cardboard between
the observer and the stimulus.

2.2 Results
Each elliptical shape produced by each observer was
described by its dw-ratio. Each shape was shown three
times to each observer at each of the two distances. For
each distance, observer and shape, the root-mean-square
error of the produced shape was computed and compared
to the shown shape. These 80 numerical values (5 shapes
x 2 distances x 8 observers) were used in an ANOVA and,
using a liberal decision criterion of 5%, the F-values were
examined. No significant effects were found, that is, for
the time being we adopt the view that neither shape
(within the 0.54 to 1.12 range) nor viewing distance (between 85 and 130 cm) affected the errors. The mean rmserror across all viewing conditions and observers was
0.138. The results are illustrated in Figure 2.

2.3 Discussion
The mean rms-error indicates a fairly substantial error
in the perception of 3D shape even under these favorable
conditions. In fact, if we assume that the distributions are
normal, our observers needed a difference in dw-value of
0.35 to be right 90% of the time, i.e. they could possibly
confuse even the extreme values in our series of shapes.
Interestingly, there was no effect of distance, seeing the
object at 4.5 or 3 degrees of visual angle did not matter.
This indicates that the problem might be one of processing rather than of measuring.

Scatter subject f
1.4

1.2

1
e
p
a
h
s
d
e
vi
e
cr
e
P

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8
Actual shape

1

1.2

1.4

1.2

1.4

Scatterplot subject a
1.4

1.2

1
e
p
a
h
s
d
e
vi
e
cr
e
P

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8
1
Actual shape

Figure 2. Scatter plots of perceived shape versus
actual shape for two representative subjects in Experiment 1. The solid line illustrates the responses of
an ideal observer and is only included for reference.

3.1 Method

3. Experiment 2
Using the same basic paradigm as in Experiment 1,
this experiment aimed at two things: first, to extend the
range of shapes to include both thinner and more elongated shapes; second, to compare the shape errors made in
the depth direction to the errors made in the frontoparallel
direction.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Stimuli. Eight elliptical cylinders of the same type as
in Experiment 1 were used. They were slightly narrower
with widths ranging between 5.4 and 5.8 cm The depths
were 2.5 cm, 3.45 cm, 4.5 cm, 5.8 cm, 6.8 cm, 7.65 cm,
9.6 cm and 10.5 cm yielding dw-ratios of 0.46, 0.62, 0.78,
1.0, 1.23, 1.39, 1.66 and 1.81, respectively. Only one
viewing distance was used, approximately 85 cm.

Apparatus, task and viewing conditions. The same
computer program and screen as in Experiment 2 were
used. Like in the previous experiments, two tables were
used. One larger placed with its top at chin height and one
smaller placed in front and below the other table. In the
3D judgment condition, the stimulus cylinders were
placed on the top surface of the larger table and the response computer on the lower table. In the 2D condition,
the response computer was placed at the front end of the
larger table while the elliptic cylinders were placed at the
lower table. In the 2D condition, the observers stood up
and leaned forward slightly so that they viewed the cylinders directly from the top. The computer screen was then
angled such that it was approximately perpendicular to the
observer's line of sight.

(8 shapes x 2 viewing conditions x 8 observers) were used
in an ANOVA and, using the same decision criterion as
before, the F-values were examined. Both the shape factor, the 2D versus 3D condition as well as the interaction
were significant (Shape: F(1,7)=21.0; p < 0.005. 2D/3D:
F(7,49)=3.6; p< 0.005. Interaction: F(7,49)=3.3; p< 0.01).
These effects are illustrated in Figure 3. The effect of
shape and the interaction were examined by looking at the
slopes of the lines describing actual versus perceived
shape. This revealed that the slopes were significantly
larger than 1, that is, there was a systematic component in
the errors.
Plot of Means
0,35

0,30

0,25

RMS error

Experimental design. The study was designed as a
three factor within subjects factorial design with shapes
(cylinders), replicate and 2D/3D as factors. Each observer
saw the eight shapes in random order two times in each of
the 2D/3D conditions. Thus, a total of 32 shapes were
judged by each subject (8x2x2).

0,20

0,15

0,10

Observers. Ten observers, four male and six female,
agreed to take part in the experiment. They were all students at Uppsala University and aged between 21 and 28.
When asked, they all reported that they had perfect vision,
in some cases with the aid of glasses. However, one subject reported having vision problems as a child and was
therefore omitted. For one observer there was equipment
failure such that not all judgments were properly recorded
by the response apparatus and the data from this observer
were discarded. In total, data from eight observers were
collected and used. The observers received a small compensation for taking part in the experiment.
Procedure. The procedure was the same as in Experiment 1 for the 3D condition. In the added 2D condition,
the experimenter placed the piece of cardboard on the
smaller table and, to make absolutely sure no preview
from an unwanted position could take place, asked the
observer to turn around. Behind the cardboard, the cylinder was placed on the table and the observer was then
asked to face the table again, to assume the correct position and, finally, the piece of cardboard was removed. The
observer was asked to produce a picture of the, now visible, top surface of the stimulus cylinder on the response
computer. The 3D condition always preceded the 2D condition.

3.2 Results
As in Experiment 1, root-mean-square errors with respect to actual shape were computed for each observer
and each viewing condition. These 128 numerical values

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

0,05

0,00
0.46

0.62

0.78

1.0

1.23

1.39

1.66

1.81

2D
3D

SHAPE

Figure 3. Group mean RMS-error as function of
shape for the 2D and 3D conditions in Experiment 2.

3.3 Discussion
Judgment of metric shape is more error prone in 3D
than in 2D. Furthermore, the errors seem to increase as
the shapes become more elongated in depth. Even if this
may be partially due to a systematic distortion, and as
such possible to remove by preprocessing of 3D scenes,
the lowest rms-error values in this experiment are very
similar to the ones found in the previous one.

4. Experiment 3
In an effort to reduce the errors in metric shape judgments, the idea of using identical comparison blocks was
tested. In [10], the authors propose that metric errors in
shape perception are due to a failure by the visual system
to recover a scale factor of distances in depth. If a comparison block then were shown in a scene, it could allow
subjects to scale depth in units of the comparison block. If
an identical comparison block is then shown in another
scene, the shape of objects in this scene could be compared along the depth dimension to objects in the first
scene and metric shape comparisons would be possible.

Having a real comparison block beside the elliptic
cylinder to be judged, but a drawing of one on the computer screen next to the response ellipse might induce
suspicion in some subjects that there was some kind of
manipulation of the comparison figure. To convince the
subjects the comparison blocks were identical, real blocks
were used, not only for the stimuli, but also for the responses and we let the subjects hold and investigate these
comparison blocks before the comparison condition
commenced.

4.1 Method
Stimuli. Three elliptical cylinders, a-c, were used.
Object b was circular (depth and width both =7cm). Objects a and c were elliptical. By rotating these two objects
five different dw-ratios were defined (see figure 1). These
depth to width ratios were 0.83, 0.88, 1.0, 1.14, and 1.20.
The comparison blocks were cardboard boxes 5.5 cm
wide, 5.5 cm deep and 2.5 cm high painted in white, red
and black. There were four such comparison blocks, two
were always presented beside the stimulus cylinder and
two amongst the response cylinders.
Apparatus, task and viewing conditions. As in the
previous experiments, the stimuli were presented on a
structured tabletop positioned at each subjects chin height.
In this experiment the distance from the subjects eyes to
the stimulus was approximately 85 cm. The response apparatus was a set of 22 cylindrical objects with shape values ranging from 0.35 to 2.8. The subjects' task was to
identify the stimulus object amongst the set of response
cylinders when these were seen almost directly from
above. To ensure this, the response cylinders were placed
on a low table directly to the left of the subjects. The
subjects were not allowed to touch the response cylinders,
only to indicate which cylinder they saw by pointing. The
subjects remained seated during the whole experiment.
During each trial they were allowed to move when viewing the stimulus cylinder but only with their upper body.
Experimental design. The study was designed as a
four factor mixed factorial design with shapes (cylinders),
with or without comparison blocks and replicates as
within-subject factors. The between subject factor was
order of presentation for the with/without comparison
blocks conditions. Half of the subjects started with the
condition having comparison blocks and half of them
started in the condition without comparison blocks. As
mentioned above, five views of three cylinders were used.
Each subject saw these five shapes in random order three
times in each of the with/without comparison blocks conditions. Thus, a total of 30 shapes was judged by each
subject (5x3x2).

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Subjects. Eight subjects, all male, took part in the experiment. They were students or staff of the Swedish National Defense College aged between 24 and 40. When
asked, they all reported that they had perfect vision, in
some cases with the aid of glasses. They received no
compensation for taking part in the experiment.
Procedure. As the subjects entered the room no cylinders except the response cylinders were visible. On the
table where the stimuli later were presented, a large piece
of cardboard was standing upright on a stand hiding whatever was behind it. The experimenter showed the response cylinders to the subject, explained the task and
then the experiment commenced. For each trial, the randomly selected cylinder was placed behind the piece of
cardboard, the piece of cardboard was removed and the
subjects were asked to look at the stimulus and then point
at a cylinder in the response set that was identical in
shape. No time limit was used. When the subject had
pointed at a response cylinder, the experimenter again
placed the piece of cardboard between the subject and the
stimulus. After every third trial, the relative position of
the cylinders in the response set was changed randomly.
When comparison blocks were used, these were placed on
each side of the stimulus cylinder with a fixed distance of
10 cm between them and with the stimulus cylinder centered in between them and at randomly selected positions
amongst the response cylinders.

4.2 Results
The resolution of the response measure, giving the
subjects a finite set of response blocks to choose from, is
of course lower than the method used in the previous experiments. In addition, the number of shapes to choose
from was not evenly distributed over the range. Therefore
a more appropriate response measure for these conditions
was chosen, the number of erroneous selections for each
subject in each of the two main conditions: With or without comparison blocks. The median number of erroneous
selections was 8 out of 15 possible in the condition without comparison blocks. In the condition with the comparison blocks the median number of erroneous selections
was 10 out of 15 possible. There are no theoretical reasons to believe that comparison blocks would make the
errors larger, but out of curiosity a statistical analysis of
the differences was carried out using the Wilcoxon
matched-pair test, employing, as before, a decision criterion of 5%. The found difference was not significant. As a
complement, the root-mean-square errors were computed.
This analysis too showed slightly larger errors in the conditions with the comparison blocks. These data were not
tested statistically.

4.3 Discussion

References

Using physical objects not only for the stimuli but also for
the selection of responses seemed a very natural task to
subjects in that they just had to point to a cylinder they
thought was the same as the one they saw on the tabletop.
The results are from that perspective solid. The idea that
comparison blocks could serve a purpose in visualizations
designed for metric shape judgments receives no support
whatsoever.

[1] Baird, J.C. & Biersdorf, W.R. (1967). Quantitative functions
for size and distance judgments. Perception & Psychophysics ,
2, 161-166.

5. General Discussion
The results from reduced viewing conditions in basic
perception research generalizes well to more representative full-cue situations and paint a fairly gloomy picture in
terms of what people can perceive of metric 3D structure
in visualizations. The human visual system does not seem
to be constructed for making metric judgments in 3D
space. If we wish to require people to make metric judgments in applications, then we will need to provide differences in depth-to-width ratios of 35% to 50% to allow the
differences to be perceived. In practice, this is useless. We
therefore have to find other uses for computer generated
3D representations than landscapes where the user is supposed to discover relations based on Euclidean distances
or shapes. Ordinal structure in 3D, especially if juxtaposition is present, for instance, is much easier for the visual
system to interpret and appreciate and could be used, as it
already is in many cases. Examples are the ideas behind
Data Mountain [6] and 3D tree views [8]. These studies,
as do [4], demonstrate one of the prime advantages of 3D
presentations. Such presentations seem to facilitate navigation and memory for location and content.
Possibly the perception of metric 3D structure can be
improved if additional features such as regular gridlines,
yardsticks and the like are added, although the results
from Experiment 3 make this doubtful. This will be further investigated in forthcoming work. However, including formal and numerical components may push viewers
into a more sequential and analytic mode of thinking that
may be counterproductive in relation to the task at hand.

6. Acknowledgements
This research was sponsored by project AQUA at the
Swedish National Defense College in Stockholm,
Sweden.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

[2] Gilinsky, A. (1951). Perceived size and distance in visual
space. Psychological Review , 58 , 460-482.
[3] Gogel, W. C. (1977). The metric of visual space. In W.
Epstein (Ed.), Stability and Constancy in Visual Perception.
New York: Wiley.
[4] Howes, A., Miles, G.E., Payne, S.J., Mitchell, C.D., &
Davies, A.J. (2001). Incidental memory and navigation in
panoramic virtual reality for electronic commerce. Human
Factors, 43:2, 239-254.
[5] Pizlo, Z. (1994). A theory of shape constancy based on
perspective invariants. Vision Research, 34(12), 1637-58.
[6] Robertson, G., Czewinski, M., Larson, K., Robbins, D.,
Thiel, D., & van Dantzich, M., (1998) Data Mountain: Using
spatial memory for document management. In: Proceedings of
UIST'98, San Fransisco, CA, November 1998, ACM Press, 153162.
[7] Simons, D. (2000) Current Approaches to Change Blindness,
In: Simons, D. (ed) (2000) Visual Cognition: Special Issue 
Change Blindness and Visual Memory, 7.
[8] Tavanti,M. & Lind M., (2001) 2D vs. 3D, Implications on
Spatial Memory, In: Andrews, K., Roth, S. & Wong, P. C. (eds)
(2001) Proceedings of 2001 Information Visualization, San
Diego, CA, October 2001, IEEE Computer Society, 139-145.
[9] Tittle, J. S., Todd, J. T., Perotti, V. J., & Norman, J. F.
(1995). Systematic distortion of perceived three-dimensional
structure from motion and binocular stereopsis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
21 (3), 663-678.
[10]Todd, J.T. & Bressan, P. (1990). The perception of 3imensional affine structure fromminimal apparent motion
sequences. Perception & Psychophysics , 48, 419-430.
[11] Todd, J. T., Tittle, J. S., & Norman, J. F. (1995).
Distortions of three-dimensional space in the perceptual analysis
of motion and stereo. Perception, 24 , 75-86.
[12] Toye, R.C. (1986). The effect of viewing position on the
perceived layout of space. Perception & Psychophysics , 40, 8592.

