2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Exploring new ways of integration, visualization and interaction with Geotechnical
and Geophysical Data

Vítor Gonçalves

Fernando Almeida

Polytechnic Institute of Castelo Branco
PhD student in IEETA (Univ. Aveiro)
Castelo Branco, Portugal
vitor@esart.ipcb.pt

Geosciences Department
Univ. Aveiro
Aveiro, Portugal
fernandoalmeida@ua.pt

Beatriz Sousa Santos
Paulo Dias

IEETA / Department of Electronics Telecommunication
and Informatics
Univ. Aveiro
Aveiro, Portugal
bss@ua.pt

IEETA / Department of Electronics Telecommunication
and Informatics
Univ. Aveiro
Aveiro, Portugal
paulo.dias@ua.pt

The main advantages of the proposed techniques
compared to those offered by the traditional systems are the
possibility to integrate several representation of all available
data in addition to the standard visualization (visualization of
terrain data), the possibility to guide the insertion of
additional information in sparse datasets, and further
assistance in the construction of other representations (e.g.
isosurfaces) based on the original data. Therefore, our aim is
to extend the capacity of visualization systems for
geographic data. Another objective is the possibility for
experts to interact and add information to the original data to
help the interpretation of geological formations.
Geotechnical data in general, and the data used in this
work, have the particularity of being very sparse, not
covering all geographical area under study, forcing experts to
create mental models that allows them to interpret geological
characteristics based on the available information. This
implies the need to create new tools more suitable for the
exploration of such sparse information allowing experts to
reach conclusions more easily.
Another problem existing in many standard visualization
systems when processing this type of data is the lack of tools
well suited for experts to interactively add information for
documentation (e.g. to include in reports). In many cases, the
expert ends up having to export the images from the GIS in
raster format and manually adding relevant information
using any editing software. Our work also aims to facilitate
the documentation and marking of data, and to enable
sharing information among experts. The added information
is included in layers, which can be grouped to produce better
and more flexible visualizations. This interpreted vector
information can also be exported to other platforms for
computer aided design, reports or further processing (volume
and area computation, for example).
This case study was based in information used to build a
Tourism Resort located on the island of Porto Santo

Abstract—The work presented in this paper aims at exploring
new ways of integrating, visualizing and interacting with
geotechnical and geophysical data that may be more rich and
interactive than those offered by most current Geographic
Information Systems (GIS). Some visualization techniques
enabling simultaneous visualization of the several data types
available in our case study are proposed. Moreover, methods
were developed to guide experts while defining layers and
other relevant geological structures. The work is still in an
early stage and is main goal has been assessing the validity and
adequacy of the proposed techniques to the specific
geotechnical and geophysical data under consideration.
Keywords:Visualization; geotechnical and geophysical data;
VTK (Visualization Toolkit)

I.

INTRODUCTION

Current systems for geological data visualization are
robust, complete and comprehensive tools for the majority of
spatial data, however they present some limitations regarding
the representation of specific data (for example sparse data)
or the fusion of data coming from different sensors. Usually
geotechnical and geophysical information deals with sparse
data with no spatial continuity resulting in large areas with
no information available. Data coming from several
modalities also poses problems to standard applications,
which usually do not support simultaneous visualization of
all available data types. In these cases, new methods and
tools are needed to help interpreting the sparse data and to
obtain more comprehensive visualizations [1].
This paper describes a set of experiments to test
visualization and interaction techniques to improve and
facilitate operations on geotechnical and geophysical data by
experts. The software was developed in C++ using the
graphical library VTK (Visualization Toolkit) [3].

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.35

181

(Portugal). The site, located on seashore, suffers from water
intrusion. The base formations are of volcanic origin
overlaid by more recent Quaternary sedimentary formations.
These different geological formations have significant
contrast in geoelectrical resistivity values, depending on
porosity or moisture content, and in geomechanical
deformation parameters depending on rock types. The
integrated tridimensional representation gives useful
information to designers while deciding, for instance, on
building and other infrastructures implantation.
Section 2 presents the type of data for which we had to
developed visualizations, as well as the methods of
acquisition of those data. Section 3 presents the various types
of visualizations proposed, and a guided method of
isosurface construction. Section 4 addresses various issues
that came up during the implementation. Finally, we present
some conclusions and future work.
II.

drilling wells for water, mining, bedrock detection, control
and monitoring of environmental problems related to the
intrusion of substances, as well as the degree of change in
rock masses, among others. Profiles are obtained by
measuring the electric potential (in various parts of the
subsoil) generated by the introduction of electric current
pulses treated by inversion methods to generate a spatial
resistivity distribution providing a discreet profile that
theoretically approximates the real value [4, 2].

GEOPHYSICAL AND GEOTECHNICAL DATA

Our experiments were mainly focused on the
visualization of three types of data that have different
acquisition methods and different purposes.
Geophysical data result from geophysical exploration
using electrical resistivity and GPR (ground penetrating
radar), which are in this case the basis of geotechnical and
hydrogeological exploration. However, only visualization
techniques for electrical resistivity data have been
implemented yet.
Electrical resistivity pseudo-sections profiles are acquired
over lines with several arrangements of four electrodes (two
for current and two for potential lectures); after that,
geophysical resistivity data inversion gives a structured grid
corresponding to a perpendicular plane to the surface.
Resistivity profiles can be obtained from the samples using
linear interpolation. These profiles help experts to obtain a
model for the geological area under study. Resistivity values
are continuous scalars that vary with the materials of the
subsurface, as soil and rocks, generally bad conductors
(although they can have different conductivities), or water,
which is a good conductor. Resistivity is measured in ohm.m
(ohm-meters), ranging from close to zero for good
conductors (particularly in the case of intruded see water
formations) to very high values for materials which are bad
conductors [2].
The second and third data types result from the
characterization and the geotechnical zoning interpretation
areas. This information comes from Dynamic Probing Light
(DPL) and Dynamic Probing Super Heavy (DPSH). These
techniques involve the underground tapered tip probe
penetration as result from the impact of a mass. The number
of beats to penetrate a standard depth (0.10m) is related to
the energy applied to the tip to reach a given depth range.
The dynamic resistance is a scalar value measured in
Kg/cm2, which ranges from zero for empty space to very
high values for rocky areas.

Figure 1. Obtaining an electrical resistivity profile.

B. Geotechnical Data – Dynamic probing (DLP and
DPSH)

Figure 2. Obtaining dynamic probing super heavy (DPSH) data.

A. Geophysical Data - Electrical resistivity profiles
An objective of geophysical exploration is to define a
model of the geological area that helps the labeling of

DLP and DPSH are penetrometer tests involving the
determination of the strokes number (N) needed to grant a
certain depth of penetration. Each record registers the

182

variation of dynamic resistance peak with depth (Rd) and the
number of strokes (N) corresponding to the penetration of 10
and 20cm in the DLP and DPSH tests respectively [4].
Finally, a normalization formula is applied so that DLP and
DPSH are expressed in the same physical unit.
III.

considered after various tests as the more representative
visualization of the data.

VISUALIZATION AND INTERACTION TECHNIQUES

The first objective of our work was the development of
integrated visualizations for the various types of data.
Several methods were also proposed in order to guide
experts while defining layers and other relevant geological
structures.
Figure 4. Visualization of dynamic resistance through a stack of cylinders
with different gray levels.

A. Visualization of electrical resistivity profiles
To represent resistivity profiles we used polygonal
meshes for geometry and colour-mapping [3] for electrical
resistivity along the profiles (Fig. 3).

However, the dynamic probing visualization through a
stack of cylinders was not entirely satisfactory, since the
variations were not very significant and the high data range
limited the use of color scales. To overcome this difficulty
we improved the initial representation as shown in Fig. 5:
besides the different gray values for different dynamic
resistance, we also used different diameters to code the same
physical measure, allowing an easier data interpretation.

Figure 3. Visualization of electrical resistivity profiles.

The visualization technique we adopted in this case is
close to the one generally used in GIS since it is familiar to
experts and represents the information collected by the
sensors. We used a rainbow colour scale [5] to provide an
intuitive interpretation, given that the blue tones correspond
to areas where there is a greater possibility of having water,
yellow/brown/red tones to rocky areas and greens correspond
to intermediate zones.

Figure 5. Visualization of dynamic resistance through a stack of cylinders
with different gray levels and different diameters.

C. Visualization of electrical resistivity isolines
Isolines enable a visualization delimiting areas with the
same resistivity, making easier the definition of areas with
higher or lower resistivity, as shown in Fig. 6.

B. Visualization of dynamic resistance data (DLP and
DPSH)
Since dynamic probing light (DLP) and dynamic probing
super heavy (DPSH) correspond to vertical drilling, they can
be associated with a vertical line in a xyz plane, where x and
y are fixed, and z varies. In addition to depth, the data also
provides a scalar representing the ease or difficulty of
drilling. Based on this information we proposed two different
visualizations: one used a graph (lines, bars or other) aligned
vertically at the measurement point of the dynamic resistance
this chart would represent the resistivity at the z coordinate.
The second proposal consisted of a cylinder stack where the
dynamic resistance value is represented by the grey value
associated to each cylinder along z. After some tests, experts
showed a preference for the second proposal, showed in Fig.
4. A range of different gray shades was adopted taking into
account the physical characteristics of dynamic resistance
and its distribution in the underground. This scale was

Figure 6. Visualization of electrical resistivity isolines.

Isoline visualization with different resistivity ranges is
provided. It is possible to visualize only certain values as
isolines to explore different physical characteristics of the
underground. Images A, B and C of Fig. 7 illustrate the

183

advantage of this representation: image A shows zones
where the soil is predominantly rocky. Image B reveals a
zone where there is water (low resistivity), but in image C
isolines show a higher water potential, virtually confined to a
more specific area of the underground.

B
A

A

B
C

D

C

E
Legend:
A – Higher resistivity areas
B – Lower resistivity areas
C – Very lower resistivity areas (subset of B)

Figure 8. Isosurface construction process.

Fig. 8 shows a demarcation zone example: initially an
area where there is a continuity of low resistivities is
identified in view A, then, a view that shows isolines of low
resistivity in each profile was adopted (B). The user marks
the points of continuity (C) and generates a polygon mesh
from these points (D). Finally, the volume corresponding to
the low resistivity zones of profiles is shown (E).

Figure 7. Visualizations of electrical resistivity isolines, for different
range values.

This visualization is intended to target underground
properties helping experts to reach several conclusions. For
example, from these visualizations it is easy to conclude that
a certain underground area has an increased probability of
having water, and therefore it will be most suitable for an
attempt to capture water (e.g. for irrigation, swimming
pools, etc.).

E. Automatic selection of points on isolines
In the example of isosurface construction in Fig. 8, the
selection of points on each isoline was carried out manually,
point by point. Since this is a repetitive and time consuming
process, we implemented a method to automate this selection
(Fig. 9). The user has only to select a single point on a
certain isoline, and all points of the selected isoline are
automatically selected. Using this method, the user selection
process is much more efficient as shown in Fig. 8, obtained
by selecting a single point in each of the three profiles.

D. Construction of electrical resistivity isosurfaces
The guided construction of surfaces by experts that
delimit areas with similar physical characteristics is essential
to make a visual interpretation more intelligible, defining the
various layers of the underground. Experts can select
interesting points on the isolines (dots in image C of Fig. 8)
that will be used to automatically create two types of
representations: the open isosurface (or just surface) and the
closed isosurface (volume). Open isosurfaces are useful to
define borders between different layers; while closed
isosurfaces may be useful to define a volume of the
underground with the same physical characteristics. The
isosurface representation is particularly interesting for users
to define regions of interest corresponding to specific
resistivity values (for example water layers as can be seen in
images D and E of Fig. 8).

Figure 9. Automatic selection of points on isolines.

184

IV.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Therefore, the integration of various types of data
increases the certainty about the underground constitution
material.

Although this project is still at an early stage, the
proposed visualizations have been evaluated and validated
by a small group of experts.
Image A of Fig. 10 shows a typical integrated
visualization provided by our methods. Resistivity profiles
are represented using pseudo-colour, (where dark-blue
corresponds to a low electrical resistivity and red to the
maximum value in the data set), while dynamic mechanical
resistance values (DLP and DPSH) are represented using a
stack of cylinders with variable radius and grey levels
(images B and C of Fig. 10) that may help users with
problems of color perception [6].
We also implemented visualizations of the data as
isolines (Fig. 7) making it possible to switch between
visualizations. Finally, users can interactively select any
viewpoint to gain insight and guide the definition of
geological structures.
An attempt was made to establish a direct relation among
geotechnical and geophysical data, in order to create new
visualizations and methods to assist experts in building
isosurfaces defining various geological structures. The
ultimate goal is to provide in the same interface, access to
more information using the same representation (resistivity
profiles, DLP and DPSH); however, establishing a relation
among these datasets is not easy. The explanation for this
difficulty is that rocks may be porous and contain water that,
unlike rocks, is a good conductor resulting in areas with low
electrical resistivity, yet having a high dynamic resistance
(rocks are difficult to drill) [2]. In other words, a direct
relation was not possible to establish. However, combining
resistivity profiles and dynamic penetrations (DLP or DPSH)
for a specific location, can help determine the type of subsoil
by comparing tables relating electric resistivity and dynamic
resistance for different types of materials.

V.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

This paper describes a set of experiments designed to
explore new visualizing ways of exploring geotechnical and
geophysical data, not offered by many standard spatial
visualization
software:
for
example,
the
simultaneous/integrated visualization of electrical resistivity
profiles and dynamic probing (DLP and DPSH) in the same
window.
The idea to establish a relation among geotechnical and
geophysical data and visualize them using the same
representation was not feasible due to the porosity of rocks.
However, combining the information seems promising to
help experts classifying geological structures.
A particularly interesting feature is the construction of
isosurfaces guided by experts based on the integrated
visualization of all available information. In isosurfaces
construction, the available data, though sparse, is the starting
point and can be presented by several means: polygonal
meshes, isolines or sub-ranges of isolines, allowing the
expert to select different underground sections.
The guided construction of these representations may
evolve in future to be more automatic. As a long-term
objective the idea is to obtain a semi-automatic
representation that can be accepted or modified by the
expert. Further improvements would be the use of a virtual
reality environment, in which the user could walk through
the data and guide the segmentation of different ground
layers. This virtual reality visualization and simulation could
also help the data exploration by other professionals,
including architects, engineers and designers.
REFERENCES

A
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

B

[5]

C
[6]

Figure 10. Simultaneous visualization of electrical resistivity profiles, DLP
and DPSH (B and C show enlarged details of DPSH samples).

185

Huang, A., Mayne, P. (2008), Geotechnical and Geophysical Site
Characterization, Edição Ilu-strada, EditoraCRC Press, ISBN:
2008ISBN0415469368, 9780415469364, 249 pp.
Luís, J. (2005), Geofísica Ambiental, Método Eléctricos, Engenharia
do Ambiente, Universidade do Algarve (Portugal), Capítulo 3, 25 pp
1-4.
Schroeder, W., K. Martin, B. Lorensen. The Visualization Toolkit,
An Object Oriented Ap-proach To 3d Graphics, 2nd ed., Prentice
Hall, 1998.
Silva, J.; Machado, A.; Moura, R. Et Al; (2002), Estudo Geotécnico E
Hidrogeológico Para Implantação Do Conjunto Turístico Colombo´S
Resort, Campo De Baixo, Ilha Do Porto Santo, Arquipélago Da
Madeira. - EnGeoMad - Planeamento e Gestão de Recursos Naturais
pp. 13-16; 31-41.
Silva, S. Joaquim Madeira, Beatriz Sousa Santos, “There is More to
Color Scales than Meets the Eye: A Review on the Use of Color in
Visualization”, Proceedings of Information Visualization, IV07,
Zurich, Zurich, July 2007, pp. 943-948.
Ware, C., Information Visualization: Percep-tion to De-sign,
Academic Press, 2000.

