2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

From data realism to dada aggregations:
visualizations in digital art, humanities and popular culture

Denisa Kera
Communications & New Media
National University of Singapore
Singapore
denisa@nus.edu.sg
Realism is shifting from an aesthetic category of mimesis
and reproduction to a more ontologically challenging
category questioning the nature of data and digital objects.
Common digital objects such as 3D animation, digital
photography, online video, various games and flash
presentations always strive for a more “realistic” effect either
in terms of visual illusions and mimesis of our everyday
reality or in terms of enhancing the imaginative possibilities
of our mind and the creation of new worlds and realities. The
data oriented visual practices offer a very critical response to
both mimesis and to the imagination. As an response to this,
they offer the contemplative distance that redefines the
whole production of meaning.
These new visual practices are iconoclastic and critical of
the present digital content to which our “reality” is often
reduced. They even take the cultural and digital content as
an object of their study, as something that can be quantified
into a large dataset or how Lev Manovich calls it “a
contemporary cultural data sets” and opportunity to study the
social and cultural processes in new ways (and even in real
time as “cultural flows”): “In the present decade our ability
to capture, store and analyze data is increasing exponentially,
and this growth has already affected many areas of science,
media industries, and the patterns of cultural
consumption…We feel that the ground has been set to start
thinking of culture as data (including media content and
people’s creative and social activities around this content)
that can be mined and visualized. In other words, if data
analysis, data mining, and visualization have been adopted
by scientists, businesses, and government agencies as a new
way to generate knowledge, let us apply the same approach
to understanding culture [5].
Whether in arts, humanities or on the public open APIs
(Application programming interfaces) and mashups we see
the same impulse oriented towards data as means of a critical
distance to the visual and media saturated world. These
emerging critical and visual practices define this new realism
of data, a data oriented realism, that does not simply
represent reality per se but performs the processes of its
present construction and representation with an almost
iconoclastic fervor. They offer a distance from the power
and seduction of the online image by allowing us to
experience the construction and visualization of various data
and by experimenting with the creative interpretations of
these data. The user generated mashups and digital art

Abstract— The orientation towards data in arts, humanities
and pop culture in recent years brings a renewed interest in
realism and iconoclasm. The various APIs (Application
programming interfaces) and mashups that are employed in
these traditionally “qualitative” disciplines offer tools for
creative and often critical interpretations. Data are becoming
means of a critical distance to the visual and media saturated
world that bring whole new perspective on our everyday life
and reality. These emerging critical and visual practices define
a realism based on data rather than on human perception,
reason or some strong ontological theses. This data oriented
realism does not simply represent reality but performs the
modern processes of its construction with an almost
iconoclastic fervor. It offers a distance from the power and
seduction of the (digital) image and asks questions about their
conditions of possibility, methods of gathering and the various
possibilities of their representation. Visualization of various
data in the form of popular user generated mashups, serious
art visualizations and new digital methods in humanities create
a tension between the new forms of iconoclastic realism and the
more playful dada collage techniques that are satirical and
rather than realist and emancipatory rather than iconoclastic.
The use of visualizations in art, humanities and online popular
culture (cyberculture) is defined by this tension between data
realism to dada “aggregations”.
Keywords- realis;, data; art; API; mashup; critical distance;
visualization; dada; collage

I.

INTRODUCTION

Growing numbers of visualizations in digital art [1], new
methodological approaches in digital humanities such as
cultural analytics [2], digital method [3] and the pop culture
of web mashups [4] present an important trend in online
visual practices. This critical and creative interest in data and
visualizations in arts and humanities opposes the
objectification and quantification of all phenomena as the
most common function of visualizations in social and natural
sciences. Its function and purpose is more iconoclastic and/or
ironic (dada) and the goal is ti question and even deride any
attempt to objectify and categorize or make decisions based
on some “neutral” grounds hidden behind quantifiable
realities transformed into data.
What is at stake in this acquisition of visualizations by
arts and humanities is the meaning of realism as such.

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.99

291
297

visualizations share this iconoclastic fervor but also the
ironic strategies of the early dada collages.
II.

in the absolute power of the quantified information, the
artistic visualizations and the popular mashups try to show
the limits of any belief in static reality and stable patterns
defined by statistics. These often playful appropriations of
data visualizations often work with more ephemeral data and
look for “patterns” that offer some form of freedom in a
world that is heavily monitored, commented and reduced.

DATA REALISM FROM SCIENCE TO ART

Data mining practices in digital humanities,
visualizations of various datasets in digital art and the use of
APIs for mashups by digital enthusiasts and geeks define this
important turn in online visual practices. Visualizations are
new means of understanding the media and information
saturated world, they represent and constitute this world at
the same time. These data visualizations interpret our present
life and reality in a manner similar in which the religious
iconography enabled political and social identity in the
Middle Ages, or in which modernist paintings expressed and
formed the belief in radical change and revolution in art and
politics. What about the society and the world today we can
learn from the data visualizations and mashups as the new
visual practice? What aspiration they express and what
functions and needs they serve? What do we mean by media
saturated world?
We live in a world saturated with information and data
that are constantly generated not only by humans that blog,
microblog and upload various online content but also by
things that monitor, tweet and upload data in real time.
Content and data are not only constantly generated but also
used as powerful means of justification of various scientific,
political and even ontological/ claims, theories and beliefs.
How they are collected, managed but also visualized and
presented is becoming a crucial issue in any present debates
ranging from science to politics. While the more serious uses
of visualizations by science and politics express a belief in
reality hidden to our senses that needs to be discovered by
the meticulous and detailed work of gathering and
interpreting data, the playful appropriations in art and
humanities and in the pop culture of the web mashups
reverse this belief and offer a more radical view of the nature
of data and visualizations. The aggregations, recyclings and
visualizations of data generated by humans and things on
various widgets, mashups and microapplications define a
new realism of data as performative but also democratic
visual practice in which not only experts but also the general
public takes an active role and which value variety and
experiment.
What is hidden in data is not only to be discovered by
various visualizations but also critically evaluated by the
playful appropriation of these technologies in digital art and
on the mashups. Reality from this perspective is not only
something that appears to our senses nor it is some
expression of the meaning creation abilities of humans but
also a complex and emergent phenomenon of interaction that
involves heterogeneous actors and forces: discourses and
matter, human minds and things, various humans and non
humans. The circulation of various data over open APIs
enable us to make sense and experience our data saturated
world from a new perspective and even to uncover
unexpected connections and networks. While the more
serious forms of data realism in science represent the belief

III.

DATA AGGREGATIONS AND DADA APPROPRIATIONS
FROM ART TO POPULAR CULTURE

The dada appropriations of scientific visualizations and
data mining that started in digital art and transformed into a
popular form of expression in the case of the web mashups
are reaching a certain climax in present time with the new
web 2.0 services that target the general public and involve
citizens in visualizations of various datasets. Services and
communities of users such as http://www.swivel.com/ and
http://manyeyes.alphaworks.ibm.com/manyeyes
define
visualization practices that use not only public but also
private datasets for various functions ranging from sheer
curiosity to more serious ambitions of bringing public
awareness and motivating public engagement. While the
social and political aspects of these dada appropriations and
aggregations of data are well represented by digital art
visualizations, the web mashups represent a more hedonistic
use of data that form almost an authentic popular culture on
the web.
Visualizations in digital art are often used as a tool for
critique of power structures that border with conspiracy
theories inspired by the early conceptual work of Mark
Lombardi and his “narrative structures”. Art examples such
as the visualizations of the structure of board members in
various companies by Josh On’s “They rule”
(http://www.theyrule.net/), the various political projects by
the
Spanish
artist
collective
“Bestiario”
(http://www.bestiario.org/) or the French artist collective
“Bureau d'études” (http://bureaudetudes.free.fr/) and many of
the curatorial projects by José Luis de Vicente and Visualizar
”Public Data, Data in Public” http://medialabprado.es/article/convocatoria_de_proyectos__visualizar_09_
datos_publicos_datos_en_publico
use visualizations as
means of a political and social critique. These visualizations
perform and let us experience the practices used to construct
social reality and use of data for decision makings. They
present a form of digital iconoclasm that reflects the nature
of the “raw” data and their various (mis)use. It also make us
very aware of the decentralized character of power, society
and politics today that is disappearing in a complexity of
links and networks between different actors. The inherent
and almost invisible injustice and misuse of power behind
these data share some of the aesthetics but also the moral
criticism of Hieronymus Bosch’s “The Garden of Earthly
Delights”. Visualizations are such “gardens” of data delights
and sins, their multitude and certain repetitiveness depicts
the elusive character of the evil today which is seductive as
much as it is pervasive and unrepresentable.

298
292

While in digital art data are becoming important tools of
political and social criticism that defines realism in terms of
power structures, web mashups and open APIs use data as a
form of digital folklore and a web pop culture. In an almost
carnivalesque manner these data and visualization practices
subvert and liberate from any strong notion of realism,
ontology or even power structure. They let millions of online
users to launch and cooperate on some new textual or
graphic adventure and to use mashup techniques to connect
different personal and public data. Users externalize their
human existence into data that can be uploaded and
“mashed” with everything around. Mashups and other web
2.0 tools with open APIs help users to inhabit the online
universe as a data enriched and transformed space
connecting user generated content and interests with
available databases and different sources often in real time.
We can add different personal layers to public websites and
services like on http://www.momenttracker.com/ where users
publish and share information on where they have been
during
significant
historical
moments
or
http://kivaworld.com which maps and visualize microfinance
loans from Kiva lenders on Google Maps. More complex
mashups involves real time data and layers information from
services such as Flickr on Google maps in
http://www.flickrvision.com/ or from chats on Google maps
that let us see how people swear around the world in this
moment http://www.mibazaar.com/sweartweets.html. These
web and map mashups can involve not only multiple layers
of information but also multiple interactions with real time
and non real time data uploaded not only by people but also
things, devices and places like in the case of
http://www.pachube.com/. These mashups and platforms are
turning the web into a new Theater of the World, a constant
flux transforming and redefining the relations between
human and non-human, small and big, private and public,
local and global but even planetary and cosmic [6].
IV.

potential to create complex new systems of relations and
dependencies. They map the increasing symbiosis and
connection between the various biological, social and
technological aspects of our lives and society that produce
this exponential growth of data.
The connections, interactions and misalliances created
between natural, social and other systems that are explored
on these new maps of our digital and data driven existence
lead to the profound changes in the perception of our place in
the universe. We are part of an emergent, hybrid and
symbiotic networks of humans and non human entities and
beings, different actors and events constituting hybrid and
evolving worlds. These tools inspire us to experiment and
create even more heterogeneous and unexpected networks
and test the limits of anthropocentrism in a world open to
constant exchanges and deteretorializations. These mashups
and web 2.0 visualization tools today are the compasses and
the maps exploring our present condition that is constantly
reshaping and redefining new networks and borders
connected to new datasets and databases.
This cosmopolitical [8] condition is defined by these
visualizations as a conceptual, technological but also
physical site of experiments with heterogeneous networks.
The philosophical, sociological and even mathematical
concepts of networks and spheres, technological possibilities
of mashups and visualizations all define the heterogeneous
and dynamic character of these new networks as
cosmopolitical experiments with the new relations between
the human and the non humans, the material and the
semiotic, private and public.
Art visualizations but also user created and recycled
mashups are means not only of modern day politics but also
ontology and tools of this new metaphysics. They revive an
interest in reality hidden in data that is indifferent to human
needs, intentions and politics and which often expresses an
autonomy of different systems on humans. They bring the
surrender of any teleology or even conspiracy theory by
presenting the complexity and emergence present behind
data. They define an attempt for new realism based on these
hybrid, complex and process based ontology of flows rather
than ontology of lasting, stable and well arranged structures
and patterns.

(COSMO)POLITICS OF DATA

With map mashups and various art visualizations we are
translating and turning into data and sharable signals all our
public but also private lives and histories. We are
externalizing them into space, objectifying them and
connecting them to millions of other data. Data
visualizations and new online visual practices are turning the
whole world into an infinite stream of data. Whether this
reduces the human historical and political dimension to
disembodied and disengaged unity that can be objectified
and forgotten or it creates a possibility for new politics
involving not only humans remains to be seen and discussed.
All visualizations function as what Bruno Latour [7]
describes as “immutable mobiles” and “centres of
calculations” that form the whole modern scientific culture
and world. They link, accumulate, count, display and
recombine all the different states or our world, they let
different actors connect and merge with one another via the
data and to create complex networks. They simply mobilize
resources through space and time and represent their

V.

CONCLUSION

The new realism of data and its playful appropriations in art
and popular culture look at the changing interconnections
between order and chaos through data and their
visualizations rather than looking for order in chaos. The
emergent models and maps of complex phenomena often
visualized in real time from various datasets and databases
are the true icons of a time in which picture is worth billions
of data rather than thousands of words and it is as realistic as
much data it is able to mirror and comprise. Visualizations
are simply forms of digital "contemplation" which explore
not only the limits of our conceptual powers when facing
reality saturated by data but also the limits of our human
importance in a very complex and hybrid world. They are
299
293

means of conceptualizing our cosmopolitical condition and
true icons of out posthuman future.
REFERENCES

[1]

Vesna, V.: Database Aestehtics. University of Minnesota Press
(2007).
Faith, J.: Interactive Data Exploration with Targeted Projection
Pursuit. In LEA Vol 16, Issue 6 – 7. (2009).
http://www.leonardo.info/LEA/CreativeData/CD_Faith.pdf
[2] Manovich, L.: Cultural Analytics: analysis and visualization of large
cultural data sets (2008).
http://www.manovich.net/cultural_analytics.pdf
[3] Rogers, R.: Internet Research: The Question of Method (2010)
http://www.govcom.org/publications/full_list/rogers_internet_researc
h_question_of_method_2010.pdf
Rogers, R.: Information politics on the Web. MIT Press (2005).
[4] Malykhina, E.: Maps Meet Mashups, Location data mixed with other
information on the Web tells who, what, and most important, where.

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

300
294

In Information Week, March 17, 2007
http://www.informationweek.com/news/internet/webdev/showArticle.
jhtml?articleID=198001255
Perez, C.P.: Google Delivers Maps Mashup Tool for Non-Techies, In
PCWorld April 5, 2007
http://www.pcworld.com/article/130419/google_delivers_maps_mash
up_tool_for_nontechies.html
Manovich, L.: Cultural Analytics: analysis and visualization of large
cultural data sets (2008).
http://www.manovich.net/cultural_analytics.pdf
Koyré, A.: From the Closed World to the Infinite Universe. Harper
& Brothers, New York (1958).
Silver,M., Balmori, D.: Mapping in the Age of Digital Media: The
Yale Symposium. Wiley Academy Press (2003).
Latour, B.: Visualisation and Cognition: Drawing Things Together
(1983) . http://www.bruno-latour.fr/articles/article/21-DRAWINGTHINGS-TOGETHER.pdf
Latour, B.: We Have Never Been Modern, Harvard Uni. Press,
Cambridge, Mass (1993).

