2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Wiimote as an input device in Google Earth visualization and navigation: a user
study comparing two alternatives
Beatriz Sousa Santos (1,2), Bruno Prada(1), Hugo Ribeiro(1), Paulo Dias(1,2), Samuel Silva(1), Carlos Ferreira(3),
(1)
Department of Electronics Telecommunications and Informatics, Univ. Aveiro, Portugal
(2)
IEETA / Institute of Electronics Engineering and Telematics of Aveiro, Portugal
(3)
DEGEI-Univ. Aveiro, CIO, Univ. de Lisboa, Portugal
{bss@ua.pt}
was projected on a common projection screen, as well as
using a mouse on a desktop.
This paper is organized in five sections: section 2 briefly
addresses Wiimote capabilities and describes the two
configurations used, sections 3 and 4 present the user study,
and main results, finally section 5 presents some conclusions
and future work.

Abstract— This paper presents a user study performed to
compare the usability of the Wiimote as an input device to
visualize information and navigate in Google Earth using two
different configurations. This study had the collaboration of 15
participants which performed a set of tasks using the Wiimote
as an input device while the image was projected on a common
projection screen, as well as a mouse on a desktop. Results
show that most users clearly preferred one of the Wiimote
configurations over the other, and over the mouse; moreover,
they had better performances using the preferred
configuration, and found it easier to use.

II.

The Wiimote is a handheld device containing several
buttons, a 3-axis accelerometer, an Infra-Red (IR) camera,
wireless Bluetooth connectivity, as well as a speaker, a
vibration motor and four blue LEDs, all coming at an
accessible cost, in a robust and easy to configure pack. Lee
[6] considered it one of the most sophisticated PCcompatible input devices available today and suitable for
exploring interaction research. In his paper, this author
addresses what is involved in developing custom
applications, as well as additional unexpected uses of the
device.
Though a remarkable device, it has limitations for
universal 3D interaction tasks; in fact, Wiimote’s spatial data
doesn’t directly map to real-world position, yet, it can be
employed effectively under constrained use (as in [2]).
Actually, according to Wingrave et al. in their tutorial about
the Wiimote [7], it “is an imperfect harbinger of a new class
of spatially convenient devices”. This tutorial discusses
techniques for exploiting its capabilities and methods to
compensate for its limitations in 3D User Interfaces (UIs).

Keywords: Google Earth, usability, user study, visualization,
Wiimote.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Since the appearance of the Wii (a game console by
Nintendo) [1], attempts to use its input device in different
applications have been made and published; papers by
LaViola [2], Sheridan et al. [3], Sreedharan et al. [4] and
Shirai et al. [5], are examples. A paper by Lee [6] and a
recent tutorial by Wingrave et al. [7] on the capabilities and
limitations of the Wii Remote Controller (Wiimote), give a
lot of information obtained by the hacking community that
has been reverse engineering the device. Moreover, various
sites devoted to the Wiimote exist [8] [9], and several
demonstration videos can be seen at Youtube (e.g. [10]).
Hence, this piece of equipment seems to have gained a
relevant place in the plethora of input devices to consider
when designing 3D applications.
We have been studying the usability of a low cost Virtual
Reality platform with different input and output devices,
mostly for navigation tasks [11] [12], and got interested in
exploring the potential of the Wiimote as an input device to
our platform, mainly due to its technical characteristics,
accessibility to the general public, and low cost. Yet, this
involved defining precisely how to use the Wiimote, as it has
several buttons and sensors allowing different input
configurations. This paper presents a user study performed to
compare the usability of the Wiimote in two different
configurations as an input device to visualize information
and navigate in a virtual environment (VE). Google Earth
was selected since it is a well known, free and ready to use
VE [13], where users can navigate to visualize information.
We had the collaboration of 15 participants which
performed a set of tasks using the Wiimote while the image
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.72

THE WIIMOTE AS AN INPUT DEVICE

A. Main characteristics
As already mentioned, the Wiimote has been hacked by
many people contributing to sites that collect a significant
body of knowledge concerning the main technical
characteristics and constraints of this device, and help using
it to develop custom applications. We include some
specifications relevant to our case [6] [14-15]. Figure 1
displays a top view of the Wiimote and its frames of
reference, showing the buttons located on the top face. It
includes twelve buttons, four in a standard directional pad
layout, other seven buttons are on the top face (to be used by
the thumb), and one (button B) is on the bottom (adequate to
be used as a trigger by the index).

463
473

choose two that seemed a priori reasonably suitable to the
type of tasks under study taking into account the Wiimote
capabilities and limitations, as well as reasonably intuitive.

Figure 1. Wiimote (adapted from [1])

IR sensors (installed as shown in figure 3) allow
tracking up to four IR sources with a refresh rate of 100Hz.
The three axis linear accelerometer provides motion sensor
capabilities. Communication is done through Bluetooth,
which allows connecting the Wiimote to many computers.
Batteries provide an operation time of 20 to 40 hours.
Wiimote capabilities to be used as a pointer or for
motion recognition have constraints. On one hand,
assumptions are made concerning the screen’s visual angle,
as well as the scale of movement when the control is used as
a pointer, and thus the cursor location corresponding to the
intersection of the pointing direction with the screen is not
computed accurately. On the other hand, while using the
accelerometer data, motion recognition may not be accurate.
Yet, these limitations do not seem to preclude its effective
use in most circumstances [6].
In order to be able to use data from the IR sensors, it
was necessary to attach to the projection screen a bar
including IR LEDs (usually referred to as “sensor bar”, in
spite of not having any sensor); we used a “home made”
device, which was very simple to develop and inexpensive,
including a simple IR LEDs circuit and a battery embedded
in a plastic bar that we attached to the lower edge of the
projection screen.
Several software solutions exist for connecting to
Wiimote, parsing the input data, and configuring the
controller. We used GlovePIE, a free Programmable Input
Emulator supporting many input devices and used to map
gestures, button presses, and other actions to keyboard keys,
mouse input, or joystick buttons and axes [16].

Figure 2. Configuration A using accelerometer and buttons (adapted
from [1])

Figure 3. Configuration B using IR sensor and buttons (adapted from [1])

The two configurations selected take advantage of different
sensors in the Wiimote. One configuration (henceforth
referred to as A) uses acceleration data and data provided by
some buttons, the other (B) uses buttons and infrared
sensors. Figures 2 and 3 illustrate how to use the Wiimote in
these configurations (namely, how to grasp it, the gestures
to do, and the buttons to press) and Table 1 shows mappings
between real world actions and consequent actions in the
virtual world, as well as the functionality of Google Earth
set off by pressing Wiimote buttons, for both configurations.
They are basically similar, however, since in configuration
A the acceleration data is parsed, users have to move up,
down, right and left in the VE making gestures with the
Wiimote (tilting it) as shown in figure 2. On the other hand,
in configuration B users have to use the Wiimote like a
pointer, maintaining it aimed at the screen as to view the
sensor bar.

B. Used configurations
Interaction in games and other applications using the
Wiimote accelerometer data varies from basic shake
triggering, to tilt-and-balance control or simple gesture
recognition. On the other hand, the control may also be used
as a pointer. A variety of more or less complex
combinations of these methods with different data coming
from the buttons, as well as various mappings among these
data and application or game functionality may be used. As
a consequence, we had a range of possibilities and had to

474
464

TABLE I.
MAPPING OF CONFIGURATIONS A AND B
(GESTURES WITH ACCELEROMETER AND IR SENSOR AND LIST
OF BUTTONS USED)

Configuration A
Accelerometer
Tilt Front
Tilt Back
Tilt Right
Tilt Left
Buttons in both
configurations
A
B
1
+
Home

III.

Difficulty values were registered in a five level scale (1very difficult; 5-very simple).

Configuration B Virtual world action
IR sensor
Move Front
Move down
Move Back
Move up
Move Right
Move right
Move Left
Move up
Functionality of Google Earth
Same as left button of the mouse
Same as right button of the mouse
Full screen
Zoom out
Zoom in
Return to original point of view

Figure 4. User performing a task under observation

After completing all tasks using the Wiimote in both
configurations and the mouse on the desktop, users answered
a written questionnaire and were invited to give their
opinions and suggestions in an informal conversation with
the observer. The questionnaire included a few questions to
characterize the user profile and a few questions to assess
user comfort and satisfaction, which could be considered as
secondary variables in our experiment (meaning that they
could also influence the results). To characterize users’
profile we asked about age and gender, as well as about
users’ experience with the Wiimote, gaming platforms, and
Google Earth. To assess satisfaction and comfort with each
condition we asked the following questions:
- did you feel any discomfort?
- did you feel any disorientation?
- did you like the experience?
We also asked which condition they preferred.
In order to study if there was any influence of the
sequence in which participants used the three different
experimental conditions (as a consequence of learning or
fatigue) the sequence in which conditions were tackled was
varied among participants, by randomly dividing them in
groups and having them starting by a certain condition
according to the group they belonged to.

USER STUDY: COMPARING THE USABILITY OF TWO
ALTERNATIVE WIIMOTE CONFIGURATIONS

To compare the two different configurations of the
Wiimote regarding their usability as an input device to
navigate in the circumstances we have been studying [11-12]
[17], we organized an experiment where we started from the
following null hypothesis: users would have similar
performance and satisfaction while using any of the two
configurations. A within-group experimental design was
used [18]; input device configuration was the input variable,
and performance, satisfaction, and comfort were output
variables. Also, some possible secondary variables were
considered. We had the collaboration of 15 volunteer
students (9 women and 6 men) from different Departments
of our University that performed a set of tasks using both
Wiimote configurations, and answered a questionnaire. All
participants also performed the same tasks on a desktop with
a mouse, so that we could assess their performance,
satisfaction and comfort, while using a platform they are
much familiarized with (giving a sort of “base line” data,
useful as a reference). Thus, all participants used three
experimental conditions, which we will call: A, B and D
(desktop with mouse).
Eight Tasks were selected as to be representative of what
users usually do while visualizing information and
navigating in Google Earth:
- T1: rotating the globe around its axis;
- T2: searching for a country and zooming in;
- T3, T6: navigating to specific locations;
- T4: observing 3D terrain features of a location;
- T5: observing from above a given location;
- T7: visiting a specific monument in a town;
- T8: making a complete circle around the monument.
Users were observed while performing each task (Figure
4), and the following data were registered:
- if they completed the task within the time limit;
- if they asked for help;
- number of errors made;
- difficulty felt by the user (as stated by the user);
- user difficulty as observed by the observer.

IV.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

An Exploratory Data Analysis was performed as a first
approach to understand the data. All statistical analysis was
performed using Statistica [19]. Figures 5 to 7 show boxplots [20] corresponding to the values of difficulty stated by
the users for all tasks while using the Wiimote in
configurations A and B, as well as the desktop with mouse
(configuration D).
Observing these plots we note that users considered tasks
4 and 8 more difficult in all conditions; however, it seems
that the difference among these and other tasks was smaller
in configuration A (see arrows on figures 5, 6 and 7). Tasks 4
and 8 consisted in observing 3D terrain features of a given
place, and making a complete circle around the monument,
respectively, both involving more complex 3D navigation
skills than other tasks.

475
465

These box-plots also suggest that users found all tasks
easier to perform using configuration A, when compared
with configuration B; yet, slightly more difficult as
compared to using the desktop with mouse, except for tasks
4 and 8.

However, comparing the overall difficulty for the three
configurations based on the box-plots shown in figure 8
(including values for all tasks performed in each
configuration), configuration A seems to have been
considered generally better (i.e. easier to use) than either
configuration B or configuration D (the desktop with the
mouse). This was confirmed using a nonparametric method,
the Friedman’s Test [21]. The calculated H=42.32 (with
N=120 and k=3); under the null hypothesis (equality of
distributions), H has a F2 distribution with (k-1) degrees of
freedom. In our case, for a 5% significance level (D),
F2(2);0.05=5.99; thus H>>F2(2);0.05=42.32 (p<0.00000) and the
null hypothesis is rejected. Table 2 presents the sum of ranks
in ascending order.

Figure 5. Difficulty felt by users while performing all tasks using
configuration A

Figure 8. Difficulty felt by users while performing all tasks using the
three configurations
TABLE II.

FRIEDMAN TEST (NON-PARAMETRIC ANOVA)
FOR COMPARISON OF CONFIGURATIONS
variable
Conf_B
Conf_D
Conf_A

Figure 6. Difficulty felt by users while performing all tasks using
configuration B

sum of ranks
195.0
251.5
273.5

A Cluster Analysis [22] based on the same data produced
dendograms displayed in figures 9, 10, and 11. We note that
for configurations B and D tasks 4 and 8 were found as more
similar to each other (arrows on figures 10 and 11) than to all
other tasks; while for configuration A, task 8 was dissimilar
from all other tasks (arrow on figure 9). This can be
confirmed in figure 12, which shows the dendogram
obtained for all tasks performed using all configurations,
where tasks 4 and 8 for configurations B and D appear as
more similar to each other than to all remaining tasks.
Concerning task completion and errors, users completed
all tasks and made errors mainly in tasks 4 and 8. Table 3
shows the number of users that made a few and many errors
while performing these tasks with each condition. These data
are consistent with the task difficulty perceived by users and,
yet again, the difference among these and other tasks was
smaller for configuration A.

Figure 7. Difficulty felt by users while performing all tasks using the
desktop/mouse

476
466

NUMBER OF USERS THAT MADE A FEW AND
TABLE III.
MANY ERRORS IN EACH CONDITION WHILE PERFORMING
TASKS 4 AND 8
Desktop/mouse
Errors/
Task
4
8

Conf_ A

Conf_B

few

many

few

many

few

many

10
4

0
9

2
4

0
0

7
8

2
4

Tables 4 to 6 show comfort data obtained for all
experimental conditions. Observing these tables we note that
more users felt discomfort or disorientation while using
configuration B; however, more users stated that they had
liked the experience a lot as compared with the desktop and
mouse. Perhaps the novelty of the Wiimote has balanced any
discomfort users might have felt while using it.
Also concerning preferences, configuration A seems to
have a large advantage over configuration B, and the desktop
with mouse. In fact, 11 participants preferred configuration
A, two preferred configuration B, and two preferred the
mouse with desktop. Moreover, this preference seems
independent of the sequence in which participants had used
the three configurations. This general preference by
configuration A may be related, on one hand, to the
seemingly lesser difficulty to complete the tasks, as well as
less discomfort and disorientation as compared with
configuration B, and on the other hand, to the novelty of the
Wiimote and adequacy to more complex 3D tasks, as
compared with the desktop with mouse.

Figure 9. Dendogram showing similarity among tasks based on the
difficulty felt by users while using configuration A

Figure 10. Dendogram showing similarity among tasks based on the
difficulty felt by users while using configuration B

TABLE IV.

COMFORT DATA: CONFIGURATION A
Conf_A

Did you feel discomfort?
Did you feel disorientation?
Did you like?

Figure 11. Dendogram showing similarity among tasks based on the
difficulty felt by users while using the desktop/mouse

TABLE V.

no
13
9
0

slightly
2
6
1

a lot
0
0
14

COMFORT DATA: CONFIGURATION B
Conf_ B

Did you feel discomfort?
Did you feel disorientation?
Did you like?
TABLE VI.

no
8
7
0

Slightly
5
5
1

a lot
2
3
14

COMFORT DATA: DESKTOP/MOUSE
Desktop/mouse

Figure 12. Dendogram showing similarity among tasks for all
configurations based on the difficulty felt by users

Did you feel discomfort?
Did you feel disorientation?
Did you like?

477
467

no
13
11
2

slightly
1
3
3

a lot
0
0
10

[3]

The obtained results suggest that configuration A is
generally more usable that configuration B (in all dimensions
considered: performance, satisfaction and comfort), and that
it can be more usable to perform certain tasks (as task 4 and
8) than the desktop with mouse. However, in this last
comparison, we should consider also the fact that all
participants had at least a reasonable computer literacy and
were all much familiarized with the desktop and the mouse,
which might imply that with some training, they could
significantly improve their performance and perception of
difficulty concerning both Wiimote configurations.
Another reflection concerning the comparison between
both Wiimote configurations is that the advantage of
configuration A could be partially explained by the necessity
of maintaining the device within the field of view imposed
by the IR sensor and sensor bar, when it is used as a pointer,
which could constrain the user’s movements and be
perceived as less natural. Moreover, configuration B resulted
very sensible to users’ gestures, which might imply a larger
learning time.
V.

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

In this paper we presented a user study comparing the
usability of three conditions, for a set of navigation and
visualization tasks in Google Earth. Two conditions involved
using a Wiimote as input device (in different configurations)
while the image was projected on a common screen; the third
condition consisted in using a desktop with a mouse. Results
obtained with 15 participants suggest that the Wiimote can
be used as an input device in these circumstances with
advantage over the desktop and mouse. Moreover, one of the
Wiimote configurations seems more usable than the other (in
all dimensions considered: performance, satisfaction and
comfort). Even if this is a specific usage scenario, there are
other similar scenarios, where using the Wiimote would
possibly result as well. However, the relatively low number
of participants is a limitation of this experiment, and this
study should continue obtaining results from more
participants, preferably having a more diversified profile.
This would provide more significance to the results and help
better understanding the causes of the observed usability
differences between the two ways of using the Wiimote for
the tasks under study.

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
[18]

Authors are grateful to Dr. Joaquim Madeira and all
participants for their collaboration in this study.
The work of Samuel Silva is supported by grant SFRH/
BD/38073/2007 awarded by the Portuguese Science
Foundation (FCT).

[19]
[20]

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[21]

Referenceshttp://www.nintendo.com/wii (visited, March
2010)
LaViola, J., “Bringing VR and Spatial 3D interaction to the
Masses through Video Games”, IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications, vol. 28, n. 5, September/ /October, 2008,
pp. 10-5.

[22]

478
468

Sheridan, J.G., Price, S. and Pontual Falcão, T., “Using Wii
Remotes as Tangible Exertion Interfaces for Exploring
Action-Representation Relationships”, Workshop on Whole
Body Interaction, CHI '09, Boston, USA.
Sreedharan, S., E. Zurita, B. Plimmer, ”3D Input for 3D
Worlds”, 19th Australasian Conference on ComputerHuman Interaction: Entertaining User Interfaces, OZCHI
2007, pp. 227 – 230.
Shirai, J., E. Geslin, and S. Richir, “WiiMedia: Motion
Analysis Methods and Applications Using a Consumer
Video Gamecontroller”, ACM Siggraph Symp. Video Games,
ACM Press, 2007, pp. 133-140.
J.C. Lee, “Hacking the Nintendo Wii Remote”, IEEE
Pervasive Computing, vol. 7, no. 3, 2008, pp. 39-45.
Wingrave, C. Williamson, B. Varcholik, P. Rose,
J. Miller, A. Charbonneau, E. Bott, J. LaViola Jr., Joseph
J. ,”The Wiimote and Beyond: Spatially Convenient Devices
for 3D User Interfaces”, IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, vol. 30, n. 2, March/April, 2010, pp. 71 – 85.
http://wiili.org (visited, March 2010).
http://wiibrew.org (visited, March 2010).
Lee, J., “Johnny Lee: Wii Remote hacks”, http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=QgKCrGvShZs (visited in March,
2010).
Sousa Santos, B., Paulo Dias, A. Pimentel, J. W.
Baggerman, C. Ferreira, S. Silva, J. Madeira, “Head
Mounted Display versus desktop for 3D Navigation in
Virtual Reality: A User Study”, Multimedia Tools and
Applications, Vol. 41, pp. 161-181.
Sousa Santos, B., P. Dias, S. Silva, L. Capucho, N. Salgado,
F. Lino, V. Carvalho, C. Ferreira, “Usability Evaluation in
Virtual Reality: A User Study Comparing Three Different
Setups”, Proceedings of Eurographics Symposium on
Virtual Environments EGVE08 (Posters), B. Mohler, R. Van
Liere (ed.), Holland, May 2008, pp.21-24.
Google Earth, http://earth.google.com/ (visited, March
2010).
http://johnnylee.net/projects/wii/ (visited, March 2010)
http://www.wiiprojects.org/ (visited, March 2010)
GlovePIE, http://glovepie.org (visited, March, 2010).
Sousa Santos, B., P. Dias, P. Santos, S. Silva, C. Ferreira,
"Usability evaluation in Virtual Environments through
empirical studies involving users", ACM-CHI 2009
Workshop Challenges in Evaluating Usability and User
Experience in Reality Based Interaction, Boston, USA,
April, 2009.
Dix, A., J. Finlay, G. Abowd, R. Beale, Human-Computer
Interaction, 3rd edition, Prentice Hall, 2004
Statistica 6.0. http://www.statsoft.com (visited, March,
2009).
Hoaglin D, Mosteller, F, and Tukey J.. Understanding
Robust and Exploratory Data Analysis, John Wiley & Sons,
1983.
Conover, W. J., Practical non-parametric Statistics, 3rd ed.
John Willey & Sons, 1999.
Hair, J., R. Anderson, R. Tatham, W. Black, Multivariate
Data Analysis with Readings, 5th ed., Prentice Hall, 1998.

