2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Highlighting in Information Visualization: a Survey
Jie Liang and Mao Lin Huang
Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology
The University of Technology,
Sydney, Australia
jiliang@it.uts.edu.au, maolin@it.uts.edu.au
information visualization still remains in the lower level as
viewing control mechanism.
However, the demanding of visual computing
development has exceeded the capacity of current
visualization tools for exploiting the meaningful
information and maximizing the human’s ability of
interpreting. To response the challenges, this paper
attempts to establish the highlighting as an essential
component of visual computing to offer services for visual
navigation and visual analytics.
Therefore, we define highlighting in three layers of
different responsibilities and purposes
• In
traditional
view-based
visualization,
highlighting acts as the viewing control to attract
user’s attention into a portion of the visualization.
• In interactive visualization, highlighting functions
as the navigation control mechanism to guide
users progressively to reach the final target by
visual interactions.
• In knowledge visualization and visual analytics,
highlighting is further applied as part of artificial
intelligence process to provide users with a set of
graphical recommendations for the decision
making.
Our new definition has gone beyond the limitation of
traditional understanding of highlighting and moved on to
the capability of speeding visual thinking and accelerating
decision making performance. This profound change is
intended not only to expand the boundary and fulfill the
theory of highlighting, but also advance the potential
development of highlighting in the future.
Therefore, the specific objectives of this paper are to
refine and extend highlighting, and also to elaborate on the
changing roles of highlighting from merely assisting with
viewing, to interacting with information, participating
directly in cognitive processes and finally suggesting for
decision making.

Abstract—Highlighting was the basic viewing control
mechanism in computer graphics and visualization to guide
users’ attention in reading diagrams, images, graphs and
digital texts. As the rapid growth of theory and practice in
information visualization, highlighting has extended its role
that acts as not only a viewing control, but also an
interaction control and a graphic recommendation
mechanism in knowledge visualization and visual analytics.
In this work, we attempt to give a formal summarization and
classification of the existing highlighting methods and
techniques that can be applied in Information Visualization,
Visual Analytics and Knowledge Visualization. We propose
a new three-layer model of highlighting. We discuss the
responsibilities of each layer in the different stage of the
visual information processing.
Keywords- knowledge discovery informationvisualization;
interactive visualization; Highlighting;; visual analytics

I.

INTRODUCTION

Highlighting was one of the most common terms in
computer graphics. However, there is little agreement on
the understanding of highlighting for both nonprofessionals and professionals. For non-professionals,
highlighting is either limited to the specific scope of color
and lighting, as self-evidence of its name, or broadened to
be the process of emphasizing information. In research,
there is also a debate on highlighting definition for
different domains of study.
In particular domain of information visualization,
Becker and Cleveland in 1987 described highlighting as
brushing special color to paint the object [3]; in 1999,
Liston et al. illustrated highlighting as the process of
emphasizing related sets of information, through visual
annotation, within a view or across multiple views [14]; in
2003, MacEachren et al. referred highlighting as the
indication method by using transient visual effects [15]; in
2004, Seo and Shneiderman suggested the term
highlighting for the visual link across multiple views [24];
in 2005, Ware and Borrow further defined it as an
effective way with pre-attentive visual cues [32]. Recently,
Ware and Borrow extended highlighting methods from
static to dynamic approaches [33]. Nevertheless, these
definitions all confined highlighting as the basic
techniques for viewing only. Hence, it also implies that the
understanding of highlighting in the literature of

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.21

II.

THE CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF HIGHLIGHTING

Highlighting as independent component of visual
computing should fundamentally be able to direct a new
way to overcome the problem of information overload and
reduce the process of human cognition, and meet
challenges of collaborative analysis tasks. The new
conceptual model we propose consists of three layers (Fig
1). The lowest layer is viewing control to solve the
information overloading problem. The middle layer is
79

III.

interaction control that aims to ease the cognitive process
for information seekers. The top layer is visual
recommendation that mainly targets for decision makers in
collaborative analysis tasks.

THE ELEMENTS OF HIGHLIGHTING

In this section, we discuss the basic elements of
highlighting, from which we can implement a variety of
highlighting
methods.
Essentially ，
the
“Differentiation” is the key to classify and implement
highlighting; differentiation in light, shape, size, motion
and presentation. The following table gives a
summarization on the elements that have been used to
design highlighting (Table 1):

A. Viewing Control for Information Overloading
Problem
Information overloading and complexity of
information are the significant reasons for employing
Highlighting. Due to the abundance, heterogeneity and
continuous updating of the data, the visual representation
of the data often generates visual clutters that add extra
cognition overheads in viewing

TABLE I.

THE ELEMENTS OF HIGHLIGHTING

Differentiation

visual variables

series logic

Differentiation in
light

Intensity

Light /medium /heavy

Frequency or

weak/strong

wavelength
Differentiation in
size

Area of object or

Large/Medium/Small

view
increase or decrease

Differentiation in
shape

2D or 3D geometric

Shape transformation

Differentiation in
motion

speed, acceleration,

motionless/relevant

displacement, and

motion/absolute motion

shapes
regular/irregular

Figure 1.

Conceptual model of highlighting

and understanding the information. Accordingly, the
analysis processes have become increasingly timeconsuming and complicated. Highlighting as a simple
technique aims to reduce confusion, to minimize the
learning curve and to increase accuracy and efficiency of
understanding the information.

time
Differentiation in
presentation

style-based

Abstract/details

Line-based

outlier/boundary

B.

Interaction Control for Information Retrieval
In interactive visualization, highlighting has the
capability to guide the information seeking process. For
extensive and recursive cognitive thinking in finding the
path towards the target view, highlighting should provide
mechanisms allowing users progressively to reach their
interested information in the most appropriate and
comprehensive manner.
C. Visual Recommendation for Decision Making
In visual analytics and knowledge visualization,
highlighting may attract decision makers’ attention to a
small portion of highly relevant information and
knowledge that is directly beneficial for their decision
making. This reduces significantly the time spent for
decision makers on reading lower relevant information and
knowledge.
Often analysts and decision makers are different
people in commercial or research community. Refined
highlighting in one work space can be the new solution for
collaborative decision making challenge in projects
particularly.

Figure 2. Simplified Samples of Differentiation in graphic elements
(a) Color (b) Light contrast (c) Transparency (d) Size (e) Shape (f)
Presentation

80

IV.

THE CLASSIFICATION OF HIGHLIGHTING

transparency for displays that have been colored with
light-to-dark color schemes.
The differentiation in lighting can be operated into one,
two, three or even multiple dimensions visualizations
based on different applications. Parallel coordinate
visualization has successfully used highlighting to control
the viewing. It displays the focused poly-lines within a
thin region. Alternatively, color and light highlighting are
used to select data in specific scope of dimensions [26].
XmdvTool [16] created by Martin and Ward progressed
the function to highlight a series of data of high
dimensions in a “brushed tunnel” (Fig. 4). Siirtola and
Raiha further advanced this solution into a new version of
parallel coordinate explorer interface [26]. They
rearranged data into multiple layers of highlighting by
adopting differentiation in light (Fig. 5).

A. Viewing Control Layer
Viewing control process is based on pre-defined
algorithms. (Fig. 3) The visualization defines the user’s
“interested” portion of the information and highlights the
corresponding portion of the view to attract user’s
attention. In this layer, The elements of highlighting most
elements are commonly used to Implement the
highlighting, such as color, light, size, shape etc.

Figure 3. The framework of viewing control

1) Differentiation in light
a) Color-based: Different range of spectrum,
displays various color groups for highlighting. The color
difference and level of saturation can be used to
distinguish the highlighted objects, depending on the
required details of views in specific visualization
environment. For example, growth matrix in financial data
visualization [11], with color and color saturation
highlighting techniques (Fig. 2a) becomes possible to
show the performance of a fund in all time intervals over a
time period of 14 years (about 11.000 intervals).

Figure 3.
Figure 4. Highlighting in Multidimensional data. The region brushed gray
color underneath the poly-lines is the “tunnel” which determines the
range of data selection in multiple dimensions. [16]

b) Light Contrast-based: Contrast also can be used
to visually separate highlighted objects from background
information. (Fig. 2b) Modification relies on
measurements to control either how sharp certain objects
appear, or how much blur should apply to background
information to make the highlighted objects appear more
obvious. In geo-visualization, it is sometime called “Depth
of field” [22]. For example, visualization tool of Kosara et.
Al., adopted semantic depth of field (SDOF) method [13]
and the user studies have proved its usefulness.

Figure 5. A poly line abstraction based on the box-and-whiskers plot in
two tunnels (grey region and blue region) [26]

2) Differentiation in size
Size-based highlighting includes the diversification of
dimension changes. (Fig. 2d) Sensible strategy of
modification also remains discovering. It is specially
applied to the situation when color or light based methods
fail to deliver the ideal outcomes, especially for colorblinds who have troubles to distinguish color and light.
Taking example of text annotation, the color and light
variation seems the simplest solution for the presentation
of overlapping digital annotation from different authors,

c) Transparency can be used as a transient
highlighting technique to dissolve the context around the
object of interests. (Fig. 2c) The alpha level of objects can
be set to render the focused object in the display, but this
potential method has not been evaluated. Nguyen &
Huang’s work in layering and transparency [17] provides
initial reference for further implementation, but it is still a
challenge to determine the appropriate level of

81

but only under the strict restriction of Authors’ number.
Beyond three authors, the visual annotation presentation
would look like a confusing color palette. We could hardly
identify or compare the annotations from different authors
in digital applications [30]. In this situation, the size of text
annotation is likely another indicator to go beyond three
authors for annotation comparison visualization.
3) Differentiation in shape
Similarly, shape has been applied into existing
practices (Fig. 2e). Taking email visual organization as an
instance, in order to expand details of email indicators,
Bernald Kerr [12] successfully adopted color highlighting
of different scheme and moved on to the indicator of shape.
In attribute highlighting, Kerr naturally used color
desaturation to rate the importance of emails, and
employed different shapes of circle, solid circle, hollow
circle to present the importance of people.
4) Differentiation in presentation
a) Style-based: The idea in style reduction or
addition is inspired by highlighting data objects in geovisualizations [21]. Style for highlighting especially works
well with visual representations that are designed with
multiple graphical elements. (Fig. 2f) We may alter styles
by reducing or adding or changing, in outlining, labeling,
and other graphical elements. For example, in internet
hyperbolic tree visualization [8], German home and
French home page attracts users’ attention with added flag
presentation.

motion highlighting technique is promising solution for
separating a group of objects enabling a rapid visual search
on the groups.

Figure 6. Motion highlighting: A flashing circle outlines a suspected
behavior of domination of the stock price in Huang and Liang and
Nguyen’s demo [10]

B. Interaction Control Layer
In interaction control, the highlighting is applied in
navigation process that guides users to progressively refine
their focus views to reach the final target view. The
navigation process may also be the process of data
retrieval (see Fig. 7). This highlighting layer may apply
differentiation in most elements, particularly size of region.
1) Differentiation in Size of Region
Most view-based highlighting takes advantage of
differentiation in size and shape to provide focus and
background information based on the details degree of
user requirements. With the support of available
information, users may modify view transformation and
browse and switch the data by different granularity with
highlighting indications.

b) Line-based method leans to be used for indicating
relationship between positions of data or objects, for
example, leader lines [20] and contouring line [21]
adopted from map design, also give differentiation for the
object from neighborhood. The challenge this highlighting
method involves connecting lines to linear representations
as shown in the parallel or multiple views. Line based
highlighting can also be drawn in variations of color,
width, and stroke style. However, the contouring method
has not been adopted in prior work as a highlighting style
yet.
5) Differentiation in Motion
Microsoft PowerPoint elicits the method of motion
highlighting in its customization of presentation slides. It
has four categories, by entrance, by exit, by emphasis, and
by motion path. The entrance and exit highlighting
include show and hide function and other dynamic effects.
The emphasis positioning may include spin, arrow,
circular [31], jolt [31], radiating and flash or combination.
For example, in our previous work of trading network
visualization [10], a flashing circle highlighting over a
suspected focus can be further implemented to identify a
suspected behavior of domination of the stock price. In the
motion path highlighting, the object or view may move in
straight-line or along curve according to certain shapes.
Bartram’s usability study [2] proved that motion
highlighting is much more effective than color or shape
change in signaling a change to a data glyph presented on
the screen. He also further supported his assumption that

Figure 7. The framework of Interaction Control

82

Visualization has successfully solved the conflict between
the goal of providing structure and the goal of
visualization detail context, by integrating the presentation
of structure with the presentation of context [10]. In the
Fig. 9, referring to the historical times from multiple
context views, and enlarged focus views, analysts could
match this significant event to the suspected trading
patterns which had frequently occurred in history and
accordingly analysts might be able to identify the actual
plans and predict the next action.

a) 4.2.1.1 One view: In partial view highlighting,
drilling-down + semantic zooming adopting differentiation
of size and shape is the most commonly used interactive
navigation technique, for example, fisheye + zooming [25],
power finger, and view distortion. This quick and simple
navigation scheme is widely established in the current
operation systems, web researching and many common
applications. Ben Bederson, director of the HumanComputer Interaction Lab, from University of Maryland
created Fisheye Menus [4] with size differentiation
highlighting, for the application of linear lists. The
interactive Map of Washington D.C, also is applied with
this primary highlighting technique, to increases size of the
station “Metro centre” and transforms the shape into the
fish eye in the navigating (Fig. 8).

Figure 9. Full context view visualization [10]

2) Differentiation in light
The previous work of context and focus visualization
by Huang and Nguyen [17], has proved that if
transparency level is carefully selected, it can be designed
to guide users in navigation as a highlighting method. In
Fig. 10, while the background of structure fades, the view
of “Applets” sub-structure is standing out of the whole
data structure and the size of the focus view is also
enlarged in the space filling presentation

Figure 8. Map of Washington D.C. [35]

b) 4.2.1.2 Two views: In coordinated views, Focus
and context view is another existing method relying on
element of size and shape. It provides users with a
detailed view of a focused sub-graph and overall graph to
maintain user orientation. Typical techniques in focus +
context navigation scheme include sunburst [28], and
information slices [1].

C.

Visual Recommendation
In knowledge visualization and visual analytics the
role of highlighting can be further extended as part of the
knowledge discovery process to provide users with a set of

c) 4.2.1.3 In different views, we also include
merging views, adopted from “overlay” technique in
construction planning. [14] This new highlighting method
merges the views from different team members into one
view. To review the project, the team could focus on
comparing and evaluating the important information on
the “merged” view. This method implements following
types of overlaying actions, overlaying document to
document of same type, objects to document of same type
and document to document of different type and objects to
document of different type by certain mechanisms.
d) 4.2.1.4 In Multiple views, visual highlighting
techniques have been largely unexplored in research. [21]
Our prior work in Full-context views visualization with
chains of full history is proposed to be one of highlighting
techniques in multiple views by increasing the context of
an entity collection step by step (Fig. 9). Full-context view

Figure 10. Highlighting with differentiation in Transparency: The data
structure stands out of the semi-transparency layers. [17]

83

graphical recommendations for their decision making.
In knowledge discovery, a large volume of the raw data is
pre-processed by analytical algorithms, such as data
mining or feature selection algorithms. These algorithms
are generated by domain experts or statistical methods
based on empirical or mathematical theory support at the
background. The outcome knowledge of the analysis is
used for facilitating the decision making process.
However, in many cases, the textual or tabular
representations of the knowledge are hard to be understood
by decision makers, especially the relational structures
among knowledge. Therefore, the modern visualization
technologies allow decision makers to take advantages of
human vision to visually interpret the knowledge.
However, for a particular decision maker, he or she may
only needs a specific segment of the knowledge, rather
than a complete set of knowledge displayed in the
visualization for the decision making. Therefore, we
“highlight” particular segments of the knowledge in the
visualization as visual recommendations, which we
believe are the most beneficial for a particular decision
making process. In the process, users have choices to
either accept or ignore the visual suggestions. When visual
results are unsatisfied, users are allowed to refine the
visualization with different highlighting mechanism.

Consequently, this visual recommendation process can be
iterative .In brief, visual recommendation could not only
suggest a shortcut for user to reach the knowledge he or
she pursue for decision making, but also enhance the
knowledge discovery experience for users.
For example, Visual thesaurus [29] powered by think
map uses intelligence to suggest the words relating to or
synonyms in a given language. It adopts color and size and
shape highlighting as viewing aid. Rollover motion
highlighting along with “back and forward” button allows
users to interact and navigate in the maps of words. To
assist learning the knowledge in thesaurus, it utilizes the
visual recommendation process and highlights the
suggested words and meaning based on system’s
definition of the term and allows users to act with
suggestions. In this way, users can either narrow or
broaden the meaning of term based his or her own
understanding and discover the knowledge. In Fig. 12, the
user looked up the word “highlighting” and the think map
highlighted six suggestions within the thesaurus. In
succession, the user clicked on the one of the suggestions.
The think map centralized and magnified the word
“spotlight” and displayed another series of suggestions.
(Fig. 12)

Figure 12. Visual Thesaurus [29] Left: when user looked up a term”
highlight” in visual Thesaurus: Right: When user clicked on spotlight
among previous suggestions

V.

FUTURE WORK & CONCLUSION

Up to now the term of highlighting has not been
defined clearly. Most designers ignored the formal
explanation and systematical theory. In most cases,
highlighting is still taken for grant as the use of color and
light. As a result, highlighting has been limited to basic
viewing aid in most applications.
As closely relating to visual representation and
Interaction, highlighting is required to raise up to higher
level of information visualization process. Therefore, this
paper has attempted to define and classify the existing
highlighting techniques. The highlighting theory should be

Figure 11. The framework of Visual Recommendation

84

explored further in our future work. Particularly, we
should put effort in investigation of the combination of
multiple highlighting techniques to satisfy the needs in
some new highlighting techniques to satisfy the needs in
some new applications. It is required to have the highest
standards which should have the real look working with
visualization and the real feel working with interaction.
Highlighting covers many disciplines and areas of
experiences, like science of cognition, user physiology,
aesthetics, human vision study, visualization and visual
analytics. The strong theory base is the ground for the
evolution of highlighting. To ensure highlighting as
lynchpin in visualization and interaction, we should
continue to fulfill the theory development and extend
practices of highlighting and advance the user-center
evaluation for highlighting in each layer of services.

[18] Nguyen, Q. & Huang, M. “EncCon: an approach to constructing
interactive visualization of large hierarchical data”, Information
Visualization, vol. 4, no. 1, 2005,pp. 1-21.
[19] Plumlee, M. & Ware C.“Zooming versus multiple window
interfaces: Cognitive costs of visual comparisons.” ACM
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) vol. 13,
no.2, 2006, pp. 209.
[20] RINA Systems, Inc. Retrieved May 5 2008 from
http://www.rinafinancial.com/.
[21] Robinson, A. & Center, G. “Highlighting techniques to support
geovisualization”, Citeseer, 2006.
[22] Robinson,
A.
“Visual
highlighting
methods
for
geovisualization”,Citeseer, 2009.
[23] Santini, S., Jain, R. et al. “Social and Content-based Approach for
Visual Recommendation of Web Graphics”, Citeseer, 1999.
[24] Seo, J. and Shneiderman B. “A rank-by-feature framework for
interactive exploration of multidimensional data.” Information
Visualization vol.4, no.2, 2005,pp. 96-113.
[25] Shi, K., Irani, P. & Li, B. “An Evaluation of Content Browsing
Techniques for Hierarchical Space-Filling Visualizations”,
Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization,
2005, IEEE, pp. 81-88.
[26] Siirtola, H. & KJ, R. “Interacting with parallel coordinates”,
interacting with Computers, vol. 18, no. 6, 2006, pp. 1278-1309.
[27] SmartMoney, Inc. http://www.smartmoney.com.
[28] Stasko, J. & Zhang, E. “Focus + Contest Display and Navigation
Techniques for Enhancing Radial, Space-Filling Hierarchy
Visualizations”, Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, 2000, IEEE, pp. 57.
[29] ThinkMap Visual Thesaurus, http://www.visualhesaurus.com.
[30] Villarroel, M., P. de la Fuente, et al. “Visualizing Shared
Highlighting Annotations.” HCI related papers of Interacci 2004,
pp. 195.
[31] Ware, C. & Bobrow R. “Motion to support rapid interactive
queries on node--link diagrams”, ACM Transactions on Applied
Perception (TAP) vol.1, no.1, 2004,pp. 3-18.
[32] Ware, C. & Bobrow, R. “Supporting visual queries on mediumsized node-link diagrams”, Information Visualization, vol. 4, no. 1,
2005, pp. 49-58.
[33] Ware, C., Gilman, A. et al. “Visual Thinking with an Interactive
Social Network Diagram”.ACM ,2007.
[34] Wexelblat, A. & Maes P. “Footprints: history-rich tools for
information foraging”, ACM 1999, New York, NY, USA.
[35] WashingtonD.C.InteractiveMap,www.cs.umd.edu/class/fall2002
/cmsc838s/tichi /fisheye.Html.
[36] Wong, P., Foote, H. et al. “Graph signatures for visual analytics.”
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
vol.12, no. 6, 2006, pp. 1399-1413.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]
[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]

Andrew, K. &Heidegger, H. “Information Slices: Visualizing and
exploring Large Hierarchies using Cascading, Semi- Circular
Discs”, Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualziation, IEEE, 1998 pp.9-12.
Bartram, L. & Ware C. “Filtering and brushing with motion.”
Information Visualization vol.1, no.1, 2002, pp. 66-79.
Becker, R. & Cleveland, W. “Brushing scatterplots,”
Technimetrics, vol. 29, no. 2, 1987, pp. 127-142.
Bederson, B.”Fisheye menus”, ACM, 2000.
Czerwinski, M., Dumais S., et al. “Visualizing implicit queries for
information management and retrieval”, ACM, 1999.
Gravity
Investment,
Inc.
http://www.gravityinvestments.
com/portfoliopics.htm.
Gross, J. and Hayne H. “Young children’s recognition and
description of their own and others” drawings.” Developmental
Science Vol. 2, no. 2, 1999, pp. 476-489.
Hyper Tree retrieved Feb 20 2010 from http://Hypertree
.sourceforge.net/.
Huang, M. & Nguyen, Q. “Context Visualization for Visual Data
Mining,” Visual Data Mining, 2008, pp. 248-263.
Huang, M., Liang, J. & Nguyen, Q. “A Visualization Approach
for Frauds Detection in Financial Market”, IEEE Computer
Society, 2009,pp. 197-202.
Keim, D.A., Mansmann, F., Schneidewind, J. & Ziegler, H.
“Challenges in Visual Data Analysis”, Information Visualization,
vol. July, 2006, pp. 9-16.
Kerr, B. “Thread arcs: An email thread visualization”, Citeseer,
2003.
Kosara, R., S. Miksch, et al. “Semantic depth of field”, Citeseer,
2001.
Liston, K., Fischer, M. et al. “Designing and evaluating
visualization techniques for construction planning.” Computing in
Civil and Building Engineering, 2000, pp.1293-1300.
MacEachren, A., F. Hardisty, et al. “Supporting visual analysis of
federal geospatial statistics.” Communications of the ACM vol. 46,
no. 1, 2003, pp. 60.
Martin, A. & Ward, M. “High dimensional brushing for
interactive exploration of multivariate data”, IEEE Computer
Society, 1995, p. 271.
Nguyen, Q.V. & Huang, M. L. “A Focus + Context Visualization
Technique Using Semi-Transparency”, Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Computer and information
Technology, IEEE Computer Society, 2004, pp.101-108.

85

