2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Choosing Knowledge Visualizations to Augment Cognition: the Managers’ View
Sabrina Bresciani

Martin J. Eppler

Institute of Marketing and Communication
Management
University of Lugano (USI)
Lugano, Switzerland
Sabrina.Bresciani@usi.ch

Institute for Media and Communications Management
University of St. Gallen (HSG)
St. Gallen, Switzerland
Martin.Eppler@unisg.ch

organizational
tasks:
idea
generation,
knowledge
transfer/sharing, evaluating and planning.
The aim of this research is twofold: first to compile a
comparative evaluation of the perceived usefulness of
popular knowledge visualizations used in business for
common knowledge-intensive tasks. This is relevant for
organizations because the resulting ranking can be used as a
starting point for choosing visualizations to support
individual and group reasoning and for facilitating the
transfer of knowledge and discovery of insights. Most of the
existing studies have focused only on one visual form, while
our work provides a comparative assessment of typical
business visuals, which permits to contrast their relative
usefulness.
Secondly, the results will contribute to the understanding
of what managers know about qualitative visualizations used
in corporations (such as the mind map, matrix, timeline,
etc.). This has implications for training and managerial
education, as it can uncover misunderstandings and a lack of
knowledge in certain areas.
At present, knowledge visualizations are mainly used in
business for presentation of information [5] and for
facilitating meetings [6, 7]. The contribution of visualization
as a support for individual and collaborative understanding
and problem solving has been gaining growing attention,
both in the academic [8, 9, 3] and in the practitioner world
[10, 11]. Our study aims at leveraging these advantages of
visualization, by understanding how different visual
representations can be used for specific managerial reasoning
tasks.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: in
the next section the methodology employed and the sample
selection are explained. Then we present the results, both
with graphs and with a concise synoptic diagram, and we
provide contextualized discussion of the findings. The fourth
section is dedicated to the discussion on the theoretical and
practical implications of our explorative study. We end the
paper with the conclusions and directions for future research.

Abstract— Growing evidence in the scientific literature
and in organizations shows the positive impact of employing
conceptual visual representation for individual reasoning,
communicating and facilitating meetings in organizations. 116
managers responded a questionnaire on the usefulness of 12
common business visualizations for typical knowledge tasks in
organizations. The resulting ranking provides an overview of
the comparative suitability of visualizations for generating
ideas, sharing knowledge, evaluating options and planning.
The findings can be used by organizations for evaluating visual
templates as a support for specific knowledge tasks.
Theoretical implications include the relationship between the
structure level of knowledge visualization forms and
convergent/divergent task type. Further implications for
theory and practice are discussed.
Keywords- Knowledge
conceptual visualization.

I.

work;

Business

representation,

INTRODUCTION

Despite a vast body of literature exists on the application
of quantitative information visualization for business [1, 2,
3] the field has thus far greatly neglected conceptual
visualization: only few studies have focused on evaluating
qualitative visualizations typically used in the managerial
world. Having a more accurate comprehension of how
knowledge visualizations can be employed in organizations,
is relevant for understanding how they can be successfully
used by managers to support individual and collective
reasoning, therefore increasing the efficiency and accuracy
of their work in organizations. It has been noticed [4] that:
“This widespread proliferation [of visualization
tools/techniques] has made it difficult for both the users and
evaluators to select and evaluate effectively an appropriate
visualization tool/technique respectively. In current
literature, the evaluation of the visualization techniques is
described on an ad-hoc basis, without matching the
applicability of the techniques to the available context.”
(Padda, Seffah & Mudur, 2007)
Responding to the highlighted lack of research, our work
intends to start exploring this broad research topic with a
comparative study: we have selected a dozen conceptual
visualizations widely used for facilitating knowledge work in
companies, and we have asked over a hundred managers to
rate their (perceived) usefulness for four common

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.56

II.

METHODOLOGY

We address the question of uncovering managers’
opinion about knowledge visualization by asking
experienced managers (from central Europe) to complete a
questionnaire. A number of qualitative studies have been
employed to understand the advantages of specific
349
355

III.

visualization types, mainly through case studies and
application descriptions [10]. Most of these works focus on
one visual form only. Other scholars have carried out
comparative studies, investigating multiple pictorial
visualizations [12] or quantitative information visualizations
[3, 13]. Yet the aim of our study is to conduct a similar
comparative study, focusing specifically on conceptual
(qualitative) visualization templates typically used in the
business context.
In the questionnaire we asked managers to rate twelve
popular visualization formats. For each visualization they
were shown the 12 pictures (as in Fig. 1), one by one, and
had to evaluate the perceived usefulness for each of them for
the four typical knowledge tasks, namely idea generation,
knowledge sharing, evaluating options and planning. They
were also asked about their familiarity with each
visualization. All the questions were answered on a 5-point
scale.
The visual forms employed in the questionnaire have
been selected based on three main criteria: first, the
visualization needed to be conceptual in nature (qualitative,
non-numeric representations of knowledge), meaning that
classic information visualizations (visualizing large datasets)
have not been considered, along with all pure pictorial
visualizations (i.e. icons, photographs, or storyboards). We
focused on visual artifacts that are typically interactive
templates populated with the users’ knowledge (so called
mapping methods, as discussed in Huff’s seminal book on
the topic, see [14]). Secondly, in order to select the most
widely known visualizations, we assessed their popularity in
the academic community and in the relevant business
literature. In particular, we have examined management
studies that address visualization [15, 16], studies that focus
on visualization and have implications for management [5,
10] and popular business books on visual thinking and
conceptual visualizations used in organizations [17]. Finally
the templates needed to be generic enough to serve a variety
of goals; therefore specialized templates for a single
dedicated purpose, i.e. the Porter’s Five Forces diagram,
have not been included. We could not include sketches,
although a popular type of visualization employed in
organizations, because they do not have a standard template
form.
The resulting visualizations chosen for the survey are the
following (Fig. 1): mind map [10], two-by-two matrix [18],
timeline [17], flowchart [19], iceberg visual metaphor [20],
argument map [21], mountain trail metaphor [22], roadmap
[16], causal loops [23, 24], concept map [11], slide ruler [25]
and bridge metaphor [25].
The respondents of the questionnaire are middle and
upper managers from various companies attending
management executive courses on the topic of strategy, in
universities of central Europe (Switzerland, Austria and
Germany). All the participants of the courses (124 executive
students) completed the questionnaire, of which 8 were
completed for less than 80% of the questions so they were
excluded from the data analysis (N=116).

RESULTS

An overview of the results is provided in a schematic
form in Figure 2. The four circles of the Venn diagram
represent the main knowledge work types in organization, as
asked in the questionnaire (generating ideas, sharing
knowledge, evaluating options, planning the future). The
different visual representations have been mapped on
according to the questionnaire results (which tasks are they
most likely to support) and the bubble size of each visual
form is proportional to the familiarity (how well were they
known by the surveyed managers, as assessed in the
questionnaire). This map provides a quantitative synopsis of
how typical business visualizations are perceived by
managers. It can also support knowledge workers and
consultants in assessing which visualization is typically used
for certain tasks, based on other managers’ experience.
Some knowledge visualizations result to be useful for
more than one task, and are therefore mapped at an
intersection of two or more knowledge work types (depicted
as circles in Fig. 2), meaning that these visuals can be used
for different cognitive tasks, even in the same meeting
session. The roadmapping template, for example, can be
used for sharing knowledge on a topic, and then for
evaluating and planning purposes (by considering different
scenarios) – according to the surveyed managers. These
flexible visualizations (found at the intersections) are very
useful to facilitate a meeting where the discussion involves
more than one knowledge task, because they support
connections between, for example, the brainstorming phase
(idea generation) and the following assessment phase,
without necessarily having to switch templates. Conversely,
other graphic forms - as for instance the timeline - are
particularly useful for one specific task (planning in this
case), by scoring high only on one task (and therefore are
positioned far from the intersections), and are successfully
employed to facilitate reasoning focused only on that
particular goal.
The figure on familiarity (Fig. 3) shows reasonably
expected results, with the mind map, flowchart and matrix
being the most well know visual templates. It is however
somewhat surprising that the argument map scores rather
low, despite its large presence in the academic literature [21].
We can hypothesize that this visual template is used in
higher education, but fails to be understood and employed in
real world business applications. A similar point can be made
for the concept map, which is increasingly employed in
education, already from primary school level on, but results
to be seldom known by managers.
The ranking on generating new ideas (Fig. 4) shows that
the mind map, the bridge metaphor and the concept map are
perceived as the most suitable visualizations. It is worth
noticing that a low familiarity does not have a negative effect
on the results: the bridge visual metaphor, the concept map
and the argument map score low on familiarity, but they are
ranked high in suitability for supporting idea generation.
This implies that these visualizations - despite not being well
known - have a strong affordance [32], that is the ability to
suggest their suitability of use for brainstorming.

356
350

Figure 1. The twelve knowledge visualizations

Figure 2. Positioning of the relative rankings of knowledge visualizations

357
351

Figure 3. Familiarity

Figure 7. Planning next steps

For knowledge sharing (Fig. 5) tasks we find again the
mind map as the highest scored visualization, followed by
the flowchart and the matrix. We can notice that all the 12
visualizations received a rather high evaluation for this task,
with the lowest being 3.24 on a five point scale. Compared to
the other tasks, it seems that any of the visual formats is
perceived as useful by the managers to support knowledge
sharing in groups.
Figure 6 shows the ranking for evaluating options, with
the argument map, the matrix and the slide ruler scoring the
highest, despite the managers’ assertions to have very low
familiarity with both the argument map and the slide ruler
(Fig. 3). It is remarkable that the causal loops do not score
very high, although they represent a visual form developed
(together with system dynamics) specifically as an aid for
assessing different scenarios in management. This might be
due to the low affordance of the causal loops, which is a
powerful but not highly intuitive visual technique.
The usefulness of the visual templates for planning next
steps (Fig. 7) seems to be easier to determine, with scores
polarizing strongly. Indeed the timeline received the highest
score (4.52 on 5) of all visualizations for all tasks, meaning
that managers are consistent in evaluating the timeline as a
highly suitable visual template for planning the future. Also
the roadmap and the mountain trail metaphor resulted to be
useful for this task in the judgments of the surveyed
managers.

Figure 4. Generating new ideas

Figure 5. Sharing knowledge

IV.

IMPLICATIONS

Our research has implications for organizations, as it
provides a support for the selection of adequate
visualizations for individual and collaborative cognitive
tasks. It also provides an overview of managers’ typical
knowledge about relevant mapping methods. The evaluation
provided by managers might not correspond to the effective
usefulness of each visualization technique, as they express a
subjective perception. Still, to the best of our knowledge,
there have been no studies thus far that objectively compare
visual representations for managerial cognition (i.e. through
the use of rigorous laboratory experiments or quasi realistic
experiments). The ranking results of our pilot study can thus
be used by managers as a starting point in the selection of
suitable visualizations for such reasoning and deliberation

Figure 6. Evaluating options

358
352

tasks, in management. Figure 2 provides a first ‘peerconsensus’-based overview on twelve such methods and
their application scope. This overview can thus help
managers in choosing an adequate visualization format that
they can test in their own work environment.
If a manager, to give an example, is responsible for
leading a meeting to plan next year’s product strategy, he or
she can employ the timeline template (Fig. 1 IV), as it
received a high rating for facilitating planning tasks (Fig. 2,
7). If the task is divergent, such as when a marketing
manager needs to provide new ideas for product
innovations, he or she can use the mind map (Fig. 1 V)
(which is the highest rated visual for this task), or he or she
can try to employ a visual metaphor such as the bridge (Fig.
1 XI) to leverage the power of metaphors for creative,
unstructured, tasks. Flexible visualizations are suitable for
more than one task: they can be found at the intersections of
the Venn diagram circles in Figure 2, and can be employed
when the knowledge work requires two tasks together or in
sequence. An example is the roadmap (Fig. 1 X), which is
successfully used for strategy planning, starting from
knowledge sharing and then moving to planning, and then
again back and forward from knowledge sharing and
planning to explore different scenarios [16]. A similar
example is the argument map (Fig. 1 II) which can be used
for sharing knowledge (i.e., everyone points out causes that
lead to a phenomenon), for generating new ideas, and then
for evaluating what the best option or the most appropriate
causal path may be. The argument map, however, is one of
the least known visualization formats in our sample (Fig. 3).
This finding can be relevant for both organizations and
business schools, as it uncovers a need of learning how to
employ a potentially highly useful visualization technique
for managerial and organizational cognition.
Our research also has implications at a theoretical level.
A pattern can be noted in the distribution of the
visualizations for the four tasks. For idea generation and
knowledge sharing, the most suitable templates (as rated by
the managers) have a rather free form and low degree of
structure. For the tasks of evaluating and planning, by
contrast, the visualizations perceived as the most
appropriate are highly codified, structured and have a formal
grammar (with the exception of the mountain trail).
Therefore we find that tasks that typically require divergent
thinking (generative cognition) - such as generating and
sharing knowledge - are best supported by visualizations
with minimal or associative structure. Conversely, typical
convergent tasks (evaluative cognition), including
assessment and planning, are best served by highly
structured and codified templates. Zigurs’s theory of TaskTechnology Fit (TTF) also highlights that divergent
processes should be supported by tools that offer
communication support, whereas convergent processes
should be supported by information processing tools [33].
Secondly, we find that some visualizations are flexible
and adaptable to various knowledge tasks (i.e. mind map,

roadmap and argument map), while other visuals are
specific to one task (i.e. timeline and slide ruler).
V.

CONCLUSION

In this study we have aimed at mapping the perceived
usefulness of typical knowledge visualizations for
organizational tasks, and to understand the current level of
managers’ knowledge on this topic. Over one hundred
managers have completed a questionnaire about the
suitability of commonly used visual templates for idea
generation, knowledge sharing, options’ evaluation and
planning. The results of this comparative study have led to
an overview of managers’ common perception about
conceptual visualizations. This tentative overview can be
helpful for knowledge workers in organizations, for having
an overview of what managers typically believe is the
usefulness of popular visualization methods as a support for
a specific reasoning task. It also provides a rough indication
regarding the typical familiarity with the different
visualization methods in middle management in central
Europe.
A limitation of this study lies in the selection of the
visual representations, which has been based on existing
literature on conceptual visual templates. Further studies
could take a grounded theory approach and investigate,
through field studies in companies, which visual templates
are currently used in organizations to assist managers in
their managerial cognition. Alternatively, qualitative studies
could shed light on the reasons why managers believe that
certain visualizations are suitable for specific tasks. The
results of the questionnaire provide information on the
common opinion of managers regarding visual templates for
managerial reasoning; as such the rankings do not
necessarily represent the real usefulness but the perceived
suitability to the matched reasoning tasks. Experimental
studies should be employed to objectively and quantitatively
compare the effectiveness of different visualizations.
In conclusion, we believe this study to be useful as a
first step in advancing the understanding of the use of
conceptual visual representations to support managerial
cognition, and to provide a comparative study on frequently
employed visual templates. This work can be used as a
tentative guideline for selecting visualizations to assist
managerial knowledge transfer and cognition in
organizations – either individually or in groups. It can
provide pointers to other researchers to focus more
rigorously on select visualization methods and assess their
impact on the quality of managerial and organizational
cognition. It can be used as a guide for selecting
visualizations for further quantitative investigations, such as
controlled experiments, that aim to understanding the
relationship between the structure of the visual forms and
the type of convergent or divergent knowledge task type, as
it emerged from this study.

359
353

[18] Lowy, A., & Hood, P. The Power of the 2 x 2 Matrix: Using 2x2
Thinking to Solve Business Problems and Make Better Decisions.
Jossey-Bass. 2004.
[19] Damelio, R. The Basics of Process Mapping: Productivity Press.
1996.
[20] Lux, M. The Iceberg Metaphor to Support the Knowledge
Crystallization Cycle. In Proceedings of the Information Visualization
2000, London, U.K. 2000.
[21] Braak, S. V. D., Oostendorp, H. V., Prakken, H. and Vreeswijk, G. A.
W. A critical review of argument visualization tools: do users become
better reasoners? Paper presented at the ECAI. 2006.
[22] Useem, M., Useem, J. and Asel, P. Upward Bound: Nine Original
Accounts of How Business Leaders Reached Their Summits. Crown
Business. 2003.
[23] Adamides, E. and Karacapilidis, N. Knowledge Management and
Collaborative Model Building in the Strategy Development Process.
Knowledge and Process Management, 12(2): 77-88. 2005.
[24] O'Connor, J. The Art of Systems Thinking: Essential Skills for
Creativity and Problem Solving. Thorsons, illustrated edition, San
Francisco, California.1997.
[25] Eppler, M. and Burkhard, R. Visual Representations in Knowledge
Management: Framework and Cases. Journal of Knowledge
Management, 4(11): 112-122. 2007.
[26] Kernbach, S. and Eppler, M.J. The use of visualization in the
communication of business strategies: An experimental evaluation.
IEEE Proceedings of 14th International Conference Information
Visualization IV10, London, U.K, 26-29 July 2010.
[27] http://compendium.open.ac.uk/institute/index.htm (Retrieved in May
2010)
[28] http://www.knowledge-communication.org/gallery.html (Retrieved in
May 2010)
[29] http://cmap.ihmc.us/conceptmap.html (Retrieved in May 2010)
[30] Bresciani, S. and Eppler, M.J. The Benefits of Synchronous
Collaborative Information Visualization: Evidence from an
Experimental Evaluation. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 15 (6): 1073-1080. 2009.
[31] Bresciani S. and Eppler M. Gartner’s Magic Quadrant and Hype
Cycle. Case Study, Reference no: 908-029-1 ECCH www.ecch.com.
2009.
[32] Norman, D. The Psychology of Everyday Things. New York: Basic
Books. 1988.
[33] Zigurs, I. and Buckland, B. K. A theory of task/technology fit and
group support systems effectiveness. MIS Quarterly, 22(3): 313-334.
1998.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

Card, S. K., Mackinlay, J. and Shneiderman, B. Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. San Francisco,
CA: Morgan Kaufmann.1999.
Tegarden, D. P. Business Information Visualization. Communications
of the AIS, 1(4): 1-38. 1999.
Lurie, N.H. and C.H. Mason. Visual Representation: Implications for
Decision Making. Journal of Marketing, 71(1): 160-177. 2007.
Padda, H., Seffah, A. and Mudur, S. Visualization Patterns: A
Context-Sensitive Tool to Evaluate Visualization Techniques. Paper
presented at the 4th IEEE International Workshop on Visualizing
Software for Understanding and Analysis, 2007 (VISSOFT 2007),
Banff, Ont., Canada. 2007.
Tufte, E. R. Visual Explanations. Images and Quantities, Evidence
and Narrative. Cheshire, Connecticut, Graphic Press. 1997.
Buergi, P. and Roos, J. Images of Strategy. European Management
Journal, 21(1): 69-78. 2003.
Platts, K., & Tan, K. H. Strategy visualisation: knowing,
understanding, and formulating. Management Decision, 42(5/6): 667676. 2004.
Larkin, J. H. and Simon, H. Why a Diagram is (Sometimes) Worth
Ten Thousand Words. Cognitive Science, 11: 65-99. 1987.
Tversky, B. Visuospatial reasoning. In Holyoak K. and Morrison, R.
(Eds), Handbook of Reasoning: 209-249. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press. 2005.
Buzan, T., Mind Maps at Work: How to Be the Best at Your Job and
Still Have Time to Play. U.K.: Thorsons. 2004.
Novak, J.D. Learning, Creating, and Using Knowledge: Concept
Maps As Facilitative Tools in Schools and Corporations. Lawrence
Erlbaum. 1998.
Lohse, G. L., Biolsi, K., Walker, N., & Rueter, H. H. A classification
of visual representations. Communications of the ACM, 37(12): 3649. 1994.
Andrews, K., Wohlfahrt, M. and Wurzinger, G., Visual Graph
Comparison. IEEE Proceeding of International Conference
Information Visualization IV09, Barcelona, Spain, 15-17 July 2009.
Huff, A. S. Mapping strategic thought. Chichester, New York: John
Wiley & Sons Inc. 1990.
Carlile, P. R. A Pragmatic View of Knowledge and Boundaries:
Boundary Objects in New Product Development. Organization
Science, 13: 442-455. 2002.
Phaal, R. and Muller, G. Towards Visual Strategy: An Architectural
Framework for Roadmapping. In Proceedings of PICMET 2007,
Portland, Oregon - USA. 2007.
Yakura, E. K. Charting Time: Timelines as Temporal Boundary
Objects. Academy of Management Journal, 45(5): 956-970. 2002.

360
354

