2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Combining Visual Analytics and Content Based Data Retrieval Technology for
Efficient Data Analysis
Jose Fernando Rodrigues Jr., Luciana A. S. Romani, Agma Juci Machado Traina, Caetano Traina Jr.
Instituto de Ciencias Matematicas e de Computacao - Universidade de Sao Paulo
Universidade Federal de Sao Carlos - Campus Sorocaba
Embrapa Agriculture Informatics - Campinas
[junio,agma,caetano]@icmc.usp.br, luciana@cnptia.embrapa.br
of a similarity query is a subset of elements, as much as
possible, similar to the query center. In an analogical view,
the query center and its scope of data retrieval resembles the
idea of a region in space; in such region the center is the query
center surrounded by neighboring data elements. This analogy
is the basic idea of our methodology:
1) first, the user must refine the dataset with the aid of
similarity queries;
2) the result sets produced by these queries are the focus
of visualization workspaces enriched with multiple visualization techniques.
We propose an environment that allows the user to browse
a dataset in its tabular format, visualize such data, select query
centers, perform similarity queries and have the results of
the queries drawn into visualization workspaces that co-exist
in the system. Our contributions aim at inserting intelligence
into the problematic of precisely and semantically filtering a
dataset into complementary visualizations. Our future goals
are to foster works on scalability and semantical visual data
analysis.
Visualization techniques in general are designed to work
with the entire dataset, providing an initial overview of the
data, followed by interactive brushing (selection). However,
what if the dataset is too complex (with too many attributes),
voluminous and/or heterogeneous, making visualizations inefficient due to overlapping of graphical items and due to
cluttering of visual information across different visualization
techniques? In the context of these issues we aim at answering
the following questions:
• How to filter out data in situations where interactive
brushing is not efficient due to overlapping of graphical
elements or due to a high number of data attributes?
• How to add semantics in the visual data analysis process,
providing better visual feedback in the context of a
specific application domain?
• How to quickly make sense of metric spaces in a visual
manner?
Our results show that the use of a metric space can significantly improve the quality of visualizations, enabling us to
answer those questions. In our work, we proceed by precisely
configuring what data items are being displayed and how these
items are arranged in multiple workspaces.
In order to test our hypotheses, we have built a system

Abstract—One of the most useful techniques to help visual
data analysis systems is interactive filtering (brushing). However,
visualization techniques often suffer from overlap of graphical
items and multiple attributes complexity, making visual selection
inefficient. In these situations, the benefits of data visualization
are not fully observable because the graphical items do not
pop up as comprehensive patterns. In this work we propose
the use of content-based data retrieval technology combined
with visual analytics. The idea is to use the similarity query
functionalities provided by metric space systems in order to
select regions of the data domain according to user-guidance
and interests. After that, the data found in such regions feed
multiple visualization workspaces so that the user can inspect
the correspondent datasets. Our experiments showed that the
methodology can break the visual analysis process into smaller
problems (views) and that the views hold the expectations of the
analyst according to his/her similarity query selection, improving
data perception and analytical possibilities. Our contribution
introduces a principle that can be used in all sorts of visualization
techniques and systems, this principle can be extended with
different kinds of integration visualization-metric-space, and
with different metrics, expanding the possibilities of visual data
analysis in aspects such as semantics and scalability.
Index Terms—Visual data analysis, multiple views, metric
spaces and similarity queries.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The concept of metric space is the main solution for the
problematic of managing data similarity. According to this
methodology, a multivariate data instance (a record) refers to
the descriptive characteristics of a single entity in a specific
domain. Having a set with multiple data items (a dataset), and
with the aid of a distance function (or similarity measure), it
becomes possible to determine an order relation within the
dataset. Once that relation is set, one can perform similarity
queries over the data and have results that reflect certain properties of the entities; the reflected properties will be defined according to the very data and according to the distance function
being used. This kind of functionality is also known as contentbased data retrieval and has a large scope of application, from
bioinformatics to complex-data storage systems. In this work,
benefiting from this methodology, we combine metric space
techniques and visualization techniques in order to discover
data patterns in a multiple views environment.
Similarity queries, the goal of metric space systems, work
by searching a dataset and tracking for the elements that,
according to a distance function, are similar to a given data
element, named query center, within a given scope. The result

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.101

61

named Metric Space Platform (MetricSPlat) (http://gbdi.icmc.
usp.br/∼junio/MetricSPlat/index.htm). MetricSPlat is a system
that integrates the components that define a metric space so
that content-based data retrieval can be accomplished in a
visual interactive environment. It uses plug-in features and
coding frameworks to permit the fast prototyping and testing of
features extraction techniques, distance functions and metric
structures. The ensemble of the system joins research concepts from database and Visual Analytics in a novel manner,
bringing an original contribution to both fields. The paper
has further five sections: related works, concepts, proposed
methodology, experiments and conclusions.

A. Multivariate data
The first thing in order to index a set of complex data is to
have it in an appropriate multivariate format, popularly called
tabular form. In many domains, such as image and video,
this step demands a process of features extraction. That is,
one must translate the data into a numerical representation
that corresponds to a vector x = {x0 , x1 , ..., xn−1 } of n
representative numbers intrinsic to the original data. Classic
examples, in the case of images, are the color histogram [7]
and the coefficients achieved with the Fourier transform [8].
In other domains, data must simply be collected in order to
represent the instances of observed events. That is, the features
extraction occurs according to a previously established model,
as for example, in commercial transactions, census data and
remote sensing data. Along this text, we refer to features
extraction in general as a function f : D → D, where D is
a domain of specific data, e.g. images, and D ⊂ Rn is an
n-dimensional features space.

II. R ELATED WORKS
According to Rundensteiner et. al. [1], conventional multivariate visualization techniques present limitations that result in a
display with an unacceptable level of clutter. In fact, most
visualization techniques suffer with data overlapping and with
datasets whose elements tend to spread over the data domain.
Therefore, such visualizations provide views with a reduced
number of noticeable differences.
The most used alternative to troubleshoot the anomalies of
data visualization is the interactive filtering principle that, according to Keim [2], claims that “in exploring large datasets, it
is important to interactively partition the dataset into segments
and focus on interesting subsets”. Following that principle,
many other authors developed tools aiming at the interactive
filtering goal, as the Polaris system [3] and dynamic querying
tools [4]. Selective visualization is fundamental since it enriches the user participation during the visualization process,
allowing users to focus on partitions of more interest by
constantly redefining the view in order to characterize the data
under analysis.
Gerken et. al. [5] make an extensive review of visual
information seeking systems. They state four conditions for the
design of efficient such systems: (1) to support various ways
of formulating an information need, (2) to integrate analytical
and browsing-oriented ways of exploration, (3) to provide
views on different dimensions of the information space, and
(4) to make search a pleasurable experience. In this work, we
consider these recommendations by proposing a methodology
that puts together the analytical power of metric spaces and
that is flexible in a multiple-ways query interface.
Following the idea of metric spaces and visual data analysis,
Hiroike et. al. [6] developed a system that presents the results
of a content-based image retrieval system in a scatter diagram.
In the diagram, image thumbnails have their size determined
by their similarity to an image used as the query center. The
arrangement of the images is determined by the values found
in their respective features vectors. The system is introduced
as an interface for content-based image retrieval.

B. Distance function
The second step in order to define a metric space is to establish
a similarity measure, or distance function, among the vectors
of numbers extracted from the data objects. A trivial way
to do this is to consider each numerical feature as an ndimensional coordinate and calculate the Euclidian distance
among the vectors. Other examples of distance functions are
the City Block and the Minkowisk distances [9]. A distance
of particular interest in this work is the weighted Minkowisk
distance [10], defined as follows:
n

δM inkowski (oi , oj ) =

p

wi (xi − yi )

p

(1)

i=1

Where oi = {x0 , x1 , ..., xn−1 } and oj = {y0 , y1 , ..., yn−1 }
are vectors with n representative numerical features, 0 ≤ i <
n, oi and oj ∈ D, the domain of elements to be indexed. The
vector w = {w0 , w1 , ..., wn−1 } is a vector of n weights.
The use of different metric distances allows not only having
a diversity of scopes around the query center in similarity
queries, it also permits to weight specific dimensions, adding
semantical interest into the query execution. These two
parametrization possibilities correspond to a guided distortion
of the space according to the needs of the analyst, who may
decide about which dimensions are more relevant in a specific
domain.
C. Metric space
Once feature vectors and a distance function are specified,
a metric space is established. A metric space refers to a set
in which the notion of distance among its elements is welldefined. Formally, a metric space is a pair M =< D, δ() >,
where D is the domain of the elements to be indexed and
δ : D × D → + is a function that associates a distance to
any pair oi , oj ∈ D. Moreover, given three elements oi , oj

III. BASIC CONCEPTS
This section reviews concepts of metric space and contentbased data retrieval, part of the techniques used in our work.

62

and ok ∈ D, the pair M =< D, δ() > is named metric space
whenever the function δ() satisfies the following axioms:
1) Symmetry: δ(oi , oj ) = δ(oj , oi )
2) Non negativity: 0 < δ(oi , oj ) < ∞ if oi = oj and
δ(oi , oi ) = 0
3) Triangular inequality: δ(oi , oj ) ≤ δ(oi , ok ) + δ(ok , oj )

http://www.gbdi.icmc.usp.br. This API defines a set of
software interfaces to ease the development of distance
functions and metric structures supporting the execution
of similarity queries. In order to make MetricSPlat easily
extensible to new functionalities, we have developed it around
a Dynamic Linking Library (DLL) framework in compliance
to the Arboretum API. Like so, MetricSPlat automatically
recognizes new dll files making them ready for use with no
recompilation.

A metric space, as stated by its name, embeds numerical
vectors inside a space in which the distances among objects
are kept coherent following the properties of the metric
axioms. The spatial analogy is what makes the concept so
useful for humans, who can intuitively operate in such a
space through the notion of similarity.

Data visualization
MetricSPlat also offers a set of visualization techniques to
permit the visual inspection of the dataset under analysis and
of the result set produced by similarity queries. When the
results of similarity queries are under investigation, the system
builds dedicated workspaces that support multi-modal visual
analysis. After the execution of a nearest-neighbor query, a
dedicated workspace is created loaded with the correspondent
result set. Each workspace is initially presented using the
FastMap spatial projection technique.
This technique is based on the dimensionality reduction
algorithm FastMap [11], which is used to reduce the dimensionality of the features dataset. FastMap is an instance of
multidimensional projection, that is, a function m : D → 3
whose goal is to minimize the sum of the distances differences between functions δ (original space) and the Euclidean
distance d (projection space). That is:

D. Similarity queries
Over a metric space, it becomes possible to perform
similarity queries. That is, given an element of interest – the
center of the query – what are the elements of the dataset
with smaller distances (higher similarities) to this element.
The most well-know similarity query is the Nearest-Neighbor:
Definition 1(Nearest-Neighbor query): Given a query object
oq represented by its features vector f (oq ), and the set of data
elements D, the nearest neighbor is the element of D such
that N N Query(oq ) = {on ∈ D|∀ oi ∈ D, δ(f (oq ), f (on )) ≤
δ(f (oq ), f (oi ))}. An example of a nearest neighbor query is:
“find the enterprise record in D, which is the most similar to
enterprise record oq ”.
The extrapolation of definition 1 for k nearest neighbors, k ≥ 1, is straight and determines what is known
as K Nearest Neighbors query (KNNQuery). Formally, a
KN N Query(oq , k) generates an ordered list in which the
(n − 1)-th-element is closer to oq , or at the same distance,
than the n-th-element, 2 ≤ n ≤ k.

|δ{(oi , oj )} − d{(m(oi ), m(oj )}|)

Argminm (

(2)

i,j

Where oi and oj ∈ D.
Once the dataset has its dimensionality reduced to 3 dimensions, it becomes possible to have it in a 3-dimensional
plot space. In such representation, one can observe clusters,
exceptions and, more important, the spatial distance-based
placement of the data. This possibility corresponds to the
visual observation of a metric space allowing to see how a
similarity query works and what are its results, as it can be
seen in figure 1.

IV. C OMBINING METRIC SPACES AND VISUALIZATION
TECHNIQUES

In this section we describe the MetricSPlat system and how it
defines a framework that supports content-based data retrieval
combined with visual analytics.
A. Overview of the Metric Space Platform (MetricSPlat)
In order to versatilely use features extraction, MetricSPlat
has an embedded dataset facility. This way, the system can
perform similarity queries over any given set of extracted
features provided in a simple tabular format. The format
requires a table in which the n first fields correspond to the
numerical features. Besides the features, it is necessary to
have an extra field named COD, an integer indexing counter,
as the last field (left to right order) of the dataset. No database
installation is necessary.

Fig. 1. Visualization of a result set in a 3-dimensional environment. (a) The
query center as the origin of the projection. (b) 3D interaction. (c) Zooming
capabilities.

Besides FastMap for spatial data projection, MetricSPlat
provides well-known techniques for visualizing the extracted
features that define the search space: Parallel Coordinates [12],
Scatter Plots, Table Lens [13], and Star coordinates [14].

Distance functions and metric structures
In MetricSPlat, we benefit from an Application
Programming Interface (API) named Arboretum –

63

allows to choose a subregion of the data domain having a specific center to focus on. The goal is to visualize the subregions
of interest out of the great data mass in dedicated visualization
workspaces, where a simplified analytical process can proceed
in a reduced graphical space. After an initial selection, the data
is overviewed in a data projection and explored with multi
modal multivariate visualization techniques, where patterns
can be observed.

B. MetricSPlat systematization
The MetricSPlat system implements all the features needed in
order to have a metric space in which similarity queries can be
performed. Once the user defines a dataset, he/she can create
a metric structure automatically, with one of several metrics
structures and distance functions, see figure 2(a). After this
step, the analyst can select subregions of the data domain by
choosing query centers of his/her interest and perform nearest
neighbor or range similarity queries. The correspondent data
elements are propagated to FastMap projections, see figure
2(b), where it is possible to observe the region of the space
that was selected. From the FastMap projections, it is possible
to derive multi modal visualization techniques, as indicated
in figure 2(c). Finally, one can re-examine the visualizations
and choose new query centers for further similarity queries,
figure 2(d). This process can repeat several times defining a
multiple views environment where each view holds a different
subregion of the data domain.
In comparison to purely visual methods, in which the user
can select subregions in a graphical data projection, the use
of similarity queries: provides more precision on the task
of selecting elements, is faster even compared to interactive
methods, is immune to overlapping elements and carries the
structural information embedded in the ensemble of a metric
space.

In figure 3, we illustrate three queries over the agrometeorological dataset. At the top of figure 3, it is possible to see
the entire data domain in a FastMap projection. In this image,
there are three regions of interest with their correspondent
query centers. Figure 3 also describes each of the three queries,
Q1 and Q2. At the left side of the image, it is possible to see
the initial Euclidean data selections in FastMap projections
along with parallel coordinates. In Q1, the query center has
id number 430, which corresponds to the region of Ribeirao
Preto in the 18th month of observation along with 40 similar
elements. Its Euclidean query returned a sparse subregion of
similar elements. Its parallel coordinates, in turn, shows a
distribution of elements tending to high evapotranspiration (the
three right-most axes) and low vegetation rate (axis 3). The
correspondent scatter plot, right, shows that this query center
corresponds to a region of extreme temperatures in the dataset
(right-top of scatter plot: average temperature x ETM) and that
this region corresponds to a profile of regions that suffer from
excessive sun radiation, defining a local correlation between
high evapotranspiration and high temperature. The query has
automatically selected for us the other regions that mostly
correspond to that profile: Jaboticabal and Jau.

V. E XPERIMENTS
In this section we answer the questions raised in section I.
We perform two experiments with two different datasets,
each followed by conclusions about how the visual analytical
process brought new possibilities for data investigation.
Because the demonstration of our interactive system is not
favored by the flat paper presentation, we have put the system
fully operational at http://gbdi.icmc.usp.br/∼junio/MetricSPlat,
where it can be experimented with several datasets.

In query Q2, the center is element number 156 from the
region of Araras in the 74th month of observation, surrounded
by 40 similar elements. Its FastMap projection depicts three
clusters, informing that there are three classes of records
regarding the similarity to element 156. The correspondent
parallel coordinates show that the profile of the most similar
elements is that of high NDVI (axis 3), high WSRI (axis 4)
and low evapotranspiration (the three right-most axes). Further,
the table lens visualization shows an inverse proportionality
between vegetation rate (column 3) and temperature (columns
2, 5 and 6). By examining the records presented in the
FastMap visualization, we verified that this profile corresponds
to the months when the sugar cane culture was in the middle
of its annual cultivation cycle (high vegetation and mild
temperatures), beginning of the cycle and, less intense, final
of the cycle (low vegetation). The more close to the middle
of the cycle, the higher is the amount of biomass in the
crops, providing higher levels of vegetation. This observation
explains the three clusters observed at the initial FastMap
projection and, also, it explains why the third cluster is less
observable. Had we defined a smaller number of elements, we
would not have the third further most cluster with records
corresponding to the end of the sugar cane cycle, when
harvesting takes place.

Filtering out data with precision and accuracy
We have performed experiments over a dataset of agrometeorological data. The dataset has nine attributes: precipitation,
maximum temperature, minimum temperature, normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI), water requirement satisfaction index (WRSI), average temperature, potential evapotranspiration (ETP), real evapotranspiration (ETR) and measured
evapotranspiration (ETM) collected partly with remote sensors
(satellite) and partly with in locu samples from sugar cane
plantation regions in Brazil. The data was collected during 82
months from 2001 to 2007, so that each record corresponds
to the data collected in a given month for one region. Since
there are 5 regions (Araraquara, Araras, Jaboticabal, Ja´u, and
Ribeir˜ao Preto), there is total of 410 records. The goal of
the data collection is to analyze the relationship between
the weather (temperature and humidity) and the agricultural
production.
To test our methodology, we aim at creating visualizations
that put together and that characterize regional weather conditions according to multiple simultaneous queries. Each query

64

Fig. 2. The MetricSPlat multiple views environment. (a) MetricSPlat interface. (b) Propagation of result sets produced from similarity queries into FastMap
projections. (c) Multivariate data visualization over subregions of the metric space. (d) Choosing new query centers, for new similarity queries.

dataset (http://stat.cmu.edu/datasets). This dataset is broadly
used due to its common sense domain, allowing readers to
quickly understand what is being presented in only a few
words. It has 8 dimensions and 406 data elements. The
information in the dataset comes from car road tests performed by the Consumer Reports Magazine between 1971
and 1983. The attributes of the data are fuel performance
in miles per U.S. gallon (MPG), number of cylinders in
the engine (CYLINDERS), engine displacement in cubic
inches (DISPLACEMENT), time to accelerate from 0 to 60
mph (ACCELERATION), output of the engine in horsepower
(HORSEPOWER), vehicle weight in U.S. pounds (WEIGHT),
model year (YEAR), and origin of the car (ORIGIN). The last
attribute organizes the dataset into three categories, American
cars (1), Japanese cars (2) and European cars (3).
In the following experiment, we want to show that with the
aid of content-based data retrieval techniques, it is possible to
add semantics to the visual analytical process. To do so we
use two different distance functions: the Euclidean distance
and the weighted Minkowski distance function with p = 4
and two different sets of attribute weights. In the website of
MetricSPlat, there is a video that shows how new distance
functions can be added to the system in less than three minutes.
Figure 4 shows at its top an overview of the cars dataset in a
FastMap projection using the Euclidean distance.
Figure 4(Q1) refers to the data domain sub region around
car number 4, an American car produced in 1970 that is
considered to be a mostly non economic car, as all of its
attributes deviate from the average toward values of high
consume and high power. At Q1, left, the set of data items
in the region around car number 4 corresponds to the 50

Fig. 3.
Multiple views visualization of the agrometeorological dataset.
At the top, an overview of the entire dataset. Following, queries Q1 and
Q2, Euclidean distance, with two distinct query centers and correspondent
multivariate visualizations, parallel coordinates, scatter plots and table lens.

Adding semantics in the visual data analysis process
Our second experiment uses the well-known semantic rich cars

65

cars that more close present attributes similar to those of car
number 4. The view achieved with the Euclidean distance,
although showing a subset with distinguishable properties,
does not present a highly characteristic silhouette in relation
to the query center. Differently, the scene achieved with the
weighted Minkowski distance, at the right, linearly weights
the attributes so that the number of cylinders (CYLINDERS)
and the weight of the cars (WEIGHT) have less impact on
the placement of the data elements. The result is that even
cars with significant differences in those attributes are put
together in the spatial arrangement of the metric space and
of the visualization. The correspondent visualization presents
data elements whose attributes have smaller amplitudes than
the Euclidean presentation, allowing the analyst to observe
the cars that, even if semantically more powerful and heavier,
have the other attributes similar to those of car number 4. That
is, attributes CYLINDERS and WEIGHT, although sound, are
not determinant for this specific subset.

Figure 4(Q2) presents the subregion of the data domain
around car number 369, a Japanese car produced in 1981
with economic features as lower number of cylinders and high
miles per gallon consume. At Q2, left, again we have the
50 cars closely similar to car 369 according to the Euclidean
distance. At this second experiment, we noticed that linear
weighting of attributes rarely produced result sets different
from Q2 left visualization. Therefore, we have opted for an
exponential weighting, so that the higher the difference between two data attributes, the much higher their distance in the
metric space. We have weighted attributes ACCELERATION
and HORSEPOWER, and at Q2, right, we can see a data
subset that aggregates cars with similarity in those attributes.
Semantically, what we see is the visualization of the cars with
average economic profile (similar to car 369), at the same time
that we can observe the local distribution of their acceleration
and power. Hence, it is possible to have an idea of the cars
that are mildly economic, with high and low power, and that
are as close as possible to profile 369. Query Q2 shows how
the use of intelligent distance functions can add semantics to
the visual data analysis process, reducing the data domain, and
the visual complexity, to reflect the analyst interests.

Fig. 4. Multiple views visualization of the cars dataset. At the top, an
overview of the entire dataset. Following, queries Q1 and Q2 for Euclidean
distance and for weighted Minkowski distance with two sets of attribute
weights.

VI. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this work we benefit from two data management methodologies: content-based data retrieval (metric spaces) and visual
data analysis. The combination of both methodologies has
been used to answer three questions: how to efficiently filter
out data for visual inspection, how to add semantics to the
visual data analysis process, and how to quickly make sense of
metric spaces. In order to answer these questions, we have built
a system named MetricSPlat, which puts together a wide set
of technologies related to similarity querying and multivariate
data analysis. The system joins both expertises by using the
FastMap multidimensional data projection. FastMap draws the
metric space defined by the features, the distance functions
and the metric data structure providing an intuitive spatial
view of the data. This spatial view is the first step of our
methodology, which is followed by multi modal multivariate
data visualization. Complementing the system, we make use
of multiple visualization workspaces presented simultaneously
to the user. This feature is specially interest because it is useful
to compare several spatial drawings of the data, enriching the
analytical possibilities.
We have demonstrated our system with two datasets. The
first one is from agrometeorological research, and the second
one, a classic dataset used in visualization demonstrations. We
have showed the possibilities of efficiently filtering out the

Making sense of metric spaces
In both experiments, it is possible to perceive the metric
space defined by the data domain. This is possible due to the
FastMap projection of the entire dataset along with the subregions selected via similarity queries. By joining the multiple
visualizations interactively, the user can build a mental map
of how the data elements are positioned in the space. This
possibility, combined to metric space techniques, can lead to
a potentially useful instrument for dealing with the challenges
of content-based data retrieval.

66

datasets with the aid of similarity queries. Also, we have presented tests on how to add semantics to the visual data analysis
process by defining intelligent distance functions according
to the analytical interests. Both experiments demonstrated the
usefulness of the tool in depicting a metric space visually,
instigating the user intuition about the data.
We conclude by stating that our work is the convergence
of two methodologies related to the same big field of data
management. Their convergence seems beneficial for both.
Visual data analysis is improved by a filtering possibility
more efficient than interactive filtering (brushing), as it can
be more accurate and semantically rich. Content-based data
retrieval is improved by the possibility of understanding the
metric space that supports the similarity queries, allowing the
fine tuning and advanced use of distance functions, features
extraction, and metric data structures. We foresee future
works following the benefits in both areas.

[12] A. Inselberg and B. Dimsdale, “Parallel coordinates: A tool for visualizing multidimensional geometry,” in IEEE Visualization, vol. 1. IEEE
Computer Press, 1990, pp. 361–370.
[13] R. Rao and S. Card, “The table lens: Merging graphical and symbolic
representation in an interactive focus+context visualization for tabular
information,” in Proc. Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1994, pp.
318–322.
[14] E. Kandogan, “Star coordinates: A multi-dimensional visualization technique with uniform treatment of dimensions,” in IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, 2000, pp. 4–8.

A KNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work is thank to Brazilian agencies Fundac¸a˜ o de
Amparo a` Pesquisa do Estado de S˜ao Paulo (FAPESP), Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cient´ıfico e Tecnol´ogico
(CNPq), Coordenac¸a˜ o de Aperfeic¸oamento de Pessoal de
N´ıvel Superior (Capes), to Microsoft Research, and to STICAmSud cooperation program.
R EFERENCES
[1] E. A. Rundensteiner, M. O. Ward, J. Yang, and P. R. Doshi, “Xmdvtool: visual interactive data exploration and trend discovery of highdimensional data sets,” in SIGMOD Conference, 2002, p. 631.
[2] D. A. Keim, “Information visualization and visual data mining,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 8, no. 1, pp.
1–8, 2002.
[3] C. Stolte, D. Tang, and P. Hanrahan, “Polaris: a system for query,
analysis, and visualization of multidimensional databases,” Commun.
ACM, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 75–84, 2008.
[4] H. Hochheiser and B. Shneiderman, “Dynamic query tools for time series data sets: timebox widgets for interactive exploration,” Information
Visualization, vol. 3, pp. 1–18, 2004.
[5] J. Gerken, M. Heilig, H.-C. Jetter, S. Rexhausen, M. Demarmels, W. A.
Konig, and H. Reiterer, “Lessons learned from the design and evaluation
of visual information-seeking systems,” Int. J. on Digital Libraries,
vol. 10, no. 2-3, pp. 49–46, 2009.
[6] A. Hiroike, Y. Musha, A. Sugimoto, and Y. Mori, “Visualization of
information spaces to retrieve and browse image data,” in VISUAL, 1999,
pp. 155–162.
[7] J. C. Felipe, A. J. M. Traina, and C. Traina Jr., “Global warp metric
distance: Boosting content-based image retrieval through histograms,”
in IEEE International Symposium on Multimedia-ISM2005, J. J. P. Tsai,
M. Muhlhauser, and M. Takizawa, Eds. Irvine, CA: IEEE Press, 2005,
p. 8.
[8] D. S. Zhang and G. J. Lu, “Shape retrieval using fourier descriptors,”
in Intl. Conference on Multimedia and Distance Education, Fargo, ND,
USA, 2001, pp. 1–9.
[9] C. C. Aggarwal, A. Hinneburg, and D. A. Keim, “On the surprising behavior of distance metrics in high dimensional spaces,” in International
Conference on Database Theory (ICDT), J. V. d. Bussche and V. Vianu,
Eds. London, UK: Springer Verlag, 2001, pp. 420–434.
[10] D. R. Wilson and T. R. Martinez, “Improved heterogeneous distance
functions,” J. Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR), vol. 6, pp. 1–34, 1997.
[11] C. Faloutsos and K.-I. D. Lin, “Fastmap: A fast algorithm for indexing,
data-mining and visualization of traditional and multimedia datasets,” in
ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, M. J.
Carey and D. A. Schneider, Eds. San Jose, CA: ACM Press, 1995, pp.
163–174.

67

