2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Immersive visualization architectures and situated embodiments of culture and heritage

Dr Sarah Kenderdine
Visiting Associate Professor, Department of Chinese,
Translation & Linguistics/School of Creative Media;
Director of Research Applied Laboratory of Interactvie
Visualization and Embodiment, City University, Hong
Kong
skenderdine@cityu.edu.hk
The specific installations made for these display systems
are part of a research inquiry in multisensory journeying that
addresses perceived challenges in visualizing ‘things’ in
archaeology, people in landscapes and the imaginary of texts.
The works act as propositions for the reformulation of digital
narrative and aesthetics through virtual embodiment and
enaction. [5]

Abstract—This paper describes a series of transdisciplinary
research projects in five large-scale, interactive visualization
architectures. These immersive architectures and their
associated visual, sonic and algorithmic techniques offer
compelling means for mapping and remediating the tangible,
intangible and abstract aspects of culture and heritage
landscapes. This paper brings these unique systems and the
installations developed for them together for the first time. The
task here is to highlight the strategies for embodied,
kinaesthetic, multisensory and collaborative engagement as
powerful ways to reformulate narrative made possible through
these stereographic, panoramic, situated interfaces.
Keywords-augmented reality, immersive architecture,
interaction,
kinaesthetic,
post-processural
archaeology,
museums, situated media, narrative, cultural heritage, visual
analytics.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The body of work described in this essay contributes to
the reframing of cultural heritage interpretation and the
reformulation of somatic, kinaesthetic and embodied
experiences in immersive digital environments. The research
has been articulated through a series of transdisciplinary
experiments in large-scale, interactive visualization
architectures (hereafter ‘immersive architectures’). These
immersive architectures and their associated visual, sonic
and algorithmic techniques offer compelling means for
mapping and remediating the tangible, intangible and
abstract aspects of culture and heritage landscapes. The
immersive architectures included in this paper are:
• The Virtual Room (Figure 1) [27]
• PLACE (Figure 2) [21]
• The EYE (Figure 3) [26]
• iDome (Figure 4) [8] [33]
• Advanced Visualization & Interaction Environment
(AVIE, Figure 6) [2] [19]

Figure 1. Sacred Angkor for The Virtual Room, © Kenderdine 2003.

These unique display systems form the core infrastructure of
a new research centre, the Applied Laboratory for Interactive
Visualization and Embodiment (ALiVE) established at the
Hong Kong Science Park, by the School of Creative Media
in conjunction with Computer Science, City University,
Hong Kong (Figure 12). [1]
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.63

Figure 2. PLACE-Hampi, PLACE © Kenderdine & Shaw, 2006.

402
408

This paper is collated together here for the first time
unique research demonstrating new modalities for
meaningful cultural experiences and narrative reformulation, utilizing the results of archaeological, historical
and anthropological field data-capture and analyses. The
installations themselves are intended for multicultural
audiences in situated public spaces (as opposed to internetbased, virtual and distributed spaces). Each explores
significant cultural precincts, including: the UNESCO World
Heritage sites of Angkor, the Monuments at Hampi, and The
Fort of the Hooded Cobra in Nagaur, Rajasthan. The
installations are:
• Sacred Angkor, 2004 (Figure 1)
• PLACE-Hampi, 2006 (Figure 2 & Figure 8)
• Eye of Nagaur 2008 (Figure 3)
• iNagaur 2008 (Figure 5)
• Hampi-LIVE 2009 (Figure 9 & Figure 10)
The work described also includes the exhibition Ancient
Hampi: the Hindu Kingdom Brought to Life (Immigration
Museum, Melbourne 2008-2010) that investigates the
archaeological imaginary of this historic precinct (Figure 7).
The research that has contributed to these installations
has been described in various scientific papers over the past
five years (for example [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17]
[18] [19]). The purpose of this essay is to juxtapose the
unique and specific properties of these works with broader
philosophical framing to make explicit their contribution to
the meta-endeavor of cultural heritage interpretation. The
reader is pointed to the aforementioned publications to
substantiate the philosophical positions taken in this essay
and the technical discussions relevant to each work.

Figure 4. Eye of Nagaur for The EYE © iCinema Centre, UNSW.

II.

POST-PROCESSURAL ARCHAEOLOGY AND
KINAESTHETICS
The theoretical frameworks that underpin the
installations described here are in part drawn from the
discourses of post-processual archaeology, including the
domains of interpretive and symmetrical archaeology. [28]
[34] From fissures within the long-established practices of
processural archaeology, there has been a growing call to
‘contest traditional predominantly textual modes of thought
and action’ and to ‘illuminate and expose the interpretive and
artistic qualities of presentation and narration’ using visual
media. [6] Similarly, advocates of media [in] archaeology
(e.g. [35], [24]) suggest broader approaches to interpretation
‘that move toward an archaeological expression of
recombinatory poetics’. [24]
In the post-processual frameworks for interpretive
archaeology, practitioner Christopher Tilley advances a
phenomenological understanding of the experience of
landscape. [28] [29] [30] His arguments emphasize
approaches to archaeological assemblages that go beyond
their material manifestation. In his book, Body and Image:
Explorations in Landscape Phenomenology, Tilley usefully
contrasts iconographic approaches to the study of
representation with those of kinaesthetic enquiry. Tilley’s
line of reasoning provides grounding for the research into
large-scale, immersive and kinaesthetically provocative
environments, designed for the experience and embodiment
of cultural and heritage. In this context, it is useful to quote
his discussion of the interpretation of rock art:
“The potential of kinaesthetic approaches tell us
something different… Iconographic approaches are
usually primarily cognitive in nature. They grant the
primacy to the human mind as a producer of the meaning
of the images through sensory perception. The mind

Figure 3. Eye of Nagaur for The EYE © Kenderdine & Shaw 2008

409
403

responds in a disembodied way… Kinaesthetic
approaches, by contrast, stress the role of the carnal
human body. The general claim is that the manner in
which we perceive, and therefore relate to visual
imagery, is fundamentally related to the kinds of bodies
we have. The body both limits and constrains. It enables
us to perceive and react to imagery in specifically
embodied ways”. [32]

Figure 7. Ancient Hampi, 360-degree videoconversation @ Kenderdine
2008.

Figure 5. iNagaur for iDome © Kenderdine & Shaw 2008.

Figure 8. PLACE-Hampi, PLACE © Kenderdine & Shaw, 2006.

The immersive works highlighted in this essay follow a
methodological
framework
that
incorporates
an
understanding of the body in motion, in both real and digital
spaces. By suggesting that landscape studies are transformed
by re-focusing on the kinaesthetic, Tilley stresses the
autonomy of images to convey meaning. Imagery has a
‘direct agency’ [31] that acts as one inhabits and moves
through the landscape. In the majority of the installations
described here, the design of the immersive systems
demands that people ambulate and circumambulate,
continuously re-orienting themselves in relation to real-world
scale imagery of augmented virtual landscapes. The acoustic
spaces in these systems are dynamic in relation to the
positioning of visitors and their movements. Participants
interact and perform with both the imagery of the virtual
world and with the other people who co-inhabit the space.
The issues of inhabiting the immersive space and its
relationship to real environments and the performative
qualities of people within these hybrid and multimodal
spaces are of central concern (Figure 8).

Figure 6. Advanced Visualization & Interaction Environment © iCinema
Centre, UNSW.

Such arguments, emerging out of post-processual
archaeology, form crucial foundations for the works included
in this essay. The challenge for digital cultural heritage
disciplines is to design environments where, for example,
‘archaeologists take up what is left of the past and translate
and (re)mediate’. [25] These new strategies avoid the
predefinition of data itself, evidenced in the current
‘archaeological meta-endeavor’, and moves towards an
approach that destabilizes the notion of ‘finding what we are
looking for’. [25]

III.

INSITU

All the installations included in this paper have been
deployed as temporary or permanent installations at major
cultural organizations, museums, galleries, on-tour as part of

410
404

arts festivals or in heritage sites throughout the world. A
primary motivation has been to animate a resocialization of
public spaces, reinforced by the understanding of museums
as places of ‘civic seeing’ and ‘zones of contact’ for people.
[3] Situated, immersive experiences bring people together in
real spaces to interact not only with the virtual ‘other’ and
the virtual objects of encounter but also amongst themselves.
Emerging research into the rapid growth of ‘casual gamers’
who come together socially to use commercial interfaces
such as Nintendo’s Wii to interact with video-style games,
also support the thesis for collective interaction with new
interfaces by non-traditional audiences in real space where
bodies are active. [10]
The situated spaces of museums and galleries provide a
counterpoint to the small-scale desktop delivery and
distributed consumption of internet-deployed cultural
content. Content that is ‘real-world scale’, stereographic,
panoramic and ambisonic such as in large immersive
architectures described, is an important aspect of the research
presented here. These immersive architectures encourage
physical proximity, allowing new narrative paradigms to
emerge through interactivity and corporeal relationships.
Situated
installations
allow
for
human-to-human
collaborative engagements in the interrogation of cultural
material and mediations of virtual worlds. The proximity of
the participants has a significant influence on the experiences
of these installations.
IV.

post-processual archaeology. This ties together ‘issues of
signification, of the embodiment and corporeality of social
actors, agency and the constitution of social structure and
social norms’. Shanks concludes, ‘performance is the root
metaphor for social and cultural processes’ and further,
archaeology itself can be conceived of as a performance
‘where the remains of the past are mobilized in practise,
often conceived as mimetic, of representing or restoring
behaviour’. [23]
These ideas can be extrapolated to new media theories of
performance and spectatorship, drawing upon the extensive
evaluation studies of PLACE-Hampi (see PLACE-Hampi
evaluation for aggregated results [21] for example as an
embodied theatre of participation. From the perspective of
the social interaction and individual/group interaction within
PLACE-Hampi, it is worthwhile to explore the dynamic
series of relationships as performance in the cybernetic
theatre. [17]
V.

HERMENEUTICS AND EMERGENT NARRATIVES

Museum specialist Linda Young, in her review of
Handbook of Material Culture [36] provides comment on a
section of the book that deals with the body, materiality and
the senses. Young says:
“…[the somatic] confronts textuality and visuality as our
culture's dominant modes of understanding material
culture, and suggests that the embodied subject and its
multiple, concomitant ways of sensing, feeling, knowing,
performing and experiencing, offer dynamic routes to
different perceptions of the human relation to the
material… Corporeality and sensuality open up to the
concept of sense-scapes—an enticing notion”. [36]
The research covered in this paper has created a manifold
terrain of both philosophical framing and tangible
demonstrators focused at the bodily and cognitive faculties
of the participants. The investigative framework also
addresses a complex mix of human-computer interface issues
that arise during the hermeneutic, phenomenological and
epistemological encounters with archaeological and cultural
heritage landscapes. The methodology recognizes that the
past is constantly re-created in learning experiences, a neverending process of ‘making sense’. This supports the notion
that interpretation is always in flux, and never final, because
more can always be said or learned in recurrent acts of
making meaning. Interpretation is always historically
situated therefore it changes through time.
This concept is fundamental to the work described here
for two reasons: firstly, it reinforces the experiential realtime encounter with interactive systems, wherein no
participant will experience the same thing twice, even after
recurring visits to the system. Secondly, it strengthens the
personalized cognitive and kinaesthetic encounter as a valid
form of interpretation—particularly important in the research
described here work, which is supported by narrative agency.
(for example see discussion on co-evolutionary narrative, for
Hampi-LIVE, Figure 9, Figure 10 [13]). In the research,
narrative content and immersive architectures combine to

DRAMATURGIES OF DIFFERENCE

New forms of archaeological investigation draw upon,
and advance, performance theory and practice. [20] [25]
Archaeology is increasingly understood less as the
‘discovery of the past, and more in terms of different
relationships with what is left of the past.’ This foregrounds
‘the anthropological questions of performance and
construction of the past, in memory and of narrative
meaning’. [25] These processes involve a re-visioning of
collections (texts and material objects) and the redesign of
archives and systems of documentation. The installations in
this essay thus can be interpreted partly as theatres for new
modalities of performance in archaeology and heritage.
The work described here, inside new forms of immersive
architectures, is motivated by media archaeologist Siegfried
Zielinski’s call for ‘dramaturgies of difference’ [37] and the
potential for the remediation of archaeological and historical
landscapes and culture knowledge. In 2001, archaeologist
Michael Shanks and performance studies theorist Mike
Pearson collaborated to write Theatre/Archaeology, an
examination of the points of convergence between
contemporary performance theory and practice and
interpretive approaches in archaeology. [20] Invoking the
notion of performance in archaeology helped to make sense
of the spiral of association between archaeological
materials—empirical, spatial, conceptual and metaphorical.
For Shanks, archaeological interpretation should also
emphasise manifestation of archaeological materials, which
is ‘letting the material display itself’. [23] He also notes the
emphasis of performance, ceremony and ritual in relation to

411
405

provide a context for multisensory mediation between
humans, machine agents and virtual environments
The prosthetic devices within the interactive display
amplify the sensorial and allow the senses to go where they
have not gone before. Modalities of interaction can be
described as forms of prosthetic vision, acoustic immersion,
kinaesthetic activation, telepresence, inhabitation and
dwelling, travelling, driving and walking, and dynamic
contemplation. In the cultural imaginary activated by
immersive architectures, the sensory world of participants is
tuned for encounter and thus emergent narratives become
possible.

magnification of prosthetics, such as telescopes and
microscopes, thus allowing perception to go where it has not
gone before. Likewise, the immersive architectures described
in this essay promote the visualization of the material—of
‘things’ and aspects of embedded meanings found within
those things.
VI.

THE FUTURE OF CULTURAL DATA SCULPTING

Visual analytics for large-scale datasets has seen
unprecedented growth in its first 5 years. ALiVE in
conjunction with several of its research partners (Museum
Victoria; iCinema Centre, University of New South Wales;
University of Southern California, San Diego; and ZKM
Karlsruhe) is currently beginning a three-year Australian
Research Council funded project (2010-2013) for
visualization and analytics of museological data. Primary
datasets include the world’s largest media art database
(ZKM) and over 30,000 multimedia rich object data from
Museum Victoria history and natural sciences collection
containing audio, video, object movies, still photographic
(panoramic, stereographic etc) and the PADiL dataset for
pest identification in Australia. [40] [41] [42]
Entitled ‘Narrative reformulation of museological data’
for coherent representation of information by users in
interactive systems’ this research builds upon foundation
work done at iCinema Centre on a homogenous dataset (24
hours of broadcast TV footage, T’Visonarium, Figure 9
[39]). In the upcoming applications using heterogeneous
data, users will be able to stand inside the 360-degree
interactive and immersive stereographic interface of AVIE
(complete with infra-red camera tracking of visitors) and
manipulate text, sound, photos, 3D or panoramic imagery
from existing digital archives, creating a whole new visual
interface for accessing data. Through real-time semantic
remapping of this data users construction narrative effects,
and are able to literally ‘walk inside’ the heterogeneous data.
The project will foster innovations in research practices for
digital humanities scholars and new cultural experiences for
museum audiences. The project will include symposium and
workshops on visual analytics and culminate in 2013 with a
public exhibition of the results.
These research trajectories seek to solve key problems
identified in visual analytics through the integration and
development of tools dealing with large-scale heterogenous
cultural datasets, in AVIE. The project uses exceptionally
rich data and will address not only the paradigms of
interrogation but also issues such as data occlusion,
cognition, contextualization, humans-in-the-loop and
distributed and localized collaboration thus contributing to
the rapidly changing face of disciplinary inquiry using digital
tools. Through the AVIE interface this project will also
provide fundamental solutions to some of the top ten
problems identified for the next 5 years of visual analytics
[9] and human-centered immersive environments design,
with application across the sciences, business and
government and entertainment industries.
Research at ALiVE concurrently underway includes
immersive environment visual analytics for textual materials

Figure 9. Hampi-LIVE graphic © Kenderdine & Shaw 2010.

Figure 10. Hampi-LIVE, autonomous monkey kingdom © Kenderdine &
Shaw 2010.

The research also investigates relationships between
embodiment and representations of the material. Don Ihde,
post-phenomenologist and philosopher of science and
technology, promotes a material hermeneutics that ‘gives
things voices where there had been silence, and brings to
sight that which was invisible’. [38] The ‘things’ of Idhe’s
visual hermeneutics are viewed through instrumental

412
406

and cultural atlases (including archaeological data such as
high-resolution laser-scan and GIS materials).

“The borderline work of culture demands an encounter
with ‘newness’ that is not part of the continuum of the
past and present. It creates a sense of the new as an
insurgent act of cultural translation. Such art does not
merely recall the past as social cause or aesthetic
precedent: it renews the past, refiguring it as a contingent
‘in-between’ space, that innovates and interrupts the
performance of the present. The ‘past-present’ becomes
part of the necessity, not the nostalgia, of living”. [4]
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Sacred Angkor and Ancient Hampi: The Hindu Kingdom
Bought to Life were produced by Museum Victoria.
PLACE-Hampi & Hampi LIVE were undertaken as part of
the Australian Research Council Grant (ARC),
Reformulating narrative in virtual heritage using a coevolutionary model of immersive interactivity. The Eye of
Nagaur and iNagaur were funded by Terry Glenn Phipps in
conjunction with the Helen Hamlyn Trust and the
Mehrangarh Fort Trust and the Maharajah of Jodhpur.
Current research is being supported in part by ARC,
Narrative reformulation of museological data: the coherent
representation of information by users in interactive systems.
Initial work in multilingual and cultural data visualization is
being undertaken at CityU in conjunction with research
partners UC Merced (Prof Maurizio Forte) and Electronic
Cultural Atlas Initiative, UC Berkeley (Porf Lew Lancaster).
ALiVE is co-directed by Dr Sarah Kenderdine and Prof.
Jeffrey Shaw, Dean, School of Creative Media, City
University, Hong Kong.

Figure 11. Figure 11: T’Visionarium, © iCinema Centre, UNSW 2008.

REFERENCES
[1]

Applied Laboratory for Interactive Visualization and Embodiment
(ALiVE), School of Creative Media, City University, Hong Kong,
doi:cityu.edu.hk/scm/alive/
[2] Advanced
Visualization
&
Interaction
Environment
doi:icinema.unsw.edu.au/projects/infra_avie.htm
[3] Bennett, T. 2006, ‘Civic seeing: museums and the organisation of
vision’, in S. MacDonald (ed.), Companion to museum studies,
Oxford: Blackwell, 263–81.
[4] Bhabha, H. 1994, The location of culture, London: Routledge.
[5] Bonini, E. 2008, ‘Building virtual cultural heritage environments: the
embodied mind at the core of the learning processes’, in International
Journal of Digital Culture and Electronic Tourism, vol. 2, no. 2, 113–
25.
[6] Cochrane, A. & Russell, I. 2007, ‘Visualizing archaeologies: A
manifesto’, in Cambridge Archaeological Journal, vol. 17, no. 1, 3–
19.
[7] Hong Kong Science Park, Tai Po, Hong Kong, doi:www.hkstp.org
[8] iDOME, doi:icinema.unsw.edu.au/projects/infra_dome.html
[9] Information Visualization, Volume 8, Issue 4 (Winter 2009), Special
Issue: Foundations and Frontiers of Visual Analytics, Palgrave.
[10] Juul, J. 2010, A Casual revolution: reinventing video games and their
players, Cambridge: MIT Press.
[11] Kenderdine, S. & Doornbusch, P. 2004, ‘Presence and sound:
Identifying sonic means to “be there”’, Consciousness Reframed,
Beijing, November 2004, 67–70.
[12] Kenderdine, S. 2004, ‘Stereographic panoramas of Angkor,
Cambodia’, in Proceedings 10th International Society for Virtual
Systems and Multimedia, Gifu, Japan, 612–21.

Figure 12. ALiVE, graphic axonometric of the research facility at the Hong
Kong Since Park © School of Creative Media, City University.

CONCLUSION
The installations and immersive architectures in this
essay contribute to the development of new strategies for the
rendering of cultural content and heritage landscapes,
demonstrating the potential for ‘presence’ and ‘co-presence’
with the past, as theatres of embodied experience from a
cultural imaginary located in the here and now. These
experiences are not concerned with the didactic learning
requirements often associated with the rhetoric of heritage
nor the desire to transport the participants back through time
using virtual technologies. In a celebration of the landscape
as ‘alive’, post-colonial cultural theorist Homi K. Bhabha
describes the spirit of these endeavors:

413
407

[27] The Virtual Room doi:www.vroom.org.au
[28] Tilley, C. 1994, The phenomenology of landscape, Oxford: Berg.
[29] Tilley, C. 2004, The materiality of stone: Explorations in landscape
phenomenology, Oxford: Berg.
[30] Tilley, C. 2008, Body and image: Explorations in landscape
phenomenology, Walnut Creek: Left Coast Press.
[31] Tilley, C. 2008, Body and image: Explorations in landscape
phenomenology, Walnut Creek: Left Coast Press. 46
[32] Tilley, C. 2008, Body and image: Explorations in landscape
phenomenology, Walnut Creek: Left Coast Press. 18
[33] Volker Kuchelmeister, Jeffrey Shaw, Matthew McGinity, Dennis Del
Favero, Ardrian Hardjono 2009, ‘Immersive Mixed Media
Augmented Reality Applications and Technology’, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science. Series: Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Subseries: Information Systems and Applications, incl. Internet/Web,
and HCI , Vol. 5879. Springer Heidelberg, 2009, 1112-118.
[34] Webmoor, T. & Witmore, C. 2005, Symmetrical archaeology,
doi:traumwerk.stanford.edu:3455/Symmetry/home>
[35] Webmoor, T. 2005, ‘Mediational techniques and conceptual
frameworks in archaeology’, in Journal of Social Archaeology, vol. 5,
no. 1, pp. 54–86.
[36] Young, L. 2007, review of Handbook of material culture, Tilley, C.,
et al (eds) 2006, in reCollections: Journal of the National Museum of
Australia,
vol.
2,
no.2,
url:
http://recollections.nma.gov.au/issues/vol_2_no2/book_reviews/hand
book_of_material_culture/
[37] Zielinski, S. 2006, Deep time of the media: Toward an archaeology of
hearing and seeing by technical means, Custance, G. (trans.),
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 259.
[38] Ihde, D. 2005, ‘Material hermeneutics’, in Symmetrical archaeology,
Stanford:
Theoretical
Archaeology
Group,
doi:humanitieslab.stanford.edu/Symmetry/746.
[39] Bennet, J. 2008, T’Visionarium: A User Guide. Karlsruhe & Sydney:
ZKM/UNSW Press.
[40] ZKM Media Art Database, doi:mediaartbase.de
[41] Museum Victoria Collections,
doi:museumvictoria.com.au/collections-research/
[42] PADiL doi:www.padil.gov.au/

[13] Kenderdine, S. 2007a, ‘The irreducible ensemble: Place-Hampi’, in
Proceedings of Virtual Systems and Multimedia 13th International
Conference, VSMM 2007, LNCS, Berlin: Springer, 58–67.
[14] Kenderdine, S. 2007b, ‘Somatic solidarity, magical realism and
animating popular gods: Place-Hampi “where intensities are felt”’, in
Proceedings of the 11th European Information Visualization
Conference, IV07, Zürich, July 2007, IEEE Comp Society, 402–8.
[15] Kenderdine, S. & Shaw, J. 2009, ‘New media insitu: The resocialization of public space’, in Benayoun, M. & Roussou, M. (eds),
International Journal of Art and Technology, special issue on
Immersive Virtual, Mixed, or Augmented Reality Art, vol 2, no.4,
Geneva: Inderscience Publishers, 258 - 276.
[16] Kenderdine, S. 2010, Place-Hampi: Inhabiting the panoramic
imaginary of Vijayanagara, Heidelberg: Kehrer Verlag (forthcoming).
[17] Kenderdine, S., Shaw, J. & Kocsis, A. 2009, ‘Dramaturgies of
PLACE: Evaluation, embodiment and performance in PLACEHampi’, DIMEA/ACE Conference (5th Advances in Computer
Entertainment Technology Conference & 3rd Digital Interactive
Media Entertainment and Arts Conference), Athens.
[18] Kenderdine, S., Shaw, J. et al, ‘Place-Hampi: Co-evolutionary
narrative & augmented stereographic panoramas, Vijayanagara,
India’, in Kalay, Y., Kvan, T. & Affleck, J. (eds), New heritage: New
media and cultural heritage, Abingdon: Routledge/Taylor & Francis
Books, 336–52.
[19] McGinity, M., Shaw, J., Kuchelmeister, V., Hardjono, A. & Del
Favero, D. 2007, ‘AVIE: a versatile multi-user stereo 360° interactive
VR theatre’ in Proceedings of the 2007 Workshop on Emerging
Displays Technologies: Images and Beyond: The Future of Displays
and Interaction, San Diego, August 2007, vol. 252, New York: ACM.
[20] Pearson, M. & Shanks, M. 2001, Theatre/Archaeology, London:
Routledge.
[21] PLACE-Hampi Evaluation 2007,
doi:place-hampi.museum/evaluation.html
[22] PLACE-Hampi, url: http://place-hampi.museum
[23] Shanks, M. 2004, ‘Three rooms: Archaeology and performance’, in
Journal of Social Archaeology, vol. 4, no. 2, 147–80
[24] Shanks, M. 2006, Media and archaeological futures, doi:
[25] Shanks,
M.
2008,
Archaeology
and
the
visual,
doi:documents.stanford.edu/michaelshanks/144, last accessed 30 June
2009.
[26] The Eye, doi:
www.vrmag.org/vartist/spotlight/THE_EYE_OF_NAGAUR.html

414
408

