2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

From Data to Knowledge
Visualizations as transformation processes within the Data-Information-Knowledge
continuum
Luca Masud, Francesca Valsecchi, Paolo Ciuccarelli, Donato Ricci, Giorgio Caviglia
INDACO Department, Density Design Research Group
Politecnico di Milano
Milan, Italy
lucamasud@gmail.com, francesca.valsecchi@polimi.it, paolo.ciuccarelli@polimi.it, donato.ricci@gmail.com,
giorgio.caviglia@gmail.com

While Tuftean authors advocate the need of a strictly
functionalist and analytic approach to visualization in the
domain of languages and techniques, other authors [3] [4] [5]
wrote about a more communicative approach to visualization
(casual info-vis, “information visualization for the people”,
information-aesthetics). Even though both these positions are
useful to reflect about specific kinds of visualizations, they
seem to be not enough (o not completely effective) to
support a interdisciplinary design-oriented approach. As a
matter of fact, there is not still a common ground model to
rely upon.
In a perspective in which we have the opportunity of
using visualization to face problems of various degrees of
complexity and different nature, communication design can
play in fact a useful role [6]. This may be especially true if
“the challenges of the modern world require integrative
problem solving and, at a more comprehensive level, holistic
thought and transdisciplinary schema promote unity of
knowledge” [7] and given that “without integrative
disciplines of understanding, communication, and action,
there is little hope of sensibly extending knowledge beyond
the library or laboratory in order to serve the purpose of
enriching human life” [8]. It is exactly in this way of
thinking that design – “by nature an interdisciplinary,
integrative discipline” [9] – and “the ability of designers to
discover new relationships among signs, things, actions, and
thoughts [...]” [8] can play a big role.
Working on visualizations from a communication design
perspective requires a different approach, one able to
consider them in the wider domain of communication
strategy. This is the reason why we need a model able to
cope with the many nuances of visualizations, a model
capable of taking into account the context in which
visualizations act as communication tools.
In such a design perspective we must start to refer to
visualizations as means to achieve purposes. This does not
refer strictly to the idea of representing of high-dimensional
sets of data: “the ability to visualize complex information
does not refer solely to the communication of quantitative
information but it also deals with the visual narration of
values and qualitative data.”[10]. So the aims of a

Abstract—In this paper we suggest a different approach that
considers visualizations in the wider domain of communication
and defines a model capable of taking into account the context
in which visualizations act as communication tools. In this
perspective we consider visualizations as transformation
processes within the Data-Information-Knowledge (DIK)
continuum. In the paper we discuss the continuum, and apply
the transformation process model to the main disciplines of
visualization. Visualizations represent powerful cognitive tools
that surround our everyday life [1]. By doing this we are able
to think about visualization from a multidisciplinary
perspective, exploring the role of visualizations in design
practice, as artifacts that are used in facing problems of
various degrees of complexity and nature. The contribution of
the model is mainly addressed to orientate and nurture the
reflective practice and to formalize the strategic more than the
technical role of visualizations in the design discipline.
Information Visualization, DIK, Data, Information,
Knowledge, Knowledge continuum, Design, transformations,
processes

I.

THE DESIGN SENSITIVITY TO VISUALIZATIONS

In our everyday life we are surrounded by many kind of
visualizations: from popular Infographics and customized
maps available on newspapers, magazines or websites to the
more specific and complex ones inside working environment
for the explanation of workflows, complex processes or
organizational structures.
This ever-growing diffusion of visualization tools even in
non-expert contexts and during decision making processes
and planning phases (opposed to an exclusively analytical
approach) requires a more open way of thinking about
visualizations, able to take in account the “world out there”
[2], the “‘real’ world” [3]. Different disciplines (especially
Information Visualization) have deeply investigated
visualizations mainly from a strictly analytical point of view,
focusing their reflections on some particular kind of
visualization, used especially in very narrow, peculiar and
usually very technical contexts.

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.68

439
445

In this perspective visualizations are not merely final
outcomes of representing data, information and knowledge.
Instead they have to be conceived as transformation
processes within the DIK continuum (figure 1).
Visualizations are in fact able to gather data, information or
knowledge (materials), visualizing them in an artifact is
information, to eventually create new knowledge (objective)
in the recipient. In Paragraph IV we will see how different
kinds of visualization create different kinds of knowledge.
The process consists of two main parts: producer's and
user's. The first one is the act of designing a visualization:
just as information is selecting, ordering and relating data a
visualization is always selecting and ordering. Visualizing
means deciding what and how to show of a given data set or
information. For this reason visualizations are always
information in the “universal domain”[12]. The second part
of the process is related to the user's interaction with the
visualization. As such the results of this part are not totally
controllable by the producer.

visualization can include indeed the capability to make sense
of context, communicate impressions, telling stories. We
need to change our perspective so that visualizations are not
merely defined by the technology they involve (as the
Information Visualization definition declares – see Paragraph
III), but rather by the relation with the aim and context they
are designed for and the recipient they want to reach.
In a user-centered design approach visualizations can be
seen as problem-solving tools differently deployed
according to their efficiency in a given context and for a
specific target. This leads to different kinds of languages
and approaches in the visualization domain.
The actual classification of visualizations based on the
different disciplinary contexts they arise from (see Paragraph
III) might be good to describe a visualization within a single
context but it fails in describing them in a cross-boundaries
perspective.
By the design framework visualizations are tools just in
the sense that they include users, context and aims in their
structure and they are expected to orientate further
knowledge and practice. Design is not pretending to provide
univocal position; as designers we need to start from the
purposes of communication focusing the reflection on the
processes rather than the outputs. Therefore we suggest that
visualizations can be categorized by the communicational
aspects they imply: what, in which way and to whom
communicate. From a designer’s perspective visualizations
represent the process that moves from data to knowledge,
where each visualization is seen as a transformation artifact
within the data-information-knowledge continuum (DIK)
[11]. In the next paragraphs we are going to develop this
concept.
II.

DESCRIPTION OF DIK CONTINUUM

Since visualizations work with data, information and
knowledge (as in some way it’s hinted – though in a
misleading way, since there's no direct correlation between
the discipline's name and the visualization per se – by the
main discipline's name: Data Visualization, Information
Visualization, Knowledge Visualization) we propose a
framework based on the Data-Information-Knowledge
continuum. As Bellinger, Castro and Mills [11] refer, the
continuum starts with raw data, “it simply exists and has no
significance beyond its existence (in and of itself). It can
exist in any form, usable or not”, proceeds with information
that occurs when data has been given meaning by way of
relational connections. Also in this case, “This "meaning"
can be useful, but does not have to be”. Finally knowledge is
the appropriate collection of information, “such that its intent
is to be useful” [11]. For example data may be the different
temperatures measured by a thermometer. By relating these
different temperatures it is possible to understand if the
temperature is rising or decreasing, giving the data a
meaning and thus transforming it in information (such that it
may be useful). Lastly, the fact that it is known that the
temperature is decreasing may trigger an action: e.g. if the
temperature was measured at home then the heating might be
turned on.

Figure 1.

III.

Visualizations as processes within the DIK
continuum

VISUALIZATION DISCIPLINES AND APPROACHES

Before understanding the different roles of visualization
it is better to start identifying the most important disciplines
in which visualization takes form. The following list is the
result of a research developed to make the various
disciplines' domains clear. As a matter of fact there are
currently no defined boundaries between the different
disciplines and their names are sometimes used
interchangeably. Here are presented the main and most
important disciplines (or domains) of visualization: even if
we are aware that this list can be improved or completed it
serves its purpose of illustrating the current state of
visualization's different approaches. Visualizations in the art
domain are not discussed in this paper. In fact art may create

446
440

new approach based on aim and targets can help the
reasoning about languages and medias involved.
In this paragraph we will integrate the Data-InformationKnowledge continuum with the different fuctions a
visualization can carry out.
Starting from the list proposed on the previous paragraph
we are able to delineate three main blocks of visualizations,
each of them based on the kind of materials and aims the
visualization works with. Furthermore we can distinguish
different knowledge kinds resulting from the visualization
process.
It could be useful to briefly outline the knowledge types
discussed in this paper. We will in fact distinguish three kind
of knowledge: declarative, procedural and conditional
[19][20]. Even if authors like Nonaka [21] distinguish five
types of knowledge (declarative, procedural, causal,
locational, relational) for our purposes the tripartition
suffices: a more refined analysis might work well in
distinguish different kinds of visualization artefacts – e.g.
locational knowledge for georeferenced visualizations – but
do not work so well for the macro-categories of this paper.
The first one includes visualizations that take data
(abstract or not) and convert it into information, in order to
let the user know something and make assumptions on the
data. It’s a transformation that explores the know-what (or
know about), to which we refer as declarative knowledge.
The second one refers to those visualizations, (i.e.
newspaper Infographics and Information Aesthetics
Visualizations) that do not only gather data and visualize it
but are also able to “tell a story” and communicate pieces of
crystallized information (as opposed to raw data). This
information can then be used by the recipient to understand
something or to know how to do something (e.g. instruction
manual pictograms, Infographics about procedures). For this
reason the second group does not only work on declarative
knowledge but on procedural one too. We should note that
the diagram in figure 2 shows data/knowledge instead of
data/information because understanding a theme is
fundamental for being able to talk about it. The
internalization of information becomes knowledge [22].
Lastly the third group does not take data as the starting
point. In fact, the aim of Knowledge Visualization is
transferring knowledge in a collaborative context, not
making sense in a high-dimensional data set. Knowledge
Visualizations does not only communicate how to do things
(procedural knowledge) but they are also able to transfer
knowledge of when and why the recipient should use his
knowledge (conditional knowledge [19]). In this perspective
the ability to “take action” in a context is fundamental in
knowledge transfer.
We will call these three categories analytical
visualizations,
communicative
visualizations
and
formative visualizations.

awareness around a given topic but it is not always able and
it is not created to give insights or explain a phenomenon.
a) Data Visualization: it refers to the practice of using
graphical representation – “information which has been
abstracted in some schematic form” [13] – to provide visual
insights in sets of data. It may refer both to static and
dynamic representations (thus covering Information
Visualization too).
b) Information Visualization: “The use of computersupported, interactive, visual representations of abstract data
to amplify cognition” [14]. While Data Visualization is
usually used as an umbrella term describing every form of
visual representation of data, Information Visualization is
restricted to computer-supported visualizations.
c) Scientific Visualization: “Scientific visualization
[...] deals with physically-based data. This kind of data is
defined in reference to space coordinates, which makes it
relatively easy to visualize in an intuitive way. The space
coordinates in the dataset are mapped to screen coordinates.
Examples are geographic data and computer tomography
data of a body.” [15]
d) Information Aesthetics: “Information aesthetics
forms a cross-disciplinary link between information
visualization and visualization art. It adopts more
interpretive mapping techniques to augment information
visualization with extrinsic meaning, or considers functional
aspects in visualization art to more effectively convey
meanings underlying datasets.[9]
e) Infographics: although “Information Graphics”
refers to the tools and techniques involved in the graphical
representation of data [16] in this paper the term is used in
relation to newspaper's infographics; for this reason is
important to remember that this kind of infographics'
background, unlike data visualization, stands in journalism,
design and the art of telling stories. Newspaper infographics
story is almost as old as newspapers themselves [17] and are
a great example of visually communicating informations to
a broad, non-expert target.
f) Knowledge Visualization: Knowledge Visualization
unlike Information Visualization uses visual representation
to trasfer knowledge between at least to person or a group or
persons rather than for data insights [18]. Given the kind of
applications of Knowledge Visualization artefacts
(Knowledge Management. Organizational Science) the
experiential and actuative – getting someone to get action –
dimension is the main feature of this discipline.
IV.

VISUALIZATIONS ACTING IN THE DIK CONTINUUM

We can note from the previous descriptions that the
boundaries between disciplines are quite blurred and that a

447
441

different kind of recipient of communicative visualizations:
being this kind of representations deployed on mass media
the general audience to which they are addressed may not
have the proficiencies for such kind of visualization. In this
group a pictogrammatic language and the use of metaphors
and illustrations are usually employed in the visualization,
since an accurate data retrieval is not its main aim: chances
are that a data-ink ratio approach to visualization may prove
non-effective or even counter-productive in this context.

Figure 2.

C. Formative Visualizations
This kind of visualizations are deeply characterized by
the context in which they are used. They share in fact
techniques with communicative visualizations even though
they have a different target and context of use.
They are used as a support in knowledge transfer inside
cooperative work groups. They represent workflows,
processes and they are able to instruct users of their role in
that cooperative context. The real distinctive feature of
formative visualizations is action: those visualizations are
realized for people in active roles inside an organization or
work group so that they are able to know how, when and
why to act in a given context. Knowledge may in fact be
described as “actionable information” [23] and some kind of
knowledge are strictly bound to experience (i.e. Procedural
knowledge that is “knowledge about how, when and why to
do something” [24])

Visualizations as processes within the DIK
continuum

This three kinds of visualization have different recipients
and contexts of use. Therefore, their function, aim and
language greatly differ from one another.
Although a deeper analysis is needed here, we start from
the identification of some main guidelines for each type of
visualization.

V.

DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS

As we highlighted visualizations may be considered as a
process. Considering aims, targets and contexts we defined
three different processes which, while sharing the same base
structure, differ in the final outcome. In fact the artifacts
belonging to each of these three processes use different kind
of languages and techniques according tohe different
transformation processes within the continuum.
This kind of classification is mainly addressed to
orientate and nurture the reflective practice and to formalize
the strategic more than technical role of visualizations in the
design discipline.
Even if the interest for data, information and knowledge
visualization grows at an impressive pace, the possibility to
define a wider and strategic role for these competences in a
knowledge society - especially within decision-making
processes related to complex problems - suffers from a
fragmented disciplinary field.
As the problems we are facing became more and more
complex and require a interdisciplinary approach and a new
framework for knowledge processes, design can play a
specific and important role. Exploiting their form-giving
ability and the attitude to connect disciplines, designers are
able to produce - together with other experts - visualizations
that respond to the multiple targets and goals of the different
phases that articulate complex-problem solving or decision
making processes. To accomplish this role, a framework is
needed to connect the different visualization disciplines, and
to overcome the limits of the traditional functional or
typological taxonomies.

A. Analytical Visualizations
In their functionalist approach analytical visualizations
largely use reversible techniques so that the recipient is able
to infer data from the representation (see Lau and Vande
Moere [9]). They are usually deployed for a strictly technical
target who use those visualization for work: this kind of user
have to rely on visualizations in their everyday work. By
technical here we do not intend it in a visualization
perspective but simply professionals who utilizes visual
representations: e.g. analysts, economists, statistical
scientists, medical personnel, etc.
B. Communicative Visualizations
In this case visualizations are not used for a detailed data
analysis but for storytelling or to communicate the meaning
of the relations of data: the author acts as intermediary in the
communication process so that the visual representation is
not used to make assumptions and analysis but to
communicate results. As Pousman, Stasko and Mateas notes
[8] this kind of visualizations (which they call “casual
information visualization”) are able to provide awareness,
social and reflective insights, even though they do not offer
analytical ones. This approach is well explained by the

448
442

We identified the Data, Information, Knowledge
continuum as the key element for a framework that considers
visualization as a process and not as a product. As a matter
of fact we are involved in the practices (the process) leading
to the visualization artifact (the product) more than in the
artifact in itself. Considering the three different approaches
to visualization, the passage from product to process allows
to define the visualization techniques and languages
according to the proposed objectives, targets and contexts in
which they will be deployed.
In our experience, it shows its usefulness in defining the
visualization requirements and the disciplinary partnerships
needed for any of the possible context-target-goal
combinations that characterize the different phases of a
decision-making/problem solving process.
More research and work is needed to validate the
framework in a wider number of contexts and to deeply
define the specific combination of techniques and languages
to be used in the three – analytical, communicative,
formative – visualization domains.

[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[16]

G. Bonsiepe. “Design as tool for cognitive metabolism, the role of
design in the socialisation of knowledge”. In International
Symposium “Ricerca+ Design”. 2000.
S. Few. “InfoVis as Seen by the World Out There: 2007 in Review”.
In IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology,
2007. VAST 2007.
M. Danziger. Information visualization for the people. Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. 2008.
Z. Pousman, J. T Stasko and M. Mateas. “Casual Information
Visualization: Depictions of Data in Everyday Life”. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, no. 6: 114.
2007.
A. Lau, and A. V. Moere. “Towards a model of information aesthetics
in information visualization”. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference Information Visualization, 87-92. IEEE Computer
Society Washington, DC, USA. 2007.
P. Ciuccarelli, D. Ricci, and F. Valsecchi. “Handling changes trough
diagrams: Scale and grain in the visual representation of Complex
Systems”. In Cipolla C. and Peruccio P. P. Changing the change
Proceedings. Turin: Allemandi, July 10. 2008.
J.T. Klein. Crossing boundaries: Knowledge, disciplinarities, and
interdisciplinarities. Charlottsville: The University of Virginia Press.
1996.

[17]
[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]

[24]

449
443

R. Buchanan “Wicked Problems in Design Thinking”. Design Issues,
8:2, 5-21, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 199
K. Friedman. “Theory construction in design research: criteria:
approaches, and methods”, Design Studies 24:6, November. 2003.
G. Scagnetti, D. Ricci, G. Baule, P. Ciuccarelli. “Reshaping
Communication Design Tools” Complex Systems Structural Features
For Design Tools, in IASDR07: International Associations of
Societies of Design Research” The Hong Kong Polytechnic
University, Hong Kong, 20 (digital). 2007.
G. Bellinger, D. Castro and A. Mills. ‘‘Data, information, knowledge,
and
wisdom’’.
URL:
http://www.systemsthinking.org/dikw/dikw.htm. 2004.
C. Zins, “Conceptual approaches for defining data, information, and
knowledge”. Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology 58, no. 4: 479–493. 2007.
M. Friendly, and D. J. Denis. “Milestones in the history of thematic
cartography, statistical graphics, and data visualization”. 2004.
S. K. Card, J. D Mackinlay and B. Shneiderman. Readings in
information visualization: using vision to think. Morgan Kaufmann.
1999.
R. Voigt. “An extended scatterplot matrix and case studies in
information visualization”. Unpublished Masters thesis. Virtual
Reality and Visualization Research Center, Vienna, AU. 2002.
R. L. Harris. Information graphics: A comprehensive illustrated
reference. Oxford University Press, USA. 1999.
A. Cairo. “Sailing to the Future: Infographics in the Internet Era.”
Creative Commons License. University of North Carolina. 2005.
R. A. Burkhard. “Learning from architects: the difference between
knowledge visualization and information visualization”. IV 2004.
Proceedings. Eighth International Conference on, 519-524. 2004.
G. Schraw. “Promoting general metacognitive awareness”.
Instructional Science 26, no. 1: 113–125.1998
G. Judelman. Knowledge Visualization. Problems and Principles for
Mapping the Knowledge Space. M. Sc. Thesis. 2004.
I. Nonaka. “A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation”.
Organization science 5, no. 1: 14-37. 1994.
C. Zins. “Conceptual approaches for defining data, information, and
knowledge”. Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology 58, no. 4: 479–493. 2007.
E. M.Awad and H. M. Ghaziri. Knowledge Management. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall Publishing, Pearson Education, Inc.
2004.
N. Basjes. “A model for procedural knowledge”. Universiteit
Nyenrode: Breukelen, The Netherlands. 2002.

