2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Visualising Virtual Learning Environments:
Case Studies of the Website Exploration Tool
V. Pascual-Cid
Universitat Pompeu Fabra &
Barcelona Media - Innovation Centre
Barcelona, Spain
victor.pascual@upf.edu

L. Vigentini
The University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK
l.vigentini@ed.ac.uk

data are tailored for the business needs and highly focused on
key performance indicators (KPIs) [2]. When considering a
closed-access system within an educational setting, in which
the VLE is either complementing the course material in a
blended delivery of instruction or provides the interactive
space in which teaching occurs, as in distance learning, the
KPIs used in business models loose meaning as usability
and students experience are central.

Abstract—In this paper we describe the long term evaluation
of the Website Exploration Tool (WET), an exploratory system
for visualising web data, through the assessment of two Virtual
Learning Environments (VLE). VLEs provide log files that
can be studied with web mining techniques to understand
the behaviour of the students and consequently improve the
pedagogy. However, statistical metrics are not always easy to
interpret for the educators, which suggests the need to develop
novel approaches for the easy discovery of usage patterns. The
integration of WET in the assessment process of two VLEs
gave us the opportunity to conduct long-term case studies
that supported the evaluation of the visual approaches used
in our tool. Our main contributions are the description of the
benefits of such approaches for the analysis of VLEs as well as
recommended features for supporting this task, and a summary
of the main findings from our case studies.

In previous work [3], [4] WET was introduced as a visual
tool enabling to explore web data through interactive visual
representations of the structure and usage of a site. WET
allows to dynamically adjust parameters to be observed via
different views and tools adding a visual dimension to aid
web usage mining. Furthermore, a key feature of WET,
which is not available in traditional log analysis tools, is the
potential to include meta-information to the logs and add
this to the visualisations. In an effort to go beyond classical
website evaluation, we integrated the system in the analysis
process of two projects that sought the assessment of two
different e-learning spaces.

Keywords-Infovis evaluation, Virtual Learning Environments, Web Mining

I. I NTRODUCTION
Ramsden [1] suggested that integrated monitoring of
student experience is an essential component and a minimum
standard of online learning provision. In fact, usage access
data could be valuable for instructors to gain a better
understanding in how students use the online resources
and evaluate how effective they might be. However, in
practice, it is rare that teachers use such data to inform their
teaching or pedagogical goals, preferring traditional faceto-face interaction or feedback evaluation forms at the end
of the teaching term. This is strikingly different from the
growing trends in e-commerce in which the use of advanced
analysis and visualisation techniques to explore usability and
effectiveness of web material has become a cornerstone of
business strategy to understand customers’ behaviour.
The lack of applied examples of web usage mining
in education is partially caused by the clunky interfaces
implemented in VLEs to access and view data, and partially
by the difficulty of finding the expertise in data mining
among teachers and instructors. There is certainly a need
to make available simple and intuitive tools to improve
pedagogy and students experience. Furthermore, typical web
analytics approaches and applications to study web usage
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.31

M. Quixal
Barcelona Media - Innovation Centre
Barcelona, Spain
marti.quixal@barcelonamedia.org

The research presented in this paper has two main goals:
the first is to explore the potential and the benefits of a visual
mining tool in educational online provision of content using
standard VLEs. The second is to provide further evidences
in support of the usefulness of WET in exploratory data
analysis providing a detailed evaluation of this tool with
two long-term case studies.
This paper is organised as follows: Section II provides a
review of current techniques for analysing VLEs as well as
visualisation methods applied in web analysis. Section III
describes the main features of WET while Section IV
introduces the methodology of our evaluations. Section V
provides a detailed description on how we integrated WET
in the assessment of the AutoLearn and e-STUB projects,
as well as the main findings to demonstrate the usefulness
and potential of the tool. Section VI includes a discussion on
the benefits of WET in the assessment of VLEs and suggests
improvements in the design of visual web mining systems.
149

II. S TATE OF THE ART

In [18] Plaisant challenged researchers to reformulate their
evaluations to capture the exploratory nature of infovis
systems and later contributed to the Multi-dimensional Indepth Long-term Case Studies (MILC) [19] in the attempt to
overcome some of these issues. This methodology enables
to conduct more naturalistic evaluation procedures with
qualitative assessment based on the observation of real users
with real tasks using the target tool during a long period of
time.

The web based nature of VLEs makes data mining techniques suitable to gather information from web server logs
that contain trails of student and teacher activity within
the platform [5], [6]. Specifically, web mining techniques,
which include the analysis of the structure, content and usage
of a site, can be used to discover and model the success
of pedagogical strategies and ease of use of the learning
platform.
Early attempts to use web server logs to explore students
behaviour using online learning material have been reported
in different studies with various degrees of success. For
example, Ingram [7] used logs to evaluate utility and usability of instructional websites. Crook and Barrowcliff [8]
carefully logged students engagement to demonstrate the
value of ubiquitous computing on campus. Hardy and colleagues [9] monitored students access to material provided
via a VLE across different disciplines to identify useful behaviour patterns. However, these studies provide a snapshot
view of usage, and much like web analytics, give only a
descriptive overview of activity.
There are many web analytics tools that generate a wide
variety of metrics such as number of page views or average
time spent by the users on the site that help to understand
website usage. However, these statistics usually provide
little insight into usage due to the lack of adequate and
comprehensible visualisations that may potentially assist the
process of making sense of the vast amount of data available.
Information Visualisation (infovis) techniques have been
applied in an attempt to overcome such problem. The most
common approach has been the usage of node-link diagrams
where nodes represent content pages and edges represent
links among them. Different layouts have been used for
representing either the organisation of the website or the
routes followed by the users when navigating through the
site [10], [11], [12], [13].
In fact, a few cases can be found demonstrating the
applications of these techniques into the e-learning domain.
For example, [14] used a file-navigation-like tree for digging
into the details of student session. [15] implemented the
DMASC tool, which provided fine-grain details of the paths
of individual users through the learning space.
However, the evaluation of information visualisation systems provides a number of challenges which has captured researchers interest for several years. Although the evaluation
of specific techniques can be usually tackled by analysing
users’ performance times and error rates through predefined
tasks, the exploratory and interactive essence of infovis systems makes it difficult to evaluate their effectiveness and the
usefulness of the visual outputs with classical methods such
as controlled and artificial experiments [16]. In that sense,
Perer and Shneiderman stated that “telling the users which
tasks to carry out is incompatible with discovery” [17].

III. T HE W EBSITE E XPLORATION T OOL
The WET system consists of a web mining module and a
visualisation system. The former is based on a database that
holds the data regarding structure and usage. New metrics
can be incorporated through the development of SQL queries
enabling the system to capture the results, and generate a
XML file. The visualisation system (Figure 1) is responsible
for interpreting the XML file and provides an interactive
environment for exploring the data. The system incorporates
three main coordinated views: a hierarchical representation
of the website structure showing the shortest paths from the
root node to every content on the site (top left image), a
visualisation of the most common paths performed from a
landing page also represented as a hierarchy [4] (top right
image), and a graph visualisation showing an aggregation
of all user paths (bottom image). Both hierarchical visualisations can be displayed using a radial tree or a treemap
metaphor, while the graph representing the navigation of the
users in the site uses a force directed layout.
The system also enables to map different metrics with
visual attributes such as colour, shape and size, and provides
dynamic filtering tools to reduce the amount of information
to be displayed. Further details of the functionalities of the
system can be found in [3] and [4].

Figure 1. The WET interface provides a set of coordinated visualisations,
a menu that allows the customisation of the visualisations and charts
representing page visits over time.

150

IV. E VALUATION M ETHODOLOGY

V. C ASE S TUDIES
We hereafter describe the projects that incorporated the
VLE assessment with WET as well as discuss a subset of
the main insights gathered with our tool. Due to space constraints we will only introduce the most important findings
in each case study.

To validate the usefulness of the visualisations and the
mining system of WET, we conducted two case studies
with real scenarios in which WET was used by at least
one analyst per project in the assessment of two e-learning
platforms. As indicated earlier, the need of visualisation
tools in education is demonstrated by the fact that in both
cases, the first engagement followed an expression of interest
from the project leaders in using visualisation tools to aid
their assessment.
Following the guidelines proposed in [19] and [20], the
main steps that we applied in the MILC evaluation can be
summarised as follows:

A. AutoLearn
AutoLearn is a VLE to learn English or German as
a foreign language developed using Moodle; AutoLearn
incorporates automatic correction facilities that go beyond
spell and grammar checking based on Natural Language
Processing techniques. The main goal of the project was to
study the use of automatically generated feedback in reallife instruction environments, which adds machine-learner
interaction to the existing teacher-learner and learner-learner
interaction. To what concerns our work, the project sought
the evaluation of the usability of the platform to understand
students satisfaction and to assess the pedagogical and
linguistic aspects of the courses.
AutoLearn was used in 7 institutions across Europe,
managing a total of 28 courses taken by 610 students during
two periods of respectively 4 and 2 months. The whole
project was divided into two phases: the first testing phase
was dedicated to the implementation of the learning system
in the first 13 courses. During this stage analysts aimed at
improving the system through the application of an iterative
evaluation-development methodology.
WET was used as the main tool in the explorative analysis
of quantitative data extracted from log files. The lack of
experience of the analysts in the web mining field generated
no primary hypothesis, which emphasised the need of an
exploratory tool for the discovery of outliers and behavioural
patterns.
1) Data Integration: Although WET incorporates automatic tools for importing data from the most common
web server log files, the existence of proxies in some
schools prevented the user identification through classical
methods of log file analysis [21]. Hence, we ported the
Moodle database, which incorporates its own usage data
with identified users, into the WET mining system.
We generated a hierarchy based upon the main structure
of the project that can be seen in Figure 2. The provided
structure had nodes representing assignments in the outermost ring of the hierarchy, enabling a histogram like
visualisation when mapping the nodes’ height with exercisebased statistics. Such histogram gets visually integrated with
the hierarchy of the platform, which enabled the discovery
of patterns and outliers, as can also be seen in Figure 2.
The developed quantitative metrics were based on the
time spent per exercise, number of visits and number of
interactions per assignment. The last one was especially
interesting as it provided a measure of the number of times
that a user interacted with the automatic correction module.

1) Initial interview and experiment setup: a first interview
enables the user and the evaluator to define the goals
of the analysis according to the capabilities of the
system. Such goals will be used afterwards to assess
the success of the analysis process.
2) Training: an extensive training must be provided to the
participants so they can understand the functionalities
of the system.
3) Early use: participants install the tool in their workplace and get the required datasets formatted accordingly to the needs of the system. Continuous contact
with the evaluator occurs to accommodate the tool to
the needs of the user.
4) Mature use: it is expected that most of the outcome
of the analysis should come during this phase, where
the participant is already skilful with the tool and
has a better idea of the type of analysis that can be
performed. Ethnographic type-of observations should
be performed.
5) Outcome: a final interview must be conducted to
review the findings and compare them with the goals
defined in the initial meeting. Participants should
provide thoughts and conclusions about the potential
of the system as well as suggest improvements for
future designs.
During the analysis process, participants were encouraged
to annotate and provide feedback about their findings or
frustrations, as well as to capture images or recordings
when discovery occurred. Moreover, the proximity with the
participants of the AutoLearn project gave us the opportunity
to install a screencast tool that video recorded all the analysis
sessions.
The interviews, communication and analysis tracking of
the e-STUB project was performed entirely online through
voice calls (Skype) and IM sessions using Google Wave.
The latter was particularly interesting because it allows
for a seamless combination of real-time and asynchronous
exchanges.

151

Regarding categorical data, the analysts identified every
node based on its type, differentiating quizzes, assignments,
resources and automatically corrected exercises.
2) Early Use: At the end of the testing phase, we
provided the analyst with an XML file containing aggregated
data from the 244 students that participated in 13 courses.
WET incorporated a radial tree as well as a treemap to
analyse the hierarchical structure of the platform, both of
them with the same interaction capabilities such as dynamic
filtering and visual mapping of metrics. We observed that
analysts felt more comfortable with the radial tree than
with the treemap as the hierarchical structure pops up more
clearly. Moreover comparing bar heights was easier than
comparing the treemap squarified areas. At the time of this
analysis there were no users’ paths visualisations in WET,
which limited the data exploration to the comparison of the
different metrics with the visualisation of the structure of
the project.
During the analysis, each quantitative metric was mapped
accordingly onto the height of the nodes, while colour was
used to distinguish between categorical values such as level
of the course (Intermediate or Advanced), language (German
or English) or type of exercise (quiz, assignment, resource
and automatically corrected exercise). Such mapping enabled the discovery of a usage pattern that revealed a decay
in the visits as the lesson advanced, as can be seen in
Figure 2. In a more detailed analysis, it was also discovered
that there was a different slope considering students from
advanced courses with intermediate ones.
This finding encouraged the analysts to develop and integrate more usage related metrics to compare in the second
round of the project.

3) Mature Use: The recorded analysis sessions allowed
us to observe a dramatic improvement in task performance,
proof of the learning curve of the analyst. When prompted,
the analyst said: “I already knew how to use the tool, so
I went straight to visualise what I wanted to see”. We
observed that the analyst developed a clear exploration
strategy that followed the Information Seeking Mantra [22]:
a very first overview of the whole structure using size and
colour according to specific metrics helped to detect outliers
and trends. Then, most relevant courses were filtered and
explored in more detail.
In this phase analysts found more examples that supported
the findings made in the early stage regarding exercise visits.
4) Outcome: Analysts discovered a very common behaviour pattern that involved the absence of use of direct links between exercises within a course. Images from
Figure 3 make apparent a pattern referred by one of the
analysts as the “flower visualisation”. In the images, the
main node represents the home page of the course, while
surrounding coloured nodes represent the different exercises
in the course. As can be seen, users tend to move back
and forth between the exercises instead of moving from one
exercise to the other. This pattern was interpreted as a sign
that each activity was in principle self-contained and that all,
at least most of, the materials needed to answer the questions
posed by the teacher could be answered without the need
to navigate around. This interpretation is supported by a
decision made after the first testing phase, which implied that
all activities including reading and listening comprehension
activities had to be so implemented that learners could have
access to either the audio, the video or the text as well as
to the questions in one single screen.
In the final interview with the analysts, it was argued that
the explorative capabilities of the tool and the “easy way
to represent the hierarchical structure of the project” helped
them in the process of generating new hypotheses which
in the long term allowed them to perform a deeper analysis.
Their main findings were also contrasted and confirmed with
the qualitative analyses performed during the project.
We also noticed an extensive usage of image editing tools
for annotating relevant screenshots after every discovery in
order to incorporate them in the analysis report. This fact
strongly suggested the need to incorporate basic annotation
tools to the system, which at the same time may stimulate
the collaborative analysis.
The final report of the project incorporated images extracted from WET to show the findings. More details about
gathered insight from the analysis of AutoLearn may be
found in [23].
B. e-STUB project
The main goals of the e-STUB project (exploration of
Students Tracking and User Behaviour) was to analyse
in detail how students used online resources provided in

Figure 2. Hierarchy of AutoLearn structure. Leafs of the tree represent
course exercises, that can be mapped according their specific quantitative
and categorical metrics.

152

Figure 3. Aggregated users’ paths from the 4 most visited courses of AutoLearn. The central node in the visualisations correspond to the main page of
the course which contain links to the different exercises, which are colour-coded according to its type.

blended courses via a VLE, and relate usage behaviours with
both performance and a number of personality metrics.
In a prior quantitative analysis, Vigentini [24] identified
some compelling correlations between the amount of usage
(characterised by frequency of access and time spent on
resources) and academic performance. However, one of the
key limitations reported was the inability to meaningfully
represent visually the visitation patterns or attempting to
define what a typical session would look like.
The dataset included over 2000 students enrolling into the
foundation psychology courses over a period of 5 years at the
University of Edinburgh. This is an extremely heterogeneous
sample in composition as the cohorts were followed from the
first into the second year and the fact that not all students
enrolled pursue a degree in social sciences, but take the
psychology course as an outside subject (i.e. only 40% of
the students are enrolled in psychology degrees).

first or second year) and performance (good performance,
i.e. student with grades above 65%, and poor performance,
i.e. between 35%-marginal fail- to 55% -satisfactory-).
2) Early Use: We observed that the learning curve to
attain a good proficiency with the use of WET was fairly
rapid. This was predominantly because the project leader
was already familiar with web analytics and some of the
core concepts involved with the handling and processing of
web log data in web usage mining. The steps to produce
the data in the right format, however were time-consuming
and required a considerable amount of effort. The exchanges
between the analyst and the developer were frequent and the
aid of the communication tool (Google Wave) in storing and
reproducing the exchanges was very valuable. After an initial
live session in which the evaluator described the tool and
its functionalities in detail, the work on graphs’ generation
took much more prominence and the analyst conducted the
exploration using WET largely independently.

1) Data Integration: Web logs were obtained directly
from WebCT Vista 6.0 (now Blackboard) using a powertool in the admin interface rather than the enduser GUI.
This generated a log of content units (pages with all the
frames/graphics and scripts) organised by user and session.
Such format is an excellent starting point as it allows one
to skip some of the preprocessing steps normally required
by the common log format. Each content unit was coded
with metadata according their functions: these correspond
to tools (i.e. content page, quiz etc), actions (i.e. view
content page, search performed etc.) and abstractions (i.e.
core content, social activity, learning activity etc.). Normally
such information is not readily available in server logs, but
the extra processing step to enrich the data gives a deeper
understanding of usage behaviours. Users’ goals cannot be
easily extrapolated from the path taken, but using the metadata, intentions can be inferred based on the resources
used. In fact, contrary to the concept of conversion page
in e-commerce, for an educational website, students could
be driven by potentially competing goals within the same
session (i.e. performing a self-test using a quiz as a learning
goal as much as spending time in reading core content, but
the intentions are different). Furthermore, although user data
cannot be easily segmented with WET, the sample was stratified to provide single datasets based on the course year (i.e.

3) Mature Use: Once the analyst had an opportunity
to explore WET and its capabilities, the representation of
meta-data and user information in the visualisation became
central. The inclusion of categorical and user data required
a further elaboration at the database level, before the generation of graphs. As the steps were standardised in the
earlier stages of the project, the exchanges of data files
and generation of graphs was considerably faster at this
point, leading to an efficient workflow. WET needed a small
upgrade to allow for the inclusion of all visual information
available, but not previously used in a concurrent fashion,
however this did not cause any side-effects in the data
analysis allowing the analyst to focus on the exploration
of data.
4) Outcome: Given the previous quantitative understanding of the patterns in the data, the analyst was mainly interested in the best possible visual representation of patterns.
In this paper we would like to focus specifically on one
cohort of students (students enrolled in the Psychology 1
course in 2007 and continuing into Psychology 2 in 2008)
to demonstrate some useful insights generated from the use
of WET.
For example, the analyst knew already that the students
mainly focused on three core content pages (both in terms
153

of time spent on resource and frequency of access): the
home page, which is the first container displayed after
login, the lectures hub (providing access to all lecture notes,
handouts and core readings related to the teaching), and
the tutorial hub (providing all material related to tutorials
and practicals). These pages are prominent in the figures
in which the size of items represents the frequency of use.
The access to the social hub (i.e. discussion forums, internal
mail system and chat) was less clear with aggregated data
indicating uneven patterns across courses and years.

Figure 5. Differences between high and low performing students’ most
common paths in a 2nd year course.

formance at the end of the year. The path to expertise in
the higher performing students suggests increased efficiency
in access, with shorter, frequent and targeted visits (i.e. the
sessions are short for all types of content), whilst the lower
performing group still shows broader and lengthier visits,
more similar to the novice state in Y1. Y1 students also don’t
seem to differentiate between the core content and social
interaction: patterns that remain similar in lower performing
students moving from Y1 to Y2. This could be an index of
distraction or an attempt to seek external validation.
Although all these observations need to be properly
substantiated by statistical analysis of the data, the visual
interaction with the navigation paths is essential to explore
for meaningful patterns.

Figure 4. Paths and frequency of access in a 1st year course; most common
paths from the homepage (left) and site structure highlighting shortest path
to search results pages (green nodes).

The graphs (Figure 4 and Figure 5) demonstrate the
expected patterns in accessing the core content. An interesting observation can be made in relation with the ’path
to expertise’ in using the system: students in year 1 (Y1,
Figure 4), in general, display longer paths in their browsing
sessions compared to Y2 (Figure 5). Longer visits in Y1
were expected from the quantitative data analysis as Y1
students tend to ’cram’ visitation toward the end of the term,
closer to the exams (see [9]). Another possible demonstration of this ’novice’, more chaotic approach, in using the
VLE is offered by the access to the ’search’ facility. The
search is available from anywhere in the site and the results
pages are dynamically generated appearing in the structure
as if they were static. Figure 4 (right) shows that in the
Y1 class there are a number of long branches (green nodes)
indicating repeated searches beyond 3 clicks. Occurrences of
the search results pages are a behavioural pattern rather than
reflecting the structure of the site and its usability. A shallow
occurrence like in Y2 (i.e. log in and find X) demonstrates
a strategic behaviour. In Y1 so many long branches and
deeper occurrences in the clickstream could be interpreted
as an index of disorientation.
The similarity of the visitation patterns in students classed
as low performers in Y2 and the Y1 group was particularly
interesting as it could be an early indicator of lower per-

VI. C ONCLUSIONS
The understanding of the usage patterns of teaching
material offered via VLEs is a very important element that
could provide valuable feedback to instructors and inform
pedagogy in respect of both learning outcomes and teaching
goals. However, web analytics and traditional log analysis
tools are unable to provide a simple and accessible way to
gain insight into the data with adequate tools for developing
customised metrics.
This paper demonstrates how the use of WET provides a
way to visually represent website data for the evaluation of
the usage of two VLEs. In both case studies, WET is enhancing the discovery of uncovered and unexpected patterns
and could provide a valuable asset for instructors and policy
makers to enhance the implementation and evaluation of elearning platforms, proving the sensemaking ability of our
system. We have also seen that the ability to embed metainformation to log data represents an important enhancement
compared with existing web analytics tools.
In both cases the project leaders expressed that a visualisation tool could enhance their assessment and understanding
of the data. Taking into account that the goal of applying
web mining techniques to VLEs is to improve learning,
which is not a tangible measure, contrary to what happens
154

in e-commerce where profit is pursued, interactive tools
such as WET become especially important as they provide
an explorative environment to aid the generation of new
hypotheses.
Relevant enhancements of the tool to be considered as
future work should incorporate the ability to annotate the
visualisations to facilitate collaboration, the generation of
data reports for further analysis, and the possibility to stratify
the data on-demand, allowing a real-time calculation of
metrics according to metadata intervals, such as time or type
of users.

[12] E. H. Chi, J. Pitkow, J. Mackinlay, P. Pirolli, R. Gossweiler,
and S. K. Card, “Visualizing the evolution of web ecologies,”
in CHI ’98: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems, 1998, pp. 400–407.
[13] T. A. Keahey and S. G. Eick, “Visual path analysis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(InfoVis’02). IEEE Computer Society, 2002, p. 165.
[14] J. Mostow, J. Beck, H. Cen, A. Cuneo, E. Gouvea, and
C. Heiner, “An educational data mining tool to browse
tutor-student interactions: Time will tell,” Proceedings of the
Workshop on Educational Data Mining, National Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 15–22, 2005.

R EFERENCES
[15] S. Sobol, C. Stones, and A. Whitworth, “Qualitative evaluation of e-learning using a visualisation tool,” Proceedings,
IADIS Conference on Applied Computing, 2005.

[1] P. Ramsden, “Learning to teach in higher education,” RoutledgeFalmer, London, 2003.
[2] J. L. Ledford, J. Teixeira, and M. E. Tyler, Google Analytics,
3rd Edition. Wiley; Pap/Dig edition, 2009.

[16] S. Carpendale, “Evaluating information visualizations,” Information Visualization. Human-Centered Issues and Perspectives (Chapter 2), vol. 4950/2008, pp. 19–45, 2008.

[3] V. Pascual and J. Dursteler, “Wet: a prototype of an exploratory search system for web mining to assess usability,”
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference in Information Visualisation (IV07), Jan 2007.

[17] A. Perer and B. Shneiderman, “Integrating statistics and visualization: case studies of gaining clarity during exploratory
data analysis,” CHI ’08: Proceeding of the twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems, pp. 265–274, 2008.

[4] V. Pascual-Cid, R. Baeza-Yates, J. Drsteler, S. Mnguez,
and C. Middleton, “New techniques for visualising web
navigational data,” Proceedings of the 13th Conference in
Information Visualisation (IV09), pp. 621 –626, Jul 2009.

[18] C. Plaisant, “The challenge of information visualization evaluation,” AVI ’04: Proceedings of the working conference on
Advanced visual interfaces, May 2004.

[5] C. Romero and S. Ventura, “Educational data mining: A
survey from 1995 to 2005,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 135–146, 2007.

[19] B. Shneiderman and C. Plaisant, “Strategies for evaluating
information visualization tools: multi-dimensional in-depth
long-term case studies,” BELIV ’06: Proceedings of the 2006
AVI workshop on BEyond time and errors: novel evaluation
methods for information visualization, May 2006.

` Nebot, F. Mugica, C. Nord,
[6] F. Castro, A. Vellido, A.
C. Girona, and M. Hidalgo, “Applying data mining techniques
to e-learning problems,” Intelligence (SCI), vol. 62, pp. 183–
221, 2007.

[20] A. Perer and B. Shneiderman, “Integrating statistics and visualization for exploratory power: From long-term case studies
to design guidelines,” Computer Graphics and Applications,
IEEE, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 39–51, May 2009.

[7] A. Ingram, “Using web server logs in evaluating instructional
web sites,” Journal of educational technology systems, vol.
28(2), no. 137-57, 1999.

[21] R. Cooley, B. Mobasher, and J. Srivastava, “Data preparation
for mining world wide web browsing patterns,” Journal of
Knowledge and Information Systems, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 5–32,
1999.

[8] C. K. Crook and D. Barrowcliff, “Ubiquitous computing on
campus: Patterns of engagement by university students,” International Journal on Human Computer Interaction, vol. 13,
no. 2, pp. 245–256, 2001.

[22] B. Shneiderman, “The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for information visualizations,” VL ’96: Proceedings
of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, p. 336,
1996.

[9] J. Hardy, S. Bates, D. McKain, K. Murray, J. Paterson,
B. McGonigle, L. Vigentini, and A. Jackson, “The modus
operandi of the next generation e-learner; an analysis of
tracking usage across the disciplines,” Proceedings of the 13th
Association of Learning Technology Conference, 2006.

[23] R. N. M. Estrada and M. Quixal, “Report
of the evaluation in the second testing phase.
technical report. autolearn project,” Barcelona Media Innovation Centre, Tech. Rep., 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://autolearn.barcelonamedia.org/node/37

[10] J. Cugini and J. Scholtz, “Visvip: 3d visualization of paths
through web sites,” in DEXA ’99: Proceedings of the 10th
International Workshop on Database & Expert Systems Applications. IEEE Computer Society, 1999, p. 259.

[24] L. Vigentini, “Using learning technology in university
courses: do styles matter?” Multicultural Education and Technology Journal, vol. 3, 2009.

[11] J. I. Hong and J. A. Landay, “Webquilt: a framework for
capturing and visualizing the web experience,” in WWW ’01:
Proceedings of the 10th international conference on World
Wide Web. ACM, 2001, pp. 717–724.

155

