2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Drawing Conclusions:
Supporting Decision Making through Collaborative Graphic Annotations
Martin J. Eppler, Roland A. Pfister
mcm institute, University of St. Gallen (HSG) {martin.eppler@unisg.ch, roland.pfister@unisg.ch}
Abstract

their deliberations and argumentations for subsequent
meetings or follow-up decisions.
An alternative, often more effective way to support
such decision and communication processes consists of
giving managers the opportunity to jointly annotate the
presented charts, either on a poster or flipchart (or
through a multi-touch large screen or an interactive
whiteboard), thus literally working with the chart and
using it as an inscription device [1] to capture their
collective interpretations of the represented data and
make the data’s implications visible to everyone.
Managers can make use of such simple sketchmarks to
augment the quality of their group communication.
Hence, the main concept introduced in this paper is the
notion of sketchmarks or markups on diagrams using
hand-drawn sketches. We define a sketchmark in this
context as follows:

Although the application of sketch-based chart
annotation is not pervasive in management, the use of
sketchmarks can provide numerous benefits to
managerial discussions. The collaborative use of chart
annotations can support management teams in their
decision making based on quantitative charts by visually
eliciting and capturing interpretation processes,
clarifying basic assumptions, stimulating different
perspectives, and extrapolating trends into the future.
Sketch-based annotations combine the simplicity and
immediacy of drawing with the clarity and richness of
charting. In this paper, we provide the rationale for this
under-researched visual management and communication practice, illustrate it through examples, and – as
our main contribution – provide a first overview
classification of the different sketchmarks that
management groups can use in their discussion of
quantitative charts (for such contexts as strategy or
project reviews). In the end of the paper we briefly
describe our future research in this area and highlight
implications for management.

A sketchmark is a hand-drawn, simple, and ad-hoc
annotation, modification, or addition to one or several
elements of a quantitative or qualitative diagram on a
poster, flipchart, piece of paper, or via a digital pen on a
tablet PC or interactive whiteboard. A sketchmark is
drawn during a conversation, usually in front of
colleagues involved in a joint decision or discussion
process.

Keywords: decision making, decision support,
management meetings, charting, sketching, chart
annotation, decision quality, sense making, sketchmark,
communication quality

1. Introduction
Quantitative Charts such as portfolio diagrams, bar,
line or pie charts often form the basis for management
decisions - for example in the context of strategy or
project reviews. Such quantitative charts are often
discussed in management teams based on a prior
slideshow presentation or a printed report. In the ensuing
discussions, however, managers may detach themselves
from the presented or reported data and revert to their
own experience or prior opinions instead of focusing on
the presented data and their meaning and implications.
Another frequent challenge of such meetings consists of
creating a collaborative atmosphere and coming to a
truly shared understanding of a strategy or a project
portfolio. Many managers also struggle to fully capture

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.98

Fig. 1. An example of a hand-drawn sketchmark
We believe that such sketchmarks will become a
useful and pervasive management practice, as
collaborative decision making approaches and the
corresponding technology matures. Sketches, however,
have so far mainly been discussed as creativity catalysts
(see Verstijnen et al. [2], McGown Green [3], Anderson
& Helstrup [4], Goldschmidt [5], Duarte [6]) and not
necessarily as analytic, collaborative thinking tools (for
exceptions see Heiser et al. [7] and Ferguson [8]).
In this article, we thus show how managers can use
the power of provisionality and informality inherent in
hands-on sketching, particularly when combined (super-

363
369

imposed) with the data-rich format of quantitative charts.
We give an overview on the different sketching actions
and conventions that managers can exploit to add
meaningful marks to numeric charts. In the next section,
we discuss some of the main benefits of sketching on
charts in management (as identified by prior studies) and
illustrate them through two simple and typical examples.
This is followed by a classification of sketchmarks. In
the conclusion we summarize the main points of the
article and describe avenues for future research in this
area.

the feeling and thoughts of a patient and lets the therapist
and patient explore important themes or issues together
(also over time, by using older sketches in subsequent
sessions). Sketching in this context becomes a reflection
enabler that gives the patient and the analyst access to
previously unarticulated hopes, fears, or experiences.
According to Mayer [14] hand-drawn conceptual
sketches in general provide the following advantages:
• They engage people and keep them focused and
concentrated.
• They help to abstract or generalize from a
concrete phenomenon or situation.
• They signal work in progress and subjective
perspectives
and
consequently
invite
modifications or extensions.
• They invite the drawer to explore a change in
perspective and view things differently.
• They help to articulate previously implicit
notions or beliefs.
• They become an instant documentation for
subsequent reference and later analysis and
comparisons.
While sketching as a chart annotation practice is
quite different from the aforementioned study contexts of
engineering, group learning, or counseling, many of the
described benefits can also be used in the application of
sketchmarks. This is true for the individual (such as
speed, change in perspective, or iterative refinement), as
well as the collaborative advantages of sketches (joint
focus and engagement, memorability, articulating
assumptions etc.). In effect, annotating graphic charts
can bring about numerous benefits that can ultimately
lead to better communication and decision quality. As
Tversky and Suwa [11] (p. 76) point out:

2. Benefits of Sketching and Sketch-based
Chart Annotation
Why should managers and organization scholars be
interested in analytic sketching (as opposed to technical
and artistic sketching)? One of the main reasons may be
the high number of benefits that such sketching can
provide for collaboration and decision making in
management. These benefits have been discussed and
demonstrated in various research projects on the topic of
sketching, primarily in the areas of design, engineering
and psychology. Below we review these benefits in more
detail. We first focus on the benefits and advantages of
sketching in general, and then focus more specifically on
sketching as a collaborative annotation practice in
management.
Sketching in general, according to design theorist
and practitioner Bill Buxton [9] (p. 105), can be
considered a tool of thought that enables the mind to
capture things which are in flux and iteratively refine
them.
Stanford psychologist and sketching expert
Barbara Tversky also views sketches as thinking tools –
individually and in groups (as do Fish & Scrivener [10]).
In her numerous articles on the topic (such as Tversky &
Suwa [11], Tversky et al. [12], or Tversky [13]), she
emphasizes the speed of sketching, its provisional nature
(before definitive commitments, in order to enable an
‘expression of the vague’), and its simplicity as key
benefits. In collaboration contexts, she and colleagues
Heiser and Silverman (Heiser et al. [7] p. 6) stress the
following benefits of sketching: establishing a joint focus
among conversers, promoting interactivity and
involvement, fostering efficient and enjoyable
collaboration, being conducive to creating shared
meanings and leading to better listening and better
memorability of the issues discussed. In their study,
Tversky and her colleagues provide experimental and
observational evidence for these benefits. Similarly,
McGown and Green [3] stress the following
(collaborative) advantages of hand-drawn sketches: they
are fast and seamless, easy to (re-) do, have an
immediate effect, can trigger a high quality response, and
they are highly expressive and only constrained by the
drawer’s imagination.
In a very different (but equally informative) domain,
namely psychoanalysis, Mayer [14] focuses on the use of
sketches as conversation and analysis catalysts among
psychotherapists and their patients. The sketch in this
context becomes a potentially unfiltered access point to

Sketches serve as an easy referent for words and
gestures, so deictic expressions like here and there and
this part and that way simultaneously make
communication easier and more precise.
This is exactly what is happening when managers
add sketchmarks to charts: By sketching on and pointing
at the chart and by adding symbols or by connecting
elements, managers make the implications of data visible
and help their colleagues see and understand the
consequences of the presented numbers.
But sketchmarks help to achieve much more than
just a common focus. As meeting participants comment
on each others’ sketchmarks and remarks, they start to
converge in their interpretation processes, clarify basic
assumptions, stimulate different perspectives and
extrapolate trends into the future. Through their playful,
collaborative, and informal mode, sketches contribute to
a truly open dialogue (Isaacs [15]; Bohm [16]) that is
characterized by the suspension of one’s own beliefs and
assumptions and by an active engagement with the
viewpoints of others.
Sketchmarks are a useful communication and
decision making practice for managers because they
offer advantages at the beginning of a meeting, during a
meeting, towards the end of a meeting, and after a
meeting. A meeting supported by the usage of

370
364

hand, the focus of the meeting is on the analysis of the
main cost drivers and on possible solutions. As usual, the
project management officer has prepared a full deck of
slides with stacked bar charts, showing the development
of costs per month in various categories.
The main part of the status meeting, however, is
dedicated to getting a common understanding of the
underlying costs and discussing potential target areas for
cost savings. After having presented lots of charts and
figures, the presenter displays a bar chart, showing the
development of the total costs over the last twelve
months. Following the micro-process described above,
they first start by highlighting and emphasizing certain
values, months or upper-limits in order to draw the
participants focus on those specific data points.
While discussing the cost development, an expert
from the controlling department sketches on the bar chart
with a red pen to highlight the increase of the cost base
during the last quarter in order to emphasize abrupt rises
or to relate two different months to each other. By
dividing and hatching the columns, the participants gain
an understanding of how the total costs add up and which
cost categories are responsible for rising costs. They
immediately see that substituting employees by
contractors in the month of July has not reduced total
costs, but rather lead to an abrupt bounce in general
expenses. The expert also uses sketching to document
cost saving activities that were implemented in March.
This can be done by extending the bars of the months
after those activities took place and helps to point out
where they would stand nowadays, without those cost
savings.
After the expert has given lots of insight on these
figures and has brought all participants to the same level
of understanding, the project manager identifies possible
toeholds for cost savings. He uses a blue pen and
extrapolates the cost curve for both scenarios. Those
possible scenarios are also captured by sketching on the
initial bar chart. In the following step, the participants
have the possibility to vote whether they would prefer
the approach to reduce personal expenses or rather keep
those expenses on the same level and reduce general
expenses instead. Each meeting participant leaves his
vote as a small vertical line on the bar chart (at his or her
preferred scenario).
In their project status meeting, the participants
mainly use arrows to depict different possible future
directions or the development of the costs, and circles to
emphasize specific values. They furthermore extended
curves, divided or resized the bars by enlarging or
hatching them. To discuss the months May and
November, which have a similar cost structure, they use
connectors to show the relationship between those
values. Very basic symbols as flashes, clocks or
checkmarks are used to draw the participant’s attention
to a specific value or development.
At the end of the meeting, the participants feel that
they truly understand how the cost curve will develop
and are confident that, based on the various discussed
scenarios, they agree on the right decisions to bring the
project to a, at least from a financial point of view,
successful end.

sketchmarks follows a simple micro-process. At the
beginning of the meeting sketchmarks can help to create
an atmosphere of open dialogue and collaboration (see
also Blackwell et al. [17]). Adding sketches can help
managers focus their attention on a joint issue and really
be in the moment (and not check their Blackberry for
new messages instead). The advantage of sketchmarks is
that the presenter and every participant has the
possibility to emphasize figures, developments or points
to focus on. Those accented deviations, anomalies etc.
stay visible and top of mind during all further steps of the
meeting.
The next step in the meeting would be the phase,
where the participants and especially the expert analyse
the displayed information. Techniques like extrapolating,
resizing and tagging the charts support the analysis by
adding additional information. All participants can play
an active part as they are invited to draw on the slides
and express their knowledge. By capturing the
participant’s implicit knowledge graphically, the
sketchmarks help to transform it into explicit knowledge
and thereby make it accessible to the whole team.
After having analyzed the discussion items and thus
gained additional information, the team members enter
the discussion phase were the sketchmarks help to make
communication more accurate by inviting managers to
point at issues under discussion and label them explicitly.
Sketching also fosters a data-driven mode of reasoning
by forcing managers to refer to numbers in charts when
making their contributions. It enables participants to
articulate their basic assumptions and beliefs, and helps
them express what they think or know and in doing so
refine their reasoning.
Towards the end of the meeting, sketchmarks
support the last step of the micro-process where they can
facilitate a convergence in interpretation among a team
of managers, and assist them in delineating a joint course
of action, as well as securing commitments for these
actions.
After the meeting, finally, the sketchmarks result in
an accessible and memorable documentation of the
different viewpoints, interpretations, and judgments, as
well as of decisions that were taken during the meeting.
Two short and realistic scenarios will illustrate a few
of these benefits in the next section.

3. Examples of Sketch-based Chart
Annotation in Management
Below, we provide two short scenarios that can
illustrate the use of sketchmarks in management
discussions, as well as the ensuing benefits for a higher
communication and decision quality in management
teams:

3.1 Cost Reduction Discussion in a monthly
Project Status Meeting
Imagine yourself sitting in a monthly project status
update meeting. As the project costs are getting out of

371
365

In their joint sketching, the participants make use of
simple icons, circles, and arrrows to represent their joint
interpretations and deliberattions. The icons used in the
example below are plus siigns to designate excellent
projects, question marks to indicate uncertainty or
doubts, a hurray person to indicate achievements
(projects 13 and 14), or dotted arrows to indicate
possible future developmennts (for example for project
25). Arrows assume differennt meanings (that need to be
made explicit in the discusssion), such as dependenices,
causes or changes.

Fig. 2. An example of sketchmarks
s on a project
cost evaluation chart
p
will
For the follow-up meeting, the participants
again use the annotated bar charts to doccument the shift
in costs since they have implemented their
t
latest cost
saving activities.

3.2 A Project Portfolio Review Meeting
Imagine that you are part of a management
committee that is reviewing the current project
p
portfolio
of the organization. To prepare thhe committee’s
discussion on which projects to cancel, modify,
m
combine,
or continue, a diagram has been develooped to map all
current projects. The projects in thee diagram are
positioned according to their current statuus with regard to
budget (i.e., in line with budget, below it or exceeding it)
and with regard to timing (i.e., on track, ahead or late).
All 27 projects (see Figure 3) currently under
u
way in the
organization are thus positioned according to these two
dimensions (time compliance and budgett compliance). A
third dimension that is mapped in the diagram is the
project size which is represented by thee bubble size in
the diagram below.
The resulting visualization has been printed out on a
large poster and has been mounted on a meeting
m
wall for
the committee’s review workshop. Infoormation on the
individual 27 projects has been distributed to all
committee members two weeks before thhe workshop. At
the beginning of the workshop, each project
p
is again
quickly presented (larger projects receive more
presentation time than smaller ones).
The main part of the review workshhop, however, is
dedicated to discussing the project portfoolio diagram and
the positioning of each project, ass well as the
implications for the corresponding funnding decisions.
While discussing the project portfolio annd the individual
projects, the participating managers sketch on the
diagram to highlight the current focus of
o discussion, to
group related projects, to emphasize theeir questions or
comments, or to relate projects to each other.
o
They also
use sketching to document their jointt decisions (for
example by crossing out a project that will
w not receive
further funding or reducing a project, suchh as number 26)
and to introduce an additional decisionn criterion that
came up during the discussion, namelly the strategic
relevance of each project (added as an S to each
corresponding project bubble). During thee discussion, the
idea of an additional project emergess. This is also
captured by sketching on the poster (projeect number 28).

Fig. 3. An example of sketchmarks on a multiproject revie
ew diagram
As a final result, the paarticipants are not only more
confident about their projectt funding decisions, but also
feel more committed to their final decisions, as they were
reached in a collaborativee and engaged manner. In
additions a photograph of thee annotated chart serves as a
handy reminder of the key arrguments and deliberations.
These two short sceenarios can illustrate the
numerous direct benefits of sketchmarks for managerial
decision making. In the neext section, we outline the
vocabulary of this simple vissual language by presenting a
classification of sketchmarkss for chart annotation.

4. A Classification of Sketchmarks
S
in Chart
Annotation
Having highlighted andd exemplified the numerous
benefits of using sketchmarkks in management meetings,
we now provide a classsification of the various
sketchmarks that managers can use to add meaning to
charts under discussion.
Although sketching has received attention in various
research fields, such as psycchology, engineering, design,
art history, education, or com
mputer science (Mayer [14],
McGown & Green [3], Buuxton [9]), the topic has not
been discussed extensively in management literature.
Dan Roam’s [18] recent bestseller
b
on the topic is a
notable exception. It reliees, however, primarily on
anecdotal evidence and doees not discuss sketching for
annotation at all (for an exxception in another area see
Landay [19]). A solid first
f
step to improve our

372
366

understanding of sketch-based annotations thus consists
of trying to capture and distinguish the different types of
annotations possible in a management meeting context.
Existing classifications of sketches in other domains
do not explicitly distinguish sketches that are selfcontained (i.e., drawn or elicited from scratch) from
those that are used as graphic annotations (although
Buxton [9]) dedicates a chapter of his book to annotating
sketches through sketches). We have only found three
classifications of sketches in general, two from the
domain of design (Ferguson [8] and Verstijnen et al. [2]),
and one from the domain of psychology (Mayer [14]).
Mayer [14] distinguishes logical or conceptual
sketches from metaphorical sketches and configurational
sketches. Logical sketches use typical diagram forms
such as Venn or Box and arrow diagrams. In the case of
metaphoric sketches people use familiar images such as
bridges, abysses, tunnels, mountains, or the weather to
express ideas or insights. Configurational sketches
represent people and their mutual relationships (or
barriers for relationships).
While Mayer focuses on the sketching content as a
classification principle, Verstijnen et al. [2] focus on the
function of a sketch and distinguish idea sketches from
presentation sketches (p. 520). While Idea sketches are
drawn to generate ideas and develop new perspectives,
presentation sketches are drawn to convey ideas to other
people.
Probably the most noted classification of sketches –
which is also based on the function of a sketch rather
than its content – has been developed by Ferguson [8].
He has identified three kinds of sketches used
collaboratively in the engineering context:
(1) The thinking sketch which engineers use to
focus and guide nonverbal thinking;
(2) The prescriptive sketch made by an engineer to
direct a draftsman in making a finished drawing;
(3) The talking sketch, produced during exchanges
between technical people in order to clarify
complex and possibly confusing parts of the
drawing (see also McGown & Green [3], p. 436,
for this point).

there may be many other annotation acts that can
contribute to a joint understanding of decision-relevant
data in management meetings.

Fig. 4. A tentative classification of sketchmarks
in chart annotation

5. Conclusion and Outlook
Saying things with sketch annotations is an unusual,
but highly effective way of supporting the joint
interpretation of data in management teams. Using this
approach does not require highly sophisticated design
know-how, nor does it have to rely on a costly
infrastructure. Sketch-based annotations are a natural
“third way” besides static, one-way slide presentations
and unsystematic, fleeting conversations. Sketch-based
annotations combine the simplicity and immediacy of
drawing with the clarity and richness of charting. To
make use of this value, managers should follow a few
simple guidelines summarized in the second table in the
working paper (published at http://www.scribd.com/full/
24753287?access_key=key-1qsmdrok4woj73cz8hlv).
This ensures that sketching is used appropriately as a
collaborative communication and annotation practice.
Still, the use of ad-hoc sketchmarks for decision
support in management meetings is a largely unexplored
research topic. In our own research we are preparing
experimental studies to systematically evaluate the
benefits and risks of this visual management practice.
These experiments should reveal, whether sketching
support is indeed able to increase the quality of the
process as well the achieved results of decisions in
management meetings and can lead to consistently
higher decision quality.
This research can also provide us with insights of
which types of sketchmarks provide the greatest benefits
for managerial decision making. As an additional result
of these experiments, we hope to develop more complex
sketching patterns that can be used in complex problem
solving and deliberation.
In addition to gathering experimental evidence, we
would also like to gather context-rich case study
evidence of how chart annotation can improve

In our specific context of sketching as an annotation
practice in management, we focus on the third type of
sketch and distinguish further types within this group of
‘talking sketches’.
We have chosen two main classification attributes
to cluster and organize these ‘talking sketches’ or
sketchmarks: the scope of a sketch annotation – that is to
say whether it regards a single item in a chart or many –
and if the sketch is used to merely highlight an item or to
actually modify or change it (the intention of the sketch).
These two attributes gives us the axis for the
classification of sketchmarks in the chart annotation
context. While the scope refers to the object or ‘what’ of
sketching, the intention designates the ‘why’ or purpose
of the sketching action (see Figure 4).
This current classification is tentative in the sense
that is more conceptual than empirically derived. Clearly,

373
367

[15] W. Isaacs, "A Pionering Approach to Communicating in
Business and in Life: Dialogue and the Art of Thinking
Together" Double Play, New York, 1999.
[16] D. Bohm, On Dialogue, 3rd Edition, Routeledge, New
York, 2000.
[17] A. F. Blackwell, Church, L., Plimmer, B., Gray, D.,
"Formality in Sketches and Visual Representation: Some
Informal Reflections“ in Proceedings of the VL/HCC
Workshoph, B. Plimmer, Hammond, T., Ed. Herrsching
am Ammersee, Germany, 2008, pp. 11-18.
[18] D. Roam, Back of the Napkin: Solving Problems and
Selling Ideas with Pictures, Penguin Books, New York,
2009.
[19] J. A. Landay and B. A. Myers, "Interactive sketching for
the early stages of user interface design“ in Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems, ACM Press/Addison-Wesley
Publishing Co., Denver, 1995.

management meetings in real-life organizations. We will
furthermore examine the role of electronic (and blended)
sketching and in how far this collaborative practice
differs from paper-based sketching. In this context, we
will also examine the usefulness of ‘sketch replay’ or in
other words the benefits to managers of being able to
record and review the development of certain sketches on
a screen.
Managers can use our tentative classification to
identify useful sketchmarks for their own meetings and
workshops (the tables in the abovementioned working
paper can provide further pointers to this regard). They
can experiment with this new visual vocabulary and in
doing so move away from static, monologue-like
presentations or data-free, ephemeral conversations to
productive, interactive, illuminating, truly visually
supported and persistent chart discussions.

References
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]

K. Henderson, "Flexible Sketches and Inflexible Data
Bases: Visual Communication, Conscription Devices,
and Boundary Objects in Design Engineering“ Science,
Technology & Human Values, vol. 16, pp. 448-473, 1991.
I. M. Verstijnen, C. van Leeuwen, G. Goldschmidt, R.
Hamel, and J. M. Hennessey, "Sketching and creative
discovery“ Design Studies, vol. 19, pp. 519-546, 1998.
A. McGown and G. Green, "Visible ideas: Information
patterns of conceptual sketch activity“ Design Studies,
vol. 19, pp. 431-453, 1998.
R. E. Anderson, Helstrup, T., "Visual discovery in mind
and on paper“ Memory and Cognition, vol. 21, pp. 283293, 1993.
G. Goldschmidt, "On visual design thinking: the vis kids
of architecture“ Design Studies, vol. 15, pp. 158-174,
1994.
N. Duarte, Slide:ology: The Art and Science of Creating
Great Presentation, 1st Edition, O'Reilly Media,
Sebastopol, 2008.
J. Heiser, B. Tversky, and M. Silverman, "Sketches for
and from collaboration." vol. 2009, 2004.
E. S. Ferguson, "Amplifying the mind's eye: Sketching
and Visual Cognition“ 1994.
B. Buxton, Sketching User Experiences: Getting the
Design Right and the Right Design: Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., 2007.
J. Fish and S. Scrivener, "Amplifying the Mind's Eye:
Sketching and Visual Cognition" Leonardo, vol. 23, pp.
117-126, 1990.
B. Tversky, M. Suwa, "Thinking with Sketches“ in Tools
for Innovation: The Science behind the practical methods
that drive innovation, A. B. Markman, Wood, K.L. , Ed.,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2009.
B. Tversky, J. Zacks, P. Lee, and J. Heiser, "Lines, Blobs,
Crosses and Arrows: Diagrammatic Communication with
Schematic Figures“ in Theory and Application of
Diagrams, 2000, pp. 389-408.
B. Tversky, "What do sketches say about thinking“ in
AAAI Spring Symposium, 2002.
C.
Mayer,
Hieroglyphen
der
Psyche:
Mit
Patientenskizzen zum Kern der Psychodynamik,
Schattauer, Berlin, 2007.

374
368

