2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

The Impact of Immersive Virtual Reality on Visualisation for a Design Review in
Construction
May Bassanino1, Kuo-Cheng Wu, Jialiang Yao, Farzad Khosrowshahi, Terrence Fernando, and
Jens Skjærbæk2
University of Salford, Salford, United Kingdom
2
COWI A/S Aalborg, Denmark
{m.n.bassanino@salford.ac.uk, kuo.cheng.wu@gmail.com, j.yao@salford.ac.uk,
f.khosrowshahi@salford.ac.uk, t.fernando@salford.ac.uk, JEO@cowi.dk}
Abstract

those involved share the same understanding about the
project. Since “shared thinking, shared planning and
shared creation” are essential elements for any
collaboration [3] communication is therefore very
fundamental in the success of any project [4] [5]
This paper will discuss a futuristic design review in
construction where a number of project team come
together in a single technology driven meeting space to
redesign a disabled bathroom in a block of flats. It will
first explain the current practice and then examine the
impact that immersive environment can have on
communicating design among the various stakeholders
involved in the project. In other words, the work
investigates whether the digital model can replace the
physical model or not.

Communication during the design process has a
substantial role because; it exchanges messages and
conveys ideas to people with different skills and interests.
Also, the development of high quality 3D modelling,
photo rendering and VR software has shifted the way we
communicate architecture, from a conventional one to a
digital format and so, provided us with another way for
the communication of information, the visualisation of
processes and the creative expression of ideas.
This paper investigates the impact that Immersive
Virtual Reality technology can have on visualisation of a
design review scenario in construction, which was
developed during the course of the European CoSpaces
project and the potential of such technologies to alter the
way enterprises work.

2. Communicating Design

Keywords- Immersive VR, communication,
current practice, future scenario, CoSpaces

75% of each working day is spent in some form of
communication [6] Whether it is verbal or visual,
communication is the centre activity of any project. In an
architectural context, the transmission of information to
communicate design through visual representation of the
real world is very crucial; there is no doubt that
presentation techniques can play a major role in how we
perceive design [1] as different presentation techniques
can easily alter our perception of architecture [7] [8]
It is the architect’s concern to communicate design
and convey his/her ideas to various stakeholders in the
project team; it is important to select the appropriate
technique to present the architectural design as the
keystone in communicating design intentions is to
convey much information about what it feels to
experience the real building; good buildings exceed our
expectations while poor designs look worse in real life
[9] .
Communicating architecture in a conventional way
whether by producing drawings or a physical mock up
has been accepted for a very long time. The act of

1. Introduction
The
relationship
between
architectural
representation and its intended final product; the building
has undergone a profound transformation over the
centuries. The age of computer aided-design has brought
another dimension to architectural presentation. With the
rapid development of computer hardware and software,
we became capable of producing images with various
kinds of presentation techniques [1]
For the nature of the construction industry and its
projects, a typical construction project usually consists of
an amalgamation of both direct and indirect stakeholders
representing a diversity of skills, cultures and disciplines
[2] . However, these stakeholders need to work together
to deliver the final product and therefore a tremendous
amount of collaboration is required to ensure that all
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 Crown Copyright
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.85

575
585

built at the architectural company for use during the
meeting.
The mock-up has already been tested by the
architect, the engineers and the main contractor in order
to achieve a good level of certainty that the meeting
would validate their proposition. A wheelchair user was
invited to test the usability of the bathroom and that the
elements are within reach and usable. While everyone is
discussing the current design and trying to consider any
future issues that could arise from it, the wheelchair user
starts testing the mock-up. Immediately, the end-user
realises that the bathroom space is insufficient for a
wheelchair to manoeuvre and some elements are not
accessible, and therefore more space is required. Due to
the fact that the bathroom has to be fully redesigned, a
modified physical mock-up should be created before any
validation is possible.

drawing has been considered as the means by which
architects manifest their contribution to a design [10] .
The advancing Computer Aided Design gave us the
opportunity that architecture could be communicated
digitally in a variety of formats such as still or animated
images, VR, multimedia and others. These digital
technologies added the effect of sound, images, words,
gestures and even expressions when paper exchanges
messages via a single sense which is seeing [1] CAD has
therefore started being used as a communication tool
during the design process [11] which started creating the
potential for a new way to convey design ideas which
ultimately result in more cooperation and better shared
understanding of design intentions.

3. The CoSpaces Case Study of a Design
Review in Construction
The CoSpaces multi million European project’s aim
was to develop a generic collaborative and engineering
environment which can support real-time collaboration
between geographically dispersed teams working
irrespective of their location [12] .
During the course of CoSpaces, a number of case
studies were developed with the aim to express a realistic
vision of the industry concerning the way advanced
technologies could support collaboration in construction
projects. These case studies provided an understanding
of the current situation as well as the problems of
collaborative working. In addition, the case studies
investigated the use of technologies to enable a better
working practice through first, providing a set of tools to
assist project teams to communicate and collaborate in a
more efficient way and secondly, these case studies
investigated how technologies such as Virtual Reality,
Augmented Reality and others can help in visualisation
of the design and investigation of different alternatives
and layouts.
The design review scenario in construction which is
the focus of this paper is about a space that was
originally designed to be a bathroom for disabled people.
During construction, the bathroom space was reduced in
floor area, because of the addition of a separate
installation shaft for the supply of a ventilation system in
the space in order to respond to new requirements for fire
protection and safety. As a consequence, the bathroom
has to be redesigned, but must include the same elements
as previously planned: a close-coupled WC, a basin, a
bath, a wall hung cupboard and a window [13] .

Figure 1 Current layout for the disabled
bathroom
The meeting ends with some limited discussions
between all the participants in order to achieve a valid
design for the next meeting. The architect takes some
notes on his notebook and quickly annotates some
drawings. It is discussed that one possibility is to
exchange the bathtub with a shower arrangement- it
cannot be decided what type of shower should be used,
but the end-user has some basic criteria such as an even
floor level, the possibility to sit, and the need for a panic
button. Finally, it was agreed that another two hour
meeting will be scheduled approximately a week later
with the same participants.
By now, the project cost has already increased by
the cost of the physical mock-ups and the travel
expenses, as well as the cost of the staff time and
materials spent redesigning the bathroom.

3.2. Future Scenario (could be)

3.1. Current Practice (as is)

The futuristic scenario proposed here corresponds to
the same situation as the one described above. It
illustrates the use of new technologies to improve
meetings through better communication and visualisation
[13] [14] . Its objective is to make the meetings more
effective, which means that there is a better shared
understanding between the participants, that more
viewpoints can be considered and problems can be

A meeting is required to discuss the layout for a
disabled bathroom in a block of flats as illustrated in
figure 1. The organisation of the meeting takes time in
order to find a common available date of all the
participants. Once a date is fixed and all the stakeholders
confirm their availability, a physical mock up is then

586
576

resolved much faster. In order to achieve this, useful
information has to be made available faster between all
the participants, in a way that is easily understood by the
people who need it. As a consequence, fewer meetings
will be required due to incomplete agreements, fewer
problems have to be solved and the possibility of
redesigning as well as testing alternative solutions during
the meeting will be available to speed up the building
construction.
Similar to the previous project situation, the project
manager invites the relevant stakeholders to attend a
meeting at the architectural company to discuss the new
layout.
On the day of the meeting, as the participants
connect to their workstation, the architect starts the
meeting by identifying the problem and suggesting some
alternative design solutions. After the presentation, the
participants study the design proposed by the architect
and discuss the various alternatives sharing their views.
In the next phase of the meeting, a wheelchair user
tests the accessibility of the bathroom (figure 2). Similar
to the previous scenario, he finds the space is restricted
and there is no accessibility for a wheelchair to
manoeuvre.
Immersive Virtual Reality is used here to produce
the digital mock up in an attempt to replace the physical
one in this scenario, so the meeting does not end here,
but it carries on where changes can be applied by the
various stakeholders as they discuss their viewpoints.
Once all changes are made, the wheelchair user starts
testing the bathroom’s model for the second time. Once
an acceptable solution for a new design layout is agreed,
the meeting ends with a definitive validation of the
design, and the participants can then return to their
everyday work without the need for further meetings to
be organised and for physical mock-ups to be modified.

Collaboration Broker (CB), Dynamic Session Manager
(DSM), Knowledge Support Management (KSM)
(KSM), Resource Manager and Application Controller
(AC).
During the meeting, all participants used their
laptops with the CoSpaces system installed on each
machine. They used the Living Lab Infrastructure,
referred to Active Distributed Development Space
(ADDS). The system ran on Windows XP operating
system and the laptops were equipped with current
standard CPU/RAM/graphic card. A plasma display if
available in the meeting room could be used to project
the design of the selected participant’s workspace to
facilitate interactive brain storming sessions among the
meeting’s participants.
The physical system set up (figure 3) consisted of:
model data server, several desktop clients to support the
multi stakeholders in the project team (such as Architect,
Structural Engineer, Quantity Surveyor, etc) and
immersive environment for the end user to validate the
design. The model data server and desktop clients were
implemented using TechSoft’s Hoops 3D Graphic
Library, while the immersive environment utilized the
OpenCOVER renderer and VICON tracking system. All
these components were network-linked using the
TechSoft’s Hoops Net toolkit.

Immersive
Environment

Arch. Desktop
(Client 1)

Eng. Desktop
(Client 2)

Other Desktop
(Client 3)

Meeting
Workspace
Networkcomponents
Figure 3- The
core
system

Model Data Server

Figure 3 The core system components

5. The Role of Immersive Virtual Reality
This case study was a good example to illustrate the
impact of the Immersive Virtual Reality on design
meetings. Although the use of VR in this particular
scenario was limited to test the design, its impact was
huge to save the project cost and time. If the design
proves to be wrong as discussed in the current practice,
another meeting is required for another test with another
physical mock-up.
The other added benefit of the digital mock-up is the
visualisation aspect. The fact that the Immersive VR can
simulate the experience of moving through and
interacting with the virtual world as if it was real [15]
enables the stakeholders to use the digital mock-up to
perform any tests required during the meeting in order to
validate any highlighted issues. Thus, VR produces a

Figure 2 The wheelchair user is testing the
bathroom’s layout using the digital mock up
during the meeting

4. The CoSpaces framework
The framework developed in the CoSpaces EU
project consists of several main modules such as
587
577

References

way for humans to visualise, manipulate and interact
with computers and extremely complex data [16]
Furthermore, irrespective whether VR is fully
immersive, semi-immersive or non-immersive [17] [18] ,
it provided the users with a sense of being there in the
user’s mind. This sense of ‘being there’ provided by realtime interaction, means that the system is able to detect a
user’s input and modify the virtual world instantly [19] .
Whether the digital mock-up is tested by a
wheelchair user as seen in the futuristic scenario or by an
Avatar as presented in figure 4, this case study illustrates
the potential that Immersive Virtual Reality can have on
visualisation of architectural design and the possibility of
the digital model to replace the physical one which has
been used for a very long time to enable both the
architect as well as the client to visualise the building
and its visual effect prior to construction [20] [21] .

[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

Figure 4 An Avatar is used to test a 3D
representation of a bathroom

[9]
[10]
[11]

Conclusions
We described the impact that Immersive
technologies can have on design projects through
explaining the current practice (as is) and identifying
some of the problems within the industry. We then
envisaged a futuristic vision (to be) by using immersive
technology in the same case study and examining the
impact that technologies such as Immersive Virtual
Reality can have on communication, decisions making
and collaboration.

[12]
[13]

[14]

Acknowledgements
The results of this paper are partly funded by the
European Commission under contract IST-5-034245
through the CoSpaces project. The authors would like to
thank the industrial partners of the CoSpaces project and
in particular we would like to thank COWI (Denmark)
and Construct IT (UK) for their valuable information
about current industrial practices and challenges.

[15]
[16]
[17]

588
578

May Bassanino (1999) The Perception of Computer
Generated Architectural Images, PhD Thesis, the
University of Liverpool, UK.
Shu Ling Lu, and Martin Sexton (2006) Innovation in
Small Construction Knowledge-Intensive Professional
Service Firms: A case Study of an Architectural Practice.
“Construction Management and Economics”, 24(12),
1269-1282.
Patricia Montiel-Overall, (2005) Toward a theory of
collaboration for teachers and librarians. “School Library
Media Research”, 8.
May Bassanino, Bryan Lawson, John Worthington,
Michael Phiri, Alastair Blyth and Chris Haddon (2001)
‘Final Report: Learning from Experience- Applying
systematic Feedback to improve the briefing process in
construction’, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
UK.
Alastair Blyth and John Worthington (2001) “Managing
the Brief for Better Design”. UK: Spon Press.
Kurt Hanks and Larry Belliston (1992) Draw! A Visual
Approach to Thinking, Learning and Communicating.
Crisp Publications, Canada.
Andy Brown and May Nahab (1996) Human
interpretation of computer generated architectural
images. In: Asanowicz and Jakimowicz (Ed). CAD and
Creativity, Bialystok, TU Bialystok.
Andy Brown, Mike Knight and May Nahab (1999)
‘Computer Generated Architectural Images: a
comparative study’. In: Brown A, Knight M and
Berridge P (Ed.) Architectural Computing from Turning
to 2000, 17th Conference of eCAADe, The University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
Paul Richens (1994) Does Knowledge Really Help?
“Automation in Construction”, 3(2-3), 219-227.
Aart Bijl (1989) Computer Discipline and Design
Practice. Edinburgh University Press. Edinburgh.
Tsuyoshi Sasada (1995). Computer Graphics as a
Communication Medium in the Design Process. In: Tan
M (ed.) Proceedings of the CAAD Futures’95.
Singapore.
CoSpaces url: http://www.cospaces.org/index.htm
Gilles Gautier, Colin Piddington, May Bassanino,
Terrence Fernando and Jens Skjærbæk (2008) ‘Futuristic
design review in the construction industry’. In: Zarli A
and Scherer R (Ed.), eWork and eBusiness in
Architecture, Engineering and Construction Conference,
Sophia-Antipolis, France. Taylor and Francis Group,
Vol. 1, pp. 625-633.
May Bassanino, Gilles Gautier Kuo-Cheng Wu, Terrence
Fernando, and Jens Skjærbæk (2009) ‘An Innovation
Approach to Improve Collaboration in a Futuristic
Design Review’. In: McCaffer R (Ed.), Global
Innovation in Construction Conference Proceedings,
University of Loughborough, UK.
Jialiang Yao (2010). A Collaborative Urban Planning
Environment, PhD Thesis, The University of Salford,
UK.
Steve Aukstakalnis and David Blatner (1992). Silicon
Mirage: The Art and Science of Virtual Reality, Peachpit
Press.
Neil Dodgson (2005). Autostereoscopic 3D Displays.
IEEE Computer 38(8):31-36.

[18] Intuition Virtual Reality Final Report (2007), IST-NMP1-507248-2, Future Workspaces Research Centre, The
University of Salford.
[19] Grigore Burdea and Philippe Coiffet (2003). Virtual
Reality Technology, Wiley-IEEE Press.
[20] Tom Porter (1997). The Arxchitect’s Eye. E&FN Spon.
UK.
[21] Martin Fischer (2008) Reshaping the life cycle process
with virtual design and construction methods. In:
Brandon P. and Kocaturk T. (eds.) “Virtual Futures for
Design, Construction & Procurement”. Oxford:
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

589
579

