2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Human Perception, Virtual Reality and the Built Environment

Angie Johnson

Emine M. Thompson

University of Northumbria
Newcastle upon Tyne
NE1 8ST, UK
angie.johnson@northumbria.ac.uk

University of Northumbria
Newcastle upon Tyne
NE1 8ST, UK

Kenny R. Coventry
University of Northumbria
Newcastle upon Tyne
NE1 8ST, UK

emine.thompson@northumbria.ac.uk

kenny.coventry@northumbria.ac.uk

result in the construction of buildings and environments that
will serve to both satisfy and meet the functionality
requirements of its users.
However, the measurement and definition of a successful
VR environment, whether as a visualisation tool or a
medium through which to augment our understanding of
space is a more complex issue. There is much evidence to
support the claim that the adoption of VR is not intuitive,
most individuals do not understand the constructive nature of
visual perception and the associative cognitive distortions.
This highlights additional challenges because knowledge and
research of what constitutes an effective visualisation or
communication tool lags behind the rapidly changing
technology [4].
This paper aims to understand the extent of the problem,
firstly by reviewing why up to date visualisation techniques
are a fundamental part of the Built Environment process.
Secondly, what is known about VR at present? Finally, and,
most importantly, the cognitive experience associated with
human perception as visual neuronal activity is influenced by
many other non-visual activities such as emotions,
physiological state and even intentions or goals [5]
As a result, a greater awareness and understanding is
called for to understand the implications of not
acknowledging the complex interaction between the
individual and the environment.

Abstract— Recent research indicates that Virtual Reality
(VR) as a communication tool to convey design intent and
construction methodologies in the built environment sector has
been utilized to varied degrees. Currently, the effectiveness of
VR has been demonstrated from conception to the final stages
of projects in many fields, yet its potential within the Built
Environment has still to realised, despite a variety of successful
demonstrations. There is concern that the current utilisation
of VR compromises its full potential, unsurprisingly, as
environmental representations focus predominantly on the
visual modality, regardless of the multi sensory nature of the
spatial experience. In addition, there is a distinct paucity of
research exploring the complex interaction of environmental
design and the user, such as the role of attention or conceptual
interpretation.
This paper aims to identify the issues
concerning the utilization of VR models to aid communication
for the Built Environment with specific reference to human
perception issues.
Keywords- v irtual reality, built environment,
perception, representations
I.

INTRODUCTION

The use of visualisation techniques as a means of
augmenting and enhancing communication, have endured
from ancient cultures to modern times. In effect,
visualisations are an external expression of models that exist
in the mind [1]. However, expressions can vary in
abstractness, complexity and clarity, and are dependent upon
the skill of the individual to either purvey or comprehend [2].
Visualisations have since progressed to serve a variety of
objectives, by externalising thought and rendering it visible
to others which can be employed to explain, refine,
encapsulate, elaborate, investigate and communicate ideas to
a wide range of parties. Moreover, they can be created
purely for aesthetic value or to serve pragmatic goals.
With specific reference to the Built Environment, the
effectiveness of visualisations can acknowledged early in a
project in some instances as conflict or errors can be
identified and corrected before Real Space (RS) construction
occurs [3]. Most importantly, VR has the value-added
potential to test environments for specific users. This will
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.88

II.

V ISUALISATION TECHNIQUES AND BUILT
ENVIRONMENT

As in many industries, i.e. engineering or design, the
methods adopted to create, develop and represent processes
or visualize objects are heavily reliant on the technology
available at that time. Therefore, the aesthetics of any
architectural design reflects the technology during that era
[6].
Most recently, the methods for representing
architectural and, in general, built environment visualisation
have became more sophisticated and are now powerful
tools, chiefly through the introduction of VR [7].
Nevertheless, the ‘science’ behind visualization techniques
appears to be predominantly driven by the most recent
methodology available for the communication of images.
594
604

effectiveness of VR is mixed. Most of the research in this
area focuses on the simulation of the visual modality. Given
that visual displays range from simplistic desktops, large
screen stereoscopic projections, "CAVEs” or immersive
head-mounted displays (HMDs), technical and logistical
issues are generally given as the main considerations, as
opposed to identifying the most suitable technology for the
particular task at hand. Or, is there a general consensus that
the most expensive and contemporary system is the most
appropriate? Clearly empirical data needs to support such
claims.
With regards to ‘how real is VR?’ it is generally
acknowledged that distances experienced in VR are
compressed in comparison to the conventional RS
experience. Nevertheless there is evidence that RS
phenomena can be replicated in VR with modest equipment.
For instance, a robust effect in spatial cognition is the
‘segmentation hypothesis’ [15]. Participants were assigned
to three paths in Real Space, laid out with masking tape
along two floors in a building. Two were 200 feet long, path
A had two turns and path B had seven turns, whilst the third
path (C) was 100 feet in length (figure 1). Exposures to the
paths were counterbalanced and all participants were
assigned path C last, with all participants being exposed to
all three paths twice.
The participants were then provided with a line (figure
2), and were advised that the point X to Y represented the
final path (C) that they walked. They were then asked to
mark paths A and B on the line, in relation to Path C.

This scenario can result in a situation where the ‘tail is
wagging the dog’, with VR utilized, because it is available,
without acknowledging the impact on user perceptual
evaluations [8]. It is recognised that VR promises exciting
developments, with potential to assimilate the eclectic and
fragmented processes within the construction industry,
providing a cradle to the grave lifecycle model [9,10].
However, there are reports that the introduction of VR has
merely been a vehicle to maintain traditional practices,
ignoring the human factors and perceptual issues [9].
Unsurprisingly, therefore, VR appears to be limited to
“client walkthroughs, design reviews and the visualization
of construction sequences”, thus compromising the potential
of the technique [10]. In addition, there is distinct paucity of
research identifying how to utilize VR in order to convey
ideas and augment communication.
In order to meet the cultural challenges of
collaboration and global competition, it is largely
acknowledged that industries need to innovate. Such
changes dictate considerable attention to the communication
processes of design and expertise in a discipline that relies
heavily on consultation through visual media. There is
evidence that VR is the preferred and expected medium;
specifically with laypeople, to communicate thoughts and
ideas, [11] and benefits have already been reported [3].
However, there is relatively little information concerning
the interaction between the representations and the cognitive
processes of the user from a communication, encoding and
interpretative perspective. Obviously the single discipline
approach within environmental research is both inadequate
and insufficient [for an overview, see 7 & 12]. Therefore the
main thrust of the issue with representations should be; what
do individuals ‘see’ and, can a framework be developed,
utilizing algorithms to identify and enhance this process
through empirical research?
The intricacy of visual perception, quite bizarrely, only
becomes
apparent
through
visual
errors
or
miscommunication. In the construction industry, where the
most skilled individuals can make errors, through inferences
of their perspectives or designs, the importance of shared
understanding should reduce timescales and budgets.
Therefore, a focus is required on the key factors which
contribute to shaping what is perceived within the context of
visualisation techniques available in Built Environment.
Identification of which approaches are most suitable during
the ‘cradle to grave’ processes will also provide insight into
associative restrictions which will hinder the impact of VR.
III.

Figure 1: Allocentric view of paths – not to scale (Sadalla & Magel, 1980)

R EAL SPACE VS. VIRTUAL REALITY RESEARCH

X

VR is considered, by many, to be the most significant
technological change and critical to scientific understanding
as it offers great potential for both research and a wide
variety of applications such as aerospace, surgery, military
and industrial training for hazardous conditions [13,14].
Whilst it is anticipated that VR technology offers an
alluring basis for a rich sensory experience, research into the

Y
Distance of path
C

Figure 2: The line on which participants made their distance estimations
(Sadalla & Magel 1980).

605
595

fastest or slowest. The two scenarios selected differed in
urgency and desirability:x Delivering medication to a critically ill friend in
hospital
x Delivering exam results to a friend, knowing that
they have failed everything.
There was also a control condition which only involved
walking in the environment without a task, akin to those
used in most previous human VR research.
The methodology for both environments was designed
to control for potential confounding variables such as visual
cues, walking pace, and time spent within the environment.
This was achieved by ensuring participants could walk
comfortably and unconsciously to the sound of a
metronome, preset to their natural walking pace. The RS
maze was covered in clear tarpaulin to reduce visual cues,
while allowing light to still filter through.
Paths were marked with tape on the floor to identify
the start and end of the task. The requirement that
participants walk in time with a metronome eliminated the
possibility that participants would simply walk more
quickly (or run) through the maze in the more urgent
scenarios. Participants took part in one task, to ensure that
their experience did not transfer from one condition to
another. The experimenter discretely timed the participants’
duration in the maze to ensure that participants adhered to
the metronome beats.
The RS maze was built from polystyrene blocks (a),
(dimensions 1.2 x 2.1 x 0.3 meters) covered with clear
tarpaulin. The total distance, using the central route of the
maze, was 15.4 meters (Figure 3a).
The virtual human maze was an exact replica of the RS
maze and was created using 3DsMax software. The model
was then transferred to VR4Max to establish immersion and
navigation capability. The model was extremely realistic,
replicating light and textures that gave the strong impression
of the original maze (figures 4a & 4b).

The path with seven turns was consistently reported as
being significantly longer in length than the path with two
turns. This study was replicated in a low cost, basic desktop
environment, with the same results and provides convincing
evidence that support desktop virtual environments as a
valid research tool [16].
The explanations for this phenomenon [17] would
therefore support the need for increased visual fidelity in the
systems in order to replicate the real world experience.
However, it is known that individuals encode information
about their environments from other modalities.
Differences in perceived speed have been identified between
RS and their virtual equivalents, and have been attribute to
perceptual motor-coupling issues [18]. This has been
highlighted further by an additional study [12] which asked
participants to walk on a treadmill, which was on a trailer
and pulled by a tractor. The treadmill and tractor were then
set to different speeds, and participants were then asked to
walk the equivalent length. The results found that
participants walked too far after the faster condition, but not
far enough following the slower condition. Thus, this study
identified a relationship between memory for distance
travelled, visual flow, distance traversed, speed of travel,
and degree of biomechanical effort. The issue of motor
input has been raised by Ruddle [19], who states that only
motor input is required to successfully navigate in one’s
environment with arbitrary visual information. This makes
the issue of utilising the appropriate VR system to mediate
with the task a key priority, especially given that
individuals, most often, will change some of the features of
their pace in accordance with the environmental features
and the purpose of their journey.
However, a main concern regarding many of the
studies comparing RS and VR is the lack of ecological
validity. Participants are generally asked to traverse a
distance in RS and then asked to replicate the same distance
in VR, or vice versa. Bearing in mind that individuals rarely
walk in an environment without a purpose, whether it is to
go to buy a loaf of bread or attend an interview, one can
question whether the use of abstract tasks really tell us about
the ecological validity of VR. Previous studies fail to take
into account the influence of goals on executive and
attentional resources. This is especially pertinent when one
considers that VR is not just as a tool for observing stimuli,
but also has the potential of testing environments for
usability.
The schools of Built Environment and Psychology and
Sports Sciences at Northumbria University are currently
developing a programme to test spatial cognition in the built
environment context. Most recently, the issue of ecological
validity has been addressed in spatial cognition by
requesting participants to deliver an object in a role play
scenario in real and virtual human mazes [20]. The
scenarios were identified by questionnaires asking
individuals to state which scenarios would make them walk

end

start

a

Figure 3a: Allocentric view of maze constructed from polystyrene blocks

606
596

Mean Distance Estimates: RS vs VR

Figure 5: Mean distance estimates for each condition in real and virtual
space.

Participants in the urgent scenario reported the path as
being significantly longer than the participants in the nonurgent, but undesirable, scenario F(2,92) = 4.22, p < 0.01
(figure5).
The VR condition did not result in significantly shorter
estimates than the RS condition F(2,92) = 2.07, p > 0.05.
The results provide evidence that goals affect the perception
of distance in both real and virtual space, although the
results of goal were slightly compressed - but nevertheless
reliable. Moreover, the effect of goal scenario was very
marked overall, with over double the mean distance estimate
for the high urgency real scenario compared to the low
urgency real scenario
The urgency reports were significant according to
scenario F(2,92) = 32.61, p < 0.001, but not for condition,
F(2,92) = 0.31, p > 0.05 . A significant correlation was
found between the level of urgency reported and the
distances estimated, r = 0.226, p < 0.05. This analysis
confirms that participants engaged with the role-play task
However, these data pertain only to a single environment
path type; a straight line path. Currently the role of goals
across differing structures and varying modalities are being
investigated. In addition, further research intends to tease
apart contributory explanations for the influence of goals,
for instance whether additional factors will interfere or
emphasize the experience. To conclude, the studies so far,
support the robustness of VR as a methodology despite
acknowledged limitations with regard to simulating real life
experience [22]. An additional advantage of these studies is
that they do not require visual complexity and are therefore
economical to develop and test.

Figure 4a: Still image showing real maze
(constructed from polystyrene blocks)

Figure 4b: Modelled VR maze

The Virtual Environment used for the Virtual Human
Maze condition consisted of Intel Xeon X5450 CPU 2 x
Quad (8 cores running at 3.00Ghz) GPU: Nvidia Quadro FX
5600, and StereoWorks DLP Passive Stereo Projection
System that was based on a rigid rear projection screen with
dimensions: 244x183cm, with images projected by two
Christie Digital DS+25 high resolution projectors. The VR
condition was passive and the pace pre-programmed
according to the individual’s natural walking speed. A ‘head
bob’ of 1.5cm was used to enhance the perception of
natural walking [21].
Immediately on completion of the task, all participants
were asked a series of questions relating to their experience,
such as; “How long did you think the path you just travelled
was?”And, “How urgent did you think it was for you to get
to your final destination?”

IV.

H UMAN PERCEPTION AND COGNITIVE CONSTRAINTS

Overall a comprehensive view of human perception and
cognition must be researched in order to fully understand
the relationship between VR and the human experience.
Previous approaches reduce comparisons between the
representations and reality to purely visual judgments,
despite well established knowledge that individuals learn

607
597

perception for recognition and perception for action, or
goals [27]. This is an essential consideration as, whilst the
aesthetics of a structure are considered to be important,
buildings are rarely built for viewing purposes alone, thus
placing greater emphasis on the need to test environments
for usability. Also, mental spaces are not unitary, as spaces
are perceived depending on the functions they serve. This
raises the issue of whether communication within the area
encompassed by built environment can rely solely on
visualisations.
This is especially pertinent when
acknowledging
that individuals
experience
their
environments through other sensory information, which
integrate to provide a seamless experience of space. Any
attempt to try to regulate the ‘seamless experience’ of space
in VR is confounded further, as even the most exact of
replications can fail to convey significant features of any
given model due to the individual differences of the
observers. For instance, what may be pertinent to one
individual may well be overlooked by another.
Conversely, there is much evidence supporting the fact
that individuals do not require exact replications of what
they are observing. The change blindness phenomenon
demonstrates that dramatic changes can be made to an
environment and individuals would fail to notice, for
example; when a person they were talking to was
surreptitiously replaced by a different actor [25]. In order to
cope with the limited cognitive resources, individuals
schematize their environment, accessing information from
long term memory. Schematic representations, therefore,
reflect an individual’s cognition, through comparing
features from objects. Whilst the level of resemblance plays
an important role, some objects do not need to be exact
resemblances. This could be demonstrated by exaggerating
the size of buildings or entrances in a more abstract form.
However, such a visual inaccuracy could create further
criticism of bias or distortion. In addition, for something to
look ‘right’ is dependent upon, the modeller, contextual
factors, expertise of the observer and the goal of the
representation. As a result, effective visualisations need to
address psychological constraints and use them to make
informed decisions and be augmented, by directing attention
to the appropriate features, through light, colour, focus or
even ‘voice-overs.’
The authors PhD, also includes future research to
investigate the role of auditory information and goals. For
instance, whether voice-overs would complement VR when
the individual has a goal or whether it might interact and
interfere with the procedure. Additional research also aims
to examine the role of motor input, for comparisons between
passive and immersive systems, and also the type of
language utilised, such as verbs.
To conclude, VR has great potential; however, before
one can project and develop the technology to its true
potential, key consideration must be given to the inherent
perceptual and cognitive capabilities and limitations of the
intended users and audience. This can only be achieved

about their environment from other modalities other than
vision, such as motor input [12]. More importantly,
individuals have very limited attention through which to
view the world, resulting in the utilization of past
knowledge that can override immediate visual information.
Tangible world objects are also mental objects, as they
become stored in memory. In order to simplify what is
seen, object grouping is fundamental to perceptual and
memory organizing principles, which results in inferences
of what is available or predicted, in both static and motion
imagery.
In addition, the mind will not only infer beyond the
information given [23] but will anticipate also, implying
that the perception of the most uncomplicated entity being a
complex, multifaceted process. Perversely, the complexity
of perception generally becomes evident from illusions or
systematic errors.
Consequently, several contributory
factors to consider during the process of perceiving are
cognitive limitations, attention and interplays between past
experiences, including one’s culture, and the interpretation
of the perceived event or object. As a consequence, creating
successful visualisations, that is, a representation which
sufficiently accomplishes a balance between abstraction,
accuracy, and realism [11], is challenging in order to
provide a framework for effective collaboration and
communication.
Therefore, visual perception provides substantial support
that the world individuals ‘see’ is not the exact image but
‘constructed’ due to cognitive constraints. Individuals are
not passive recipients of their environment, taking selective
'snapshots’, but actively interpret the environment. As a
result, representations can never be classed as neutral or just
as static ‘pictures.’
Similarly, memory for the environment is not an isolated
process nor is it solely connected to a ‘visual memory.’ As
stated previously, a principle factor to consider when
individuals walk in an environment is attention, as their
awareness can also be determined by what they choose to
attend to, not merely on stimuli entering the senses.
Attention, as a cognitive feature, binds information from the
different modalities i.e. vision, hearing and motor, in
addition to effort and touch, etc. [24]. Furthermore, the
availability of cognitive resources influence the level of
attention individuals can sustain towards an environment, of
which there is much evidence in the ‘looked but failed to
see’ phenomenon [25]. Attention can be either exogenous, a
typical bottom-up process, controlled by external stimuli
present, or endogenous, a top-down controlled mechanism
[26], requiring the individual’s attentional effort, such as the
delivery of an object. In addition, the goals of the individual,
such visiting the doctor, can vary greatly in urgency and
desirability. Therefore, navigation in an environment is a
complex interaction between the individual and the
environment.
With specific reference to visualisations, it is pertinent to
note that there are differing neural mechanisms between

608
598

through empirical testing, identifying how individuals
experience their environment and how this compares with
their virtual counterparts. From this, a framework can be
developed which will reduce the risk avoidable expenditure
or, making costly errors.

history, from telepresence to virtual reality,” The First
International Workshop on Haptic Human-Computer
Interaction. Citeseer, 1–7. (2000)
[15]Burdea, G. C. and Coiffet, P. Virtual Reality
Technology.2ed.NewJersey:Wiley-IEEE Press.(2000)
[16] Sadalla, E. K., & Magel, S. G., “The perception of traversed
distance,” Environment and Behavior, 12, 65-79. (1980)
[17] Jansen – Osmann, P. and Berendt, B. “Investigating Distance
Knowledge Using Virtual Environments,”. Environment and
Behaviour, 34 (2) 178-193. (2002)
[18] Montello, D.R.
“The Perception and Cognition of
Environmental Distance: Direct Sources of Information,” In
S.C.Hirtle & A.U.Frank (Eds.), Spatial information theory: A
theoretical basis for GIS. Proceedings of COSIT '97. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 1325Berlin: Springer-Verlag. (pp.
297-311). (1997)
[19] Banton, T., Stefanucci, J., Durgin, F., Fass, A., Proffitt, D.
“The perception of walking speed in a virtual environment,”
Presence-Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, 14(4),
394-406. (2005)
[20] Rieser, J. J., Pick, J. H. L., Ashmead, D. H. and Garing, A. E.
“Calibration of human locomotion and models of perceptualmotor organization,” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 21, 480 – 497. (1995)
[21] Ruddle, R. “For efficient navigational search, humans require
full physical movement but not a rich visual scene,”
Psychological Science, 17, 460-465. (2006)
[22] Johnson, A., Coventry, K. R. and Thompson, E. M. “The
Effect of Goals on Memory for Human Mazes in Real and
Virtual Space,” In N.A. Taatgen & H. van Rijn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, July 2009. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society. 1752-1757. (2009)
[23] Massaad, F., Lejeune. T. M., & Detrembleur, C. “The up and
down bobbing of human walking: a compromise between
muscle work and efficiency,” Journal of Physiology, 58, 22,
789-799. (2007)
[24] Campos, J., Nusseck, H. G., Wallraven, C., Mohler, B. J., and
Bülthoff, H. H. “Visualization and (Mis)Perceptions in
Virtual Reality,” Tagungsband 10. Workshop Sichtsysteme,
10-14.(Eds.) Möller, R. Shaker,Aachen, Germany (11).(2007)
[25] Driver, J. and Spence, C. “Attention and cross modal
construction of space,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2, (7)
254-262. (1998)
[26] Simons, D. J. & Levin, D. T. “Failure to detect changes to
people during a real-world interaction,” Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 5, 644–649. (1998)
[27] Jonides, J. “Voluntary versus automatic control over the
mind's eye's movement,”. In: Long, J B and Baddeley, A D,
(Ed.) Attention and Performance vol. IX, NJ, Lawrence
Erlbaum, Hillsdale. (1981)
[28] Milner, A. D. and Goodale, M. A. “Separate visual pathways
for perception and action,” Trends in Neurosciences, 15, 2025. (1992)

R EFERENCES
[1] Tversky, B., Agrawala, M., Heiser, J., Lee, P., Hanrahan, P.,
Phan, D., Stolte, C., and Daniel, M. P. “Cognitive design
principles: From cognitive models to computer models,” In L
Magnani (Editor), Model-based reasoning in science and
engineering. London:King's College.227-247.(2006)
[2] Tversky, B. “Some Ways Images Express and Promote
Thought,” In Grialou, P., Longo, G. & Okada, M. Image and
Reasoning, pp.15-29. Tokyo:Keio University Press. (2005)
[3] Westerdahl, B., Suneson, K., Wernemyr, C., Roupé, M.,
Johansson, M. and Allwood, C. M. “Users’ evaluation of a
virtual reality architectural model compared with the
experience of the completed building,” Automation in
Construction, 15, 150-165 (2006)
[4] Orland, B., Budthimedhee, K., and Uusitalo, J. “Considering
virtual worlds as representations of landscape realities and as
tools for landscape planning,” Landscape and urban planning,
54, 139-148. (2001)
[5] Proffitt, D.R. “Embodied Perception and the Economy of
Action,” Perspectives on Psychological Science.1(2) 110-122.
[6] Giddings, R. and Horne, M.
Artists’ Impressions in
Architectural Design. E&F N Spon (2002)
[7] Wergles, N. and Muhar, A. “The role of computer visualisation
in the communication of urban
design – A comparison of
viewer responses to visualisations versus on-site visits,”
Landscape and Urban Planning, 91, 171-182. (2009)
[8] Zube, E. H., Simcox, D. E., Law, C. S. Perceptual landscape
simulations: history and prospect. Landscape J. 6 (1), 62–80.
(1987)
[9] Bouchlaghem, N., Khosrowshahi, F. and Whyte, J. “Virtual
reality as a visualisation tool: benefits and constraints,” In:
International Journal of Computer Integrated Design and
Construction, CIDAC Special Issue on Visualisation in
Architecture, Engineering and Construction, 2(4), 216–224.
(2000)
[10] Greenwood, D., Horne, M., Thompson, E. M., Allwood, C.
M., Wernemyr, C. and Westerdahl, B. “Strategic Perspectives
on the Use of Virtual Reality within the Building Industries of
Four Countries. Architectural Engineering and Design
Management,” 4, 85-98. (2008)
[11] Dawood, N. “VR-roadmap: a vision for 2030 in the built
environment”, Journal of Information Technology in
Construction (ITcon), Special Issue Next Generation
Construction IT:Technology Foresight, Future Studies,
Roadmapping, and Scenario Planning, 14, 489-506.(2009)
[12] Bruner, J. “Going beyond the information given,” In Gruber,
H (Ed.), Contemporary Approaches to Cognition. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press. (1957)
[13] Pietsch, S. “Computer visualisation in the design control of
urban environments: a literature review,” Environment and
Planning B: Planning and Design, 27, 521 – 536. (2000)
[14] Stone, R. J. “Haptic feedback: A potted history, from
telepresence to virtual reality. Haptic feedback: A potted

609
599

