2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Visual Intention in Moving Image Editing and Eye-Tracking Methodology.
An exploratory study.
Thorbjörn Swenberg
Dalarna University and Mälardalen University, Sweden
{tsw@du.se}
Abstract

reach a thorough understanding of the visual queries
involved in moving images, every kind of shot or edit
must be put under such scrutiny dealing with any kind of
visual property of relevance [1].
Being a former video editor, my attempt is to start
exploring these issues by finding a method to examine
three aspects of the editing of moving images. To reach
an understanding of to what extent the editor’s intentions
with singular edit points actually controls the gaze of the
viewer we need a method that, at first, considers the
production culture where the moving images are
manufactured in terms of what intentions and decisions
are usually the editors’ as that profession is demarcated
[18], what profession specific skills are attributed to the
editor and what conventions are attached to these in
terms of ideas and execution of productional operations.
Second, as far as the editor is concerned we need to get
to how s/he thinks about how singular transitions may be
shaped and why. Finally, the method must also take into
account whether or not the intended visual performance
did occur with the viewers at those edits [4].
Film and video editors’ production culture may be
considered well presented in practioners' literature [5, 6, 7]
where general ideas of the field as well as specific ideas
and attitudes governing their profession emerge. There
from, I use the terms ‘shot’ for an uninterrupted visual
event on the screen and ‘frame’ as a singular image in
the stream of images (25/second) that a moving image
consists of. I use ‘frame edge’ as its (square) border limit.
A ’trailer’ is a short sequence of shots from a moving
image production (meant to pre-present the production to
its audience). The term ‘edit’ I use for the moment of
transition between two shots (an editor has to consider
what happens before and after an edit point as an ‘edit’),
whereas ‘edit point’ is the specific point in time where one
shot ends and the next starts. If the transition between
shots is sharp, frame-to-frame, it is a ‘cut’.
The intentions of the editor on specific edits, though,
must be found in direct contact with the editor while
editing. This requires an ethnographic approach where
observation without disturbance of the editor in her/his
creative work in combination with interviews, at a proper
time, might provide the data needed [8]. But for further
understanding this also has to be complemented by records
of the editing process to be able to find where the specific

Moving images production teams’ skills in directing
the visual perception of viewers have been confirmed
lately through eye-tracking methodology. One interest
lies in explaining the use of different techniques by the
production team for its realization of visual intentions.
These intentions are however many in most moving
images.
This paper undertakes the development of a method
for grasping the film or video editors’ intentions with the
editing of moving images, and has been carried out as an
exploratory study. The method suggested considers
conventions of the trade, observational study with
running screen-dump and proximate interviews with
editors on specific edits, as well as the testing of moving
image sequences where the intention of each edit point is
known. The test is conducted on viewers, with the use of
eye-tracking techniques.
The findings are that the method should be useful in
distinguishing between when the editors’ grip on the
audience is firm, and when it is rather vague. But the
method also suggests new aspects of understanding the
viewers’ gazes when watching moving images.
Keywords--- Film and video editing, intention,
perception, eye-tracking.

1. Introduction
Considering the viewing of moving images as a
visual query may provoke a number of issues. Some of
those deal with the conditions regarding the production
of those images. One issue is where the gazes of the
moving image viewers are intended by the production
team to be and what means they use to achieve that [1].
Whereas the overarching intention of the production
team might be expressed in terms of ‘film experience’ or
the similar and as such needs to be investigated through a
phenomenological stance [2], that main intention needs
to be understood as accomplished through many singular
decisions made by individuals with specific crafts all
along the image production [3], and therefore we need to
find the intentions attached to those decisions. In order to
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.59

375
381

editing difficulties lay and how the editor solves them.
The follow-up of moving images in terms of how
actual viewers perceive them can be done with the use of
eye-tracking techniques as Goldstein et al. did, but they
did not study the editing specifically [9]. They showed
though, that we should expect a degree of common visual
performance among viewers but also a range of individual
variations of areas-of-interest within those moving images,
and that this varies with different kind of shots. Hochberg
and Brooks have proved the importance of ‘visual momentum’ in moving image editing, but failed to deal with frameto-frame perception across edit points due to too low sampling frequency [24], whereas d’Ydewalle and Vanderbecken
took a stance in ‘editing errors’ [4]. They, as well as Merchant
et al, have based their analyses on general editing ideas [1, 4].
When we instead compare the editors’ intentions with
specific edit points to viewers’ visual performance across
those edits we might find what kind of conventions, ‘editing
rules’ and underlying ideas that work well with what kind of
shot and what type of edit in a qualitative discussion.

stood to be through visual queries aiming to affect the view
of the viewers [5, 6, 7, 13]. A forced gaze movement in
altering directions is assumed to provide collision and a resting of the gaze in an area of the shot, as well as a continued
eye movement in a certain pattern (eg. left to right or shaped
as a harmonic curve) is assumed to create continuity.
‘Eye contact’ from viewers’ side towards human characters’ or animals’ eyes in an image, explained by Yarbus
[14], is also a commonly assumed rule of thumb to keep as
guidance in editing moving images [6, 13]. Another rule of
thumb concerns the convention on movement transitions:
if there is a moving object in a shot, the path of that movement across the screen describes a trajectory, which can be
kept across an edit point as another object in the following
shot picks up that movement through starting out at the
expected position on the screen as the cut away object would
have had at that next frame [6, 13]. The consequences of this
regarding gaze-patterns is discussed in 2.3.2. The whole
reasoning is consistent with what is known about human
visual perception being very sensitive to movement [15].

2. Description of the exploratory study

2.2. Understanding the intentions of the editor
In this study I have observed an editor at work,
editing a trailer for the TV-drama Gustav III:s äktenskap
[The marriage of Gustav III], some 37 seconds in running
time. The trailer ended up with 10 shots and 9 edits – all
cuts. This trailer was then to be used as stimuli in an eyetracking test on viewers. The use of professional high
production value material is critical for avoiding unintended
visual queries in the stimuli, as far as possible.
To define the actual intentions of an editor for the
visual perception of a specific edit, first, we need to
consider all of the two specific shots that are to meet at the
edit point, and the specific editor’s thinking about the edit
point – which frame to match up with which other frame.
This we can reach only by observing the editing process and
ask the editor questions about her/his decisions.
Simultaneously with my observation I made a
running screen-dump with the software iShowU, recording
the software (Avid MC) on which the editing was performed. In addition, a web-camera with microphone captured
the activities in the edit suite (displayed aside the Avid
interface on the computer screen). This way I could get to
what was considered complicated in the editing of this
specific moving image material by the editor. This also
enabled me, after the editing, to confront the editor with
questions on her thinking for every decision she made.
A general concern for the editor, of prime
consideration when editing moving images, is visual
rhythm. This is a basic principle of hers in all her editing.

The aim of this exploratory study is to form a method
for understanding the moving images editor’s visual intentions in editing and to what extent those intentions direct
the gazes of viewers. Editors are dependent on a limited set
of decisions they can possibly make through what the
production culture of the field allows for their profession.
This includes the arrangement of the order of shots (and
sounds), choosing of the best ‘take’ per shot (and sound)
and deciding the start and end frames of each shot to create
a fluidness for the moving images. Thus they relay on conventions and ‘general rules’ that have been established in
the field. These, in turn, may apply to how sequences of
shots are constructed or how transitions between two shots
are to be effectuated. The use as well as the relevance of
these conventions and ‘rules’ in this latter instance will be
examined through comparing them to viewers’ gazes.

2.1. Editing conventions and principles
Since early cinema two guiding principles have
governed the editing of moving images, continuity and
collision [10, 11]. Either two shots should collide in a quite
noticeable edit provoking a reaction with the viewer with
his/her meaning-making as the intention of the editor. Or
the two shots should merge as one continuing visual
experience for the viewer, his/her gaze passing across the
edit point with the change of shots remaining unnoticed.
These principles still apply to any edit of moving images,
mutually excluding each other.
Another always present aspect of editing moving
images is rhythm [5, 6, 7, 12]. A sequence of shots is usually
expected to have a flow where the perception of each shot
should be experienced in relation to those shots
immediately preceding and following it. This flow might
be fast or slow and relates to camera movement and image
content as well as to editing, all together this makes up this
visual rhythm and thereby influencing perception.
An editor’s ways to direct perception qualities are under-

2.2.1. Altering the editor’s intention To see what
relevance the specific frame-by-frame matching between
the shots in the TV-drama trailer had for the viewers’
perception, I made a second version of it. I used the trailer
made by the editor, and altered the edits made by her by
changing the edit points a few frames (adding or deleting
frames), in different ways for different edits, to undo or
disturb the expressed intention of the editor. This version
of the trailer was used for comparison in the viewer-test.

382
376

2.3. Eye-tracking viewers

200ms generally considered [15]) made the following of a
fast eye movement across an edit point possible, which a
setting of 150ms did not. Whereas the spreading area
when set to 100px (pixels) allowed within a fixation gives
a too rough estimation of what the eye is undertaking, an
easier to interpret presentation is achieved when the
spreading area is set to 40px. The narrower span is better
since a moving image can be rather dense in terms of
number of visual queries, and it is therefore better in
achieving qualitative understanding of what is at stake.

The eye-tracking test was carried out at Mälardalen
University/Mälardalen Usability Experience Lab in April
2009 in two rounds. The first round was set up to have a
variety of viewers (8) in terms of sex (4-4), age (24-48y),
education (11yrs public school – PhD) and amount of
(moving)/image experience (less-more). In some ways
they may be related to the viewing of the trailers as in
Goldstein et al. [9] But this is not analyzed in this paper as
a quantitative test is needed to make any significant
statement. The second test round was primarily arranged
to come to terms with settings in the SMI eye-tracker
system but provided some data of interest to the over-all
purpose of the test. The age span was then widened to
55yrs and (moving)/image experience was vast in this
group (5). The total number of participating viewers was 13.

3. Visual analysis
What is of prime interest when analyzing the gaze of
viewers across moving image edit points is what happens
the seven first frames after the edit point, in relation to
what happened up till a second before the edit point (how
the gaze was moving), since seven frames is close to the
time approximated (300ms) as the perceptual “now” of
human experience [17]. Thus I have used three categories
to discriminate between gaze patterns: Resting (R) as the
eye dwelling in approximately the same area of the screen
across an edit point and staying there for at least seven
frames. Consequent movement (CM) is defined as when
the same gaze movement trajectory that starts before an
edit point continues in the same path after the edit point.
Radical movement (RM) is either a long movement across
the image plane where a CM has been interrupted and the
gaze goes for another area than it was first heading for, or
that the gaze in rest has been disturbed from the position
where it was resting at the edit point, or that the gaze
changes object of fixation after the edit point from the
object it first fell on to some distinct other, within the
seven frames from the edit point. The fact that sound is
having impact on viewing is a known phenomenon [19],
but is not taken into account here as the only sound in this
trailer is that which is in synch with the shots (what is
heard is also seen).

2.3.1. Data collection was made with the use of
SMI’s Eye-tracking system, including the remote eyetracker device attached under a 523x327mm2 monitor,
iView eye-tracking software and BeGaze analysis
software. Individual viewers were sitting 55-60 cm in
front of the monitor (1280x1028 pixels resolution), at eyelevel. After the nine-point calibration sequence, made with
the software WinCAL, they were watching the two TVdrama trailers in subsequent order: the editor’s version
first and mine second, with a gap of four seconds of black
in between. Before each trailer started a white fixation ring
was displayed on black background to get a common
starting point for the viewers’ gazes.
This eye-tracker uses the pupil/corneal reflection
method [16] to measure points of regard. The recorded data
of the eye gaze position is sampled 60 times per second.
The data is sorted (by iView) as fixations (the eye rests in
position), saccades (movements between fixations) and
blinks.
The visualization of this data was made in the form of
gaze-patterns to be able to follow individual gaze movements. Blue rings were set to indicate the present fixation
and the ring size fixation time, whereas saccades were
shown as orange coloured lines between fixation points.
Previous fixation rings were altered in colour to orange as
well. The gaze-pattern was given a display time limitation
to allow an understanding of where the gaze was at the
preceding moment, for any frame, without having the
gaze-pattern covering the screen as time runs. The display
time limit was first set to 2.2 seconds but was shortened to
1.5 s. in the second test round, which was still more than
needed for this test. Gaze-pattern colours were changed in
test round two, to brighter colours.

3.1. Gaze-patterns across editor’s edits
3.1.1. Edits with editor’s contention

2.3.2. Considerations An issue here is the small eye
movements. How much should the eye be allowed to
move on the image plane before it is a saccade, and how
long does it have to rest to complete a fixation? This has to
be considered in relation to the moving image as a kind of
dynamic scene consisting of displayed running still
images, 25 per second (which equals 40 ms per frame)
since a saccade means a shift of attention [25, 26]. Setting
the fixation time to 80ms (which is rather shorter than the

Figure 1: First shot, King Gustav III upset. Gaze-pattern
at the frame before the first edit point. © SVT

383
377

of the frame edge and back to the right side again
(camera following slightly).
Gaze distribution is 6 R and 7 RMs, but several of the
Rs have to make RMs right after the 7th frame, all
reasonably due to colliding movements in those shots.

The first edit was from a shot with the King upset
speaking to a shot with Mr. Munch listening.

Figure 2: Second shot, Mr Munch listening. Gaze-pattern
3rd frame after the first edit point. © SVT
This edit was perceived through resting gaze (R) by 9
viewers whereas 3 made radical movements (RM). (Loss
of data for one viewer.) Those who moved their gaze refixated at another location in Mr. Munch’s face than where
the gaze was at the edit point.
The second edit was from the second shot to a shot of
Prince Johan behind a billiard table in a lounge.

At the fourth edit the moving King cuts to the fifth
shot – the Queen, slightly moving her head towards the
left side of the shot.

Figure 3: Third shot, Prince Johan at billiard table. Gazepattern the frame after the second edit point. © SVT

Figure 5: Fifth shot, The Queen watching the King.
Gaze-pattern the frame after the fourth edit point. © SVT

This edit was perceived as R by 2 viewers, as a consequent movement (CM) by 1 viewer and as RM by 9 (1
LoD). Here gazes are rather spread out on the left hand
side of the third shot after the edit point and they have
many visual queries to catch on to.
By the third edit Prince Johan is moving from the
left side of the third shot towards the right side, as the
camera pans right, cutting to the fourth shot where the
furious King is having an outburst towards the left side

Here perception follows the movement: 10 CMs and
3 RMs – but fixation time set at 150ms for those RMs
which make them doubtable.
By the fifth edit the Queen is passed by the King right
in front of the camera, and the cut to the sixth shot occurs
when he is covering the frame and is out of focus.
The perception record of this edit is 7Rs and 6 RMs.
The same gaze performance occurs here as with the first
edit as several viewers change fixation point within the
Queen Mother’s face.

Figure 4: Fourth shot, King Gustav III furious. Gazepattern 3rd frame after the third edit point. © SVT

384
378

Trailer version
Edit #
1
2
3
4
5

Editor’s version
9R ----2R 1CM
6R --------- 10CM
7R -----

3RM
9RM
7RM
3RM
6RM

Altered version
4R
3R
5R
2R
10R

--------1CM
3CM
-----

9 RM
10R
7RM
7RM
3RM

Table 1 – Gaze movements in trailer versions. R and
CM refer to the concept of continuity, whereas RM is
related to the concept of collision.
The fourth edit though have a different record: 2 Rs, 3
CMs and 7 RMs. And the fifth edit also differs – in the
opposite way though: 10 Rs and 3 RMs.

4. Qualitative analysis

Figure 61: Sixth shot, The Queen Mother. Gaze-pattern
the frame after the fifth edit point. © SVT

The main interest of this study is to explore whether
the gaze patterns created from the eye-tracking of the
viewers and the concepts used to analyze the gaze
behavior across edits can be used to evaluate the editor’s
intentions. This study only uses data from a few viewers,
so any quantitative result cannot be reached to determine
the degree of fulfillment of the intentions [20]. But a
qualitative analysis of the gaze behavior of the viewers can
reveal the relevance of the concepts used and indicate
whether we are creating useful data or not to answer such
questions. So what about the editor’s intentions?

3.1.2. Editor’s uncompleted edits The time available for editing the trailer was not enough for the editor to
come up with a completely finished trim of all edit points,
but we had to settle with her being discontent with the four
last ones. This in turn is valuable for this project – as we
may see differences in the perception of those edits.
The sixth edit is from the (sixth) shot of the Queen
Mother to a medium close-up of the King (the seventh
shot) looking back at her and listening. Here, the perception result is 10RMs and 3Rs, most viewers’ gazes refixating at other places in the man’s face.
From the seventh shot the seventh edit is to a close
insert of a sword’s handle being drawn (eighth shot). The
gazes of all but one viewer stay resting, and the odd one
makes a small RM. This is due to most viewers’ gazes
being at the same spot in the middle of the frame when the
cut comes and a strong line passes that position on the
screen (a white manchette over black pants) in the new
shot, followed by a harsh movement.
The eighth edit is from the close-up to a wide shot of
several people in a salon where swords are being drawn
and is a continuation of the same action. Gazes are
distributed as 7 Rs and 6 RMs with short movements but
with changes of objects fixated.
The final (ninth) edit is from the sword scene shot to a
medium close-up of the King slightly on the left hand side
of the shot (tenth). 2 gazes are R and 11 RM due to a need
to compensate for the King’s position on the screen.

4.1. Editor’s intention and viewers’ gazes
At the first edit the editor wants the viewer to know
where to look when the second shot appears and then read
the face of Mr. Munch “as a landscape” [quote]. For most
viewers this was what happened – gazes rested, but not for
all. Three viewers made radical movements that seem to indicate the “search” for a new spot to continue reading from.
The editor’s intention with the second edit is that the
viewer keeps looking at the eyes of Mr. Munch in shot 2
and meets the eyes of Prince Johan in shot 3. Seven
viewers seem to read Mr. Munch’s face in shot 2 “like a
landscape” and have their gazes at different spots in his
face when the edit point occurs (perhaps due to different
“reading pace”). They have to start looking at shot 3 with
their gazes somewhere on Prince Johan’s body and from
there make radical gaze movements towards his head.
Only two viewers rested their gazes across the edit point.
So the editor’s intention with the edit might be unfulfilled,
if what these few viewers indicate stands a large test.
Following the performance of gazes it seems like the
reading of a face is an endeavor with various paths for
individuals (compare to [21]) and that a wide shot with
many visual queries provides many alternatives for the
gazes (compare to [22 and 24]).
The third edit is intended by the editor to be a visual
collision between the shots, through their movements. At
this edit seven viewers make radical movements
immediately whereas six follow the editor’s lead and rest
across the edit point, only to make the next gaze
movement a radical one. Two viewers seem to rest the

3.2. Gaze-patterns across altered edit points
When the edit points were altered (at the edits that the
editor was content with) one could assume changes in
gaze patterns would occur, and that happened.
At the first edit Rs dropped to 4 and RMs rose to 9,
but at the second edit the results were similar to the
original edit. At the third edit there were 5 Rs, 1 CM and 7
RMs, similar to the editor’s version.
1

(figures 1-6 from the TV-drama Gustav III:s äktenskap
[The marriage of Gustav III] © SVT)

385
379

gaze for many frames (15 and 19) – this data might be due
to too long fixation settings in the BeGaze software
though. Anyhow the radical movements are possible to
relate to the idea of collision.
Again at the fourth edit movement is the core concept
as the editor intends the viewers gaze to follow the King
across the screen, across the edit point and then follow the
head movement and eyes of the Queen in image 5. This is
what happens with most viewers’ gazes. They are thus
consequent movements.
At the fifth edit editor’s intention is that the movement of the King in the fifth shot is to lead to the eyes of
the Queen Mother in the sixth shot. Seven viewers have a
resting gaze across the edit point, not hitting her eyes
though (but most of them hitting the face), and six have
radical movements within the important area of the shot –
the Queen Mother’s face.

point. At the fifth edit a majority of viewers rest their gaze
across the edit point, more than for the editor’s version.
This might be due to recognition of the shots and the
sequence, but could also be due to the changes made.

5. Outcome
The method used in this paper should be considered a
way forward to reach an understanding of the impact the
editing decisions have on moving images as it gets deeper
into the intentions of editors than merely referring to general
assumptions, and as well considers the perception at the
receiving end.
In order to understand in what ways a film or video
editor tries to direct the gazes of viewers I find it necessary
to know what the specific intention of a specific edit is and
what challenges it has brought for the editor. This may be
found and discussed only through taking part of and
recording the editing process.
The fundamental editing concepts of continuity and
collision may be transferred to a gaze analysis in terms of
resting, consequent movements or radical movements of
the gaze for use in a gaze analysis. But the reasons for
those gaze behaviors must be related to specific qualities
of shots and edits, thus depending on further qualitative
analysis. When an edit point is altered the gaze is likely to
be altered as well. And if the edit is not perfected in the
editing process the gaze might be rather unpredictable.
As long as the editor’s intention can be referred to either
of the two fundamental concepts of continuity or collision
the grade of fulfillment of intentions can be perceived and
evaluated with the help of eye-tracking. The visual rhythm
though, is hard to analyze this way, since it is an overarching property of a moving image sequence and thus relays on
a longer time span with a large number of shots and edits.
What is also confirmed in this study is that eyes in a moving image is perhaps not attracting the viewers gaze as much
as the moving image production culture assume, and that
faces are probably being read in several different ways [23].

4.2. Uncompleted edits and viewers’ gazes
The last four edits, which the editor was discontent
with due to lack of time to trim them to completion, are
analyzed with the help of the same concepts, but no
intention of the editor’s is considered. The visual rhythm
might be one aspect that the editor was not happy with.
The edit point of edit six is met with a resting gaze
by only three viewers whereas ten make radical movements, and thus it is a noticeable cut to them. Across the
next edit point all but one viewer rest their gazes and the edit
should be perceived as continuous. At the eighth edit there
is an almost equal distribution of viewers with resting gazes
(7) and radical gaze movements (6). The radical movements though are not very long, and thus the edit perhaps
was close to being continuous. The last edit provokes
radical movements from eleven viewers, which makes it
clearly noticeable.

4.3. Altered edits and viewers’ gazes
When the five first edit points are altered the purpose
is that the editor’s intentions are to be disturbed or undone.
Here, the visual rhythm is likely to be affected.
At the first edit what happens is that the number of
resting gazes and radical gaze movements are inverted and
thus more viewers react to the edit, contrary to the editor’s
intent. At the second edit there is no significant difference,
likely due to the scattered gaze distribution already present
in the editor’s version. By the third edit the gaze performances seem similarly distributed in terms of movements
as in the editor’s version, but with significant qualitative
differences: more viewers follow the face of Prince Johan
in shot 3 – as the editor originally intended, and thus their
gazes hit the fourth shot on the wall before the angry King
enters the left side of the frame and meets viewers’ gazes.
This might have been the specific intention by the editor,
or, perhaps, the viewers anticipated these shots since it
was the second time they watched the trailer. The fourth
edit was standing out as the editor’s intention to make the
viewers’ gazes follow movements on the screen across the
edit in a consequent way was fulfilled in the original
version. This is now broken up as seven viewers miss the
face of the Queen in shot five with their fixation at the edit

6. Further implications
A small number of viewers might provide enough data
for a qualitative research in a study like this, but to reach a
significant amount of data for a quantitative analysis of the
extent of the fulfillment of a moving image editor’s
intentions about 300 viewers should be tested. Especially
if we were to consider parameters as sex, age, education
and moving image experience. Moreover, heat maps
should probably complement gaze-patterns. The lab test
situation is also set up in a way which makes it distinctly
different from most natural viewing situations, which need
to be considered. One such consideration is the relation
between the screen size and the distance between screen and
viewer. Another one is that sound often influences viewing.
Moving images and edits vary in regard to different
productions for conventional use in films, TV, internet
virals etc. and very few look exactly the same. Therefore
we need to get to the general through the specific;
studying actual editing, using a variety of shots and edits
between them that covers a wide range of visual queries.

386
380

[12] Roger Crittenden. Fine cuts: the art of European film
editing. London et al., Focal Press. 2006.

We need to consider what is known from visual perception
research as well as from the study of habits and intentions
within the moving image production culture.
The fact that viewers read faces in many different
ways may require a search for factors that draw attention,
for instance, to the mouth instead of to the eyes as is often
anticipated. Perhaps the mouth becomes an attraction
(through movement), or maybe some of us need to read
lips due to reduced hearing.
To be able to analyze visual rhythm with the help of
eye-tracking we need to consider other laboratory set-ups
and concepts for analyzing it.
To address those issues a major study is carried out at
Mälardalen University and Dalarna University in collaboration, where the method developed here will be used on a
large scale, gathering both qualitative and quantitative data.

[13] Don Fairservice. Film editing: history, theory and practice.
Manchester and New York, Man. Univ. Press. 2001.
[14] A.L.Yarbus. Eye movements and vision. New York,
Plenum Press. 1967.
[15] Colin Ware. Information visualization: perception for design
2nd ed. San Francisco et al., Morgan Kaufmann. 2004.
[16] Andrew Duchowski. Eye tracking methodology: theory
and practice, 2nd ed. London, Springer. 2007.
[17] Francisco J Varela. The specious present. In Naturalizing
phenomenology: issues in contemporary phenomenology
and cognitive science. Edited by Petitot, Varela, Pachoud
and Roy. Palo Alto, CA, Stanford Univ. Press. 1999.
[18] John Thornton Caldwell. Production Culture: industrial
reflexivity and critical practice in film and television.
Durham and London, Duke Univ. Press. 2008

Acknowledgements
Images are provided by the Swedish Television,
SVT, to which all copyrights belong.

[19] Charles Eidsvik. Background tracks in recent cinema. In
Moving image theory: ecological considerations. Edited
by J.D. Anderson and B. Fisher Anderson. Carbondale,
Southern Illinois Univ. Press. 2004.

References
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

Paul Marchant, David Raybould, Tony Renshaw and
Richard Stevens. Are you seeing what I’m seeing? An eyetracking evaluation of dynamic scenes. In Digital
Creativity. vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 153-163. September 2009.

[20] David. S. Wooding. Fixation maps: quantifying eyemovement traces. In Proceedings of the 2002 Symposium
on Eye-tracking Research and Applications. New York,
ACM pp. 31-36. 2002.

Vivian Sobchack. The address of the eye: a phenomenology of film experience. New Jersey, Princeton U. Press. 1991.

[21]

Howard S. Becker, Robert R. Faulkner and Barbara
Kirshenblatt-Gimblett. Editors’ introduction. In Art from
start to finish: jazz, painting, writing, and other
improvisations. Edited by H. S. Becker, R. R. Faulkner
and B. Kirshenblatt-Gimblett. Chicago, Ill, University of
Chicago Press. 2006.

[22] Lew B. Stelmach, W. James Tam and Paul J. Hearty.
Static and dynamic special resolution in image coding: an
investigation of eye movements. In SPIE vol. 1453 Human
vision, Visual processing and Digital display II. pp. 147152. June 1991.

Géry D’Ydewalle and Mark Vanderbeeken. Perceptual
and cognitive processing of editing rules in film. In From
eye to mind: information acquisition in perception, search,
and reading. Edited by R. Groner, G. d' Ydewalle and R.
Parham. Amsterdam, North Holland. 1990.

[5]

Roger Crittenden. Film and video editing, 2nd ed. London
and New York, Routledge. 1995.

[6]

Ken Dancyger. The technique of film and video editing:
history, theory and practice, 3rd ed. London et al., Focal
Press. 2002.

[7]

Walter Murch. In the blink of the eye: a perspective on film
editing, 2nd ed. Los Angeles, Silman-James Press. 2001.

[8]

Patrik Aspers. Etnografiska metoder: att förstå och
förklara samtiden. Malmö, Liber. 2006.

[9]

Robert B. Goldstein, Russell L. Woods and Eli Peli.
Where do people look when watching movies: Do all
viewers look at the same place? In Computers in Biology
and Medicine. Vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 957-964. July 2007.

Claudio M. Privitera and Lawrence W. Stark. Algorithms
for defining visual regions-of-interest: comparison with
eye fixations. In IEEE Transactions on Pattern analysis
and Machine intelligence. Vol. 22, no. 9. September 2000.

[23] Rudolf Groner, Franziska Walder and Marina Groner.
Looking at faces: local and global aspects of scanpaths. In
Theoretical and applied aspects of eye movement
research. Edited by A.G. Gale and F. Johnson.
Amsterdam, North Holland. 1984.
[24] Julian Hochberg and Virginia Brooks. Film cutting and
visual momentum. In The mind’s eye: Julian Hochberg on
the perception of pictures, films and the world. Edited by
M.A. Peterson, B. Gillam and H.A. Sedgwick. Oxford,
Oxford University Press. 2007.
[25] Julian Hochberg. Looking ahead (one glance at a time). In The
mind’s eye: Julian Hochberg on the perception of pictures,
films and the world. Edited by M.A. Peterson, B. Gillam and
H.A. Sedgwick. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 2007.
[26] Benjamin W. Tatler. Current understanding of eye
guidance. In Visual Cognition. vol. 17, Issue 6-7, pp. 777789. August 2009.

[10] Béla Balász. Visible man: or the culture of film. (1924)
Reprint in Screen. Vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 91-95. Spring 2007.
[11] Sergei Eisenstein. Film form: essays in film theory. Edited
by Jay Leyda. New York, Harcourt, Brace & World. 1949.

387
381

