2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

A 3D Visualization of Multiple Time Series on Maps
Sidharth Thakur
Renaissance Computing Institute
Chapel Hill, USA
sthakur@renci.org

Andrew J. Hanson
Indiana University Bloomington
Bloomington, USA
hansona@cs.indiana.edu

Abstract—In the analysis of spatially-referenced timedependent data, gaining an understanding of the spatiotemporal distributions and relationships among the attributes
in the data can be quite difficult. We present a visualization
technique that addresses some of the challenges involved in
visually exploring and analyzing the distributions of geo-spatial
time-varying data. We have developed a pictorial representation that is based on the standard space-time cube metaphor
and provides in a single display the overview and details
of a large number of time-varying quantities. Our approach
involves three-dimensional graphical widgets that intuitively
represent profiles of the time-varying quantities and can be
plotted on a geographic map to expose interesting spatiotemporal distributions of the data. We show how combining our
visualization technique with standard data exploration features
can assist in the exploration of salient patterns in a data set.
The visualization approach described here supports expeditious
exploration of multiple data sets; this in turn assists the process
of building initial hypotheses about the attributes in a data set
and enhances the user’s ability to pose and explore interesting
questions about the data.

Figure 1. A dense plot showing temporal changes in unemployment
rates in North Carolina’s (USA) 100 counties.

A standard example of data containing multiple timeindexed numeric quantities is census data. Besides containing demographic data, census records often contain a
number of socio-economic factors that indicate growth in
one or more geographic regions (e.g., per capita income,
unemployment rates, and poverty). Standard representations
such as the line graph shown in Figure 1 are useful for
exploring temporal patterns in a large number of time series.
However, it is challenging to graphically expose both the
overview and details of such spatial-temporal distributions
in a single line graph.
In this paper, we present a three-dimensional (3D) visualization approach to address some of the challenges in effective visual exploration of multiple time-varying quantities
having a geo-spatial component. The main components in
our visualization include a 3D graphical representation that
we have developed to intuitively represent the time-varying
data and an adaption of the standard space-time cube system
[15] to generate a holistic display of the spatio-temporal
distributions of the data on a geographic map. In addition, we
employ standard visual-analytical tools such as interactive
data mapping and filtering techniques to support exploratory
analysis of multiple time series. These methods assist an
analyst to quickly identify important patterns in the spatiotemporal distributions in the data and allow expeditious
exploration of multiple numeric quantities.
We begin with a review of the problem and discuss related
work in Section II. We present our visualization approach
in Section III and discuss features and design considerations
in our method and how they apply to visualization issues.
Section IV deals with various analytical techniques and data
exploration tools used in our approach for exploring spatiotemporal data. Finally, we conclude in Section V with a
summary of our techniques.

Keywords-3d information visualization, overview + detail,
time series visualization, spatio-temporal data, glyphs

I. I NTRODUCTION
In many domains that deal with information and scientific
data, a frequently occurring and important attribute of the
data is time. Time is often also considered significant because the temporal domain has unique characteristics (e.g.,
inherent levels of granularity such as day, month and year)
compared to some of the other types of fundamental data
quantities, such as space and population [1].
A rich variety of visual-analytical methods have been
developed to assist in the exploration of time-varying data
(e.g., see [2]). However, effective exploratory analysis of
geo-spatial data that involve multiple time-varying quantities
can be quite challenging.
The analysis of geo-spatial time-dependent data typically
requires an understanding of the distributions of the patterns
of changes and relationships among data attributes over
both space and time [4]. These spatio-temporal relationships
can be especially complicated when the data involve a
large number of individual time-varying data series that
correspond to multiple variables [25].
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.54

330
336

Figure 2. A plot showing an overview of the spatial and temporal distributions of crime rates for some of 100 counties in North Carolina (USA) using
our 2D graphical icons called Data Vases [23]. The shapes of the icons (i.e., widths at various time steps) represent the profiles of the time-dependent
variable. The solid colors and the horizontal arrangement of the icons represent a regional classification scheme (see the map on top) and reveal interesting
patterns in the data, for example, the high rates in some individual counties and the relatively low rates in the western part of the state (e.g., mountain
region). The 2D data vases approach provides overviews of other interesting data values such as outliers and missing data.

II. T HE P ROBLEM AND R ELATED W ORK

axis. The STC method has been applied to visualize the
spatio-temporal information in a variety of event-related
data; two representative examples are the visualization of
movement of crowds and traffic [18, 22] and the visual
analysis of events [9, 12].
Although the STC approach is primarily applicable for
visualizing event-based data, some approaches have explored
its use for visualizing time-varying data that are associated
with a continuous, linear temporal domain. For example, an
interesting application utilizes 3D graphical icons plotted on
a geographic map to display multi-variate time-varying data
[25]. In another example [8], the time-varying profiles of a
temporally evolving financial portfolio are visualized using
cylindrical 3D icons whose positions are determined using
a network graph.
In our work, the space-time cube provides a basic framework within which we display geo-spatial temporal data.
For visualizing the profiles of time-varying quantities, we
have adapted a two-dimensional (2D) technique called Data
Vases that we developed to compactly visualize multiple
time-varying data series [23]. The shapes of the graphical
widgets (or glyphs) in this 2D approach represent the profiles
of numeric time varying quantities. Figure 2 shows an application of this 2D approach for visualizing a census-related
quantity. In the figure, the time scale is vertical, increasing
from the bottom to the top, and data values are encoded
by the width of the 2D glyphs. Optionally, color is used
in this technique to redundantly encode data values and/or
statistical quantities such as percent change and moving
averages. Another related method for displaying multiple
time-varying quantities is the Horizon Graph [16], which
employs an effective layering and color coding technique
to compactly display data such as stock prices. However, a
Horizon Graph is primarily suited for visualizing non-spatial
data and is therefore not considered here.
The 2D plot in Figure 2 provides a compact representation

Many map-based visual-analytical techniques have been
developed for visualizing numeric time-varying data having
a geo-spatial context; some of the standard approaches
involve animated two- and three-dimensional maps that use
color schemes (e.g., choropleths) or graphical icons (e.g.,
ellipses) to encode and display data values [20]. Other
methods involve graphical icons that represent profiles of
time-varying quantities and are plotted directly on a map
(e.g., bar charts [4] and theme-river icons [21].
However, it is still challenging to visualize holistically
the spatial and temporal distributions in geo-spatial timevarying data. For instance, some of the approaches discussed
earlier can be limited either because they can handle only
a limited number of time steps (e.g., animated displays)
or because they cannot support effective display and exploration of complicated spatio-temporal patterns (e.g., bar
graphs plotted on a map).
A visualization approach that is capable of showing
overview and details facilitates exploring many types of
spatio-temporal data. For example, such an approach can
allow expeditious exploration of the spatial and temporal
distributions in geo-referenced data involving multiple timevarying quantities (e.g., socio-economic indicators in census
records). The readily apparent distributions can help in
formulating initial hypotheses about the patterns and even
stimulate further inquiry by allowing an analyst to pose
interesting questions about the data.
Some methods have been developed that can provide
overview and details for some types of geo-spatial time
varying data. A classic example is the standard space-time
cube (STC) metaphor [15] used to display the positions and
evolutions of locations of objects as a function of time. The
STC approach consists of a 3D plot in which the spatial
component (e.g., a geographic map) is plotted in the X − Y
plane and the temporal domain is represented on the vertical
337
331

Figure 3. Visualizations of the spatial and temporal distributions of food stamps issued in the 100 counties in North Carolina through a nation-wide
program of the federal government of USA. In the standard small multiples [26] display of the data (top) some interesting patterns are visible; for example,
higher food stamp claims occur in the north-eastern part of the state. Our 3D visualization on the bottom provides enhanced access to the spatio-temporal
distributions of the food stamp claims and selected details of changes in the claims in individual counties, all in a single view.

of the spatio-temporal relationships in the data. However,
the approach provides limited information about the spatial
distributions since the horizontal arrangement of the glyphs
is restricted to showing gross regional clusters.

B. Design Considerations and Issues
We next discuss some features and design considerations
in our visualization approach for generating informative
views of geo-spatial time-varying data.
3D vs 2D. Our primary motivation in choosing a 3D
approach based on the space-time cube metaphor is to
enable a holistic display and exploration of interesting
patterns in space and time rather than presenting the related
information as separate spatial and temporal “slices” [12].
Another motivation is based on the usefulness of the spacetime cube approach for supporting exploration of spatiotemporal data; for example, a recent study [19] found the
space-time cube system to be faster for performing selected
spatio-temporal exploration tasks compared to a baseline 2D
method. Although a study to evaluate the representations and
data in our case still lies in future, we discuss in Section IV
some of the exploratory tasks supported by our approach.
Finally, using our 3D approach we can easily display data
sets having a total of up to a few tens of thousands of
time steps, which may not be possible using approaches
involving 2D graphical icons (refer to Section II). Figure
4 shows an example visualization of a dense data set using
our technique.
Scene simplification. In 3D visualizations a standard problem affecting readability of graphical elements is occlusion
caused by overlapping glyphs. Another general factor that
affects the complexity of the display is data density; depending on the type of visualization method used, a dense
data set can result in overplotting and occlusion of graphical
elements. Our technique also suffers from these issues, as
shown in the dense visualization in Figure 4.
We deal with the problem of complexity in our 3D
visualizations using two general approaches, namely (a)

III. V ISUALIZATION A PPROACH
We present here a visualization method that is capable
of displaying a large number of time-varying data series
(time series) on maps. Our approach involves 3D glyphs
based on the 2D data vases technique and adapts the spacetime cube system to generate a display that allows effective
representation of multiple time series.
A. Construction of the 3D Glyphs
Our visualization approach employs 3D glyphs whose
shapes represent the profiles of time-varying quantities corresponding to various geographic regions in a data set. Our
method involves a straightforward construction in which
polygonal disks, one for each time step, are stacked along
a vertical temporal axis. The size (diameter) of the disk
at each time step is scaled according to normalized data
values and based on a pre-determined maximum disk size.
The thickness of the disk is usually set to some constant
value, though a user can interactively adjust the maximum
width and thickness of the glyphs. Finally, we use the colors
of the disks to encode data values and statistical quantities.
In the next step, the 3D glyphs representing the timevarying quantities are generated for each of the geographic
regions in the data set; each glyph is positioned at the
corresponding region’s centroid on a geographic map in the
X − Y “ground” plane of the space-time cube. Figure 3
shows a visualization of a time-varying data set generated
using our 3D approach and compares our method with a
standard approach that involves multiple thumbnail charts.
338
332

Figure 4. A dense visualization of the monthly unemployment rates in North Carolina (Jan-1999 to Dec-2008, about 13K data points) shown earlier in the
graph in Figure 1. The inset (bottom left) shows a few interesting glyphs selected for closer inspection and comparison. Some of the interesting patterns
include the regular fluctuations in unemployment rates in some of the counties (see eastern and western part of the state); these regular changes might be
related to the agricultural cycles in these counties. Note that a diverging color scheme is used in this visualization to expose low and high values.

manipulation of display properties, and (b) transformation
of data (e.g., data aggregation). Our first approach involves
interactive manipulation and transformation of the 3D view
(e.g., rotation, translation, and scaling); this straightforward
approach is used for reducing occlusion in a scene and for
closer inspection of the profiles of the 3D glyphs. Another
general technique that we use is brushing and filtering [4]
and information hiding [25]; the latter method is a generalization of the principle of brushing and filtering and employs
transparency and hiding of irrelevant information to present
a simplified view of events-related data to an observer; see
the inset in Figure 4 for an example. Other methods have
been developed that use sophisticated exploratory tools to
navigate complex 3D data visualizations [10], but are yet to
be explored in our approach.
Our second approach for simplifying scenes is based on
standard data transformation methods (e.g., filtering and
aggregation) and is discussed in Section IV.
Smooth vs. discrete profiles. The 3D glyphs in our visualizations can be generated using either line graph (smooth)
profiles or bar graph (stepped) profiles depending on the
sampling in the temporal domain. Figure 5 shows a closeup
of some 3D glyphs drawn using the two profiles. Line graph
profiles are typically used to display time-dependent data
that vary continuously between the time intervals. However, since data values need not change smoothly between
adjacent time steps, for example, when time intervals are
relatively long (e.g., months and years), the glyphs can be
generated using a stepped profile.
Color mapping. Color is used as a redundant graphical
attribute of our 3D glyphs (i.e., in addition to the width of
the glyphs) to encode data values and statistical quantities.
In fact, color is extremely useful for exposing unusual data
values such as outliers and abrupt changes, especially when
the data set is dense. We use standard available tools and

guidelines for generating suitable color encoding schemes
[5, 24]. Another color-encoding technique used with our 3D
glyphs is binning, which is useful for displaying changes in
data values or for highlighting clusters of similar data values.
In binning, the data values are categorized according to
user-defined intervals and the attributes of the corresponding
graphical elements (e.g., colors of the disks) are determined
based on a discrete color scheme. Examples of this approach
are shown in Figures 3 and 4, where data values have been
binned into six intervals.

Figure 5. Examples of our 3D glyphs drawn using smooth profiles
(left), and discrete, bar-graph profiles (right).

Orthographic vs perspective projection. The choice of
projection for the 3D glyphs in our visualization is an
important consideration because our method depends on the
visual comparison of the shape and size of the 3D glyphs1 .
We choose an orthographic (parallel) projection to render
the 3D scene because it preserves the shapes of the glyphs
in various rotationally-transformed views.
Variation on bubble charts. Our 3D glyphs can alternatively be imagined as a stack of bubbles (i.e., ellipses used
in traditional 2D map-based plots to encode numeric data).
However, in our initial experiments, stacks of individual 2D
bubbles were found to be useful in only limited 3D rotated
1 The type of projection pertains to the projection used to create the view
frustum in the graphical scenes in our 3D visualizations.

339
333

Figure 6. Visualizations of the distributions of the numbers of alcohol-related accidents reported in the 100 counties of North Carolina generated using
distinct data mapping schemes: (left) absolute values, and (right) per-capita values.

views for observing the profiles of time-varying data. We
have therefore chosen solid shapes for our 3D glyphs for
representing time-varying data.
Miscellaneous considerations. Although we primarily show
visualizations involving geographic maps, our 3D glyphs
can be used for displaying time-varying data that have a
non-geographic spatial context, for example, abstract layouts
such as network graphs and tree maps. In addition, it is
sometimes useful to display missing or unreported data
values, which are easily displayed in our approach by using
distinct colors or graphical markers on the 3D glyphs.
Finally, the 3D glyphs in our approach are similar to the
cylindrical widgets in [8]; however, our method has evolved
directly from the 2D data vase approach.

normalized by some quantity such as population of a region.
This straightforward option to switch between absolute and
per-capita values allows exploration of interesting spatiotemporal patterns in a given data set; an example of these
mappings is shown in Figure 6. Another useful data mapping option is to encode statistical quantities using the size
and/or color of the 3D glyphs. For example, visualizing the
rate of change of a time-varying quantity (percent change)
and moving average can provide useful information during
the visual data exploration process.
Data transformation. Data transformation in our context
refers to a set of general data processing and manipulation
methods that are useful for highlighting salient patterns
in a data set. Some of the standard data transformation
methods include aggregation, clustering, summarization, and
computing correlations [4]. We briefly discuss some of these
techniques and their applicability in our approach.
Aggregation and Data abstraction. Aggregation is a common data transformation method in which multiple data
points are replaced by a few data points or aggregates that
represent the original data set; the aggregate can be derived
using a variety of statistical formulations such as sums,
averages, and variances [13]. Additionally, data abstraction
methods such as summarization employ standard analytical
techniques such as dimensionality-reduction to extract and
display salient properties of attributes of multi-dimensional
data [7].
In our approach, data aggregation and summarization
serve as a useful tool for generating overviews of the data
over space and time [3]. For instance, spatial aggregation is
obtained by creating glyphs based on data aggregated over
regional clusters. On the other hand, temporal aggregation
is achieved by collapsing data values over the multiple
levels of granularity inherent in the temporal domain (i.e.,
collapse monthly values to yearly averages). These aggregation schemes support our overall goal of providing quick
overviews and greatly simplify the visualizations of dense

IV. E XPLORATORY NAVIGATION I N O UR A PPROACH
The compact pictorial overviews of spatial-temporal data
that are generated using our approach allow a user to quickly
browse through a large number of time series in multiple
data sets. However, our objective is not limited to (just)
creating interesting displays but also supports various exploratory tools that can enable an analyst to pose interesting
questions and hypotheses relating to his or her data. In
this section we discuss some visual-analytical tools and
exploratory tasks supported by our approach.
A. Exploratory Tools and Features
We employ some standard data manipulation methods as
the basis of interactive exploratory tools in our approach;
the following is a discussion on these techniques.
Data mapping. A fundamental operation during the construction of any visualization is the mapping of data values
to various attributes of graphical icons or glyphs (e.g., size
and color). The options for mapping different data-related
quantities can itself serve as an effective visual-analytical
tool [11]. For example, one option in our method is to
map onto the 3D glyphs either the absolute (raw) data
values or data values that have been transformed, that is,
340
334

Figure 7. Spatial and temporal aggregation of data values of the dense data set in Figure 4 (top). The aggregated values represent monthly regional
averages (left) and yearly averages (right). In the case of regional aggregation (see regional color legend), a single glyph is drawn at the centroid of a
county representing each regional cluster.

data sets. Figure 7 shows an example of these spatiotemporal aggregation schemes.

the data points displayed, thereby making it easier to observe
patterns in the data. Our visualization approach involves a
variety of standard interactive tools to filter data based on
user-specified ranges or intervals; for example, (a) selecting
a pre-determined interval by clicking on the discrete ranges
in the color palette, (b) using a range slider to select a continuous interval, and (c) selecting some arbitrary maximum
and rescaling the width and color of the glyphs based on
the new maximum value. Figure 8 summarizes the results
of applying these filtering techniques.

Clustering. Clustering is a computational technique for
identifying subsets that contain similar items based on
some similarity measure. A specialized application of this
approach is clustering of time series, which is used to
determine salient patterns in either multiple distinct time
series (whole clustering) or on parts of a single, streaming
time series (subsequence clustering) [6]. In our approach,
whole clustering can be used to determine spatial distributions of salient patterns in geo-spatial time series data.
The profiles of the representative patterns of the time series
can be displayed using our 3D glyphs to depict similarity
relationships over space and time. Another option is to
support visual exploration of patterns generated by a user
based on standard querying tools for exploring temporal data
[17].

B. Analytical Tasks Supported
Visual-analytical tools are often designed to support two
general types of analytical tasks: directed exploration and
exploratory navigation [11]. The tasks are differentiated
based on whether the exploration involves prior knowledge
or hypotheses about the relationships in the data, or whether
the tasks are purely exploratory.
Our visualization approach has been conceived to support
the latter, exploratory type of interactive data exploration.
Our methods can also be used as a data exploration tool to
complement some of the existing standard visual-analytical
methods for investigating geo-spatial temporal data (e.g., see
the methods in [3, 14, 27]).
We next discuss various data exploratory tasks supported
by our approach; our discussion is based on a comprehensive
data-task framework [4] that describes exploratory/analytical
tasks that are useful for analyzing spatio-temporal data. For
details beyond the brief discussion given here, refer to [24]
for an overview of the task typology of the framework.
According to the data-task framework in [4], exploratory
tasks can be broadly categorized as elementary tasks and
synoptic tasks. Elementary tasks are basic and are usually
concerned with determining the values of unknown quantities (i.e., dependent variables) when one or more known
quantities (independent variables) have been specified (i.e.,
lookup of values). Synoptic tasks are more complicated
and are related to finding general patterns and relationships

Correlation analysis. A standard analytical technique that
is used for understanding relationships in a multi-variate
data set is based on examining correlations among the
multiple attributes in the data. In many visualization approaches, features such as correlation matrices and nodelink diagrams can be exploited to display and explore the
inter-relationships. In our approach, however, the visual
representation is limited to the display of multiple time series
corresponding to at most a single attribute. This limitation
can be overcome to some extent by displaying correlations
between pairs of time-varying attributes. For example, we
can pre-compute temporal correlations among a set of data
attributes and display the correlation values using our 3D
glyphs. An example of a comparative analysis is shown
in Figure 8, where the differences between the values of
two numeric time-varying quantities are plotted using our
3D glyphs; the visualization has been annotated to highlight
features of interest.
Data filtering. Data filtering is a useful technique that can
assist not only in the visual-analytical exploration process
but can also reduce complexity in a 3D scene by reducing

341
335

Figure 8. Visualization of the differences in two time-varying quantities using our 3D glyphs (top). The visualizations on the bottom show the results
of some data filtering operations based on ranges selected using (a) pre-determined discrete intervals in the color-palette, and (b) a continuous range in a
selector (top right).

among a set of multiple dependent and independent variables. Since the general behavior of a system or phenomenon
is usually represented by relations among groups of entities
(e.g., system parameters and data attributes), synoptic tasks
are considered more important than elementary tasks. However, elementary tasks are still quite useful, for example, to
obtain details about individual data points (e.g., data values
at selected time steps).
Our visualization approach supports a number of elementary tasks and some synoptic tasks. For example, a user can
readily look up where and when certain data values occur.
Our method also provides quick overviews of distributions
of numeric quantities over space and time. Other, detailed
information on spatio-temporal patterns can be obtained by
using some of the data mapping and filtering tools discussed
earlier in this section. Finally, our method supports some
basic synoptic tasks: for example, a straightforward visuallyguided task in our approach is the comparison of the timevarying profiles of a quantity across multiple geographic
regions. Some other, more complex synoptic tasks that are
supported include identification of salient temporal patterns
using some of the clustering and correlation techniques
discussed earlier.
However, our visualization approach has certain limitations. For instance, it does not currently provide a means
to directly display and compare multi-variate time-varying
data. In the visualization of Figure 8, the changes in the
political affiliations could be due to changes in demographics or other factors; however, these relationships are not
shown in the display. Another general limitation pertains
to the perceptual issues relating to some of the dense data
visualizations generated using our approach; for example, a
comparison of multiple 3D glyphs can be difficult, especially
when the profiles of time-varying quantities are complicated.

A thorough evaluation of the analytical capabilities of our
methods will require a comprehensive user study: such an
evaluation has been planned as future work.
V. C ONCLUSION
We have presented a three-dimensional visualization approach for displaying profiles of multiple time-varying data
series on geographic maps. Our method adapts the spacetime cube metaphor and employs intuitive 3D graphical
icons to generate a visualization that provides overviews
and details of spatial-temporal distributions of time-varying
quantities, all in a single view. We present some analytical
exploration features and tools that can be used in our
visualization approach for supporting various exploratory
tasks. Our visualization approach is intended to assist an
analyst to quick explore multiple time-varying quantities on
a map and extract useful information that can be used for
building hypotheses about the data, as well as stimulating
further explorations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was carried out at the Renaissance Computing
Institute’s (Renci) engagement center at North Carolina State
University (NCSU). We would like to thank our colleagues
at Renci and NCSU for providing valuable feedback and
interesting data sets to work with.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Aigner, A. Bertone, S. Miksch, C. Tominski, and H. Schumann. Towards a conceptual framework for visual analytics
of time and time-oriented data. In Procs. of the 39th conf.
on Winter simulation, pages 721–729, Piscataway, NJ, USA,
2007. IEEE Press.

342
336

[2] W. Aigner, S. Miksch, W. Mller, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski. Visual methods for analyzing time-oriented data. IEEE
TVCG, 14(1):47–60, 2008.

[18] M.J. Kraak. The space-time cube revisited from a geovisualization perspective. In Proc. 21st Intl. Cartographic Conf.,
pages 1988–1995, 2003.

[3] Gennady Andrienko and Natalia Andrienko. A visual analytics approach to exploration of large amounts of movement
data. In Proceedings of VISUAL ’08, pages 1–4. SpringerVerlag, 2008.

[19] P. Kristennson and et al. An evaluation of space time
cube representation of spatiotemporal patterns. IEEE TVCG,
15(4):696–702, 2009.
[20] A. M. MacEachren. How Maps Work: Representation, Visualization and Design. Guilford Press, 1995.

[4] Natalia Andrienko and Gennady Andrienko. Exploratory
Analysis of Spatial and Temporal Data: A Systematic Approach. Springer, December 2005.

[21] P. Schulze-Wollgast, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski. Visual
analysis of human health data. In Procs. 14th Int’l Conference
of the Information Resources Managment Association, IRMA
2003, May 2003.

[5] Cynthia Brewer.
Colorbrewer - color mapping tool.
http://colorbrewer2.org/ (accessed Dec 2009).

[22] Y.B. Shrinivasan and M.-J Kraak. Visualization of spatiotemporal patterns in public transport data. In XXII Int’l
Cartographic Conference, July 2005.

[6] Jason R. Chen. Useful clustering outcomes from meaningful
time series clustering. In AusDM ’07: 6th Australasian
conference on Data mining and analytics, pages 101–109.
Australian Comp. Soc., 2007.

[23] S. Thakur and T.-M. Rhyne. Data vases: 2d and 3d plots for
visualizing multiple time series. In LNCS, volume 5876/2009,
pages 929–938. Springer., 2009.

[7] Qingguang Cui, Matthew Ward, Elke Rundensteiner, and Jing
Yang. Measuring data abstraction quality in multiresolution
visualizations. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 12(5):709–716, 2006.

[24] C. Tominski, G. Fuchs, and H. Schumann. Task-driven color
coding. In IV ’08, pages 373–380, Washington, DC, USA,
2008. IEEE Computer Society.

[8] Tim Dwyer and David R. Gallagher. Visualising changes in
fund manager holdings in two and a half-dimensions. IV ’04,
3(4):227–244, 2004.

[25] C. Tominski, P. Schulze-Wollgast, and H. Schumann. 3d
information visualization for time dependent data on maps.
In IV ’05, pages 175–181, Washington, DC, 2005. IEEE
Computer Society.

[9] R. Eccles, T. Kapler, R. Harper, and W. Wright. Stories in
geotime. In VAST, pages 19–26, Nov 2007.

[26] Edward R. Tufte. The visual display of quantitative information. Graphics Press, Cheshire, USA, 1986.

[10] N. Elmqvist and P. Tsigas. A taxonomy of 3d occlusion
management for visualization. IEEE TVCG, 14(5):1095–
1109, Sept.-Oct. 2008.

[27] C. Weaver. Cross-dimensional visual queries for interactive+animated analysis of movement. In GIScience Workshop
on GeoSpatial Visual Analytics, Park City, UT, 2008.

[11] Stephen Few. Now you see it. Analytics Press, 2009.
[12] P. Gatalsky, N. Andrienko, and G. Andrienko. Interactive
analysis of event data using space-time cube. In IV 2004,
pages 145–152, July 2004.
[13] Jade Goldstein and Steven F. Roth. Using aggregation and
dynamic queries for exploring large data sets. In CHI ’94,
pages 23–29, New York, NY, USA, 1994.
[14] D. Guo, J. Chen, A.M. MacEachren, and K. Liao. A
visualization system for space-time and multivariate patterns
(vis-stamp). IEEE TVCG, 12(6):1461 –1474, Nov.-Dec. 2006.
[15] T H¨agerstrand. What about people in regional science?
Papers of the Regional Science Association, pages 7–21,
1970.
[16] J. Heer, N. Kong, and M. Agrawala. Sizing the horizon: The
effects of chart size and layering on the graphical perception
of time series visualizations. In CHI 2009, Bostom, MA,
USA, 2009.
[17] H. Hochheiser and B. Shneiderman. Dynamic query tools
for time series data sets: timebox widgets for interactive
exploration. Info. Vis., 3(1):1–18, 2004.

343
337

