2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Visualization of news access activity in the SAPO
News website
Rui Raposo, Ana Veloso, Pedro Correia, Óscar Mealha
Department of Communication and Art
University of Aveiro, UA
Aveiro, Portugal
raposo@ua.pt, aiv@ua.pt, pmac@ua.pt, oem@ua.pt

In the case here described the two fundamental factors
mentioned are worked on according to a methodological plan
involving desktop and field exploratory research,
participatory design and prototype testing integrated in an
iterative research process.
SAPO Broker, used to collect the data used in this work,
is a SAPO1 web service, which monitors in real time a large
number of variables, related to events that happen within
SAPO’s Web Portal. In the News website section of the
portal, the information collected included: i) the number of
clicks made in different areas of the interface layout; ii)
content searched for; iii) geographical point of access;
among others. Data collected from SAPO Broker represents
great potential as a possible pattern indicator of users’
preferences and, from an editorial and business point of
view, a valid tool for over viewing current activities and
defining further ones. However, the data gatherable by
Broker is still understated and underused due to various
factors, which include technological limitations, and the fact
that current visualization applications are too technical and
not user friendly enough. These limitations lead to situations
where experts are called on to provide enlightenment and
end up keeping communication at a highly jargon level thus
rendering analysis superficial or setting it aside altogether
[3]. The question underlined here is - How do we establish a
harmony between the user and the system, in order to
transform, through user interaction, data into information,
information into knowledge and knowledge into wisdom?
Part of the research done has contributed to the establishment
of some indicators regarding how this harmony may be
sought after, within the context of use presented.
During the remaining of this paper, research developed in
the field of Information Visualization (IV) with the use of
data collected from SAPO's Broker, will be described first by
enunciating some of the concepts included in the theoretical
framework adopted, then by reporting some of the work
done and results achieved in the conceptualization,

Abstract — This paper holds as its core objective the report of
the research developed towards the conceptualisation and
prototyping of an Information Visualisation system capable of
providing a quick and accurate view of the set of data collected
by the SAPO Broker web service regarding access activity in
the SAPO news website. SAPO Broker, a real-time monitoring
application that collects data generated by every type of
activity within the SAPO Web Portal. The research presented
and its results undertook two major challenges: i) design a
visual metaphor capable of integrating news related collected
data for a specific target audience, technology setup and
context of use; ii) design user friendly and context valid
interaction tools able to assist data analysis and help improve
news editorial related tasks. Throughout this paper the need
for transdisciplinary teamwork and diverse scientific
knowledge correlation is reinforced, as we believe it should be
when the core issue is Information Visualisation.

Keywords- Information Visualisation, Interaction, Tacit
Knowledge, Explicit Knowledge

I.

INTRODUCTION

The uncompassable amount of data and information,
which is generated during the glimpse of an eye these days,
drives the need to create tools capable of aiding two
fundamental factors involved in information sharing [1]:
• the need to translate data into an understandable
visual metaphor (moreover when non numeric and
non spatial data is considered);
• the need to assure that the visual metaphor is truly
understood and that data is correctly analyzed.
These seemly simple needs are, however, efforts which,
more than often, fail to be met deriving in what is commonly
known as chart junk [2]. This unfortunate reality is easily
justifiable with the ease with which any user may generate
data visualisation solutions from various commonly used
desktop applications in just a couple of mouse clicks.

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.40

1

213

Largest Portuguese Web Portal (http://www.SAPO.pt)

states that data exploration tends to follow the following
path: i) Overview first; ii) zoom and filter and iii) details-ondemand.

prototyping and testing phases and, towards the end some
final considerations will be presented.
II.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK AND STATE-OF-THE-ART

If deconstructed to a deeper level, work done in
Information Design, tends to fall into one of these patterns
where:

We have come a long way since William Playfair’s work
started setting the grounds of what would now be discussed
as IV. However, despite the fact that his work dates more
than over a century ago, the truth is that some paradigms
used for IV still find their kickoff inspiration in the work of
people like William Playfair, Charles Joseph Minard and
John Snow. In spite of this tendency to benchmark good
practices of the past, present practices drive IV research to
adopt a transdisciplinary approach capable of assisting the
progression of data to information, information to knowledge
and knowledge into wisdom [4] while granting that data and
information may be both looked at in a clear, accurate and
useful way [5]. The endless oceans of data generated by
second in any given technological context of use has drawn
data miners to the importance of IV “to use computersupported, interactive, visual representations of abstract data
in order to amplify cognition” [6] in data mining “The
science of extracting useful information from large data sets
or databases” [7].

a) Display Patterns include:
• correlations (Scatter plots and Bubble Charts);
• continuous quantities (Simple Line Charts and
Multiset Line Charts);
• discrete quantities (Simple Bar Charts, Multiset Bar
Charts and Stacked Bar Charts);
• data proportions (Nightingale's Polar Area
Diagrams, Pie Charts and Ring Charts);
• flow diagrams (Sankey's Diagrams and Thread
Arcs);
• hierarchies (Tree Diagrams and Treemaps);
• networks (Diagram Maps and Relation Circles);
• spatial configurations (Topographic Maps and
Thematic Maps);
b) Behaviour Patterns include:
• Navigation (Simple Zoom, Local Zoom, Panning,
Timeline, Linked multiples and Overview plus
detail);
• Filtering (Layering, Active Objects, Boundary
Filters, Facet Browsing and Dynamic Query);
• Disposal
(Selective
Arrangement,
Sortable
Columns, Custom Dimensions and Isolated
Comparisons);
• Exploration ("Details on Demand" and DataTips);
• Transition (change in element’s colour or size and
element animation);

Current needs in IV contexts are looking for solutions,
which will enable practices to go beyond what is already
done and help improve results at a technological, interaction,
visual and management level by focusing on
transdisciplinary and convergence trends and inherit
opportunities. This is easily confirmed by work done by
Manuel Lima 2 , Andrew Vande Moere 3 and at MedialabPrado 4 . In this context the understanding of contributions
easily merged from areas such as visual cognition and
perception [8] with an interesting focus on visual
taxonomies, colour theory and the, not always consensual,
dispute image vs text, all well documented in the work of
authors such as Tufte and Tidwell [9][10] Information
design, and within it scientific visualization, infographics
and information aesthetics, has helped to not only shed some
light on, the not always easy task of getting the message
across, but also to do so in an appealing way, an aspect well
emphasized in the work of Chen [11] and Lau & Moere [12].

c) Interaction Patterns include:
• Boolean selection (usually done with interface
elements such as radio buttons, checkboxes, and
dropdown menus);
• Linear adjust (Sliders and double Sliders);
• Spatial navigation (Drag and Drop and Selection
Masks).

The widespread search for distinct and innovative
solutions in information design, in comparison to some of
the commonly used ones, has enabled the compiling of
visualisation methods, or design patterns, as described by
Behrens [13] and which may be divided into: a) Display
Patterns; b) Behaviour Patterns and c) Interaction Patterns
which, in a sense are closely nit with what Shneiderman
suggests as an Information Search Mantra [6], in Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think, this author

Further literature review, in this case directly related with
eventual commercial use of IV as a tool capable of assisting
managers in their on the spot decision making, suggest that
there should even be considered a niche in IV appropriately
named Business Information Visualization (BIV). This
concept may be understood as “a process of creating
appropriate computer-generated visual representations of
large amount of non-geometric managerial data for human
problem-solving and decision-making support” [14]. It may,
without doubt, contribute for an organization’s overall
Business Intelligence, a concept introduced in the 80’s by

2

http://www.visualcomplexity.com/vc/
http://infosthetics.com/
4
http://visualizar.org/
3

214

hypothetical new version of the IV solution. Questions
linked to this last goal where included with the objective of
trying to induce the editor-chief into exteriorizing tacit
knowledge (TK) thus converting it into explicit knowledge.
This explicit knowledge (EK) would be then used as useful
guidelines for the task of defining appropriate visual
representations and interaction mechanisms for the IV
solution. If given more time to develop the research this
work done on converting TK to EK would be extended to the
rest of the target users thus enabling a more complete
understanding of what they truly do, truly know and truly
want. In the words of Polanyi “we know more than we can
tell” [18] and as included in the work of Leonard & Sensiper
[19], who suggest that we know more than we think we
know, the issue of TK should not be neglected when
exploring the desires, needs and expectations of target users.

Gilad e Gilad [15] and examples such as Spotfire5 a Business
Intelligence Tool, Smartmoney6 a Map of the Market Tool or
Newsmap7 a news agregator. In the context of out research,
the SAPO News website, the clear correlation established
between BIV and our goals was easily established and
helped to keep in focus the needed relation between our
goals and the business component of the study.
From a usability point of view, challenges presented in
IV imply that “Usability is more than the color of widgets
and placement of text. Usability is about understanding,
stating, and serving user needs.” [16] and not simply
definable as the extent to which a product can be used by
specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness,
efficiency and satisfaction in a specified context of use. In
the context of IV the concept of data usability [17] was also
looked upon for guidance when establishing criteria for both
visual representation (cognitive complexity, spatial
organization, information coding, state transitions) and
interaction mechanisms (help and guidance, navigation and
query, data reduction).
III.

A. Visual metaphor
As a result of the exploratory interviews and desktop
research of similar cases it was defined that the visual
metaphor would have an IV solution capable of:
• Monitoring the most accessed areas of the News
website;
• Doing quick analysis of daily, weekly and monthly
data related with the news (most read, most clicked,
most commented, etc);
• Flexibly adapting the number of articles viewed on
the top article list;
• Representing the daily, weekly and monthly traffic
towards news partners from the SAPO News
website.
The search for a visual metaphor capable of meeting
these requisites led us to focus on establishing clusters of
information and visual and interaction variables associated
with each of them. This mix and match task enabled the team
to gradually understand what would be called for from a
programming and graphic design point of view and what
would be the structure of the initial interface wireframe.
Various solutions where suggested and abandoned during
the fine-tuning of the metaphor. This was all done at a low
fidelity level by centring metaphor proposal development on
a common image editing software. Figure 1 includes some of
the solutions created, discussed and abandoned during the
process.

EMPIRICAL RESEARCH AND APPLICATION
DEVELOPMENT

The research and development of an IV solution fed on
data collected by SAPO Broker8, which, through its public
component, allows the subscription of a configurable number
of topics. These topics represent, in a nutshell, SAPO Portal
real time interaction or interaction related data. Although
written in Java, Broker has several clients in various
languages such as: Perl, Python and PHP.
Processing, an open source project, originally created in
2001 by Ben Fry and Casey Reas9, was used to work on the
sets of data supplied by SAPO and the implementation of the
visual representations and interaction mechanisms
conceptualized for our specific context of use and group of
target users.
Our target users, a relatively small group due to project
nature, time and various context restraints, included 3
journalists, 3 news editors and 1 professional responsible for
search and advertisement in the News website. In spite of
being short in number, the participants represented the
generic profiles of our intended end users.
One of the editors, the SAPO News website chief-editor
to be more precise, took part in and initial exploratory semistructured interview with 3 main goals: understand and map
daily routines concerning the context of use in which the IV
solution would be used; outline interaction patterns already
established between the news team and an already existing
IV solution; and, at a more in depth exploration level, collect
pointers on desires, needs and expectations regarding a
5

http://spotfire.tibco.com/SEO/business-intelligence-tool.aspx
http://www.smartmoney.com/map-of-the-market/
7
http://newsmap.jp/
8
http://softwarelivre.SAPO.pt/broker
9
http://processing.org/
6

215

Colour

RGB

Hexadecimal

(44, 44, 44)

#2c2c2c

(191, 221, 29)

#bfdd1d

(151, 152, 156)

#97989c

Figure 3. The colour palette used in the interface prototype.

Figure 1. Some screenshots of visual metaphors and interfaces thoughtout for the application but later abandoned.

The final interface proposal, illustrated in figure 2, was
agreed on as was felt as a globally acceptable from a visual
and potentially interactive point of view.

Figure 4. Screenshot of the application interface with an outlining of
its 4 main content areas.

E1, situated on the half left side of the interface, includes
all the information regarding the most read articles in each of
the 5 news areas (news, sports, economy, life and local). It
uses a simple horizontal menu to access each news area,
resizes each menu item according to its percentage of
importance within the total of accesses collected by SAPO
Broker, and uses a bar chart solution for representing the
numbers behind each article that made it to the top. In a clear
analogy with what already exists in the SAPO News website,
in the horizontal menu the user may choose one of the 5
news areas as seen in figure 5. In an initial stage the order of
these areas was thought out according to the number of
access registered, left to right, most to least. However, it was
decided that the transposing of an already learnt spatial
distribution pattern would enable the target users to integrate
it into their activities in a more natural manner.
E2, located on the top right quarter of the interface shows
the user the global top 3 articles from the previous day. This
area uses a bar chart in order to show the dynamics
associated to each top 3 articles during a period of time.
The X axis of the bar chart represents the time variable,
which is refreshed at an hourly basis, while the Y axis
represents the number of mouse clicks during that hour.
Although the prototype, illustrated in figure 2 only includes 3
of the 5 news areas, a future version will include all 5.
Colour is used to differentiate each area with the inclusion of
an annotation, at the bottom of E2, as an aid to interpreting

Figure 2. Screenshot of the final visual metaphor and interface
adopted in the application.

B. Prototype description
Chromatically the prototype uses a simple 3-colour palette
where the use of each colour is not limited to applications on
backgrounds, surfaces, lines or text. In the news subject
menu, colour was used as a feedback resource for each item
in order to indicate its active and inactive status. The colour
palette adopted is illustrated in figure 3.
The interface adopted for the prototype is divided into 4
main areas, which are highlighted in figure 4. Each of these
areas, described in the following paragraphs, were developed
according to task related needs pointed out in the initial
exploratory phase of the research.

216

IV.

the colour code used for each area. The bar chart solution
was used as a simple, yet efficient way of illustrating the
most accessed news and helping the editorial team in
decision making regarding which areas were generating most
buzz at what period of the day. In cases where 2 or more
news articles share a very similar visual representation, a
rollover solution was implemented with the goal of giving
exact numeric values associated to each bar.

EVALUATION RESULTS

The evaluation phase of the prototype took place in the
target users’ work environment with the clear goal of placing
the proposed solution in a simulated real use situation. The
sample of users, due to its relatively small size, was
accounted for as a non-probabilistic and convenience sample
of subjects [18] and, as mentioned in the beginning of this
paper, consisted of members of the SAPO News editorial
team. The 7 team members chosen included 3 Journalists, 3
Editorial Managers 1 professional responsible for search and
advertisement in the News website, between the ages of 22
and 52 years, and, in terms of gender, divided into 2 males
and 5 females. A Think-Out-Loud [19] evaluation technique
was used with the aid of a semi-structured interview, which
included both questions with a multi-point rating scale [20]
and open-ended questions [21], and which was also audio
recorded.
The interview structure was divided into 4 sections: a)
characterization of the sample; b) Display pattern related
questions; c) Interaction Tools and d) Future Perspectives.
Visualization and Interaction issues were considered
separately due to the fact that they are often interpreted in a
different manner [17].
The evaluation’s major concerns were confined to the
following items: a) General opinion about the already
existing application; b) prototype display pattern; c)
prototype interaction pattern; d) prototype behavioural
pattern; and e) specific questions related with areas E1, E2
and E3, already previously described in this paper.
All the data collected pointed towards a satisfying result
concerning the proposed prototype. However, the
development team is quite aware that the number of of
subjects used to evaluate it is clearly not representative and
further evaluation, with the help of a larger sample, would
provide more accurate and detailed results regarding the
validation of the set of solutions presented in the prototype.
If considered that 4 out of 7 used the already existing
solution and considered it a very useful tool, clearly the
prototype would have to represent a breakthrough in
comparison to it.
In general results obtained pointed out that: i) the
interface was adequate for their needs regarding colour use
(5 out of 7) and spatial distribution of the various elements (6
out of 7) with the remaining users evaluating these items as
very adequate; ii) display patterns were adequate (E1 and E2 :
4 out of 7) or very adequate (E1 and E2 : 3 out of 7) but with
an overwhelming not adequate response to the display
solution provided for area E3 (6 out of 7); iii) interaction
patterns provided were not consensual and balanced in
general, for all 3 areas, between perceptible and not very
perceptible, though usable after being explained, which led
us to believe that initial tutorial training and an in context
help tool was needed; iv) visual feedback gathered general
consensus on its adequacy (average of 5 out of 7); and v) that
there were still numerous context, task and job related
additional functions needed in each area. This last general
opinion led us to understand that this visualization solution
was still at its initial stage and just scratching the surface in

E3, includes a representation of the number of mouse
clicks that have led the news reader from SAPO News to
other websites, most of them SAPO business partners.
Initially the volume of traffic from the SAPO News website
outwards to partners was represented by randomly drifting
labelled circles sized according to their percentual
importance in the total outgoing traffic. This random
movement was then seen as possibly a setback in terms of
interaction and a new solution, a circular multigraph, was
implemented. Circles no longer floated around but where
instead set in a locked position and the diameter of the circle
proportional to the generated traffic.
The news area, represented in E3, may be chosen
through the filter solution included in E4. E3 includes,
besides the circle representation of traffic generated by
partners, additional information linked to each circle and
accessible by placing the cursor over it. It changes its colour
in order to inform that its status is active and presents the
additional information on the right side of the area occupied
by E3. An example of this functionality is illustrated in
figure 5.

Figure 5. A zoom-in view of the information presented in the E3 area
outlined in figure 4.

The area, at the footer of the interface, E4, includes all
the filtering tools used to configure what is visualized in the
other 3 areas. It includes a double slider for selecting how
many news articles are represented in E1, the possibility of
choosing the period of the day (morning, afternoon and
night) visualized in E2, and news area (news, sports,
economy, life and local) illustrated in E2.

217

regards to the editorial team’s desires, needs and
expectations. The last section of this paper compiles some of
the conclusions drawn from the work developed.
V.

[4]
[5]

CONCLUSIONS

[6]

One may say that the work described in this paper is only
a starting point towards a necessarily more in depth research,
but that much of its outcomes have already helped to set
pieces into place regarding a methodology and paths worth
exploring in more detail. Understanding that the data
readable from SAPO Broker is still not used to it’s fullest
potential and that the Tacit Knowledge possessed by each
member of the editorial team, and still to be converted into
Explicit Knowledge, is a valuable resource which must no be
overlooked, enables us to state that in reality this work has
just begun. The evaluation results obtained support this by
revealing that, although some of the results were adequate,
there is still much to do in relation to: exploring new display
patterns; improving the correlation between display,
behavioural and interaction patterns in this particular
visualization solution and context of use; converting TK into
EK as a way to preserve and share this knowledge with
others; searching for tools capable of assisting further steps
in converting information into knowledge in this particular
area and wisdom reapplyable in other contexts. However, the
global positive nature of the results achieved led to the
company’s administration to suggest that the research should
continue and that work already done was already a
contribution to assisting the work done by the editorial team.
VI.

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

[17]

Our acknowledgement to SAPO and SAPO's News
editorial team in Lisbon for the support provided during the
development of this research.
[1]
[2]
[3]

[18]

Geroimenko, V., & Chen, C. (2005). Visualizing the
Semantic Web: XML-based Internet and Information
Visualization. Springer.
Tufte, E. (1983). The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information. Cheshire: Graphics Press.
Rosling, H., Ronnlund, A. R., & Rosling, O. (2004). New
software brings statistics beyond the eye. Statistics,
Knowledge and Policy. Palermo: OECD World Forum on
Key Indicators.

[19]

218

Lusignan, S., Pritchard, K., Chan, T. (2002). Knowledge
management Model for Clinical Practice. Journal of
Postgraduate Medicine, p. 297 – 303, 2002.
Few, S. (2006). The Surest Path to Visual Discovery.
Perceptual Edge.
Card, S. K., Mackinlay, J., & Shneiderman, B. (1999).
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
Think. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann. Pag7
Hand, D. J., Mannila, H., & Smyth, a. P. (2001). Principles
of Data Mining.
Ware, C. (2004). Information Visualization: Perception for
Design. San Fracisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Tufte, E. R. (1990). Envisioning Information. Cheshire:
Graphics Press.
Tidwell, J. (2005). Designing Interfaces: Patterns for
Effective Interaction Design. Sebastopol: O´Reilly Media
Inc.
Chen, C. (2002). Information Visualization. Palgrave
Macmillan.
Lau, A., & Moere, A. V. (2007). Towards a Model of
Information Aesthetics in Information Visualization. Sydney:
Key Centre of Design Computing & Cognition.
Behrens, C. (2008). The Form of Facts and Figures.
Potsdam: University of Applied Sciences.
Zhang, P. (2001). Business Information Visualization:
Guidance for Research and Practice. Encyclopedia of
Microcomputers, Volume 27, Supplement 6.
Ahokas, T. (2008). Information Visualization in a Business
Decision Support System. Helsínquia.
Shneiderman, B., Grinstein, G., Plaisant, C., Stasko, J. T., &
Kobsa, A. (2003). Which comes first, usability or utility?
IEEE Visualization Conference. Pag 606
Freitas, C., Luzzardi, P., Winckler, R. C., Pimenta, M., &
Nedel, L. (2002). Evaluating Usability of Information
Visualization Techniques. Brasil.
Polanyi, M. (1997). The Tacit Dimension, in Prusak, L. (ed.)
Knowledge in Organization. Butterworth-Heinnemann,
Boston, MA, Pag 136
Leonard, D., Sensiper, S. (1998). The role of Tacit
Knowledge in Group Innovation, California Management
Review, vol. 40, nº 3

