2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Visualisation of web based e-Learning activity
Ana Patrícia Oliveira, Óscar Mealha, Carlos Santos
Department of Communication and Art, University of Aveiro, Portugal
{apoliveira@ua.pt, oem@ua.pt, carlossantos@ua.pt}
Abstract

supported by traditional feed aggregation tools. Although
these tools are a valuable asset to follow User Generated
Content (UGC) they do not provide any help to deal with
tasks related with community monitoring and
supervision. For instance, teachers aren’t able to easily
track which students are getting behind when related to
participation.

The aim of the current paper is to report on the
conceptualisation of visual methods and techniques that
were adapted for the monitoring of community
participation on Thinkster e-learning platform. This
platform supported the research activities of Masters
students in Multimedia Communication program at
University of Aveiro (2008/2009 academic year).
This research work implies two components, which
are dependent. One of the components is related to the
development of a Web based functional prototype in
order to allow teachers and system administrators the
visualisation and analysis of the users’ interactions on
Thinkster’s communication and information system. The
other component of this work is focused on the prototype
evaluation with an analytical method that revealed some
of the target users’ expectations, opinions and their
satisfaction level related to the application interface.

2. Aims and objectives
With the research approach proposed in this paper,
teachers have access to an efficient holistic and specific
analysis of several resources published in the system by
each student.
The conceptualisation process of the related
visualisation methods were integrated in a functional
web prototype and its properties and functionalities
evaluated. The main aim of these visualisation
methodologies is the exploration, analysis and register of
user’s interaction activity, besides supplying feedback
concerning the contents that are produced by the
community. In this way, the research problem is related
with the conceptualisation of visual based techniques and
services to monitor interaction in a specific Web context,
namely an educational platform that uses different tools
and Web 2.0 services to support the development of the
academic work in a blended-learning context.
The research questions inherent to this work are
synthetically two:
x Is the Treemap paradigm adequate to visualise a
communities’ contributions and interaction
activity in the Thinkster platform?
x Does the prototyped Web application meet the
final users’ expectations and needs?

Keywords --- Information Visualisation, Web 2.0,
e-learning, monitoring.

1. Introduction
The aim of this study is to conceive a visualisation
method suited for the analysis of interaction in a
communication and information system in a
technological mediated context of use. The system used
as a study case is the educational platform Thinkster,
based on Wordpress MU 1 with additional support for
some custom services (social bookmarking, file sharing
and blogs categories). This Web 2.0 platform was built to
support the student research community of the 2nd year
of the Masters in Multimedia Communication at the
Communication and Arts Department of the University
of Aveiro (2008/2009 academic year).
The aim of the monitoring application is to support
the teachers of “Dissertation Project” and “Seminar”
courses, in following-up by the activities developed for
the students in the Thinkster platform. Taking into
consideration that one of the evaluation components of
these courses is the participation of the students in the
dynamics of the community; teachers must deal with a
large amount of information related with all student
participation within Thinkster’s services. Teachers’ tasks
concerning students activity monitoring have been done
1

2. Research Context
In this section the theoretical framework alongside
the main concepts in the b-learning processes are
presented, namely the ones associated to the use of Web
2.0 tools in educational contexts. The relevance of
visualisation techniques and methods to monitor user
interaction is pointed out and characterised for the
mentioned purposes.

2.1. e-Learning 2.0
e-Learning can be defined as a learning modality
that facilitates the creation of a learning environment

http://mu.wordpress.org/

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.41

219

supported by the information and communication
technologies [1]. Currently it is possible to identify some
phases of e-Learning and its evolution throughout time.
According to Ebner [2] there are two phases inherent to
the development of e-Learning processes: e-Learning 1.0
and 2.0. The author establishes that e-Learning 1.0 is
based, essentially, on reading and not on interaction,
existing a great focus on the available content. The
participation and contribution between students and
teachers is almost inexistent in this e-Learning phase and
the control of the learning process subsists in
institutional e-Learning platforms, as Virtual Learning
Environments (VLE). Moving to the e-Learning 2.0
concept, the participation and contribution is promoted
through the use of tools and Web 2.0 services as blogs,
wikis, tags, social bookmarking and RSS feeds. For
Downes [3], e-Learning 2.0 understands the Web as a
space of participation, where sharing and contribution,
makes the establishment of a more open and flexible
learning environment, through which students create and
recreate their own learning path.

2.3. Visualisation methods
Starfield Display and Social Network Analysis
Starfield method [5] uses scatter-plot displays and
dynamic queries to supply an easy and quick access to a
large number of individual data points representing
records in a database. This method provides zoom
functions, panning, scale, scroll, and allows user to
manipulate the interface to select and review points and
sub points in order to dynamically search in the dataset.
Colours and shapes can be used to represent points,
however in a higher complexity level the records could
include images and labels. Starfield method has been
applied in several domains, e.g. movies, house purchases
and city guides.
Social network analysis is a powerful method that
represents social relationships in networks. With this
method users can find patterns and comprehend the
structure of networks with many nodes (networks’
actors) and ties (relationships between the actors). An
example of a social network analysis tool is SocialAction
[6] developed by the Human–Computer Interaction Lab
at the University of Maryland that integrates
visualisation and statistics to improve the analytical
process. Users are able to interact with this tool by
filtering nodes, finding outliers and cohesive subgroups,
and focusing on communities of interest.

2.2. Monitoring Technologically mediated
Communities
With the emergence of networks and on-line
communities’, the monitoring techniques are used to
analyse and perceive the contributions and promoted
dynamics by the users who constitute them. According to
Croll and Power [4] there are several elements that must
be measured and analysed when monitoring a
community, which are:
x User reputation: The degree of respect that a
user acquires within the community that he
takes part in.
x Threading: The scheme to organise the
answers/feedback between members of the
community normally supported on comments.
x Voting: It supports the verification of good and
bad contents, for example with flags and/or
ratings.
x Notifications: They allow the users to keep
track of what is happening inside of the
community.
x Social graph: It describes the relations
established between the members, for example
with the presentation of blacklist of a best friend
ranking.
x Searching: It allows the search of some
interaction data and publishing activity in the
system.
x Topics, sub-groups and events: Groups and
activities to which the members of the
community can join.
However, other conditions must be taken into
account in order to carry out Web monitoring in a more
efficient way. The monitoring of statistical information
in the Web (Web analytics) is the basis of a complete
monitoring strategy, jointly with other monitoring
resources, as performance monitoring, usability and
community management [4].

Treemaps
The space representation with the treemap method
was created and developed by Shneiderman [6],
exemplified originally with the visualisation of the
occupied space by files in a hard disk.
This methodology is based on the subdivision of bidimensional space, in which an initial rectangle is
recursively subdivided into new rectangle areas. Each
area of the rectangles is proportional to an entity
according to previously defined criteria.
According to Shneiderman [7], this visual
methodology is able to represent data with great
hierarchical structures in an exiguous space. The
representation through treemaps has been applied in
different domains from the financial analysis to sport
reports. A key element of treemaps is the algorithm to
create child rectangles. In its first article concerning this
methodology, Shneiderman [7] uses the algorithm sliceand-dice to divide the rectangles into smaller rectangles
(child). Besides this algorithm, there are other proposals
for treemap layout constructions. The cluster method [8]
uses a simple algorithm that significantly reduces the
narrow aspect of the layout rectangular areas. With
intention to enrich this goal, Bruls et al. [9] had
introduced the squarified algorithm that reduces the
narrow areas of the layout, substituting the rectangles by
squares.

3. Visualisation of e-learning with Thinkster:
study case
Thinkster platform is based on Wordpress MU
(Multi-User) that allows the integration of a limitless
number of blogs and users in a single Wordpress
installation. Within Thinkster, WPMU functionalities

220

were expanded with the use of plug-ins and additional
custom programming for adding file sharing and social
bookmarking integrated tools.
Users have the possibility to introduce three
categories of resources: posts, links or files. The use of
tags indicates the category that the resource belongs to.
All the resources added by the community can be
commented, by the exterior (it demands moderation) as
by other users of the community (Figure 1).

related to the courses of “Dissertation Project” and
“Seminar”.

Figure 3 Attributes of scientific categories

Figure 4 Time interval slider selector to
visualise the platform activity

4.1. Treemap Prototype
The developed prototype application, in terms of the
context and detail visualisation, is based on an
Overview+Detail approach, which provides two or more
representations of the structure. Usually, a simplified
global view (for orientation) and a detailed view (where
the user will focus its actions) [10] are presented, besides
that, successive quantitative and user details can be
accessed.
It is important that treemap application presents a
global view of data (Figure 5) because it will allow the
detection of global patterns, as well as an overview index
of activity, which helps the final user in the selection of
the next action.

Figure 1 Thinkster’s e-learning system
architecture
Thinkster was used within the context of two
courses of the Masters in Multimedia Communication.
The scientific activities related to the Masters
programme are organised into six research areas, that
were also used to organise the information inside
Thinskster: i) Communication, technology and social
networks; ii) Research methodologies; iii) Interactive
narratives and games; iv) Audiovisual platforms,
contents and multi-platform narratives; v) Usability and
vi) Web 2.0 and Education. Besides this, it was
necessary to represent one more category (global
category) that enables the possibility of a holistic
visualisation of interaction activity inherent to all
scientific categories (Figure 2).

Figure 5 Global view of system activity data in
the treemap application

Figure 2 Attributes of global activity category

With a clear reference to Card’s [10] work, a more
specific treemap scheme (Figure 6) was implemented to
quickly represent details.

Each one of the categories (nodes) have some
attributes (sub-nodes or child nodes) that describe the
community’s activity, being: i) the number of blogs; ii)
existing users; iii) the number of page views; iv) the
number of created posts; v) files; vi) links and vii) the
number of comments in these resources (Figure 3).
All categories, with exception of global category,
still have another level in the hierarchy that ramifies
from the child nodes, which represents the number of
users’ contributions in these resources.
Parallel to the space representation of several
categories is the possibility to visualise the platform
activity in time with a slider (Figure 4). Considering this
community’s activity, the temporal slider has a fortnight
resolution, since it is the period of time in which a higher
index of activity exists, due to the contents publication

Figure 6 Example of a detailed view in the
usability category in the treemap application
221

Since the representations are multiplexed in space,
the need to determine, in a balanced way, the relative use
of the global space was imperative. Thus it was decided
to use 40% of the application’s total area to present the
global view of the categories’ contents. For the global
view, it was considered convenient to use this percentage
in order that the detail space was a little more prominent,
because it is the area where the final user interaction
takes place. These options had been based on Card’s [10]
proposal which argues that the visualisation techniques
that use this approach need to balance correctly the use
of space.
According to the detail view, a zoom technique was
used to visualise the structure in detail. This enlargement
is followed by an animation that in visual terms
facilitates the understanding of the focus change. This
zoom technique is useful, because it allows the user to
have a perception of the “busy space” for child nodes
and sometimes the rectangles have dimensions that are
not easy to visualise and/or to select.
The treemap application was developed with the
support of a treemap package in Javascript created by
Martin Cowie (Js-Tree map) [11].
Due to the need to divide the interface areas
according to a homogeneous colour scheme, colour
clustering was chosen as a solution.
In accordance with Kim [12], that considers a new
scheme for the Fuzzy algorithm c-means (FCM)
proposed by Dunn [13], the dominant colours are the
main colours to represent the sets (attributes) that will be
grouped, where the number of dominant colours must be
the same as the number of attributes.
In order to determine the dominant colours for the
attributes a harmony of seven colours were selected with
two predefined properties: saturation and brightness
above of 50%. After choosing the dominant colours, the
variant colours were selected to represent the top and
basis hierarchic levels [12]. In the top level, red is more
saturated than the dominant colour (magenta – blogs
attribute) with the intention that the categories can be
distinguished in the interface in a first analysis.
Considering only level basis, green was selected with
more luminosity in relation to the dominant colour (sea
green- links attribute), in order to be differentiated from
the remaining attributes (Figure 7).

Study participants
The sample of the research participants was selected
from the citizens’ population with content managers’
profile. These participants were acquainted with the use
of services or tools of content management, having been
able to contribute in the monitoring and management of
the information area. In total, 6 participants were
selected and contributed with their professional
experience for the analytical evaluation of the treemap
application. The evaluation also contemplated users’
opinions related with satisfaction supported on
qualitative and subjective methods.
Data collection techniques and instruments
In order to conduct this evaluation, the following
collecting data techniques were used:
x direct observation;
x semi structured interview.
Based on these two instruments the following
actions were implemented:
x goal oriented tutorial was done by participants:
to point out different tasks that are normally
executed by participants and to collect data in
an organised and structured way.
x an interview applied before and after-test to the
participants.
“Before-test” interview
Initially, a hyperlink of the treemap application was
given to the participant, with information on the
interface, its goals and key concepts. After this brief
presentation, the “before-test” interview was applied,
which consisted in three different questions:
1. Do you know the tree map visualisation method
used in the application?
2. Have you ever used this type of visualisation
method?
3. Do you consider that the used colour scheme
distinguished the nodes from sub-nodes?
After these questions, the participants had some
minutes to interact with the application, and any doubt
related with its functioning was clarified.
Heuristic Evaluation
As soon as the user felt prepared, the evaluator
presented to him a goal-oriented set of tasks. The
evaluator also observed if the participant executed the
different goals successfully. The participants executed
three groups of goals in the treemap application, in a
total of five tasks of increasing complexity:
Group I – Navigation in the global view:
x goal 1. In the global view of “all categories”,
the user has to indicate a node that keeps the
same value throughout time.
Group II – To find a specific child node:
x goal 1. The user has to indicate in the fortnight
that begins on the 26th of November, which is
the participant who has a greater number of
posts, in the “Web 2.0” scientific category.
x goal 2. The user must point out which is the
scientific category with bigger number of
comments in the fortnight that begins on the
10th of December.

Figure 7 Scheme of dominant and variant
colours used to represent attributes, categories
and users

4. Prototype Evaluation
In order to evaluate this prototype, analytical methods
were used based on heuristics and goals, because it was
crucial to analyse the qualitative and subjective
characteristics of participants’ reviews and comments to
obtain data related to their satisfaction level.

222

that with the proposed colour scheme it is possible to
distinguish the different categories and attributes.

Group III – Child nodes comparison and
identification:
x goal 1. In the fortnight that begins on the 10th
of December, the user must indicate which
categories (methodologies or platforms) have a
bigger number of posts.
x goal 2. The user has to analyse the treemap and
indicate the number of page views associated to
the “usability” category.

Heuristic Evaluation
It is important to mention that no participant
classified above 2 values the various heuristics for all
executed goals, so it will be verified that despite some
tenuous usability and interaction problems, the
application seems to answer the initially specified goals.
The aesthetic and minimalist design heuristic was
always classified with the value 0 for all participants in
all goals that had been carried out, suggesting that the
system presents the information that the user require in a
specific moment. Finally, it was verified the participants’
tendency to classify a greater number of heuristics above
0 as more goals were fulfilled, perhaps because of the
increasing complexity of the tasks.

After executing each goal the participants had six
proposed heuristics, previously selected for each goal, in
a scale from 0 (no existence of usability problem) to 4
(serious usability problem), and additional comments
that are considered relevant. The set of six principles that
constitute the main heuristic for this evaluation were
extracted from the heuristic suggested by Nielson [14]
cited by Dix et al. [15]:
1. Visibility of system status – the system should
inform the user about the actions that he
executes.
2. Match between system and the real world – the
system must use a familiar language to the user.
3. User control and freedom – the user must
always have the possibility to cancel or remake
an action.
4. Consistency and standards – the same command
or action in the system must always have the
same result.
5. Colour use – the system must transmit a
coherent image of the information structure and
classification.
6. Aesthetic and minimalist design – the system
must only present information that the user
requires at the moment.
The participants executed the goals with a
predefined order, however they had the freedom to
choose, not to answer the heuristics, when they did not
understand them or when they considered that the
heuristics were inappropriate.

“After-test” interview
In the “after-test” interview some participants
showed difficulties in the required use of rollover to be
able to visualise some data, as well as in the
impossibility to visualise nodes and sub-nodes labels
when these are greater than the area occupied by them.
This is a treemap paradigm limitation related to direct
overlay of static information. An alternative could be the
use of mouse roll-over tags which in the other hand
compromises intuitive exploration of information which
still has spatial pin-point problems in extremely small
treemap areas.
Even so, besides these limitations, the majority of
participants stated that they would use this type of
application to monitor community contributions and
activity.

Conclusions
Answers to the research questions
The evaluation methodology of the conceptualised
and implemented application created a set of results that,
to some extent, justified the usability analysis and
validated the prototype’s interaction design. The
following sections have comments and suggestions for
application improvement, inherent to the context of use
considered in this work.

“After-test” interview
At the end of the previous phase, the “after-test”
interview was carried out to the participants with the
following questions:
4. What is/are the main difficulties experienced
when surfing in the application?
5. Would you use this type of application to
monitor the contributions of a web community?
6. What are the main changes that you would
propose for the application? Would you add
new functionalities?

First research question - revisited
Is the Treemap paradigm adequate to visualise a
communities’ contributions and interaction activity in the
Thinkster platform?
To answer this question the following actions were
pursued:
x State of the art concerning the information
visualisation topic, focusing the analysis in its
structuring concepts.
x The selection of a hierarchical visualisation
method (treemap), which allows answering to
the monitoring application requirements:
o the efficient perception of several
community contributions;
o the fast information extraction;
o the
holistic
representation
of
Thinkster’s platform activity.

5. Data Analysis
“Before-test” interview
The “before-test” interview reveals that only half of
the participants were acquainted with this visualisation
method and, the remaining three participants didn’t have
any previous knowledge of the treemap method.
All the participants familiar with the treemap
visualisation method also answered that they had already
used a treemap. Finally, all the participants considered

223

x

The information Treemap monitoring approach
(one of the possible areas of visualisation
techniques applicability), fulfilling the study of
monitoring strategies of Web 2.0 communities.

context. A precious acknowledgment to all students of
the 2008/2009 masters program that participated with an
annual use of Thinkster for the purposes mentioned in
this paper.

References

Second research question - revisited
Does the prototyped Web application meet the final
users’ expectations and needs?
It is considered that in terms of functional and
interaction design and usability, the application answers
the enunciated question, since:
x All heuristics had not gotten a symbolic
classification above 2 values for all users, which
show some evidence of a possible global
acceptance of the considered methods and
techniques;
x The goals execution reveals a success rate
above 75%, in 30 tasks, 23 of them had been
carried out successfully, which we consider
promising for a first prototype trial;
x All the participants believe that the used colour
scheme is suited for its function: to distinguish
the several categories and attributes represented
in the application interface;
x The majority of participants (five of six) stated
that they would use this type of application to
monitor community contributions, showing the
rich degree of satisfaction obtained with the
treemap application use.

[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

Future Work
Supported by users’ feedback, it is considered that
the current prototype application could be improved with
some additional features, for example:
x Filtering by attributes, would allow the user to
focus attention in a specific set of data;
x The presence of alternative texts (alts) that
complement the possibility to visualise the
attributes data with rollover;
x The ‘Back’ button should be placed in another
position on the screen or still be complemented
and/or replaced by another strategy that allows
the user to return to the previous level of the
application;
x The inclusion of a new functionality, where the
users could have access to their history
navigation in the treemap hierarchical structure.
x The possibility of changing the organisational
strategy and categories without changing
treemap base algorithm which is considered an
essentially contribution in functional terms.
x The integration of an evaluation mechanism that
could analyse the communities’ contribution
context in a qualitative way, allowing a
formative accompaniment, by teachers and by
students.

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

Acknowledgements
The authors address a special thanks to Professors
Luís Pedro and Pedro Almeida, Directors of the Masters
Program and directly involved in customising Thinkster
for student use in the course mentioned in this research
224

JISC. Supporting education and research url:
http://www.jisc.ac.uk.
M. Ebner. e-Learning 2.0 = e-Learning 1.0 + Web 2.0?.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 2007.
S. Downes. E-learning 2.0, eLearn Magazine –
Education and Technology in Perpective url:
http://www.elearnmag.org/subpage.cfm?section=articles
&article=29-1. 2005.
A. Croll and S. Power. Complete Web Monitoring:
Watching your visitors, performance, communities, and
competitors. O’Reilly Media, Inc., First Edition. 2009.
C. Ahlberg and B. Shneiderman. Visual information
seeking: tight coupling of dynamic query filters with
starfield displays. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems:
Celebrating interdependence. ACM, New York. 1994.
A. Perer and B. Shneiderman. Integrating Statistics and
Visualization for Exploratory Power: From Long-Term
Case Studies to Design Guidelines. IEEE Computer
Graphics & Applications 29, 3, 39-51. 2009.
B. Shneiderman. Tree visualization with treemaps: A 2D space-filling approach. ACM Transactions on
Graphics. 1992.
M. Wattenberg. Visualizing the stock market. In
Proceedings of Extended Abstracts of Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI 99) ACM Press. 1999.
M. Bruls, K. Huizing AND J. J. Van Wijk. Squarified
treemaps. In Proceedings of Joint Eurographics and
IEEE TCVG Symposium on Visualization (TCVG 2000)
IEEE Press. 2000.
K. Card, D. Mackinlay and B. Shneiderman. Overview +
Detail. In Readings in Information Visualization: Using
Vision to Think. San Francisco, California: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, 1999.
Js-Treemap. Treemapping in pure Javascript url:
http://js-treemap.sourceforge.net.
D. Kim, K. H. Lee, and D. Lee. A novel initialization
scheme for the fuzzy c-means algorithm for color
clustering. Pattern Recognition Letters. 2004.
J. C. Dunn. A Fuzzy Relative of the ISODATA Process
and Its Use in Detecting Compact Well-Separated
Clusters. Journal of Cybernetics 3: 32-57. 1973.
J. Nielsen. Heuristic evaluation. In J. Nielsen and R.L.
Mack (Eds.), Usability Inspection Methods. John Wiley
& Sons, New York. 1994.
A. Dix, J. Finlay, G. Abowd and R. Beale. HumanComputer Interaction. Third Edition, Prentice Hall. 2004.

