2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

Swedish Road Weather Visualization
Patrik Lundblad*, Jonas Thoursie†, Mikael Jern*
NCVA ITN LiU*, SMHI†
{Patrik.Lundblad@itn.liu.se, Jonas.Thoursie@smhi.se, Mikael.Jern@itn.liu.se}
Abstract

with domain experts from Swedish Meteorological and
Hydrological Institute (SMHI) and the Swedish road
administration facilitating a collection of dynamic map,
weather and information visualization methods
integrated with the Adobe© Flash© and Flex©
development platform.

The large and ever-increasing amounts of timevarying and geospatial digital weather information
related to emergency scenarios that must be accessible
to the public represent a major research challenge. A
need to analyze and make decisions, often in time-critical
situations, demand interactive web-enabled visualization
tools that can aid the user to explore, communicate and
publish visually large geo-information spaces. Geovisual
analytics is an emerging research task facilitating
dynamic time-linked visual representations that enable
the users to simultaneously analyse relations among
several different attributes with the aim to augment an
analyst and decision-maker capabilities to assimilate
complex situations and reach important knowledge. In
this context, we introduce a web-enabled application for
road weather visualization, a tool for analyzing and
communicating information about road weather
conditions particularly during the Swedish winter
months. RoadVis is customized in close collaboration

1. Introduction
In Sweden during the winter months, the roads are
dangerous for driving. Due to ice, rain and snow the
roads get slippery and every year hundreds of people are
killed or injured. To prevent this, the Swedish road
administration tries to prepare the roads based on realtime weather forecasting. This is however today done by
accessing static pictures over the Internet and through
direct contact with meteorologists over the telephone.
This often leads to a short and narrow focus and it is hard
to get the general overview and there is a need for a more
real-time visualization solution.

Figure 1: RoadVis multi-linked visual user interface, where a station, represented by a circle, is here coloured according to temperature.
Meteorological diagrams are shown for two selected stations in the map. A parallel coordinates plot makes dynamic inquires and filter
the multivariate weather data. A time slider controls time steps for the time-linked views.

1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.51

307
313

in section 3. In section 4 the system implementation is
described followed by a user case scenario in section 5.
Section 6 contains a user evaluation. Finally the paper is
concluded with the general results and a discussion in
section 7.

In this context, we introduce a web-enabled
application “road weather visualization” (RoadVis), a
tool for interactively analyzing and communicating
gained insights and discoveries about road weather
conditions based on a geovisual analytics framework.
RoadVis represents a customized and task-oriented
application, developed in close collaboration with
domain experts from Swedish Meteorological and
Hydrological Institute (SMHI) [1] and the Swedish road
administration. The key feature of RoadVis is its
deployment to Internet users for dynamic web. RoadVis
facilitates real-time forecasts and observations of
selected weather attributes for the Swedish roads, such as
temperature and downfall, as well as how these weather
parameters affect the road, e.g. ice slipperiness,
condensation and frost.
Because RoadVis is developed on top of Adobe
Flash, it can be applied in most user organization. A
previous demonstrator (Road Wizard) [2], .NET client
based and developed in C# using DirectX, created
problems when integrated into existing operations both
in form of security as well as the need for deploying
quick updates to the software.
Real-time weather data information is supplied by
SMHI and consists of both observation and forecasts for
more than 770 road stations all over Sweden (figure 1).
The observed values for these stations are used to
calculate warning scenarios using variables such as
temperature, dew point and downfall.
The visual representation for RoadVis is based
around a map of Sweden where each individual station is
marked and colored depending on requested attribute
value. The user can select relevant road condition such as
ice slipperiness, frost, condensation and temperature etc.
RoadVis then calculates both present and forecasted
scenarios for the coming six hours as well as the next 24
hours using the short and the long forecast. Parallel
Coordinates Plot (PCP) [13] is used to view, analyze and
make visual inquiries for the multivariate weather data.
Relations and trends are observed and the analyst can
also filter data and discover areas with a higher risk for
accidents unless preventive methods are taken
immediately. Meteorological diagrams visualize both the
observed values and the forecasted weather for the
selected stations.
The following key user motivated and task-based
designs for RoadVis were defined by SMHI and the
Swedish road administration:
• Find warning scenarios and alert the user of the risks.
• Deploy multiple-linked visual representations to
allow for a simultaneous analysis and visualization.
• Demonstrate how interaction techniques can facilitate
exploration and discovery.
• Apply iterative design and frequent usability
inspections to gather insights for enhancements and
future development.
The reminder of this paper is structured as follows.
Some relevant background and related work is provided
in section 2. General description of RoadVis and the
attributes in the input data and how it can be interpreted

2. Related work
Earlier work within this area has been a prototype to
RoadVis [2] which was implemented as a client. This
work was a first step towards a Road Warning Prediction
System, but it was not possible to distribute the client to
its area of use. Some of the experiences learned from this
project were improved in this new version made in flash.
Koonar [3] presents a paper regarding how to
acquire and process data to create a Road Weather
Information Network. “A network of Environmental
System Sensors is used to collect information about road
and weather conditions, such as precipitation and air
and surface temperatures and send it to the Provincial
Computer Centres. Using data from Provincial
Computer Centres, transportation agencies can
determine when there are hazardous road conditions due
to precipitation, fog, high winds, snow, ice and/or
flooding.” This paper however does not focus on how
the accumulated and calculated data can be visualized.
For an overview of several recent research papers
within visualization of spatio-temporal data, see [4].
GeoVista Studio [5] and CommonGIS [6] are general
systems which support exploratory data analysis with
decision-making and Andrienko and Andrienko have
illustrated other motivating approaches in earlier papers
[7], [8]. Jern and Franzén presents a paper regarding how
to simultaneously analyze multiple attributes data and
spatio-temporal behavior [9] and introduce a generic
”GeoAnalytics” visualization (GAV) [10] toolkit. Jern et
al. emphasize the advantages and need of multiple linked
views (MLVs) for dynamically exploring time-varying,
geographically referenced and multivariate attribute data.
Parallel Coordinates Plot [11], [12], [13], [14] with
embedded visual inquiry methods that serve as a visual
control panel for dynamically linked and coordinated
views is a well-known visualization technique for
multivariate data [15].
Roberts [16] provides a review of multiple linkedview tools, methodologies and models, discusses related
challenges and ideas, and provides some rudiments for
coordination within a geovisualization context. In
accordance with Roberts linking and relating information
in one view to that of other views will assist the user in
the exploration process and may provide additional
insight into the underlying information. Operations such
as filtering, dynamic queries [17] and selections applied
simultaneously in different views when affecting not
only the same information but more effectively
collections of different data is pointed out by Roberts as
more interesting and an important aspect to consider.
Spirkovska and Lodha presented AWE – Aviation
Weather Data Visualization Environment [18] which
focuses on visualization of critical weather elements.

314
308

AWE focuses on interactive graphical displays of these
weather elements and maps them onto a cartographic
grid specific to the pilot’s interest.

earlier forecast to observation. The variables collected
and predicted are:
• Surface temperature. The temperature of the road
surface measured at the surface layer. This
temperature exists for both sunny areas as well as
the ones in shadow.
• Air temperature. The temperature of the air at 2m
above the road surface.
• Dew point. This is the temperature to which a given
parcel of air must be cooled, at constant barometric
pressure, for water vapor to condense into water.
Used to determine if there is frost or condensation
on the road surface.
• Wind speed and direction. The wind measured at
6m above the road surface. This variable is
important when snow falls on a frozen surface since
snow drift can occur for certain wind speeds and
direction.
• Gust. Inconstant winds characterized by the
apparent rapid change in force and/or direction, also
measured at 6m above the road surface.
• Cloudiness. How much of the sky is obscured at the
station on a scale from 0 to 8 where 0 is sunny and
8 is very cloudy
• Water and snow downfall. Using optic sensors at
the road stations the amount of snow and water can
be measured. If it is snow or water depends on how
long time the downfall takes to pass the optic
sensor.
• Accumulated amount of snow or water on the road
for the last hours.

3. RoadVis
RoadVis is composed of three different views as
shown in figure 1. The left side is a map of Sweden with
the municipality borders and the road stations. Each road
station is colored after the state the road is in at that area.
The upper right area is used for meteorological diagrams
and a table view. The user can choose between which of
these two visualizations is best used at the moment. The
bottom right area is for a PCP representation where each
station is represented by a line for all the numerical
attributes for the stations. At the bottom of the
application is the time slider where the user can choose
which time step to focus on. The coordination between
the three views in RoadVis is exemplified by the
following actions:
• When one or several stations are selected in the
map view the stations are also highlighted in the
PCP and the meteogram view.
• When one or several lines are selected in the PCP
view, corresponding stations are also selected in the
map and meteogram view.
• When moving the sliders in the PCP all stations
removed by this filtering action are also removed in
the other views.
• When changing which attributes to show in the PPC
the selected attributes are also shown in the map
tooltip when hovering over a station.
Menus and buttons for interaction with RoadVis are
encapsulated into the visualization so that each available
action is tied to the view it will affect. Some global
commands are available from a menu strip in the upper
left corner. Here the user can manually search for
updated data, store snapshots, clear the selected stations,
choose attributes for details on demand and open the
manual for RoadVis.

3.2 Interpretations
By using the observed and forecasted values
different states for the roads can be estimated. The states
are used to decide what actions need to take place in
order to secure safe roads.
Ice slipperiness
• If surface temperature <= 0 degrees & the
accumulated amount of water on the road > 1
millimeter: Ice slipperiness
Frost and Condensation
• If surface temperature >= dew point: No
danger.
• If surface temperature < dew point & surface
temperature >= 0 degrees: Condensation on the
road surface.
• If surface temperature < dew point & surface
temperature < 0 degrees: Frost on the road
surface.

3.1 Data Source
The input data stream consists of both observations
and predictions of weather information supplied by
SMHI. The observation data is measured at 770 stations
placed alongside the Swedish roads. These stations are
connected to a central monitoring station through ISDN
lines so that data from the stations can be collected once
every hour. This process is automated and monitored in
case of failures so that the users can be informed if data
is missing.
The forecasts are then made using both measured
values and earlier forecast values from global and local
forecast models. Short forecast for the coming six hours
are made every hour and are valid for that hour. The
longer 24 hour forecast are made every sixth hour and
are valid for the coming six hours. But in order to see
trends over a day RoadVis stores and uses the four last
24 hour predictions so that the user can see and compare

315
309

4. Implementation

of the circle depends on which attribute is selected. The
attributes shown in figure 3 are currently temperature, ice
slipperiness, frost slipperiness, condensation/frost,
downfall, wind and gust. All of these attributes are
important since they will show the state of the road and
indicate which measure needs to be taken.

Figure 2: RoadVis is developed from GAV Flash components
The RoadVis application is customized from our
Web-enabled GAV Flash class library, programmed in
Adobe’s object-oriented language ActionScript and
includes a collection of common geo- and information
visualization representations such as choropleth map,
scatter plot table lens, parallel coordinates plot, time
graph, pie chart, table grid (figure 2) etc. Spatio-temporal
data are analysed through the use of multiple-linked
views [16], [19]. Complex patterns can be detected
through a number of different visual representations
simultaneously, each of which is best suited to highlight
different statistics pattern and can help stimulate the
analytical visual thinking process so characteristic for
geovisual analytics reasoning. All graphs are timelinked, an important feature in the synthesis of animation
within explorative data analysis targeted towards large
multidimensional temporal data.
Another key component is the data providers that
open GAV Flash to external data sources and databases –
an often under-estimated task. The GAV Flash data
model is optimized for handling spatio-temporal and
multivariate indicator data in a geovisual analytics
context [9]. This conceptual data model can be seen as a
data cube with three dimensions: space, time and
indicators. The spatial dimension is represented by the
(X,Y) points and the indicators are measurements such as
(surface temperature, air temperature, wind speed, etc).
Time is the data acquisition period. The general method
for finding a value in the cube is by its position (space;
time; indicator;). Space-time-indicator awareness means
that the data cube can be analyzed and visualized across
all three dimensions simultaneously. GAV Flash
performs this task by integrating and time-linking all its
motion graphs (figure 1): meteorological chart,
choropleth map, parallel coordinates plot, etc.
Interactive features that support a spatial analytical
reasoning process are exposed such as tooltips, brushing,
highlight, visual inquiry, conditioned statistics filter
mechanisms that can discover outliers and methods
supporting dynamic linked multiple views.
The visual representations in RoadVis have been
chosen in cooperation with domain experts at the
Swedish Road Administration and at SMHI in order to
give the users the best overview of the weather situation.

Figure 3: Map settings and the attributes plotted in the map.

Using the time slider the user can move through the
data in time and see how the states of the road changes
depending on the weather. One can zoom in the map and
pan around using the mouse. Picking can be done to
select one or more stations as described above. Also
when hovering above a station a mouse over function is
activated and shows the current values for that station in
a popup.
Extra layers have been added to the map on the
request of the user group. The current layer that is most
often used is a map of the highways in Sweden. Since the
user group is more used to navigating with this extra
information the application becomes more familiar and a
smoother transition into this new application has been
achieved. Another layer we are using is Google map, as
shown in figure 1 and 4.

Figure 4: GAV Flash facilitates a map layer architecture that
allows the user to combine maps from various GIS sources. A
standard use is shown here where 2 layers are integrated: the
Choropleth Map view with road weather information (surface
temperature, snow, etc.), and the external Google Map layer.
Layers are under control by the user and can be turned off/on
and used with opacity control.

4.1 Swedish map view
This view offers an overview of Sweden and each
station is plotted as a circle using its position. The color

316
310

4.2 Meteorological diagram view

diagram cover the entire view. When done the user can
zoom out and restore the multiple diagrams view.

4.3 Parallel coordinates plot view
Of particular interest is the introduction of the
common information visualization methods parallel
coordinates plot [20], to a great extent unknown to the
meteorological community. In this context, our GAV
Flash PCP component (figure 6) has been extended with
special features that are important to exploration of
multidimensional indicators, for example, compare the
profiles of selected regions, motion to see these profiles
change over time, frequency histograms and filter
operations based on percentile statistics [21], switch min
and max on an axis, assign user values to min and max
etc. The Flash motion PCP (figure 6) have slowly
demonstrated to be not only functional but also
productive analyzing patterns for multidimensional
statistical (4-10) indicators.

Figure 5: 6 hours meteorological diagram of the station at
Virserum. Black line is surface temperature in the sun, dotted
black line is surface temperature in the shadow, blue line is air
temperature and the red one is the dew point. Red dots are
warnings for ice slipperiness. Wind and cloud information is at
the bottom of the diagram.

This view represents one or more meteorological
diagrams, as shown in figure 5, for the selected road
stations. The basic for the meteorological diagram is a
line plot where the x-axis is the timeline. This timeline is
divided into hours and displays the current hour and 6
hours ahead. The y-axis is divided into two, one for each
side. The left one is for plotting temperature and the right
one is for downfall, both rain and snow. Thus the surface
temperatures, air temperature and the dew point are
plotted as lines corresponding to the left axes. The
accumulated amount of snow is plotted as a line
corresponding to the right axis. Rain is plotted as cubes
where the width equals one hour and the height is the
amount of rain in mm within that hour.
On the x-axis circles are plotted when there is a risk
for a dangerous road state. The circle is filled with color
corresponding to the severity of the risk. Red is the
highest risk which warns for ice slipperiness. White is
used for frost slipperiness and blue is when there is
condensation on the road. These colors have been used
for decades and it has therefore been decided to keep
them, despite the fact that other colors and orders could
serve better for warnings.
Beneath the x-axis are cloudiness and wind
displayed in form of text and symbols. Each hour has a
cloud symbol displaying how much of the sky is
obscured. A wind arrow displays the general wind
direction and beneath it in text is the wind speed.
Since the user may want to have a broader overview
it is possible to select multiple stations. The screen area
is then divided up between the stations. So with one
station selected it covers the entire area. When two are
selected the area is split even and so on. This makes it
possible for users with bigger screens to have more
information displayed at once. Also when multiple
stations are selected the user can use a zoom function in
any of the meteorological diagrams and make that

Figure 6: PCP implemented in Flash and customized for the
meteorological visual analytics domain. Three stations are
highlighted and provide exceptional means to compare them
against several indicators. Patterns never before discovered are
visually now obvious to the analyst.

In the PCP view each vertical axis corresponds to a
numerical weather attribute. For each attribute there is a
minimum and maximum value that is displayed at the top
and bottom of its axis. Using range sliders one can
increase or decrease these minimum and maximum
values which will affect the filtering. Every station that
has a numerical value that is between the maximum and
minimum value for each axis is visible, the others will be
hidden. Thus making it possible for the user to perform a
dynamic filtering on the weather condition they are
interested in.
Each station is then plotted as a polyline between
these axes and the line is colored after the currently
selected attribute. This makes it possible for the user to
see trends along the axes and find patterns corresponding
to different road states.
In the current application there are three attributes
visible at start, they are surface temperature, dew point
and snowfall amount. The attributes can be changed
using an interface where the user can add or remove
attributes and decide on their own how many attributes to
be shown and also which attributes these are.

317
311

4.4 Table view

text. A sharable story (figure 8) is created and stored
locally on the client or a server in a public repository.
Users can through hyperlinks in the metadata that
instantiates a snapshot in the visual representation,
follow the analyst’s way of reasoning. This focus on
publishing through assisted content creation with
emphasis on visualization and aesthetics that takes into
account heterogeneous nature of information represents
the key advantage of our storytelling.
A highlighted text item in the descriptive metadata
could represent a hyperlink to a snapshot (discovery) or
any external Web site. When mouse clicked, the story
mechanism automatically initiates the snapshot, for
example, a zoom to a certain region, change of indicators
or links to referenced external Internet content.
Hyperlinks to a GAV Flash view state are an important
feature in our storytelling mechanism together with
associated descriptive text and guide the reader in the
analyst’s way of way of thinking.

Figure 7: A table view of the input data. Cells with colors are
of interest due to their values.

The table view, figure 7, presents the raw data to the
user in a table format. This table is connected to the other
views so that picking and filtering will reduce the table.
The table contains both numerical values as well as
symbols for some attributes such as cloudiness and wind
direction. The user can do an order by column in the
table so that for each attribute it is possible to see the
order from highest to lowest value. Also by coloring the
cell background for interesting values and stations the
user can easily scroll through the table and find which
areas are in need of attention.

5. Example usage scenario

4.5 Storytelling

Figure 9: A scenario where the user has filtered in the PC so
that the southern part of Sweden is in focus. Four different
stations throughout the area have been selected to display the
weather conditions and the short forecast. From this the user
can get both an overview of the area as well as detailed weather
information, both present and forecasted.

Figure 8. The storytelling construction mechanism

Collaboration [22], [23] is achieved through a
mechanism in GAV Flash (figure 8) that supports the
storage of interactive events in an analytical reasoning
process through “memorized interactive visualization
views” or “snapshots” that can be captured at any time
during an explorative data analysis process and becomes
an important task of the storytelling authoring process.
Meteorologists with diverse background and
expertise participate in this creative discovery processes
(figure 8) that transforms meteorological data into
knowledge. Storytelling tools integrate the geovisual
analytics process with collaborative means that
streamline a knowledge exchange process of developing
a shared understanding with other meteorologists and
after consensus has been reached is published. The
snapshot mechanism helps the author to highlight data
views of particular interest and subsequently guide others
to important discoveries. The storytelling tool creates a
single or a discrete series of captures during the
explorative process. The author elects relevant
indicators, stations-of-interest, color schema, time step,
filter conditions focusing on the data-of-interest and
finally highlights the “discovery” from the most
appropriate visual representations and include reasoning

A typical usage scenario from January 27th 2010
based on real time data that has been stored for later
analysis. In this scenario the users have been informed
that bad weather condition will hit Sweden in the
evening. The map in figure 9 focuses on an operational
area in the western part of Sweden where roads are
particular dangerous for driving. Ice, rain and snow make
the roads slippery and many people are killed or injured
in this area every year.
With the aid of the range sliders in the PCP, several
stations are removed by a filter operation resulting in that
only relevant data remains in the map view. Figure 9
shows the observed weather situation at noon and the
user can see that some areas are having problems with
the downfall. Subzero rain is coming in and both ice,
snow and frost is affecting the roads
Using the map view four different stations have been
selected throughout the area to give an overview of how
different the weather is. In the PCP these four stations
are highlighted and the user can see their profile, as well

318
312

6.2. Procedure

as the maximum and minimum value for the chosen
attributes.

The participants were asked to perform five tasks
after being through a demonstration of RoadVis. These
tasks were chosen so that they would be representative of
the end user tasks and operations. They were asked to
think out aloud when performing these tasks and they
could also ask for help when they were confused with the
application or did not know how to achieve the task.

6.3. Results
None of the participants has had earlier experience
with visualization tools of this type and none had used
the PCP before. They were all used to the current method
of looking at static pictures and browsing through
webpages to get their information.
All participants completed their tasks and found the
application to be useful and enjoyed being able to give
feedback on it. During this feedback it was clear that
many users thought there were too many representations
available. Therefore a scatter plot and also a text
component were removed to streamline the application.
So instead of many views they were after fewer with
more interactivity and higher details.
Other suggestions on changes and desirable features
to be included were given by the users and some of them
are listed below. Most of the requested features have
now been added to RoadVis and further evaluation
should be performed to gather more information
regarding future work and improvements.

Figure 10: At 6pm the downfall in southern Sweden is
affecting the roads as both snow and subzero rain is coming in.
The forecasted wind is picking up and the temperature in the
meteorological diagram is going towards zero.

By combining the meteogram view and the time
slider the user can now follow how the situation develops
and start preparing for the work needed to keep the roads
safe. At 6pm according to the forecast the amount of
areas with ice slipperiness has increased as shown in
figure 10. The PCP also shows that the snowfall has
increased both in amount as well as coverage. The wind
has picked up and will together with the snowfall most
likely affect visibility on the roads. The meteorological
diagrams are now showing the 24 hour forecast together
with the 24 hour observation. In the meteorological
diagram the accumulated amount of snow is rising
rapidly and as the temperature forecast goes towards zero
degrees the preventive actions are needed and resources
should be prepared for the evening. Using RoadVis
instead of traditional static pictures the user has gotten a
better overview as well as details and has easier to
distribute the resources available for preparing the roads.

Overall changes
• Increase the amount of data so that the last 24
hours of observation and the latest 24 hour
prognoses can be displayed.
• Use a snapshot method to save current settings
to the users favorites.
Meteogram view
• Mouse over function for the meteogram when
hovering above one of the lines.
• Make it more interactive so that the user can
choose the time span to display.

6. Usability evaluation
A small formative evaluation was performed during
development to assess how well the prototype worked
for the intended user. The evaluation was based on
inspection methods [24] and the participants were asked
to perform a set of tasks. These tasks were chosen so that
the user could test as much of the interface as possible in
order to find advantages and disadvantages in the visual
representation and interaction. The evaluation also
gathered information about the future development of the
application where users were asked to discuss what they
were missing in the application.

Swedish map view
• Add one attribute that displays the wind
strength and direction.
• Reset button for the map that takes the user
back to the start position and zoom level.
Table view
• Add symbols to the table view replacing values
such as wind direction which are hard to
interpret. Also color the cells according to
severity for the important attributes.

6.1. Participants
This evaluation was done using two persons
working at the Swedish road administration and three
persons working at SMHI. Their role is to monitor the
situation within their area and order where preparations
of the roads are to be done.

319
313

Conclusions

Swedish Road Administration who supplied data and
comprehensive evaluation of the system. The research is
in part supported by funding from the “Visualization
Program” coordinated by the Swedish Knowledge
Foundation. The author thanks the entire research team at
NCVA, Linkoping University for valuable contributions.
The author also wishes to thank Erik Ernerudh SMHI for
their dedicated contribution that made this project
possible.

Traditional practices for geovisual analytics methods
applied to meteorological data need tools for more user
participation and increased expectations in terms of user
experience. This paper presents a seamless integrated
meteorological road data exploration, collaboration and
publication process that will address editorial storytelling
aimed at producing meteorological news content in
support of an automatic authoring process. The author
should could simply press a button to publish gained
knowledge that efficiently and clearly visualize statistical
data. A storytelling technology with the goal to advance
research critical to road information production and
publishing and to deliver this information into a webenabled toolkit for the generation, management and
publication of embedded dynamic visualization with the
analytics sense-making metadata joined together and
publishable in any HTML web pages such as blogs,
wikis etc. It could also enable the users to take a more
active role in the discovery process of exploring road
information. The tool will increase the interest in and
knowledge of weather structures and development
patterns among specialist as well as non-specialist users.
Comments from our partners who started to evaluate
the tool highlights the following features:
• GAV Flash is freely available.
• Easy-to-use.
• Ability to have dynamic time-link views and see the
multi-dimensionality of road.
• Possibility to capture, save and open discoveries
(snapshots) with attached analytics reasoning
metadata.
• Important tool to publish weather information news
on the Web.
• Increased expectations in terms of user experience.
• Will encourage more educational use of official
statistics;
For future work, RoadVis would benefit from using
our new storytelling methods in GAV Flash. This would
allow the user to create emergency scenarios from
RoadVis and share with colleagues based on widgets
(Vislets) that integrates selected emergency storytelling
scenarios supported by interactive visualization and
descriptive metadata embedded into blogs, wikis etc.
The Vislet is created from the contextual description
of a geovisual analytics reasoning discovery process in a
RoadVis generated Story. The Vislet, represented by, for
example, a single map view or a composite time-linked
map and meteorological graph view, facilitates the
transition of selected tedious meteorological data into
heterogeneous and communicative sense-making news
entities with integrated metadata and dynamic embedded
animated visualization that could engage the user

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

Acknowledgements

[16]

This research and case studies were carried out by
NCVA [25] in close collaboration with SMHI and

320
314

Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute
(SMHI) url: http://www.smhi.se.
P. Lundblad and M. Jern, “GeoVisual Analytics applied
to a Swedish Road Warning Prediction System” in
Conference on Geo-Information Systems for Crisis
Management, 2008.
A. Koonar, P. Delannoy and D. Denault, "Building a
road weather information network for integrating data
from heterogeneous sources," in 3rd International
Conference
on
Information
Technology
and
Applications, ICITA 2005, 2005, pp. 501-507.
W. Müller and H. Schumann, ”Visualization methods for
time-dependent data - an overview,” in Proceedings of
the 2003Winter Simulation Conference: Driving
Innovation, 2003, pp. 737-745.
GeoVista Studio url: http://www.geovistastudio.psu.edu.
CommonGIS url: http://www.commongis.de.
G. Andrienko and N. Andrienko, ”Visual exploration of
the spatial distribution of temporal behaviors,” in 9th
International Conference on Information Visualization,
iV05, 2005, pp. 799-806.
N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko, ”Interactive visual tools
to explore spatio-temporal variation,” Proceedings of the
Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces AVI
2004, pp. 417-420, 2004.
M. Jern and J. Franzén, ””GeoAnalytics” – exploring
spatio-temporal and multivariate data,” in Information
Visualization 2006, IV06, 2006, pp. 25-31.
M. Jern and J. Franzén, ”Integrating InfoVis and geo vis
components,” in 11th International Conference
Information Visualization, IV 2007, 2007, pp. 511- 518.
G. Grinstein, M. Trutschl and U. Cvek,
”Highdimensional visualizations,” Proceedings of the 7
SIGKDD Workshop on Visual Data Mining (KDD2001)Th, pp. 1-14, 2001.
J. Blaas, C. P. Botha and F. H. Post, ”Extensions of
parallel coordinates for interactive exploration of large
multi-timepoint data sets,” IEEE Trans. Visual. Comput.
Graphics, vol. 14, pp. 1436-1443, 2008.
A. Inselberg, ”The plane with parallel coordinates,” The
Visual Computer, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 69-91, 1985.
E. J. Wegman, ”Hyperdimensional data analysis using
parallel coordinates,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, vol. 85, no. 411, pp. 664-675, 1990.
G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, ”Construction Parallel
Coordinates Plot for Problem Solving,” Smart Graphics
’01 (Pergamon), 2001.
J. C. Roberts, ”Exploratory visualization with multiple
linked views,” Exploring Geovisualization, pp. 159-180,
2004.

[17] B. Shneiderman, ”Dynamic queries for visual
information seeking,” IEEE Software, vol. 11, pp. 70-77,
1994.
[18] L. Spirkovska and S. K. Lodha, ”AWE: Aviation weather
data visualization environment,” Comput Graphics
(Pergamon), vol. 26, pp. 169-191, 2002.
[19] Jern M., Johansson S., Pettersson M., Feldt A.: “Tailormade Exploratory Visualization for Statistics Sweden”,
CMV 2005, London, July 2005, published by IEEE
Computer Society.
[20] Edsall R.: Design and Usability of an Enhanced
Geographic Information System for Exploration of
Multivariate Health Statistics. Professional Geographer,
55, no. 2, 2003.
[21] Johansson S., Jern M.: GeoAnalytics Visual Inquiry and
Filtering Tools in Parallel Coordinates Plot, Seattle,
ACM GIS 2007.
[22] Wohlfart, M., Hauser, H.: Story Telling for Presentation
in Volume Visualization, EuroVis2007.
[23] Jern M., Rogstadius J., Åström T., and Ynnerman A:
”Visual Analytics presentation tools applied in HTML
Documents”, Reviewed proceedings, IV08, London, July
2008, published by IEEE Computer Society.
[24] J. Nielsen, "Usability inspection methods," in
Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. Part 2 (of 2), 1995, pp. 377-378.
[25] National Center for Visual Analytics NCVA url:
http://ncva.itn.liu.se.

321
315

