2010 14th International
Information
Conference
Visualisation
Information Visualisation

EMG biofeedback based VR system for hand rotation and grasping rehabilitation

Sha Ma, Martin Varley, Lik-Kwan Shark

Jim Richards

ADSIP Research Centre, School of Computing,
Engineering and Physical Sciences,
University of Central Lancashire
Preston, Lancashire, PR1 2HE, England
{SMa, MRVarley, LShark}@uclan.ac.uk

Allied Health Professions Research Unit,
University of Central Lancashire,
Preston, Lancashire, PR1 2HE, England
JRichards@ uclan.ac.uk

Compared to conventional real-world rehabilitation, the
patient can undertake repetitive self-training safely within
the virtual world, and easily adjust the difficulties of the
training tasks. Therefore, there is a move in the development
of the rehabilitation training environment from the real world
to virtual worlds. An additional advantage of this approach is
that automatically recorded training data can be retrieved for
subsequent analysis by clinicians [4, 6]. In particular, VR
based rehabilitation allows the patient to receive multiform
feedback which could enable the patient to focus during long
and tedious repetitive training, and enhance performance to
approach the movement target goal [7]. A large variety of
platforms and programs are currently being used and
developed in VR applications for used in medical health
rehabilitation [7-12].
In addition to VR, biofeedback is another effective
technology increasingly used in motor rehabilitation [13].
Biofeedback is a technique which increases the ability of a
person to voluntarily control physiological activities by
providing information about those activities, such as blood
pressure, heart rate, and muscle electrical activity [13, 14].
Using EMG biofeedback in rehabilitation could provide
patients with opportunities to improve the ability of assessing
their muscle activity response and learning self-control of
movement during specific training tasks, e.g. grasping and
releasing [13]. Several studies [13-17] have shown that EMG
biofeedback can assist CP and stroke patients to regain some
hand active functions.
The aim of this study is to integrate EMG biofeedback
and VR technology into one system, which offers multiple
feedback mechanisms such that CP and stroke patients can
increase the acquisition of skills during hand motion
rehabilitation. Incorporating EMG information as an
important interactive tool in VR based rehabilitation system
could provide significant evidence for evaluating the
progress of hand motion rehabilitation. The hand rotation
and grasping motion rehabilitation training task (virtual
balloon shooting) is specially designed for the developed
EMG biofeedback based VR system. Ten healthy University
students participated in the task evaluation tests, and the

Abstract—Individuals who have upper limb movement problems
include people with cerebral palsy (CP) and stroke victims. Both
these conditions lead to difficulties in daily activities such as
reaching, grasping etc. Virtual reality (VR), which could provide
a repetitive multimodal task-oriented rehabilitation environment
for patients to undertake self-training in safety, is considered to
be a suitable tool for medical health rehabilitation. Using
electromyography (EMG) biofeedback in rehabilitation could
provide patients with opportunities to improve the ability by
assessing their muscle activity response and learning self-control
of movement during specific training tasks. This paper presents a
study on developing EMG as an important interactive tool in a
VR based system for hand rotation and grasping motion
rehabilitation. The input interface includes an EMG system and
a real-time magnetic motion tracking system, and the output
interface is a PC monitor. The developed EMG biofeedback
based VR system enables the user to interact with virtual objects
in real-time with multiform feedback. Ten healthy subjects
participated in the preliminary task evaluation test, and the
results suggest that the specified skills have improved during
training. The beneficial effects of the developed system indicate
the potential values for further clinical application.
Keywords-EMG biofeedback; virtual reality; hand motion
function rehabilitation; multiform feedback

I.

INTRODUCTION

A variety of conditions, including cerebral palsy (CP)
and stroke, can lead to movement disorders, where such
patient groups commonly have difficulties in daily activities
such as reaching and grasping [1]. Hand motion function
rehabilitation is relatively important in improving the quality
of independent living and performing daily activities [2]. It is
suggested that hand motion performance ability could have
functional improvements with effective repetitive training
and use of enhanced sensory feedback [3]. Research is
currently focused on various approaches and technologies to
provide better rehabilitation platforms and systems.
VR is a computer-generated immersive environment in
which users can simulate their physiological activities
through a variety of interactive interface devices [4, 5].
1550-6037/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IV.2010.73

469
479

tutorial provided by the XNA game studio [18]. The control
signals used in the task are the measurements of hand
rotating actions (azimuth and elevation), and grasping
actions. The hand rotating control signals are the orientation
measurements provided by the magnetic tracking system.
The hand grasping control signals are the features extracted
from the processed EMG signal.

results suggest that the specified skills have improved during
training. The beneficial effects of the developed system
indicate the potential values for further clinical application.
II.

METHODS

A. Rehabilitation system setup
The proposed EMG biofeedback based VR system
prototype (Fig. 1) used for developing the hand motion
rehabilitation training task is constructed with three main
modules: VR engine, software and databases, and I/O
devices. The VR engine, software and databases are in a PC.
In this study, the program based VR engine processor creates
the virtual environment, receives and outputs data through
I/O drivers, and accesses the corresponding databases to
adjust the feedback and display. The databases also store the
recorded results of each patient for further assessment. The
virtual environment interactive input interfaces are a realtime magnetic motion tracking system (Fastrak, Polhemus
Corp.) used for hand position and orientation tracking [18]
and an EMG biofeedback system (MP100, BIOPAC System
Inc.) used for muscle activity detection. The muscle
contraction activity is measured by the MP100 BIOPAC
EMG system, which is integrated to the VR system by an
additional analogue to digital converter (DATA
TRANSLATION, DT9816). The analogue to digital
converter has a resolution of 16 bits and the analogue input
ranges from -10V to +10V. The VR visual output interface is
a desktop monitor in this study.
Input devices

Magnetic
tracker

PC

VR Engine

Figure 2 Screen shot of the developed VR scene in the study

The 6DOF measurements collected from the Polhemus
Fastrack 3-SPACE motion tracking system are X, Y, and Z
translation coordinates and azimuth, elevation and roll
rotation coordinates. The system has a fixed transmitter
consisting of three mutually orthogonal coils that emit lowfrequency magnetic fields and receivers containing three
mutually orthogonal Hall-effect sensors [19]. In this study, a
single receiver operated at 120 Hz is utilised to provide hand
rotating measurements as the control signals of rotating the
missile launcher head. If the subject’s palm faces the floor,
azimuth rotation is the hand rotating about the wrist in the
horizontal plane (left and right), and elevation rotation is the
hand rotating about the wrist in the vertical plane (up and
down). Azimuth and elevation rotations will control the
missile launcher head pointing direction (Fig.3).

Output device

Desktop
Monitor

And
EMG
System

Software &
Databases

Figure 1 The proposed VR system prototype for hand motion rehabilitation

B. Rehabilitation task development
Hand rotation movement and muscle control for grip
movement are the emphasised rehabilitation tasks in this
study. The balloon shooting task has been developed to
integrate both rotating and grasping rehabilitation training
tasks, and the VR scene of the task is shown in Figure 2. In
this study, the hand rehabilitation training task is developed
by XNA framework and programmed in C#. The balloon
shooting training task (Fig. 2) is re-engineered based on a

Figure 3 Orientation measurements

The raw EMG signal collected from the EMG system is a
stochastic train of motor unit action potentials unfolding over
time [20, 21]. The collected raw EMG signals are rectified,
then bandpass filtered by a 4th order Butterworth band-pass
filter with cut-off frequencies of 10 Hz and 350 Hz [22, 23],
and smoothed by finding the threshold, positions of onset
points, and peak positions (Fig.4). The extracted EMG

480
470

are in the place of mouse and keyboard. The balloons appear
randomly and move toward to the participant in the VR
scene. The participant can fire missiles by grasping his/her
hand, and control the rotation of the missile launcher head by
rotating his/her hand. Both visual and audio feedback could
be acquired in the task. The task ends when 5 balloons have
been shot. Additional functions are available, such as
recording the data, and adjusting the training task difficulties
by turning the threshold up or down.

feature used for firing the missile is the onset point. The
threshold is set to 30% of the maximum contraction for each
subject [22].
Remove DC
offset
Feature
extraction

C. Experimental setup for evaluation test
In this study, ten healthy University students participated
in the system evaluation tests. Only right handed subjects
were used in this study. The study was approved by the
Ethics Committee of University of Central Lancashire
(CEPS0910/3). All the participants gave their informed
consent before the test.
For hand rotation movement tracking in balloon shooting
training task, the magnetic tracker is set on the table next to
the PC. The position of the transmitter is fixed, and one
remote receiver sensor is pasted on the back of the
participant's right hand (Fig.6). For muscle contraction
activity detection, the electrodes are placed on the right
forearm of the participant (Fig.6). The sampling rate for the
EMG signal is 200 samples per second. The grasping
information is provided by the Flexor Carpi Radialis muscle.
The bipolar disposable Ag/AgCl surface electrodes with a
gel-skin contact for each electrode are pasted on the desired
muscle with 25 mm centre to centre separation distance of
the electrodes. The reference electrode is put on the back of
the right hand. The skin under the electrodes is cleaned in
order to reduce noise.

Band-pass
filter
Moving
average filter
Downsampling
Feature
extraction

Figure 4 EMG feature extraction

Visual
feedback

Subject

Audio
feedback

Grasping hand

Rotating hand

Extracted features
from the raw
EMG provided by
EMG system

Rotation
measurements
provided by
magnetic tracker

Fire missiles

Change missile
launcher head
pointing direction

Figure 6 Sensor placement in the experiment

In this study, the threshold setting in the balloon shooting
task is different for each subject, based on the maximum
hand grasping contraction of each subject measured before
the test. The average time to complete 20 trials, with each
trial requiring the subject to shoot 5 balloons, is about 22
minutes. The rest time between each teat is less than 1
minute. It is assumed that the maximum contraction of each
subject does not change during the test. The threshold is set

Figure 5 Balloon shooting multiform feedback training task

The EMG biofeedback based VR system for hand motion
rehabilitation could provide multiform feedback during
training (Fig.5). The magnetic tracker and the EMG system

481
471

as the same value, 30% of the maximum contraction,
throughout the 20 trials for each subject. The completion
time for each trial, and the measurements provided by each
device, are recorded for each task.
The evaluation test protocol includes three main parts.
The first part is introduction. The balloon shooting task goal
has been introduced before the test. The participants are
asked to sit in front of the table, face the desktop monitor,
and keep their forearm and upper arm vertical. They are
asked to maintain the same posture during the tests. The
second part is hand maximum contraction measurement. The
participants are asked to perform three maximum hand
grasping actions. The average value is used as the measured
maximum contraction for setting the threshold. The third part

is testing. The participants are asked to shoot five balloons in
each trail, and repeat 20 times.
III.

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

The stable operation of the system provides a suitable
training environment for participants to finish the test. The
performances of all the participants in the balloon shooting
hand motion rehabilitation task are shown in Figure 7. The
horizontal axis indicates the trial number, and the vertical
axis shows the time to complete the task. The first three
participants took 10 trials in the balloon shooting training
task, and the rest of the participants all took 20 trials in the
balloon shooting training task.

Figure 7 Performance in the evaluation test

Figure 8 Shooting accuracy in the test

482
472

Figure 9 Normalised average contraction strength in the test

The potential beneficial effects of the developed system
for further clinical application are discussed in the next
section.

The hand rotating and grasping actions are the specified
skills need to be acquired during training. The skills are
acquired by the repetitive actions during task-oriented
practice. The improvement of a skill is shown by the
corresponding activity becoming better organised and more
effective as a result of repetitive practice [3]. In Figure 7, all
of the participants spend more time on the first trial, and the
completion time is then seen to decrease as more trials are
undertaken, which indicates that the hand rotating and
grasping activities are better organised and more effective. In
another word, the skills used in the training task have
improved during training.
The EMG biofeedback applied in the balloon shooting
task is to turn on the muscle activity. The shooting action in
the task is controlled by the onset point extracted from the
raw EMG signal. The task is to shoot 5 balloons in one trial,
and no limit is applied to the number of shots in the task. The
numbers of missed shots in each trial are shown in Figure 8.
The number of the missed shots tends to decrease as the trial
number increases for each subject, i.e. as the subject gains
experience with the task. The shooting accuracy result
indicates the shooting action is more effective during training.
The normalised average hand grasping strength with
respected to the threshold for each subject over 20 trials is
shown in Figure 9. The majority of the trends are nearly flat,
indicating that each subject uses similar hand grasping
strength during the test. The threshold setting could control
the difficulty of firing missiles in the balloon shooting task.
In this test, the threshold used in the 20 trials is a fixed value
for each subject, which is 30% of his/her maximum
contraction. If the muscle activity is above the threshold, the
missile can be fired, and vice-versa. Therefore, the subject
could easily remember the strength required to fire the
missile. The threshold up and down setting function is
developed by manually adjusting a track bar to turn up and
down the threshold. In this study, the threshold up and down
setting function is used to set the specific threshold for all the
trials executed by each subject. In the further study, the
threshold up and down setting function should be applied for
each subject in different trials to test whether the average
hand grasping strength will change with different threshold
in the same balloon shooting task.

IV.

DISCUSSION

Although measurement of motor performance is critical
for the gaining of information about the behavioral effects of
rehabilitation, it is also crucial to understand what is
happening at the biological level [3]. Compared to the
normal VR based rehabilitation system, the EMG
biofeedback based VR rehabilitation system developed in
this study could provide some significant biological
information recorded during training for subsequent analysis,
such as muscle fatigue, muscle tension, estimated muscle net
force, and level of muscle activation [22]. The information
that is useful in improving muscle control ability in different
rehabilitation tasks could be extracted from the raw EMG
signal in both time domain analysis and frequency domain
analysis. Using EMG biofeedback in VR based rehabilitation
system could increase the amount of information available to
the individual, which will lead to an increase in skills
learning. In this study, the combination of biofeedback and
virtual environment offers more beneficial measurements
which may help clinicians to improve the quality of
treatment of motor disorders.
With EMG biofeedback, the specific task-oriented
rehabilitation actions could be designed for increasing
muscle strength and improving muscle control abilities. The
features extracted from the raw EMG data could provide
much useful information to inform development of different
tasks. The onset point extracted from the EMG data could be
used to turn on a muscle activity in the task. Threshold-based
uptraining and downtraining, often clinically referred to as
positive and negative shaping [23], are the main clinical
entities of biofeedback application. The threshold-based
downtraining techniques are used to reduce the activities of
the overactive muscles, and threshold-based uptraining
techniques are used to turn on the inhibited muscles or
weakened muscles [24]. These beneficial factors of EMG
biofeedback techniques are considered and utilised in the
hand grasping task developed in the reported study.
The hand rotating and grasping motion are selected as the
motor skills to learn in the developed balloon shooting

483
473

training task. The training target in this study is to turn on the
muscle activity, therefore only the onset point is utilised in
the task. In this study, the EMG control information could be
visualised by firing missiles in the balloon shooting task. A
track bar is used to turn up and turn down the threshold in
order to adjust grasping strength levels in the balloon
shooting task. The balloon shooting game has also been used
as the main training task with multiple feedback in a
previous study [25] aimed at overcoming the information
overload problem, which might make the patient feel
confused and distracted with multiple indices during training.
The future work is to implement the designed system and
developed hand motion rehabilitation training task with a
small number of cerebral palsy or stroke patients. The
evaluation results obtained by using healthy subjects could
be an important reference to get NHS ethical approval for
future work involving CP or stroke patients. In clinical
applications, other rehabilitation tasks could be developed
based on the motion skills need to be acquired during
specified rehabilitation actions. The threshold up and down
setting function could be utilised in the task to train the hand
grasping strength of the patient. Other VR output interfaces
such as a head-mounted display (HMD) to provide
stereoscopic view with depth impression, which may provide
improved simulation of real world rehabilitation, will be
considered in further studies.

[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

V.

CONCLUSIONS

An EMG biofeedback based VR system has been
developed to provide an interactive training environment for
hand motion rehabilitation. The developed balloon shooting
training task includes hand rotating and grasping motions.
Ten healthy subjects participated in the task evaluation test,
and the results suggest that the specified skills have
improved during training. The recognised beneficial effects
of the EMG biofeedback based VR hand motion
rehabilitation system indicate the potential values for further
clinical applications.

[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]

REFERENCES
[21]
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]
[5]

D. Jack, R. Boian, A.S. Merians, M. Tremaine, G.C. Burdea, S.V.
Adamovich, M. Recce, and H. Poizner, “Virtual Reality-Enhanced
Stroke Rehabilitation”, IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, VOL. 9, NO. 3, 2001.
M.A. Murphy, K.S. Sunnerhagen, B. Johnel and C. Willen, “Threedimensional kinematic motion analysis of a daily activity drinking
from a glass: a pilot study”, Journal of NeuroEngineering and
Rehabilitation 2006, 3:18.
J.H. Carr, R.B. Shepherd, “Neurological Rehabilitation: Optimizing
Motor Performance”, Oxford, Reed Educational and Professional
Publishing Ltd, 1998:130.
M. Holden and T. Dyar, “Virtual environment training: a new tool
for neurorehabilitation”, Neurol Rep, vol. 26, pp. 62-71, 2002.
A. Viau, A.G. Feldman, B.J. McFadyen, M.F. Levin, “Reaching in
reality and virtual reality: a comparison of movement kinematics in
healthy subjects and in adults with hemiparesis”, Journal of
NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2004, 1:11.

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

484
474

H. Sveistrup, “Motor rehabilitation using virtual reality: review”,
Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2004, 1:10.
T. Koritnik, T. Bajd, M. Munih, “Virtual environment for lowerextremities training”, Gait & Posture 27, 2008, 323-330.
S. Subramanian, L.A. Knaut, C. Beaudoin, B.J. MxFadyen, A.G.
Feldman, M.F. Levin, “Virtual reality environment for post-stroke
arm rehabilitation”, Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation
2007, 4:20.
J.C. Stewart, S.C. Yeh, Y. Jung, H. Yoon, M. Whitford, S. Y. Chen,
L. Li, M. McLaughlin, A. Rizzo, C.J. Winstein, “Intervention to
enhance skilled arm and hand movements after stroke: a feasibility
study using a new virtual reality system”, Journal of
NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 2007, 4:21.
S.V. Adamovich, A.S. Merians, R. Boian, J.A. Lewis, M. Tremaine,
G.S. Burdea, M. Recce and H, Poizner, “A virtual reality-based
exercise system for hand rehabilitation post-stroke”, Presence 2005,
161-174.
J.H. Crosbie, S. Lennon, M.C. MxGoldrick, M.D.J. McNeill, J.W.
Burke, S.M. McDonough, “Virtual reality in the rehabilitation of
upper limb after hemiplegic stroke: a randomised pilot study”, Proc.
7th ICDVRAT with ArtAbilitation, Maia, Portugal 2008, 229-235.
J. Broeren, A. Bjorkdahl, L. Claesson, D. Goude, A. LundgerenNilsson, H. Samuelsson, C. Blomstrand, K.S. Sunnerhagen, M.
Rydmark, “Virtual rehabilitation after stroke”, eHealth Beyound the
Horizon, S.K. Andersen et al, IOS Press, 2008, 77-82.
H. Huang, S.L. Wolf, J.P. He, “Recent developments in biofeedback
for neuromotor rehabilitation: review”, Journal of NeuroEngineering
and Rehabilitation 2006, 3:11.
E. Dursun, N. Dursun, D. Alican, “Effects of biofeedback treatment
on gait in children with cerebral palsy”, Disability and rehabilitation
2004, VOL.26, NO. 2, 116-120.
Y.P. Chen, H. Huang, W.W. Xu, R.I. Wallis, H. Sundaram, T.
Rikakis, T. Ingalls, L. Olson, J.P. He, “The design of a real-time,
multimodal biofeedback system for stroke patient rehabilitation”,
MM’ 06, 2006, Santa Barbara, California, USA.
S.A. Binder, C.B. Moll, S.L. Wolf, “Evaluation of
electromyographic biofeedback as an adjunct to therapeutic exercise
in treating the lower extremities of hemiplegic patients”, Physical
therapy 1981, 61: 886-893.
S.L. Wolf, “Electromyographic biofeedback applications to stroke
patients: a critical review”, Physical therapy 1983, 63: 1448-1459.
XNA creators club online, http://creators.xna.com/en-GB/,
28/02/2010.
Polhemus Corp., “3space FASTRAK user’s manual”, OPM00PI002,
Rev.E, April 2005.
A.J. Fridlund, and J.T. Cacioppo, “Guidelines for human
electromyographic research”, Psychophysiology 1986, VOL. 23,
NO. 5:567-589.
M. Zardoshti-Kermani, B.C. Wheeler, K. Badie, and R.M. Hashemi,
“EMG feature evaluation for movement control of upper extremity
prostheses”, IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering 1995,
VOL. 3, NO. 4:324-333.
R.P.M. Kleissen, J.H. Buurke, J. Harlaar and G. Zilvold,
“Electromyography in the biomechanical analysis of human
movement and its clinical application: review”, Gait and Posture,
1998, 8:143-158.
J. Richards, “Biomechanics in clinic and research: an online
interactive teaching and learning course”, Edinburgh: Churchill
Livingstone, 2008.
P.P. Roberto Merletti, “Electromyography Physiology, Engineering,
and Noninvasive Applications”, I. Press, Ed. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2004.
S. Ma, M.R. Varley, J. Richards and L.K. Shark, “Overcoming the
information overload problem in a multiform feedback based virtual
reality system for hand motion rehabilitation”, CyberWorlds, pp.5156, 2009 International Conference on CyberWorlds, 2009.

