Visualizing Association Rules for Text Mining
Pak Chung Wong, Paul Whitney, Jim Thomas
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory†

ABSTRACT
An association rule in data mining is an implication of the form X
→ Y where X is a set of antecedent items and Y is the consequent
item. For years researchers have developed many tools to visualize
association rules. However, few of these tools can handle more
than dozens of rules, and none of them can effectively manage
rules with multiple antecedents. Thus, it is extremely difficult to
visualize and understand the association information of a large
data set even when all the rules are available. This paper presents a
novel visualization technique to tackle many of these problems.
We apply the technology to a text mining study on large corpora.
The results indicate that our design can easily handle hundreds of
multiple antecedent association rules in a three-dimensional display with minimum human interaction, low occlusion percentage,
and no screen swapping.

1

INTRODUCTION

Association is a powerful data analysis technique that appears
frequently in data mining literature. An association rule is an implication of the form X → Y where X is a set of antecedent items
and Y is the consequent item. An example association rule of a
supermarket database is 80% of the people who buy diapers and
baby powder also buy baby oil. The analysis of association rules is
used in a variety of ways, including merchandise stocking, insurance fraud investigation, and climate prediction. For years scientists and engineers have developed many visualization techniques
to support the analyses of association rules. Commercial data
mining systems such as SGI’s MineSet [10] and IBM’s QUEST
[8] provide tools to visualize the associations of business databases. Many of the visualizations, however, have come up short in
dealing with numerous rules or rules with multiple antecedents.
This limitation presents serious challenges for analysts who need
to understand the association information of large databases.
This paper presents a novel association-rule visualization system
designed to tackle many of these problems. The system was developed to support our ongoing text mining and visualization research [6][7][11][13][14][15] on large unstructured document
corpora. The focus is to study the relationships and implications
among topics, or descriptive concepts, that are used to characterize
a corpus. The goal is to discover important association rules within
a corpus such that the presence of a set of topics in an article implies the presence of another topic. For example, one might learn
in headline news that whenever the words “Greenspan” and “inflation” occur, it is highly probably that the stock market is also
mentioned. We demonstrate the results using a news corpus with
more than 3,000 articles collected from open sources. We show
that it is critical to have an effective visualization tool to support
the analysis of topic associations on large corpora.

2

RELATED WORK

A visualization of association rules is a depiction of one-to-one or
many-to-one mapping of information items. Prior work on visualization of association rules can be found in commercial data mining software such as MineSet [10] and QUEST [8][9]. The matrixbased visualization designs that position items on separate axes are
†

P.O. Box 999, Richland, WA 99352, USA.
pak.wong@pnl.gov, paul.whitney@pnl.gov, jim.thomas@pnl.gov
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory is operated for the U.S. Department of Energy by Battelle Memorial Institute under contract DE-AC0676RLO 1830.

among the most popular approaches to visualize binary relationships. Hetzler et al. [6] animate a directed graph to visualize the
associations and disassociations of information items. Becker
[1][2] describes a series of elegant visualization techniques designed to support data mining of business databases. Westphal et
al. [16] give an excellent introduction of visualization techniques
provided by current data mining tools.

3

ASSOCIATION RULE DEFINITION

The definition of an association rule varies with disciplines and
implementations. Our definition of association rules is similar to
that found in QUEST [9]. The basic approach is to mine qualitative [12] rules that describe associations between sets of items.
This is different from the mining of quantitative rules in scientific
simulation and modeling. Because our application (text analysis)
requires no domain knowledge for mining, we adopt the qualitative definition in our implementation.
Given a set of items, S = {i1, i2,…, ij,…, in} where n ≥ 2. An
association rule is an implication of the form X → ij where X ⊂ S,
and ij ∈ S such that ij ∉ X. The set of items X is the antecedent,
while the item ij is the consequent of the association rule. The size
of X is between 1 to (n-1) items. The support of the rule X → ij is
defined as the percentage of items in S that satisfies the union of
items in X and ij. The confidence of the rule is the percentage of
articles that satisfies X and also satisfies ij. MineSet [10] has
similar definitions but uses the terms predictability and prevalence
(instead of confidence and support) to describe the strengths of
association rules. These are also naturally interpreted as estimates
of conditional and joint probability.

4

ASSOCIATION RULE VISUALIZATION

At least five parameters are involved in a visualization of association rules: sets of antecedent items, consequent items, associations
between antecedent and consequent, rules’ support, and confidence. Our goal is to visualize a large number of association rules
and their metadata in a three-dimensional (3D) display with minimum human interaction, minimum occlusion, and no screen
swapping. There is no maximum limit on the number of antecedent items allowed in an association.

4.1

Current Technology

The two prevailing approaches used today to visualize association
rules are the two-dimensional matrix and directed graph. This
section describes the general design of each approach and discusses their strengths and weakness.

4.1.1

Two-Dimensional
Matrix

The basic design of a two-dimensional
(2D) association matrix positions the
antecedent and consequent items on
separate axes of a square matrix. Customized icons are drawn on certain
matrix tiles that connect the antecedent
and the consequent items of the correFigure 1: B→C.
sponding association rules. Different
icons can be used to depict different metadata such as the support
and confidence values of the rules. Figure 1 depicts an association
rule (B→C). Both the height and the color of the column icon can

be used to present metadata values. In Quest [8], the values of
support and confidence are mapped to 3D columns that are built
separately on and beneath the matrix tiles. Other icons such as
disk and bar are also used to visualize metadata in the Rule Visualizer of MineSet [10].
A 2D matrix is arguably the most
effective technique to show one-toone binary relationship [17]. It has a
long history of analyzing a wide variety of data in different disciplines.
The strengths of a 2D matrix, however, break down when we need to
visualize many-to-one relationships
such as association rules with multiple antecedent items. For example, in
Figure 2 it is almost impossible to tell
Figure 2: (A+B→C) or
whether there is only one association
(A→C and B→C).
rule (A+B→C) or two (A→C and
B→C). The lack of a practical way to
identify the togetherness of individual antecedent items makes a
2D matrix a weaker candidate to visualize rules with multiple
antecedent items.
MineSet addresses the problem by
grouping all the antecedent items of
an association rule as one unit and
plotting it against its consequent, i.e.,
an antecedent-to-consequent plot. For
example, a dedicated item group
(A+B) is created in Figure 3 to
describe
the
association
rule
Figure 3: Identities of
(A+B→C). The strategy works fine
A and B are lost in
for smaller antecedent sets (e.g., less
(A+B).
than 3 items). In our text mining
studies, we encounter association rules with as many as 12 items
in the antecedent. The replication of items in the antecedent
groups creates a much larger antecedent-to-consequent plot when
compared with the corresponding item-to-item plot. The loss of
item identity within an antecedent group also defeats the purpose
of visualizing the associations with a
matrix. For example, the row (or
column) of the matrix connected to an
item can no longer be used to search
for all the rules involving that item.
Another problem in a 2D-matrix
display is object occlusion, especially
when multiple icons are used to depict
different metadata values on the
Figure 4: Object
matrix tiles. The occlusion problem is
occlusions.
obvious in Figure 4.

4.1.2

Directed Graph

A directed graph is another prevailing technique to depict item
associations. The nodes of a directed graph represent the items,
and the edges represent the associaFigure 5: Left: (A→C
tions. Figure 5 shows three associaand
B→C).
Right:
tion rules (A→C, B→C, A+B→C).
A+B→C.
This technique works well when
only a few items (nodes) and associations (edges) are involved. An
association graph can quickly turn into a tangled display with as
few as a dozen rules. Hetzler et al. [6] address the problem by
animating the edges to show the associations of certain items with
3D rainbow arcs. The animation technique requires significant
human interaction to turn on and off the item nodes. It is not an

easy task to show multiple metadata values, including support and
confidence, alongside the association rules.

4.2

A Novel Visualization Technique

We present a novel technique to visualize many-to-one association
rules. Instead of using the tiles of a 2D matrix to show the item-toitem association rules, we use the matrix to depict the rule-to-item
relationship. In Figure 6 and CP1, the rows of the matrix floor
represent the items (or topics in the context of text mining), and
the columns represent the item associations. The blue and red
blocks of each column (rule) represent the antecedent and the
consequent of the rule. The identities of the items are shown along
the right side of the matrix. The confidence and support levels of
the rules are given by the corresponding bar charts in different
scales at the far end of the matrix. The system supports basic
query commands through the use of pop-up menus to restrict key
items to be included in the visualization. The display has a mousecontrolled zooming capability to support context/focus analysis.

Figure 6: A visualization of item associations. See CP1.

The rule-to-item visualization approach has many advantages over
all the other matrix-based predecessors:
•
There is virtually no upper limit on the number of items in an
antecedent.
•
We can analyze the distributions of the associations (horizontal) and the items within (vertical) simultaneously.
•
Unlike Figure 3, the identity of individual items within an
antecedent group is clearly shown.
•
No new antecedent groups are created because of the multiple
antecedent items in association rules.
•
Because all the metadata are plotted at the far end and the
heights of the columns are scaled, few occlusions occur.
•
No screen swapping, animation, or human interaction (other
than basic mouse zooming) is required to analyze the rules.
From our experiments, this technique works well with up to several hundred association rules and dozens of antecedent topics on
a 17-inch monitor. This is a significant improvement over the
traditional 2D item-to-item association visualization.

5

TEXT MINING - AN APPLICATION

This section briefly describes our design philosophy and implementation issues of a text association mining system. (See [18] for
more information about the overall system.) The design is based
on ideas from information retrieval and syntactic analysis. The
underlying text engines, like others [4][5], construct a mathematical signature of a block of text. If similar text corresponds with
similar signatures, then some useful text analyses can be performed on the signatures using standard mathematical and data
analytic techniques.

5.1

Demonstration Corpus

Unabomber

Unabomber

The experimental results and graphics presented in this paper are
generated using a news article corpus obtained from open sources.
The medium-sized (~9MB) news corpus is stored as an ASCII file
with more than 3,000 articles collected during April 20-26, 1995.
This corpus has a strong theme associated with the bombing of the
U.S. Federal Building in Oklahoma. Other major news stories
during the week include the Simpson trial, the Unabomber, the
Bosnian crisis, and the France election.

CIA

Unabomber

Mazzola

Simpson trial
North/South Korea nuclear talks

5.2

treaty

System Overview

Figure 7 shows a high-level system overview of the topic
association mining system. A corpus of narrative text is fed into a
text engine for topic extractions. The mining engine then reads the
topics from the text engine and generates topic association rules.
Finally, the resultant association rules are sent to the visualization
system for further analysis.

Jospin

France election

Serb

Bosnian crisis

McVeigh

Oklahoma bombing

Simpson

Simpson trial

Nichols

Oklahoma bombing

Nuclear

North/South Korea nuclear talks

Sarajevo

Bosnian crisis

Ito

Simpson trial

Koernke

Oklahoma bombing

refugee

Bosnian crisis

5.4

Topic Association Mining

The topic words selected by the text engine are fed into the mining
engine to compute the association rules according to the requested
confidence and support values. Table 2 shows a sample of topic
association rules with confidence ≥ 80% and support ≥ 1% generated from the April 1995 news corpus.
Figure 7: Overview of the topic association system.

5.3

Text Engine

We developed two text engines to generate conceptual topics from
a large corpus. The first one is word-based and results in a list of
content-bearing words for the corpus. The second is concept-based
and results in concepts (represented as word groups) based on the
corpus. The engines are similar in that the topics and concepts are
initially evaluated using the entire corpus. Because of limited
space, we only present the word-based engine here. A description
of the concept-based text engine is available in [18].
The word-based text engine selects an interesting subset of words.
Words separated by white spaces in a corpus are evaluated within
the context of that corpus to assess whether a word is “interesting”
enough to be a topic. Bookstein’s [3] ideas regarding identification
of content-bearing words are used to assess the relative contribution of a word to the content of the corpus. The co-occurrence or
lack of co-occurrence of these “interesting” words in documents is
used to evaluate the strengths of the words. Stemming is used to
remove suffixes so that similar words are represented by the root
word. Commonly appearing words that do not directly contribute
to the content — such as prepositions, pronouns, adjectives, and
gerunds — are ignored.
Table 1 shows the top 20 topic words generated from this text
engine using the news corpus. The content-bearing topic words
(all nouns in this example) included in the table represent many
familiar headline news stories of the week.
Table 1: Top 20 topic words and their corresponding news stories.
Topic Word

News Story

billion

Congress and budget

Neufeld

Simpson trial

Korea

North/South Korea nuclear talks

Chirac

France election

tribunal

Bosnian crisis

Bosnian

Bosnian crisis

Table 2: A sample of twelve association rules (not in order).
Antecedent
Manager & McVeigh
& Michigan & motel
& Nichols & sketch
Ito & court & jury &
Mazzola & testimony
France & election &
socialist
Blood & testimony
Court & judge & jury
Blood & vial
Ammonium & nitrate
& bomb & FBI
Bomb & cult &
Michigan & militia
Hutu & Rwanda
Bosnia & Bosnian &
Crimes
Bosnia & Serb &
Sarajevo
Cult & gas & subway

5.5

Consequent
Truck

Confidence
91.30%

Support
1.39%

Simpson

100.00%

1.72%

Chirac

97.30%

1.19%

Fung
Ito
Mazzola
Nichols

81.25%
96.49%
100.00%
89.13%

1.29%
1.81%
1.19%
1.35%

McVeigh

100.00%

1.22%

Refugee
Serb

92.86%
100.00%

1.29%
1.22%

War

90.48%

1.25%

Tokyo

95.00%

1.88%

Topic Association Visualization

Figure 8 and CP 2 depict a set of topic association rules extracted
from the April 1995 news corpus with support ≥ 6% and confidence ≥ 60%. The rules are shown in ascending order from the left
side according to the confidence values. This visualization can be
used to study different aspects of the topic associations, including
the topic distribution of selected rules and the correlation between
different metadata values. Figure 9 and CP3 show a different arrangement of the same set of association rules, which are now
ordered by the consequent items. All the associations with the
same consequent items are group together for analysis.

6

DISCUSSION

Switching from an item-to-item arrangement to a rule-to-item
design of a 2D matrix lets us effectively display association rules
with multiple antecedent topics. The current design works well
with up to several hundred association rules on a 17-inch monitor

Miller, Grant Nakamura, Lucy Nowell, and Renie McVeety who
provided assistance of many forms throughout this research.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

Figure 8: Rules are sorted by confidence values. See CP2.

[4]

[5]
[6]

Figure 9: Rules are sorted by consequent topics. See CP3.

screen. With mouse zooming and topic selection, we encounter no
problems when analyzing 10,000+ document corpora using our
visualization system. For the other applications that involve thousands and thousands of association rules, a pixel-based or glyphbased visualization technique [17] might be needed to display the
rules and figures using pixels or glyphs instead of blocks and
charts.

7

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

This paper presents the prevailing techniques to visualize association rules and discusses their weakness in dealing with a large
number of association rules with multiple antecedent items. We
introduce a new visualization technique designed to overcome
many of the shortcomings of it predecessors. We apply the new
technique to a text mining system to analyze a large text corpus.
The results indicate that our design can easily handle hundreds of
multiple antecedent association rules in a 3D display with minimum human interactions, low occlusion percentage, and no screen
swapping.
Our long-term goal is to integrate many of our tools and techniques into a single visualization environment that provides userfriendly navigation, in-depth association and implication analyses,
time sequence analysis, hypothesis explanation, and document
summarization.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research has been supported by a Laboratory Directed Research and Development grant funded by the U.S. Department of
Energy for the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. We wish to
thank Dan Adams, Kris Cook, Wendy Cowley, Vern Crow, Don
Daly, Scott Decker, Sharon Eaton, Harlan Foote, Sue Harve, Beth
Hetzler, Cherry Lei, Rik Littlefield, Dennis McQuerry, Nancy

Barry G. Becker. Volume Rendering for Relational Data. In Proceedings of Information Visualization ‘97, pages 87-90, Phoenix,
Arizona, Oct 20 - 21, 1997. IEEE CS Press.
Barry G. Becker. Visualizing Decision Table Classifiers. In Proceedings of Information Visualization ‘98, pages 102-105, Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina, Oct 19 - 20, 1998. IEEE CS Press.
A. Bookstein, S.T. Klein, and T. Raita. Clumping Properties or Content-Bearing Words. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science, 49(2):102-114, 1998.
Scott Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, George W. Furnas, Thomas K.
Landauer, and Richard Harshman. Indexing by Latent Semantic
Analysis. In Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 41(6):391–407, 1990.
Steven Finch. Finding Structure in Language, Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of Edinburgh, 1993.
Beth Hetzler, W. Michelle Harris, Susan Havre, and Paul Whitney.
Visualizing the Full Spectrum of Document Relationships. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Society for Knowledge Organization (ISKO) Conference, 1998.

[7]

Beth Hetzler, Paul Whitney, Lou Martucci, and Jim Thomas. Multifaceted Insight through Interoperable Visual Information Analysis
Paradigms. In Proceedings of Information Visualization ‘98, pages
137-144, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, Oct 19-20, 1998.
IEEE CS Press.

[8]

www.almaden.ibm.com/cs/quest/demo/assoc/general.html

[9]

www.almaden.ibm.com/cs/quest/publications.html#associations

[10] www.sgi.com/software/mineset
[11] Nancy E. Miller, Pak Chung Wong, Mary Brewster, and Harlan
Foote. TOPIC ISLANDS™ - A Wavelet-Based Text Visualization
System. In David Ebert, Hans Hagan, and Holly Rushmeier, editors,
Proceedings of IEEE Visualization ‘98, pages 189-196, New York,
NY, Oct 18-23, 1998. ACM Press.
[12] Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro, Editor. Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Menlo Park, CA, 1991. AAAI Press.
[13] J. S. Risch, D. B. Rex, S. T. Dowson, T. B. Walters, R. A. May, B.
D. Moon. The STARLIGHT Information Visualization System. In
Stuart K. Card, Jock D. Mackinlay, and Ben Shneiderman, editors,
Readings in Information Visualization - Using Vision to Think, 1999.
Morgan Kaufmann.
[14] Jim Thomas, Kris Cook, Vern Crow, Beth Hetzler, Richard May,
Dennis McQuerry, Renie McVeety, Nancy Miller, Grant Nakamura,
Lucy Nowell, Paul Whitney, and Pak Chung Wong. Human
Computer Interaction with Global Information Spaces - Beyond Data
Mining. In Proceedings of British Computer Society Conference,
Bradford, UK, April 1999. Springer Verlag.
[15] James A. Wise, James J. Thomas, Kelly Pennock, David Lantrip,
Marc Pottier, Anne Schur, and Vern Crow. Visualizing the Nonvisual: Spatial Analysis and Interaction with Information from Text
Documents. In Nahum Gershon and Steve Eick, editors, Proceedings
of IEEE Information Visualization ‘95, pages 51-58, Los Alamitos,
CA, Oct 20-21, 1995. IEEE CS Press.
[16] Christopher Westphal and Teresa Blaxton. Data mining solutions Methods and Tools for Solving Real-Word Problems, New York,
1998. John Wiley and Sons.
[17] Pak Chung Wong and R. Daniel Bergeron. 30 Years of Multidimensional Multivariate Visualization. In Gregory M. Nielson, Hans Hagan, and Heinrich Muller, editors, Scientific Visualization - Overviews, Methodologies and Techniques, pages 3-33, Los Alamitos,
CA, 1997. IEEE CS Press.
[18] Pak Chung Wong, Paul Whitney, and Jim Thomas. Mining of Topic
Associations. Technical Report PNNL-SA-30975, Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory, Richland, WA, 1999.

