Sensemaking of Evolving Web Sites
Using Visualization Spreadsheets
Ed H. Chi, Stuart K. Card
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center
3333 Coyote Hill Road
Palo Alto, CA 94304 USA
{echi,card}@parc.xerox.com
Abstract

In the process of knowledge discovery, workers examine
available information in order to make sense of it. By
sensemaking, we mean interacting with and operating on
the information with a variety of information processing
mechanisms [3,18]. Previously, we introduced a concept
that uses the spreadsheet metaphor with cells containing
visualizations of complex data. In this paper, we extend
and apply a cognitive model called “visual sensemaking” to
the Visualization Spreadsheet. We use the task of making
sense of a large Web site as a concrete example through
out the paper for demonstration. Using a variety of
visualization techniques, such as the Disk Tree and Cone
Tree, we show that the interactions of the Visualization
Spreadsheet help users draw conclusions from the overall
relationships of the entire information set.
Keywords

Information visualization, Spreadsheet, Sensemaking,
World Wide Web, Information ecologies, Log file analysis
1. Introduction

A graphic is not “drawn” once and for all; it is
“constructed” and reconstructed until it reveals all the
relationships constituted by the interplay of the data.... A
graphic is never an end in itself; it is a moment in the
process of decision-making. –Jacques Bertin [3]
In the present and the past, knowledge workers have
utilized various technologies to reduce the cost of
accessing, processing, and understanding large data sets.
The vision of Vannevar Bush’s ‘MEMEX’ was to enable
workers to make sense of information by employing
technology that allow them to “make real use of the
record” [4] by extracting relationships between pieces of
information. Recently, researchers have shown that
information visualization techniques are capable of
communicating vast amounts of information very quickly
[5]. Typically this is accomplished by carefully examining

the task requirements and then designing an application
that fits the needs of the user.
The exploratory nature of many tasks suggests that we
need to construct an environment that provides a set of
data and graphic processing primitives that users can
employ as needed.
The techniques of information
processing play an equally important role in enabling users
to make sense of the data.
Since the structure of many exploratory tasks is iterative
[18, 3], the environment needs to support cyclic processes.
These processing techniques include visualization
interactions that directly manipulate the displayed
information. Thus, we have identified both the needs for
an exploratory information visualization environment as
well as a user cognitive model.
In this paper, we extend and apply a cognitive model called
“sensemaking” to an information visualization environment
called the “Visualization Spreadsheet.” Previously, we
presented the Visualization Spreadsheet as an information
visualization environment capable of integrating various
information visualization techniques in a single system [8].
We also presented an interaction and operator framework
for visualization systems [7], as well as a single-view
application for visualizing Web site traffic evolution [9]. In
this paper, we use the “Visual Sensemaking” model to
show the advantages of the Visualization Spreadsheet in
real-world analysis scenarios involving usage patterns of
Web sites. We:
1.

Extend the sensemaking cognitive task model to
information visualization.

2.

Apply the visualization operator framework called
“Data State Model” to Web site usage analysis.

3.

Demonstrate visual sensemaking in specific Web site
analysis tasks in the Visualization Spreadsheet.

4.

Analyze the advantages of the Visualization
Spreadsheet from the visual sensemaking perspective.

To ensure the reality of our analysis scenarios, we use a
large 15,000 file Web site associated with hundreds of
megabytes of real-world usage information. The Web site
is constantly changing, and our discoveries are direct
results of needed sensemaking tasks.

The rest of the paper is structured
as follows.
In Section 2, we
introduce some background on Web
visualizations and the Visualization
Spreadsheet. Section 3 describes
the visual sensemaking cycle.
Section 4 describes the operators in
the Web analysis system. In Section
5, we show how to use the
spreadsheet in visual sensemaking
of the Xerox.com web site.
2. Background

In this section, we present related
work to Web visualization and
introduce
the
Visualization
Spreadsheet.
Site administrators want to discover
usage patterns of their Web sites so
that they can more effectively
deliver information to users.
Marketing strategists would also
like to mine information about Figure 1: Web Analysis Visualization Spreadsheet showing the Xerox.com web
users, such as product interest. site using Cone Trees. Columns 1—5 show the site on week 1—4 of April 1997
Users need tools to navigate and and week 3 of August 1997. (Red=high usage, blue=low usage) Row 1
locate information faster. To thresholds the frequency of usage to values between 0 and 100, whereas Row
support these tasks, various 2=[100,500] and Row 3=[500,2000]
researchers
have
visualized
hypertext spaces using various
(1) Grid: The tabular layout lets users view collections of
methods [10,16,12,1,19,2,14]. Each system is designed for
visualizations simultaneously. The Visualization
specific tasks, and has enabled users to better understand
Spreadsheet displays the visualization of an arbitrarily
Web spaces.
large data set in each cell.
Our targeted users include Web analysts, marketers,
(2) Operators: Operators are available for generating or
advertisers, Webmasters, and administrators, who have a
modifying cell contents. Operators can be applied
need to reduce the cost of accessing millions of pieces of
across a specified range of operand cells, such as an
related usage information. We hope that, by reducing their
entire column or row.
cost of comprehending this immense amount of dynamic
(3) Dependency: The spreadsheet keeps track of the
Web data, we will enable sensemaking tasks to be
dependencies between cells and automatically updates
performed much faster than before. Since Web sites and
the cells appropriately when they are manipulated.
their associated usage data change daily, this cost-structure
We can integrate a variety of different visualization
reduction is critical in maintaining timely Web sites.
techniques together in a single system and allow it to be
We use the visualization spreadsheet paradigm in the
user-programmable, so that it can be tailored to many
sensemaking of Web sites. We present a visualization
analysis situations.
application called the Web Analysis Visualization
For the purpose of this paper, we will examine the
Spreadsheet (WAVS) that enables the processing and
application of WAVS to the evolving Xerox.com Web site
subsequent understanding of an evolving Web site’s
over a one-year period, which contains roughly 15,000 files
content, usage, topology, and rating (CUTR). Figure 1
and their associated evolving attributes. We use
shows the WAVS system during one step of the analysis.
visualization techniques such as the Disk Tree [9] and
The spreadsheet metaphor provides a structured, intuitive,
Cone Tree [17] to show the Web site structures and
and powerful interface for exploratory data analysis [8].
associated usage data.
Spreadsheets have proven to be highly successful
3. Cognitive Model: Visual Sensemaking Cycle
environments for interacting with numeric data by
Information is the reply to a question. –Jacques Bertin [3]
providing an environment that easily affords the
application of a variety of operators and the definition of
In this section, we apply concepts from the sensemaking
data dependencies. The concept of the Visualization
cognitive model to information visualization. We use the
Spreadsheet [8] is based on three characteristics:
Web analysis task as an example to demonstrate how these

concepts can be used productively in this particular data
domain. We can generalize to other data domains with this
cognitive framework.

Defining the problem

Defining the data

3.1 Stages of Visual Sensemaking

The central concept in sensemaking is that users perform
operations to gain successive understanding of the
information. In order to model this process, Bertin
mentions the five major stages of decision-making [3]. We
extend these five major stages to define the finer-grained
nine-stage visual sensemaking cycle, which is shown in
Figure 2. The gray boxes denote Bertin’s five stages of
decision-making. The other four boxes denote the added
finer grain stages.
1.Defining the problem: An analyst, when faced with a
problem, first defines the problem by asking certain
questions. Often the questions are formed in the context
of a hypothesis. E.g. are certain areas of the Web site
accessed more than other areas? Do the access patterns
in these areas change over time?
2.Defining the data: Once the problem is framed in the
context of hypotheses, we must now gather the raw data
that are necessary for answer the questions.
3.Choosing an analytical abstraction: The raw data must
be organized into data structures for easy access and
query later. E.g. we extract the Web linkage information
into graphs represented using adjacency lists.
4.Choosing visualization abstractions: We know certain
data abstractions are visualizable. Depending on the
structure of the analytical abstractions and the
visualization techniques that are available to us, we can
choose among a variety of visualization abstractions.
Alternatively, new techniques can be invented to
visualize new abstractions. E.g. we know that visualizing
a graph of on the order of 100 nodes is difficult.
Unfortunately, the Web graphs we are dealing with are
on the order of 10,000 nodes. To solve this problem and
in order to take advantage of the hierarchical nature of
the Xerox Web site, we choose a hierarchical
representation for our visualization abstraction. We
show back links as detail-on-demand.
5.Adopting a processing language: The next step in visual
sensemaking is to determine the operators that are
appropriate for the task. We will describe this in detail in
Section 4. For an example, see Table 3.
6.Transcribe the value into view: This stage is essentially
the execution of the visualization pipeline to generate a
new visualization state. The user sees visualizations that
shed light on the hypothesis that was posed in stage 1.
7.Processing the value or view: At this stage, we perform
certain interactive operators on the results, such as
rotation, scaling, detail-on-demand zooming, or valuefiltering. Specific visual features will grab the users’
attention.

Choosing an analytical abstraction

Choosing visualization abstractions

Iterate

Adopting a processing language

Transcribe the value into view

Processing the value or view

Interpret and deciding

Figure 2: Visual Sensemaking Cycle
8.Interpret and deciding: The users cognitively process the
visualization in order to understand the visual features in
these specific views.
9.Iterate: After some new understanding of the data,
further hypotheses will be formed, and new visualizations
will then need to be constructed to answer those
questions. The process repeats until the analyst is
satisfied that she has completely made sense of the data.
3.2 Information Level

The aim in the above visual sensemaking cycle is to
successively discover new higher-level knowledge in the
information. The visual sensemaking cycle can be viewed
a “Knowledge Crystallization” task [5]. This requires the
discovery of new relationships between information
subsets in each cycle.
1.Elementary or Local Level: Uncovering local
information is finding a specific entry in the data. In any
analysis, the tool should always provide access to the
precise specific values using detail-on-demand. E.g.,
what is the usage rate of the home page?
2.Intermediate or Comparison Level: Information at this
level consists of relationships that exist between subsets
of information. E.g., are usage patterns in May 1998
similar to a year ago?
3.Overall or Global Level: This is the highest discovery
level attainable from the data. The knowledge obtained
at this level is condensed from the correlation between
one aspect of the data with another aspect. For example,
are there any usage trends governed overall by time?
Using the information level as a measuring stick, we can
gain understanding of how effective a visualization system
is in uncovering new knowledge.
Taking the information level concept together with the
visual sensemaking cycle, we can better model the
exploratory nature of many tasks. We showed Web
analysis to be one such task. In the next section, we define

the processing operators in this task. These operators are
what enabled us to carry out the real-world analysis
scenarios in Section 5.
4. Web Analysis in the Visualization Framework

To use the Visualization Spreadsheet, we developed the
“Data State Model” for identifying, categorizing, and
analyzing visualization operators [7].
Using this
framework, we developed a set of hypertext visualization
operators, which forms the operating primitives for
conducting iterative cyclic analysis tasks on the Web.
4.1 Web Analysis in the Data State Model

The visualization operator framework places operators in
the context of the information visualization pipeline [7,5].
Value is converted and transformed into four major stages:
Value, Analytical Abstraction, Visualization Abstraction,
and View (see Table 1). In between each of these four
stages, there are three major processing steps: Data
Transformation, Visualization Transformation, and Visual
Mapping Transformation (see Table 2).
Stage

Description

Value

The raw data.

Analytical
Abstraction

Processed data that is not yet mappable
but include all information from the
raw data that will be visualized.

Visualization
Abstraction

Information that is visualizable on the
screen using a visualization technique.

View

The end-product of the visualization
mapping, where the user sees and
interprets the picture presented to her.

We applied this framework to the Xerox Web site:
Value: For the exploration of Web ecologies, we chose the
Xerox Web site over a one-year period from April 1997 to
May 1998. The Xerox web site contains roughly 7,500
HTML pages and 8,000 non-HTML items. The hyperlink
topologies and usage information were recorded on a daily
basis.
Analytical Abstraction:
Content: The words in the page as well as clusters of items
Usage: For each file, the frequency of page requests was
aggregated using one-week intervals. The transition matrix,
or hop count, from one node to another was also computed
Topology: The hyperlink structure of the site was extracted
from the HTML pages.
Rating: For each file, we compute its similarity or
relevance to other files using Spreading Activation [15].
Visualization Abstraction:
Tree: The result of the Breadth First Traversal is a
hierarchy of items with back links.
Item Attribute: Each item stores its associated access
frequency and hop count to its children. Each item also
contains information about its lifecycle stage (newly
created, deleted, moved, or modified).
Item Vector: Each item also has a set of vectors that
specify the pre-computed Spreading Activation patterns
generated by each modality. Moreover, the Spreading
Filter
V alue

Table 1: InfoVis Pipeline stages [7]
Visualization operators operate on data sets in each of the
four stages. The classification of visualization operators
shows that each operator either performs a transformation
that takes information between stages, or generates another
data set within the same stage [7]. For example, a valuefiltering operator selects a subset of the data and produces
a new data set within the same stage. Between stage
operators are called Transformation Operators:
Processing
Steps

Description

Data
Transformation

Generates some form of analytical
abstraction from the value (usually by
extraction).

Visualization
Transformation

Takes an analytical abstraction and
further reduces it into some form of
visualization abstraction, which is
visualizable content.

Visual Mapping
Transformation

The Visual Mapping Transformation
takes information that is in a
visualizable format and presents a
graphical view to the user.

Table 2: Transformation Steps in InfoVis Pipeline [7]

web p ag e
collec tion

c reate
web p ag e
linkdag e

depth
first
tra versal

Con e
Tree

D ata
Trans form at ion

gra ph

An alytic al
Abs trac tion

bre adth
firs t
tra vers al

Visu aliz atio n
Trans form at ion

hier arc hy

Dis k
Tree

Va lu e

Dis k
Tree

Visu aliz at io n
Abs trac tion

Visu al Map ping
Trans form at ion

vis ualiz atio n

foc us

View
rotate

Figure 3: Information Visualization Operator
Framework applied to Web Analysis

Type
Within Value

operator
Filter-Value

Description
Create a subset of the data. For example, create a subset of data containing only files
that are reachable within four clicks of the root node.

Data
Transformation

Extract linkage
information

Create linkage graph from the hypertext files.

Extract usage
information

Produce daily summarization of each file’s access frequency and the usage flow from
one file to another (hop count).

Within Analytical
Abstraction

Cluster nodes

Produce classes of the items, as well as identify groups of users, using several
different clustering algorithms.

Visualization
Transformation

Breadth First Traversal

Generate a hierarchy that can be visualized using various tree visualization techniques.
Since the Xerox web site is highly hierarchical in nature, this generates a useful view
of the entire site.

Within
Visualization
Abstraction

Usage Frequency
Pattern Algebra

Generate a frequency pattern over the web site, which can then be
subtracted/added/averaged with other patterns from other weeks.

Spreading Activation
Pattern Algebra

Compare/aggregate Spreading Activation patterns by subtracting/ adding one with
another.

Display Disk Tree

Layout hierarchy based on a planar circle. This is our primary visualization technique
used to visualize large hierarchies. Because it is a 2D technique, we can embed
additional attributes using glyphs on the third dimension.

Display Cone Tree

Layout hierarchy based on a 3D cone. A 3D hierarchy visualization technique that
shows the various levels in the tree extremely well.

Apply Coloring Pattern

Map color onto a displayed tree based on numeric item attributes.

Display Pattern Glyph

Show the Spreading Activation pattern on top of the Disk Tree using glyphs. Each
pattern consists of pairs of <item, activation strength>.

Geometric Operators

Rotate, translate, zoom, scale, etc.

Detail-on-demand Zoom

Fly directly to the selected item for close examination.

Animation

Show several disk trees in succession.

Visual
Mapping
Transformation

Within View

Table 3: Web Analysis Visualization Operators
Activation is computed over the evolving document
collection, which enables the comparison of results from
different time periods.
4.2 Classification of Web Analysis Operators

Using the Data State Model as a basis, we classified and
studied operators in the Web analysis domain. At the heart
of the WAVS system is the set of Web analysis
visualization operators. The operators are significant
because the operators that are applicable to a wide variety
of different analysis scenarios for understanding a Web
site’s content, usage, topological, rating patterns. Figure 3
contains a depiction of the framework with some Web
analysis operators. We present the details of Web analysis
operators in the context of this framework in Table 3.
5. REAL-WORLD ANALYSIS SCENARIOS

In this section, we will demonstrate how the WAVS
enables users to gain successive higher levels of knowledge
on a large Web site.
5.1 Faddishness of Information

In previous work [9,15], we showed the importance of
finding various patterns of faddishness in information. A
problem encountered in using the Time Tubes visualization
is the choice of color scale for mapping frequency of

usage. Each color scale has advantages and disadvantages.
As a result, we typically found ourselves experimenting
with many different color scales without finding a perfect
scale.
The Visualization Spreadsheet provided the
appropriate tools for experimenting with color scales.
First Sensemaking Cycle: Cone Tree
In Figure 1, we choose to threshold the color scale so that
it maps values between [0,100] in Row 1, and [100, 500] in
Row 2, and [500, 2000] in Row 3. Across the columns, we
show the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th week of April 1997. The 5th
column is the 3rd week in August 1997. We use Cone
Trees to show the hierarchy, and the color scale is a
rainbow heat scale where red correspond to high levels of
usage, and blue correspond to low levels of usage. Figure
4 shows two particular features that emerged in Row 3
(color scale = [500,2000]). The feature marked by a
yellow square corresponds to the sub-tree rooted at
http://www.xerox.com/investor/content.html, while the
feature marked by the yellow circle correspond to
http://www.xerox.com/news.html. Both features show that
the information rose in usage from the 1 st week to the 3rd
week and then lowered again on the 4th week. It is
important to note that this feature is not visible in either
Row 1 or 2.

Value to Structure Mapping
One important lesson learned from this
example is the importance of being
able to map values onto the structure of
the spreadsheet.
By using the
horizontal
dimension
of
the
spreadsheet for time and the vertical
dimension for various usage color
scales, we externalize the variability of Figure 4: First Cycle: Discovering Faddish Information. The areas marked
the two variables we are interested in by yellow squares and circles first increase in usage, then decrease again on
correlating. Without the spreadsheet, the 4th week.
correlating between these two variables visually is difficult.
We call this process Value to Structure Mapping. By
employing external cognition, we reduce the cognitive load
of the user and speed up the sensemaking.
5.2 Correct Creation of New Content

Second Sensemaking Cycle: Disk Tree
After doing the interpretation step of the sensemaking
cycle, we decided to try a different visual mapping
transformation—the Disk Tree. Figure 5 shows the same
data using Disk Trees instead of Cone Trees. Notice that
while these two features are also visible on the third row,
they were harder for the eye to pick up because the Disk
Tree layout algorithm does not exaggerate those areas of
the tree. On the other hand, it is much easier to
comprehend the overall structure and usage pattern using
the Disk Tree, because Disk Tree is a 2D technique that
does not have occlusion problems. This example shows
that different visualization techniques can contribute
different senses in visual sensemaking.

Figure 5: Second Cycle: Using Disk Trees to discover
the source of a fad.
that is highly desirable to web users. The importance of the
content is validated by the amount of attention it received.
Detail on demand

Continuing with our case study, we wanted to find out why
One lesson we learned from this example is the importance
these two areas rose in usage. By brushing around the areas
of allowing quick access to detailed information. The tool
on the Disk Tree and examining the content, we found that
provides this via brushing and picking. The amount of
on April 15, 1997, Xerox announced “New Digital Product
detail displayed is programmable via the spreadsheet’s
Family Unveiled: Becomes Basis of Xerox Office Products
interpretive command line.
into the Next Century” http://www.xerox.com/PR/
Parallel application of operators
NR970415-newfam.html. A new product series was to
Another lesson learned from this example is the usefulness
present a new approach to network printing, faxing and
of the parallel application of operators. By first selecting
scanning. In this press release, Xerox introduced two of its
all of the cells in the first row, the user can simultaneously
first products in this series, the Document Centre 220 and
zoom, rotate, and translate to the same area of all of the
230 Digital Copier. In looking this press release, we found
Disk Trees. The spreadsheet affords this parallel operation
a new page linked off of the root node of the web site that
in a natural manner, thus making the interaction easy and
was the primary product page for this product series
fast. By reducing the cost of interaction, we reduce the
(http://www.xerox.com/Products/XDC/content.html). The
details of this area are shown in Figure 6.
While it is immediately obvious that the
pattern of usage as well as structure has
changed on the 4th week, other less obvious
visual features are also noticeable after
careful examination. The feature marked
by a long rectangle corresponds to this new
product page, and its related pages. The
red coloring of this entire area shows its
high usage. Because this area is new and is
being used extensively, this means the area Figure 6: Parallel Application of Navigation Operations enables
shows a correct creation of new content examination of details in different Disk Trees at the same time.

users’ cognitive load for view manipulation so that they
can concentrate on the task at hand, rather than minute
details of the interface. In terms of the visual sensemaking
cycle, it is imperative that we provide fast and easy
interactions.
5.3 Surprising Increases or Decreases in Usage

So far, the interpretation of the visualizations has
uncovered an interesting story around the introduction of
an important product line and how it has affected the usage
of the Web site. We are interested in mining for other
changes in usage that may be hard to visually pick up using
direct visual comparison. In order to accomplish this task,
we realized that a new analytical abstraction must be
computed — the subtraction of one usage pattern from
another usage pattern.
Third Cycle: Visual Usage Pattern Subtraction
Figure 7 shows the result of constructing a new
spreadsheet. Column one shows the result of subtracting
week one from week two, while Column two is week three
subtracted from week two, and Column three is week four
subtracted from week three. In other words, we are

showing the first order difference between the weekly
usage patterns. In Row 1, we show only the negative
values (blue on the color scale) and only the positive values
(red) in Row 2. Row 3 shows both values at the same time.
The visual usage subtraction shows the rise of information
for the PagisTM and TextBridgeTM home pages (marked
with a yellow oval in Figure 7). On the other hand, the
Copier’s home page had increasing usage (marked with a
yellow rectangle) during the second week, but not the third
or fourth week. Without the visual subtraction, these trends
are not at all noticeable (see the original mappings in
Figure 7a).
5.4 Validation of Web Site Design

Fourth Cycle: Relevance by Spreading Activation
As the last step in the visual sensemaking cycle, we wish to
validate the web site design using spreading activation
[15], which is an algorithm for computing the relevance
between items. Using document similarity as our relevance
metric, we perform spreading activation over the Web site.
Figure 8 shows the result of performing this operation over
the week of May 10, 1998. From left to right, we show the
Web site in two-day intervals. In the first Disk Tree, we
spread over the supplies.html page, and the red vector
glyphs show that most relevant documents are within its
own sub-tree (marked in yellow). In the middle Disk Tree,
however, the visualization shows that there are two clusters
of documents in different parts of the hierarchy that have
relevance to the workgroup.html node. The third Disk
Tree shows the relevant documents to the services.html
node are in only one cluster. This example shows the
documents in these parts of the web are placed in relatively
accessible positions according to document similarity.
We have presented Web Analysis Visualization
Spreadsheet (WAVS) as another example of a series of
techniques we are developing for Web Ecology and
Evolution Visualization (WEEV). We showed how WAVS
supports a visual sensemaking cycle by presenting realworld scenarios in the context of analyzing the entire
Xerox web site. We picked out visual cues that show
patterns and trends in the relationships among content,
usage and topology over time. By identifying the

Figure 7: Third Cycle: Visual Usage Pattern
Subtraction shows differences in usage quickly.

Figure 7a: Straight mapping of the usage patterns does
not show difference in usage at all.

Figure 8: Fourth Cycle: Spreading Activation
visualization enables visualization of related contents
using document similarity. The clusters are localized
to sub-trees, which means the web site is well designed
relative to these areas.

visualization operators in web ecology analysis, we have
opened the door to the answers of many interesting web
site design questions. WAVS provides a web analysis
workbench that provides users with a set of tools that can
be combinatorically applied in various analysis tasks.
6. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we extended an existing cognitive model to
form a new model that we call “visual sensemaking”. We
show how information visualization is central to this model
by carefully examining the processing primitives that are
employed in visual sensemaking. We analyze how the
“Visualization Spreadsheet” fits in with this model. Our
scenario analysis shows that the success of spreadsheetbased interaction eliminates many of the stumbling blocks
in visual sensemaking, because it:
•

•

Forms an external cognition device. We showed that,
in using the spreadsheet, the user constructs the
required information in each step of the visual
sensemaking cycle. Step by step, the user forms an
understanding of the relationship between pieces of
information. By externalizing this cognition process
of sensemaking and by showing the intermediate
results of each operation, the Visualization
Spreadsheet is an externalized cognition device.
Reduces the cost-structure of the analysis. The
Visualization Spreadsheet allows new, ad hoc analyses
to be defined quickly. By structuring a few simple
rules for applying operations, the user can readily
apply processing mechanisms very quickly. By
carefully constructing an operator set, as we did with
Web Analysis Operators, the total time spent on a
study can be significantly reduced. Instead of custom
programming, the spreadsheet allows a wide-range of
new analyses to be defined as combination of other
cells.

The power of visual sensemaking comes from the
combinatorics of visualization operators. There exists a
variety of ways in which the operators can be combined to
answer new questions. This combination of operators
covers a large conceptual space, where some concepts are
not conceived ahead of time. As we have shown, the key is
that the assembly of new visualizations must proceed at
about the same rate as the analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Peter Pirolli, James Pitkow and John Riedl for
thoughtful discussions. This work was supported in part
by Office of Naval Research N00014-96-C-0097 to P.
Pirolli and S. Card.
REFERENCES
1. Keith Andrews. Visualizing cyberspace: Information
visualization in the Harmony Internet browser. In Proceedings
of Information Visualization ’95. IEEE, 1995. Atlanta, GA.
2. Astra SiteManagerTM. http://www.merc-int.com, 1997.
3. Jacques Bertin. Graphics and Graphic Information
Processing. Walter de Gruyter, New York, 1981.

4. Vannevar Bush. As We May Think. Atlantic Monthly, 176:
101-108, 1945.
5. Stuart Card, Jock Mackinlay, Ben Shneiderman. Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan
Kaufmann, 1999.
6. J. Carrière, R. Kazman. Interacting with huge hierarchies:
beyond cone trees. In Proceedings of the Symposium on
Information Visualization ’95. IEEE CS, 1995. Atlanta, GA.
7. Ed H. Chi, John Riedl. An Operator Interaction Framework
for Visualization Systems. In Proceedings of the Symposium
on Information Visualization ’98, pages 63-70. 1998.
8. Ed H. Chi, J. Riedl, P. Barry, J. Konstan. Principles for
Information Visualization Spreadsheets. In IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications (Special Issue on Visualization)
July/August, 1998. IEEE CS, p. 30-38.
9. Ed H. Chi, J. Pitkow, J. Mackinlay, P. Pirolli, R. Gossweiler,
S. K. Card. Visualizing the Evolution of Web Ecologies. In
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
’98), pages 400-407,644,645, April 1998. Los Angles, CA.
10. Ed H. Chi. WebSpace Visualization.
http://www.geom.umn.edu/docs/weboogl/webspace/. The
Geometry Center, University of Minnesota. (Also appeared in
First WWW Conference, Chicago, IL. November 1994)
11. S. G. Eick, G. J. Wills. Navigating Large Networks with
Hierarchies. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization ’93, p.
204-210, 1993.
12. Hendley, R. J., Drew, N. S., Wood, A.M., and Beale, R.
Narcissus: Visualizing information. In Proceedings of
Information Visualization '95, p. 90-96. Atlanta, Georgia.
13. P. Kahn. Mapping Web Sites: Planning diagrams to site maps.
http://www.dynamicdiagrams/seminars/mapping. Dynamic
Diagrams, 1998.
14. D. Nation, C. Plaisant, G. Marchioinini, A. Komlodi.
Visualizing Websites using a Hierarchical table of contents
browser: WebTOC. Proceedings of 3rd Conference on Human
Factors and the Web, 1997. http://www.uswest.com/webconference/proceedings/nation.html
15. P. Pirolli, J. Pitkow, R. Rao. Silk from a sow’s ear: Extracting
usable structures from the web. In Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '96), p. 118-125, 1996.
Vancouver, Canada.
16. J. Pitkow, K. Bharat. WebViz: A Tool for World Wide Web
access log visualization. In: Proceedings of the First
International World Wide Web Conference. Geneva,
Switzerland, May 1994.
17. G. Robertson, J. Mackinlay, S. K. Card. Cone Trees: Animated
3D visualizations of hierarchical information. In Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’91), p. 189-194.
1991.
18. D. Russell, M. Stefik, P. Pirolli, S. K. Card. The Cost
Structure of Sensemaking. In Proceedings of InterCHI ’93, p.
269-276, 1993. Amsterdam.
19. J. Wise, J. Thomas, K. Pennock, D. Lantrip, M. Pottier, A.
Schur, and V. Crow. Visualizing the Non-Visual: Spatial
analysis and interaction with information from text documents.
In Proceedings of Information Visualization '95, p. 51-58.
1995. Atlanta, GA.

