Domain Analysis: A Technique to Design A User-Centered Visualization Framework
Octavia Juarez Espinosa, Chris Hendrickson, Ph.D., James H. Garrett Jr. Ph. D.
Civil and Environmental Engineering Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,PA
Abstract
Domain Analysis for Data Visualization (DADV) is a technique to use when investigating a domain where data visualizations are going to be designed and added to existing
sof?ware systems. DADV was used to design the data visualization in VisEIO-LCA, which is a framework to visualize
environmental data about products.
Most of the visualizations are designed using the following
stages: formatting data in tables, selecting visual structures,
and rendering the data on the screen. Although many visualizations authors perform implicit domain analysis, in this
papec domain analysis is added explicitly to the process of
designing visualizations with the goal of producing more
usable sofmare tools.
Environmental Life-Cycle Assessment (LCA) is used as a
test bedfor this technique.

tasks such as search, lookup, verify, and computation [25].
Although most of the research papers do not include a
domain analysis explicitly, the analysis has been performed
for some of the visualizations designers.

Technique
Selection
Figure 1: Traditional Visualization Design Process
The explicit addition of a new step, domain analysis, to
the traditional design process allows for a better fit of the data
visualizations to the user tasks. During domain analysis, the
knowledge of users and tasks are gathered and structured to be
used in the selection of visualization and interaction techniques. Figure 2 shows the recommended process for designing data visualizations.

1. Introduction
( Doma: A n a l y s i s 1
The research on information visualization has been
focused on graphic techniques as well as interaction techniques. Progress has been made by many groups in the following areas:
l

l

l

Visualization of Multidimensional Data [ 1,2];
Automatic Design [3,4];
Interactive Techniques [5,6,7];

Figure 2: Augmented Design Process
Explicit domain analysis is useful as a document that
allows designers to evaluate effectiveness of visualizations
based on the users requirements and needs. Also, explicit
domain analysis is useful to store the knowledge about the
design process that may make it possible to reuse old visual
designs.
The modification of this process requires a systematic
method to gather knowledge about tasks and domains as well
as heuristics to guide the process of selection of graphical and
interaction techniques.
To achieve these tasks, a method to perform domain analysis is described in this paper. Also described is a set of heuristics to select the graphic techniques.

Focus and Context [8,9,10];
Tree and Network Visualization [ 11,121; and
Visualization Frameworks [ 13,14,15]; etc.
Currently some research groups are working on the visualization of documents and information on the internet.
In this paper, the focus is on developing data visualizations based on user tasks. It is our hypothesis that the study of
a user’s tasks should yield usable information for visualization
design. The knowledge of tasks and user models can help to
select the data structures, the visualization techniques to use,
as well as the interaction techniques.
The traditional design process starts with the data tables
as shown in Figure 1. In this traditional design process,
designers select the data visualization techniques used in their
systems based only on the type of information to visualize [3,
41. Other researchers design visualizations based on low level
l

l

l

2. Domain Analysis
Domain Analysis for Data Visualization (DADV) pro-

For Color Plate, See Page 144.
44
O-7695-0431-0/99 $10.00 0 1999 IEEE

provided the knowledge needed to design a visualization tool
that supports their tasks.

duces a structured description of the domain, a group of user
tasks, and a list of visualization needs.
Domain analysis is an exploratory activity to gather
knowledge about a specific domain. It is similar to the activity
of knowledge acquisition used by knowledge engineers who
gather knowledge when developing expert systems. Domain
analysis practitioners gather knowledge about of the data and
problem solving processes of a domain.
The methods used to gather knowledge about a specific
domain are expert interviews, reviews of literature about the
domain, observation of users performing tasks, and problem
solving in the studied domain.
The output from domain analysis is the domain description, the description of the user tasks, and the list of visualization needs.

3.1. Domain Description
Life-Cycle Assessment (LCA) is a tool used by environmental scientists to evaluate the environmental impacts of a
product or service during its entire life-cycle [ 171.
The reason to evaluate the entire life-cycle of a product is
that environmental emissions might occur during any lifecycle period, such as manufacturing, material extraction, or
end-of-life.
A life-cycle study is divided into the following stages:
inventory analysis, impact analysis, and improvement analysis. In the inventory analysis step, the materials, energy, and
emissions during the entire life are computed. The impact
analysis consists of assessing the effects of emissions and discharges during the inventory step. Finally, the improvement
analysis step looks for opportunities to minimize emissions,
material usage, and environmental discharges [ 171.
Economic Input-Output Life-Cycle Assessment (EIOLCA) is a specific method used to perform LCA [ 18,19,20,
2 1,221 based on the economic method named input-output
[ 161. This method receives a change in the demand, in millions of dollars, for particular industrial sectors as inputs and it
computes the environmental effects due to these changes for
the entire supply chain. The data used in this method are publicly available. The economic data used is the commodity by
commodity matrix that reflects the economic information for a
particular country. The toxic release inventory (TRI) for the
same year as that of the economic data, and other environmental vectors, such as energy, fuels, and ores consumed by every
industrial sector, are components of the EIO-LCA data.

2.2. Domain Description
The domain description includes only the objects related
to the solution of problems:
Entities, The entities are used to describe the phenomena
in the model. These entities consist of a set of attributes
that describe the objects in the world.
Relationships between entities. The relationships could be
mathematical or causal.
Assumptions. The assumptions in the data model are
needed to understand the limitations.
Data sources. These data sources are the data used in the
domain.

2.2. User Tasks
The list of user tasks is ranked by frequency. The task
description includes:
l

.

.

the user tasks when he/she solves a problem;

Entities. The entities considered in an EIO-LCA study
are industrial sectors, materials, environmental discharges,
changes in the demand, and LCA stages.

the stages followed to solve a problem, which are needed
to understand the whole process of data analysis and information processing; and
the data analysis heuristics followed by the users.

Industrial Sectors. The economy of an area is divided in
industrial sectors. Those sectors interact by exchanging
goods. A matrix describes the interaction between sectors,
where the coefficients characterize the exchange between
the sectors. A column represents the inputs to the sector
while the outputs of sectors are represented by a row.
Materials. The materials used to produce a product or to
offer a service are included in this category. The most
important materials to evaluate are non-renewable
resources. Those materials are never accounted for in the
social cost of a product.
Environmental Discharges. These discharges are the toxic
chemicals released into the environment. These discharges
are accounted for based on the media into which they are
released. The media reported by the companies include air,
water, land, and underground.
Changes in the Demand. These changes are purchases or
sales in one or more economic sectors, used to assess proposed designs.

2.3. Visualization User Needs
Users are interviewed about their visualization needs.
Users suggest the types of displays that may make solving the
problem easier. The visualization needs consists of:
9

heuristics to perform the data analysis;

l

l

graphic techniques suggested; and
the level of detail needed.

3. Domain Analysis: A Case Study
The domain analysis method was used in the analysis of
the Life-Cycle Assessment (LCA) domain, which is a data
intensive domain.
An existing software prototype to practice LCA was used
as a starting point in this domain study. A group of LCA users

LCA Stages. These stages are the components for the life

45

of a product. The stages considered are materials extraction, manufacturing, use, and end-of-life. An EIO-LCA
evaluation could address of one or more of these stages of
a product life-cycle.
Relationships. The relationships between entities are
illustrated in Figure 3. The entities represented by rectangles
are sectors that interact by buying or selling products or goods
to other sectors. Relationships are represented using diamonds, which join the entities. Arrows represent inputs and
outputs to each sector. Every industrial sector uses materials,
fuels and energy. The same sectors send environmental discharges to the environment.

J

Figure 4: Materials used and emissions of industrial sectors
l

Change in the Final Demand
*
l

Fuels, Materials,
Energy

Fuels, Materials,
Energy

Toxic Release Inventory. This database is provided by the
US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The most
recent published data is for 1995. This database only contains data from manufacturing industries and consists of
more than 600 chemicals sent to different media [23].
Data about energy, fuels, ores, conventional pollutants,
hazardous waste, and water were obtained from different
sources such as the EPA and the Census Bureau. The data
was integrated by industrial sector and the units used are
metric tons by million of dollars.

The data analysis components were obtained after interviewing users performing EIO-LCA evaluations. The ten
users that were interviewed belong to the same research
group, but they have different degrees of expertise.
Emissions

3.2. User Tasks

t Environmental Effects

The study of user tasks was performed by interviewing
EIO-LCA users. EIO-LCA users were asked to describe the
way they define the problems and the way they perform the
data analysis.
Other tasks, which are not included in Table 1, were studied by interacting every day with the LCA research team.
The tasks could be divided in the following groups: tasks
for LCA practitioners and tasks for LCA researchers.
As can be seen in Table 1, the task performed with more
frequency by EIO-LCA practitioners was the comparison of
alternative designs, policies, or processes. The users try to find
answers to questions such as which design, process or policy
is more environmentally friendly.
The second most common user task is the LCA of a product, which is a subtask of a product comparison.

Figure 3: Sectors relationships
Figure 4 illustrates another important relationship, which
links industrial sectors to toxic emissions, materials or energy
consumed.
Assumptions. The major assumptions made for EIOLCA users are described below.
The environmental effects are proportional to the economic effects. A sector with more change in the economy
will have more emissions than a sector with a lower economical change.
The product or service evaluated is considered as an average product. For example, when a car is evaluated, the system considers a generic car without distinction in the
architecture, prices, and any other differences.
l

EIO-LCA Practitioners Tasks. These tasks were gathered
from user interviews. Ten EIO-LCA users were interviewed to
have a clear understanding of how EIO-LCA is used. The
tasks performed by EIO-LCA users are product comparisons
and EIO-LCA evaluations.

The economic data remains constant over 5 years. The
Department of Commerce updates this data every five
years.

l

Data Sources. The data sources are publicly available.
The data are provided electronically and are explained below.
l

Six digit commodity-by-commodity economic matrix.
This table is a component of the 1992 Benchmark InputOutput Accounts. This document is produced by the
Bureau of Economic Analysis in the US Department of
Commerce [24].

46

Product Comparison. Frequently, EIO-LCA users wants
to compare many alternative designs or many products.
The comparison is performed based on environmental
impacts. For example, two car models built with different
materials can be compared based on environmental
impacts through their entire life-cycle. In the same way,
the environmental impacts produced by the changes in
some industrial sectors could be compared. In the case of

the name of the data set to be analyzed. Every column from
the second to the tenth represents a user. The numbers represent the priority assigned for the users to review the data.
While 1 represents the maximum priority, 7 represents the
lower priority.
As can be seen in Table 2, the average user assigned 1 to
the economic data and 2 to the electricity data. Table 2 shows
that no user assigned a priority to every vector in the data
analysis process. Users did not seem to assign priorities to the
data about ores and fertilizers. Global warming potential,
ozone depletion, and water data did not receive a priority from
many users.
Table 2 suggests that users only reviewed a short portion
of the data displayed in the results and they had different criteria to prioritize which data to review in the process of analysis.

comparisons, an EIO-LCA evaluation must be performed
for every product or design compared.

Comparison of Designs

9

LCA of a Product

4

Industry Analysis

3

Relationship Economic 2
and Environmental Data
Effects of Changing a
Policy

1

Suppliers Analysis

1

Table 1: LCA Practitioners Tasks

Economic

EIO-LCA Evaluation. An EIO-LCA evaluation is a subtask of a product comparison. An EIO-LCA evaluation
estimates the environmental impacts of a product through
its life-cycle. Many times, an EIO-LCA evaluation is practiced for every product life-cycle stage. For example, one
EIO-LCA for manufacturing, and one EIO-LCA for recycling.
Tasks for EIO-LCA Researchers. The EIO-LCA researchers
perform the same tasks as the EIO-LCA practitioners, but they
perform additional tasks. Two of those tasks are described in
the following paragraphs.

Electricity

l

l

l

Data Benchmarks. Advanced users are aware that EIOLCA is still a research prototype. As such, they perform
validations of particular data sets. For example, if they
were to receive the general statistics of electricity for the
entire US, then they would want to compare the data with
the information used by EIO-LCA to perform the computations. The validation and comparison of data sets is performed also with conventional pollutants and global
warming potential. Other times, they might want to compare the environmental effects of performing an LCA with
data from two different years.
Data Navigation. Some users want to investigate specific
data values in the economic matrix or the environmental
vectors when they do not agree with the EIO-LCA results.
However, many times they need also to see the Make
Table, and the Use Table, which are other economic matrices used to compute the commodity-by-commodity matrix
included in the software. It is difficult to navigate over the
complete information because these matrices are very
large and they do not fit on the screen.

3

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

2

2

2

2

4

2

7

2

3

Fuels

2
3

Ores

2
2

2

6

2

2

Fertilizers
3

Toxic Releases

5

2

2
2

2

Toxic Releases
weighted by toxicity

7

3
3

7
7

2

2

3

2

2

3

Conventional
Pollutants

1

4

1

2

5

3

2

7

Global Warming

2

2

7

Ozone Depletion

2

2

7

Water

2

6

2

2

6

2

Hazardous Waste
Social Costs

2

4

4

2

5

7
7

4

7

5

Table 2: User Heuristics for Data Analysis
There is a possibility that every user had a different
degree of confidence about the data. Some users seemed to
have more confidence in TRI data, while others might had
more confidence in other data sets.
Visualization techniques suggested. The users interviewed
suggested the visualization representations that they would
like to use to represent the EIO-LCA results. Table 3 presents
the suggestions given by the users.
As can be seen in Table 3, more users preferred the presentation of ranks including percentages. Some users wanted
to see several products in the same graphic display when they

3.3. Visualization User Needs
The heuristics of analysis as well as the visualization
technique suggestions, were obtained from user interviews.

Heuristics to perform the data analysis. Data analysis strategies are summarized in Table 2. The first column represents

47

were doing comparisons.

two columns: names of the detail required and the data frequency required.

Collapse information to five
numbers

1

Weighting the
environmental effects

2

Show totals

Normalize the
environmental vectors

1

Show direct and indirect
environmentaf effects

Comparison of information
with national data

Show summaries

Show sectors comparison

1

1

Show detail and summaries

2

Display of data showing
percentages

3

Show detail only for specific
questions

2

Summary Tables

1

Table 4: Level of Detail Required by Users

Summaries of information
organized by LCA stage

1

Network of suppliers

1

As can be seen in Table 4, users preferred summaries and
ranks of data instead of detailed information. Detailed information seemed to be necessary only when a user had a very
specific question.

Graphics of several
workspaces

2

Use of tables for detail

1

Show only the top tens
values for every
environmental vector
(Ranking)

3

Show different graphics of
the same data

1

Without doing the domain analysis, the starting point to
select the interaction and visualization techniques would be
the data tables. However, the selection of visualization techniques can be improved by using the knowledge about the
domain.
The design of VisEIO-LCA was directed by the following
user tasks: product comparisons and data navigation.

Show the top five values
(Direct and Indirect)

1

4.1.

Show the information of
several products at the same
time

2

Allow users an index
detinition

1

Show comparative tables of
products

1

Show a matrix of
environmental vectors with
histogram in the top

1

4. VisEIO-LCA Design

Product Comparisons

This task is performed by LCA practitioners using a
matrix with 485 rows representing the industrial sectors and
5 1 columns representing the environmental vectors.
To perform a comparison of several products, a user
works with one matrix for each product.
When designing a data visualization for this task, it is not
necessary to display the whole matrix on the screen, because
users do not want to see the complete matrix. The users select
subsets of the matrix to visualize as can be seen in Table 2.
The EIO-LCA users do not need the whole environmental
vector (a column in the EIO results matrix). They usually see
only the summaries (only totals are included in summaries) or
the top five or ten elements in each vector.
To perform perceptual comparisons, the best graphical
property is length. For a human, it is more difficult to compare
two objects based on color, shape, or orientation. However,
when the objects are represented using length the perceptual
comparison is easier when the objects are shown together.
Chart styles, such as bars, lines, areas, and steps, can be used

Table 3: Presentation Techniques Suggested by Users
Level of detail needed. To evaluate the level of detail that
users need when they perform a data analysis, a question concerning this issue was posed during the interview. Table 4
shows the EIO-LCA users opinions. The data is presented in

48

ules as shown in Figure 5:

to encode the data to be compared.
The data used in a comparison can be represented as a
chain of sectors. This chain has several products at the root
level. Every product has several environmental vector families. Every family contains several environmental vectors. The
data navigation might be done using the hierarchy. Because
trees are good to represent hierarchies, they could be used to
represent the data used in the comparison.
Based on the previous information, the following techniques were selected: trees to group the information of products as a hierarchy (view trees), and charts to represent the
product data. The workbook metaphor is used to allow users
to have different graphics for the same comparison.
Only 2D graphics were selected because the task does not
require more sophisticated techniques.

l

l

l

l

Chart Visualization. This component allows the user to
select a level of detail for the information. A user also can
select the number of sectors to visualize. One or more
products might be displayed on one screen.
Scatter Plot Visualization. This component displays the
data in detail. This view allows the user to see the whole
environmental vector on the screen while the chart view
only allows users to see a partial picture of the system.
Data Visualization. This component allows the user to see
the data matrices in detail. The user can investigate specific values as well as look for patterns in the data sets.
Geographic View. This component allows the user to see
the environmental impacts by geographic area. A user can
see which areas are impacted by changing the final
demand value and the environmental vector.

4.2. Data Navigation
The EIO-LCA module generates the data sets used by the
visualization modules. Currently, there are three different
ways to see the EIO-LCA results and only one way to view
the data sets. The only communication between modules is
based on the system data inputs or the data results.
Module details are explained in the following paragraphs.

Advanced EIO-LCA users want to navigate the data sets.
For this goal, there is no information about how the users
would like to see the data displayed.
There are 3 economic matrices used as data sources in
EIO-LCA. Those matrices are the make matrix, the use
matrix, and the commodity-by-commodity matrix.
The selection of interaction techniques and the graphic
techniques was made for every type of data source.

5.1. Chart Visualization
The following information with respect to the use of the
chart view was obtained from interviews of experienced users:

Matrix Visualization. The complete matrix is presented on
the screen. The matrix to display can be selected from a tree
that contains every data set in the system as can be seen in
Color Plate 1.
The whole matrix is rendered on the screen. Color is used
to represent the values in the matrix. The range of values is
divided into categories and then a color is assigned to each
category. A user can interactively change the color map and
the limit values for each category. Also, a user can select only
subsets to view or a specific point in the matrix to see in
another window in more detail. Color Plate 1 shows the matrix
visualization. In addition, a bar chart can be displayed for
every row and column in the matrix.

EIO-LCA

Environmental Vectors Visualization. There are 51 environmental vectors that can be visualized in the system. Every vector is displayed completely on the screen. Color was used to
represent each value. The values are divided into categories
and then the user can assign a color to each category. The limits between categories can be changed by the users as well as
the color map.
Detail about the vector can be seen in another window,
which magnifies specific vector areas as can be seen in Color
Plate 2.

Figure 5: VisEIO-LCA Architecture
The most performed task is the life-cycle comparison of
designs or products.
The LCA evaluation of a product is the second most tiequent task.
Users do not view the whole data set to make their decisions.
LCA practitioners want to see data summaries.
Users like to view the information ranked by specific values. They are only interested in the top five or ten commodities in the list.

5. VisEIO-LCA Architecture
The architecture of VisEIO-LCA has the following mod-

The data subsets selected to perform the analysis differ
from one person to another.

49

Based on the information obtained from users, the following data visualization design decisions were made:
l

l

l

l

The use of charts was selected because users want to see
summaries.
The styles of charts that were selected were those that use
bars, steps, lines and areas. They were selected because the
use of length as a graphic property is more effective for
performing comparisons of numerical data.
A user can display several products at the same time using
a particular chart style.
The product information can be compared with the
national values. For example, the comparison of energy
required for one product and the energy consumed in the
whole country.

user can change the color maps and the ranges to visualize the
data. The user can see in detail specific sectors in the detail
window.
The matrices are encoded by color. The commodity-bycommodity matrix, the make matrix, and the use matrix can be
navigated by users. A user can see the names and values for
specific points in the matrix by using the detail window that
magnify specific areas on the screen. A user can also display
the values for an specific sector in a row or column as can be
seen in Color Plate 1.
Users can magnify the matrix cells in the detail window.
For example, they can show the values for the interaction
between sector 1 and sector 2.
5.4. Geographic Visualization

5.2. Scatter Plot Visualization
The geographic view was not suggested by the EIO-LCA
practitioners, but was by some advanced EIO-LCA researchers. This component allows users to see the graphic locations
affected by the environmental impacts.
A user can select an economic sector and a vector to visualize on the map. For example, a user can select primary batteries as the sector and air releases as the environmental
vector. A user also can select all sectors and an environmental
vector to visualize on the map where the affected areas are
located. For example, a user selects air releases for the whole
group of economical sectors.
Users can zoom in on the map or they can get the information about specific states. Color Plate 4 shows the graphic
view of the data set.
This geographic data of EIO-LCA evaluations can be
only seen by using graphic tools and is difficult to visualize
using tables.

This view was provided although users do not seem to
look for details. However, it was considered important
because sometimes they might require details on demand.
This view presents the complete set of points for one
environmental vector over the entire set of sectors. The horizontal axis contains the 485 industrial sectors and the vertical
axis contains the values for the environmental vector as can be
seen in Color Plate 3. The following functions are provided
with this data view:
l

l

Change the range of values. This function allows users to
select a subset of the data set. For example, a user wants to
see the sectors that produce air emissions between value 1
and value2.
View different data vectors in the same scatter plot. This
allows the comparison of two environmental vectors.

View the detail for an specific point selected. For example
the name of the sector and the exact value for the specific
point. The detail is presented in a different window.
A user can have up to 10 vectors at the same time in one
scatter plot as can be seen in Color Plate 3.
l

6. Implementation
VisEIO-LCA supports four different views that include
the chart view, the scatter plot view, the data view, and the
geographic view.
The graphic interface for the software prototype is shown
in Figure 6.
The information is presented to users using the following
three windows: the Project Window, the Workspace Window,
and the Detail Window.
The Project Window that is shown in Figure 8 to the left
of window that displays the chart includes the data sets that a
user can visualize and includes three tabs that are useful to
select the data views. The first tab allows users to display
charts, the second tab allows users to display the data sets used
for the EIO-LCA software to make the computations, and the
third tab that allows users to view the data using scatter plots.
The Workspace Window is the where the graphics are
displayed. In Figure 6, The Workspace Window presents a bar
chart. This window can be composed of many pages that compose a workbook with visualizations about the task performed

5.3 Data Visualization
This module was created because advanced EIO-LCA
researchers sometimes want to verify or compare the data in
the system. The tasks that users want to achieve with data are
the following:
l

l

Compare a data vector with a vector obtained from other
information sources. This operation is called data benchmarking in this document.
Navigate through the economic matrices and environmental vectors. This function is needed when users are trying
to explain some results obtained from one EIO-LCA evaluation.

To support data benchmarking, the visualization of vectors was selected. The vectors are displayed using color to represent values.
A family of vectors is displayed in one workbook page. A

50

in the project.
Finally, the Detail Window, that is to the left of the CMU
logo in Figure 6, allows users to see detailed information for
the data and scatter views.

PI

131

[41

151

[61
Figure 6: The graphic user interface for the software tool

7. Summary and Future Research
Explicit domain analysis helps to direct the process of
designing a software system that provides data visualization.
The design of visualization tools based on user tasks should
produce more usable tools.
Explicit domain analysis was useful for designing and
implementing the visual EIO-LCA software. The advantage of
using explicit domain analysis is that provides documentation
about the user requirements, user tasks, and the process used
to design the visualizations. This documentation can also be
used to evaluate effectiveness of the visualization.
Other engineering domains are being investigated so as to
obtain a more robust and generic tool applicable to other
domains.

[71

I81

[91

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) and NSF (National Science Foundation) under
the Title Environmental Input-Output Life-Cycle Assessment:
A Tool to Improve Analysis of Environmental Quality and
Sustainability.
We thank Green Design Initiative for the support received
for this research, including participation in the interviews and
users that help to test the system.

1101

1111

[121

References
[ll

[131

Feiner, Steven and Beshers, Clifford, Worlds within
Worlds: Metaphors for Exploring n-Dimensional Virtual Worlds, in Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH

51

Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, p. 76-83, 1990.
Inselberg, A. and Dimsdale, B., Visualizing MultiVariate Relations with Parallel Coordinates, in Proceedings of the Third International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction, Work with Computers:
Organizational, Management, Stress and Health
Aspects; Interface - Displays and Controls, 1, pp. 460467, 1989.
Mackinlay, J. Automating the Design of Graphical
Presentations of Relational Information. ACM Transactions on Graphics, (Vol. 5 No. 2), April 1986.
Roth S. and Mattis, J., Automating the Presentation of
Information, Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Artificial Intelligence Applications, Miami Beach, FL,
February 1991, pp. 90-97.
Ahlberg, C., Shneiderman, B. Visual Information
Seeking: Tight coupling of dynamic query filters with
starfield displays. ACM CHI ‘94 Conference Proc.
(Boston, MA, April 24-28, 1994) 3 13-3 17.
Plaisant, C., Mushlin, R., Snyder, A., Li, J., Heller, D.,
Shneidemran, B. (1998) LifeLines: Using Visualization to Enhance Navigation and Analysis of Patient
Records. Department of Computer Science, University
of Maryland, Technical Report CS-TR-3943 , UMIACS-TR-98-56
Chuah, M.C., Roth, S.F., Mattis, J., and Kolojejchick,
J. SDM: Selective Dynamic Manipulation of Visualizations, Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology, Pittsburgh, PA,
November 1995, pp. 6 I-70.
Fumas, George W., Generalized fisheye views. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM (April 1986)
16-23.
Rao, Ramana and Card, Stuart K., The Table Lens:
Merging Graphical and Symbolic Representations in
an Interactive Focus+Context Visualization for Tabular Information, in Proceedings of ACM CHI’94 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
Information Visualization, 1, pp. 3 18-322, Color plates
on pp. 481-482, 1994.
Lamping, John, Rao, Ramana, and Pirolli, Peter, A
focus + context technique based on hyperbolic geometry for visualizing large hierarchies, Proc. of CHI’95.
Johnson, Brian, and Shneideiman, Ben, Tree-maps: A
space-filling approach to the visualization of hierarchical information structures, Proc. IEEE Visualization
‘9 1, IEEE, Piscataway, NJ (199 l), 284-29 1.
Becker R.A., Eick S.G., and Wilks A.R., Visualizing
Network Data, IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, l(l), 16- 28. March 1995.
Roth S. et al. “Visage: A User Interface Environment
for Exploring Information,” Proceedings Information
Visualization 96, IEEE Computer Society Press.his is
the first reference.

[I41

[151

1201

PII
kw
~31
1241

P51

2. C. Ahlberg and E. Wistrand. IVEE: An environment
for automatic creation of dynamic queries applications.
Conference Companion, CHI 95, ACM May 1995, pp
15-16.
Roth, S.F., Kolojejchick, J., Mattis, J., and Goldstein,
J., Interactive Graphic Design Using Automatic Presentation Knowledge,Proceedings of the Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (SIGCHI
‘94), Boston, MA, April 1994, pp. 112-l 17.
Leontiff, Wassily Input-Output Economics. New
York: Oxford University Press, 194 1.
Vigon B.W. et al Life-Cycle Assessment Inventory
Guidelines and Principles. EPA/600/R-92/245, February 1993.
Cobas E., Life Cycle Assessment Using Input-Output
Analysis, PhD Thesis, Pittsburgh, PA, Carnegie Mellon University, 1996.
Horvard, A. “Estimation of Environmental Implications of Construction Materials and Designs Using
Life-Cycle Assessment Techniques,” PhD. Thesis
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University, 1997.
Joshi, S. “Comprehensive Product Life Cycle Analysis
Using Life-Cycle Assessment Techniques,” PhD. Thesis Heinz School of Public Policy and Management,
Carnegie Mellon University, 1998.
Hendrickson , C. et al, “Economic Input-Output Models for Environmental Life-Cycle Assessment,” Environmental Science and Tecnology, April 1998.
Green Design Initiative, “EIO-LCA software,”
www.eiolca.net.
US EPA, 1987-1995 Toxics Release Inventory. EPA
749-C-96-003.
US Department of Commerce. “Six Digit Commodityby-Commodity Total Requirements,” Industry Economics Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis BE51, 1998.
Casner, S. “A Task-Analytical Approach to the Automated Design of Graphic Presentations,” ACM Transcations on Graphics, Vol. 10, No. 2, April 199 1.

52

