Animating and Interacting with Graphical Evidence :
Bringing Courtrooms to Life with Virtual Reconstructions
Dr. Damian Schofield
Assoc. Prof. of Computer Games and Digital Media
School of Creative Media, RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia
{Damian.Schofield@rmit.edu.au}
Abstract

Three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions of evidence
offer great potential in the field of forensic science. They
can help in the presentation of complex spatial and
temporal data to a non-technical audience. In addition to
these 3D technologies, the digital age has brought a
plethora of new evidence forms, evidence detection
methods, and means of evidence presentation.
This position paper describes the previous use of 3D
reconstruction evidence in courtrooms. It then outlines
the forensic process in terms of tasks and phases
involved, and describes the state of the art in terms of
digital technology usage. The paper then presents a
taxonomy of these phases in terms of a technology
continuum. It goes on to highlight areas where new
applications of 3D digital technologies could be used to
enhance particular phases of the forensic process. This
paper does not deal with security issues relevant to the
devices discussed.
Keywords--- Forensics, Evidence, Visualisation,
Reconstruction, Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality,
Mixed Reality.

1. Introduction
The modern information and technology explosion
is bringing a plethora of new technologies into the field
of international security and forensic investigative
science, many of which will end up needing to be
admitted to these courtrooms as evidence. In most
jurisdictions technology is slow to become accepted in
the world’s courtrooms. While efficient trials within the
world’s courts can potentially quickly remove terrorists
and criminals from society and ensure rapid outcomes to
protracted criminal investigations and complex fraud
cases, there are also a number of problems with the
global use of the technology available to ensure this
occurs. Courtroom presentation (in some jurisdictions)
has already been enhanced by the introduction of such

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

technologies as video conferencing to bring remote
witnesses to the courtroom, voice recognition software to
transcribe proceedings, and the use of three-dimensional
(3D) computer reconstructions as a means of portraying
complex evidence to a non-technical audience [1, 2].
This position paper reports on the author’s
experiences of using 3D reconstructions as forensic
courtroom presentations. It beyond the scope of this
paper to discuss the application of other forms of
forensic imaging (digital images, QuickTime VR
panoramas etc.) The paper then gives an overview of the
forensic process, and describes the current usage of
digital technologies within the distinctive phases of the
process. The paper then introduces a proposed taxonomy
highlighting the parts of the forensic process where the
technologies are being used, and also where they are not.

2. Examples of the Use of 3D Technologies
The use of new technologies in order to gather,
analyse and present evidence is of the utmost importance
in today’s technologically advanced world. Better
collection and analysis of evidence from a wide range of
digital media technologies can be achieved by the use of
data from the devices of witnesses, and those involved in
incidents. The devices which may provide additional
evidence include mobile phones, PDAs, digital cameras,
and closed-circuit TV. Recent terrorist event have
highlighted these new forms of evidence as mobile
phone images and video are collected from members of
the public who were at the scene of the incident. The use
of such evidence in the courtroom creates enormous
problems such as ownership, bias, veracity, ethics and
the security of the chain of custody of the evidence.
Presentation of the evidence relating to a particular
incident in a courtroom can bring about the need for
arduous descriptions by lawyers to get across the
specifics of complex spatial and temporal data. As Burns
[3] states “The presentation typically takes the form of a
report, and the scientist must be prepared to explain this
report in such a way that a typically science-phobic judge
and jury are able to comprehend it. Presentation is
everything.”

Figure 1a CG Accident Reconstruction

Figure 1b Pathological CG Visualisation

Figure 1c A 3D Murder Reconstruction

Figure 1d Shooting Case Briefing Tool

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Presenting data related to road traffic accidents in
the courtroom is a prime example of this need to relate
spatial and temporal data, for which the use of 3D
computer generated reconstruction technology has been
extensively adopted [4]. In such cases, a computer
generated forensic reconstruction is built using a 3D
virtual model of an incident or scene created from actual
measurements taken by police at the time of the incident,
and using scientific calculations based on those
measurements. This computer model can then be
rendered to create an animation, or a series of
animations, which describe the scene or incident. These
forensic animations, when used in court, must support
and corroborate existing evidence and the supportive
evidence must be used in conjunction with the animation
to be admissible as substantive evidence in any
courtroom [5].
Using computer graphics technology, it has been
possible to show views of an accident from the positions
of the vehicles and pedestrians involved, and also those
of the witnesses [4]. Images from two computer
generated animated reconstructions (created by the
author) which have been presented as evidence in a UK
court are shown in Figures 1a and 1b. Figure 1a is a view
from evidence created regarding a road traffic accident
where two motorcyclists were killed when they collided
with the side of a car [5]. Figure 1b shows a pathology
reconstruction used in a murder case to investigate the
nature of a stabbing incident [6].
The use of computer generated forensic animations
has been taken a stage further with the introduction to
courtrooms of interactive ‘real time’ applications. This
offers a unique platform for the collation, interrogation,
analysis and presentation of complex forensic data across
a wide spectrum of crime-scene and accident scenarios.
3D interactive reconstructions of incidents have allowed
the user to visualise views from multiple relevant
positions within the virtual environment, something
which can be beneficial within the dynamic, adversarial
environment of the courtroom.
The author has applied interactive, ‘real time’,
virtual environment technology to numerous criminal
cases1. Two recent high profile examples are described
below:
For the case of the murder of PC Malcolm Walker, a
motorcycle policeman in Birmingham, UK [1, 7] an
interactive virtual environment was created (Figure 1c).
It was designed to specify and identify all debris found at
the scene of the incident, by using context-sensitive links
to the scenes of crime digital photograph evidence. It
was used during the trial as evidence to successfully
convict the defendant, Nicholas Walters, of murder.
For the high profile case of the shooting of Leticia
Shakespeare and Charlene Ellis in Birmingham, UK, the
police commissioned a forensic reconstruction. In this
case, two teenage girls were shot dead during an all-night
party at a hairdressing salon whilst celebrating the New
1

The majority of these interactive forensic reconstructions are powered
by commercially available computer game engines.

Year. The dead girls (inset in Figure 1d), both aged 18,
were caught in the crossfire when a gun battle broke out
between two rival gangs. A crime scene briefing tool
(Figure 1d) was created, with all people and vehicles
involved represented, so that the police could view the
crime scene and event chronology in an interactive way,
updating the virtual evidence as and when new
information came to light [8]. A high degree of realism
was created in the images to the extent that even the
graffiti on the walls was photographed, measured and
modelled accurately in the virtual environment.

3. Defining the Forensic Process

4. Digital Technology Used
This paper will concentrate on evidence
presentation. However a brief overview of the other
stages in a forensic investigation will be given.

4.1. Evidence Collection
Digital technology has been utilised in the forensic
evidence collection field in three main areas. Those of:
• Digital evidence forms
• Digital capture of the scene
• Digital data management systems
Recent other uses of such technologies for forensic
evidence collection include using mobile phone location
information as additional evidence placing a suspect at
the scene of the crime/incident at a particular point in
time. Digital technologies can also be considered for the
capture of the physical crime scene in the
survey/document physical evidence phases of the process
in Figure 2. Crime scene measurements previously taken
with a tape and notebook are now routinely taken using
electronic distance measurement (EDM) surveying
technology or 3D laser scanners [16].
The need for rigorous documentation of crime and
incident scene data has brought about the development of
several technical systems to assist with the process,
examples include HOLMES 2 [17], SOCRATES 18] and
LOCARD [19] and Mobile Data [20].
Research is currently ongoing at the University of
Birmingham, UK, into the use of wearable computers to

The successful use of the 3D technology described
above in a courtroom raises the question of whether there
are any other parts of the forensic process that may be
suited to the use of modern digital technologies. In order
to define areas of the forensic process which may be
enhanced by novel digital technology use, it is necessary
first to break down the process into its constituent
phases. Many books and papers have been published that
summarise the steps involved in forensic investigation
into generalised stages [9, 10, 11]. These publications
usually incorporate similar steps, although the
nomenclature and the order may vary slightly.
More recently, researchers have tried to generalise
models for digital forensic investigations [12, 13, 14].
Carrier and Spafford [15] suggested describing a linked
digital and physical forensic examination, assuming that
each individual digital device was treated as a separate
crime scene. A computer is
considered as a single piece of
Readiness Phases
•
Operations Readiness
physical evidence at a crime
•
Infrastructure Readiness
scene, but it may contain
hundreds of discrete and vital
Deployment Phases
•
Detection/Notification
pieces of digital evidence. The
•
Confirmation/Authorisation
investigation of the digital and
physical crime scenes could
Physical Crime Scene Investigation
Digital Crime Scene Investigation
Eye-Witness Investigation
then take place independently,
whilst using evidence from one
Preservation of Physical Scene
Preservation of Digital Scene
Identification of Eyeto guide further investigation in
Witnesses
the other. This arrangement also
Survey for Digital Evidence
Survey for Physical Evidence
allows the digital investigation
to be structured in a similar way
Evidence
Document Physical
Document Digital
Evidence/Scene
Evidence/Scene
to the ‘tried and tested’ structure
Collection
of the physical investigation.
Search for Digital Evidence
Search for Physical Evidence
Figure 2 illustrates a generic
flow diagram developed by the
author based upon work
Evidence
Reconstruct Physical Crime Scene
Eye-Witness Statement
Reconstruct Digital Crime
(possible digital reconstruction)
Evidence
Analysis
conducted by Carrier and
Scene
Spafford [15].
As illustrated in Figure 2,
Presentation of Digital
Presentation of Complete
Scene Theory
Evidence
Theory
the forensic process is both
Presentation
complicated and iterative, but it
can be divided into three major
Review Phases
phases, those of evidence
Was the case successful?
New procedures/training?
collection, evidence analysis
and evidence presentation.
Figure 2 Flow Chart for Generalised Forensic Investigation

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

support expert forensic scientists [21]. The aim is to
create a ‘narrative’ of an investigation through tracking
the location, movement and activity of the investigator.

4.2. Evidence Analysis and Processing
There are numerous forensic analysis techniques
which may be utilised dependent on the type of
crime/incident and the forms of evidence present. Such
methods as DNA, fibres, and fingerprint analysis;
psychological analyses, analyses of location data from
mobile phones, tracking systems and CCTV footage can
be used. This paper however is more concerned with
identifying new digital technology uses and so shall not
discuss these in depth.
Certain types of forensic evidence, such as
fingerprints and DNA evidence require laboratory
comparison to the suspect’s supplied samples. These
comparisons can be made utilising digital analysis
techniques. Facial and physical attribute recognition
(biometrics) is also a field where digital technologies are
being applied to analyse images from closed-circuit
television (CCTV) or other footage.
Analysis of digital data storage is often a key area in
crimes, so much so in fact, that the computer is
sometimes now considered as a separate crime scene as
discussed in Section 3 of this paper. The computer may
hold evidence in the form of documents, e-mail records,
web history and caches, login dates and times of access,
and illegal files, to name but a few. The digital evidence
process has become so focused around this area, that disk
analysis has become known, by some authors as
‘forensic computing’ [21, 22].
Arguably no other type of scientific evidence is
exposed to anywhere near as many opportunities for
destruction, mishandling and contamination as forensic
evidence. The documented travel path of the evidence, or
audit trail, seeks to record the history of the entire
forensic process as well as the chain of accountability.
These processes remain labour intensive and error-prone,
and currently, a considerable amount of a forensic
scientist’s time is often spent managing this audit trail
rather than undertaking forensic investigation.

4.3. Evidence Presentation
Forensic science advances in leaps and bounds and
the public who regularly watch high-technology crime
scene investigation on TV now expect to now see similar
visual representations of technical information, spatially
distributed evidence and event chronologies in the
courtroom. Courtroom environments, which have been
one of the last bastions of the oral tradition, are slowly
morphing into cinematic display environments. Many
lawyers now rely on slick visuals to replace rhetoric and
depend on their audience adapting a ‘seeing is believing’
attitude to persuade juries to believe in their hypothesis.
The use of digital display systems (particularly 3D
reconstructions) for courtroom presentation worldwide
has raised a number of issues, which have been discussed

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

in depth in numerous publications by the author [1, 2, 4,
5, 6, 16]. Most of the issues raised affect the
admissibility of the reconstructions as courtroom
evidence in the various global jurisdictions, and can be
summarised as a list of advantages and disadvantages:Advantages of using the technology include:
• Comprehension Increase – 3D reconstructions
have the ability to improve the comprehension, and the
memory retention of complex spatial and temporal data
and evidence.
• Efficiency – 3D technology can improve the
speed with which complex information can be imparted
to a courtroom audience, and therefore may shorten the
length of a case. They may alternatively, on occasion, be
responsible for extra points of confusion and cause an
increase in case length.
• Persuasiveness – According to research
conducted in the USA [23] people are twice as likely to
be persuaded when arguments are supported by visual
aids.
• Attention Increase – People’s attention is drawn
to moving objects. They rank top on the hierarchy of
methods to draw attention which spans from actions,
through objects, pictures, diagrams, written word, to
spoken word [2]. This increased attention should lead to
the triers of fact (usually a judge and jury) studying the
evidence more intently.
Disadvantages of using the technology include:
• Prejudice – Visual displays when used can
introduce levels of prejudice, if one side has such
evidence and the other does not.
• Bias – 3D reconstruction technology is
potentially prone to allowing bias into the presentation,
whether that be conscious bias (a form of evidence
tampering) or subconscious bias. In an attempt to reduce
this, all computer generated evidence must be backed up
with a comprehensive audit trail, and the expert witness
presenting such evidence must be able to prove the
accuracy of the reconstruction, both in terms of the
original data used to reconstruct the incident, and the
accuracy of the reconstruction [24].
• Relaxation of Critical Faculties - again this is
an issue of the ‘persuasiveness’ of the technology. It has
been shown that when a subject is shown a 3D computergenerated reconstruction of an event they often feel
mesmerised, or that they are seeing the actual event
happen. Jurors may have a ‘seeing is believing’ attitude
[16], as has been shown to be the case with television
viewing. There is therefore a potential reduction in their
level of critical appraisal of the reconstructed evidence.
In summary, the main benefit of the use of 3D
reconstructions in the courtroom is their ability to
persuade a jury. In terms of admissibility in courtrooms
around the world, this persuasive nature may also bring
about a variety of objections to its use.
In most legal jurisdictions, some legislation and case
law exists that governs (or can be applied to govern) the
admissibility of computer-generated evidence in court.

The uses for digital technologies in evidence
collection, analysis and presentation can be categorised
and segregated in many ways. The author proposes a
taxonomy displaying them in relation to a technology
continuum. This clearly lays out the current technology
usage in the forensic evidence field. This can be used to
identify areas where novel uses for digital (particularly
visualisation) technologies may be of benefit.

5. Proposed Taxonomy
Milgram and Kishino [25] described a “virtuality
continuum” which connects real environments to virtual
ones. Between completely real and completely virtual the
continuum spans a region of mixed reality which may be
mainly real (Augmented Reality) or mainly virtual
(Augmented Virtuality).
Relevant digital technology usage in the field of
forensics, as described in the previous section has mainly
involved the documentation of evidence collection and
analysis, and the production of completely virtual
environments in order to assist with presentation. As
evidence documentation appears as a major usage the
author has added ‘Documented Reality’ to the
technology continuum representing real objects with
some form of tagging or explanation attached to them.
The technology continuum axis then extends through
Mixed Reality to Virtual Reality.
Breaking the process down into collection, analysis
and presentation of evidence gives the second axis for
the taxonomy. The author has also considered a third
variable, that of whether the technology usage is at the
incident scene, or away from the incident scene. This
third variable has been labelled In-Situ (at the scene) or
Ex-Situ (away from the scene). This addition essentially
gives a third dimension to the taxonomy, but is
represented in the taxonomy (Figure 3) by doubling up
on the y-axis to give a simplified presentation.
The individual items on the taxonomy itself are
depicted either in bold or plain text, representing whether
they are a new (proposed) technology or an existing
technology/techniques.

6. Novel uses of Digital Technology
This section of the paper describes proposals for
novel uses of technologies in the forensic evidence
collection, analysis and presentation field. They aim to
demonstrate available technologies which could be
exploited to bring innovative methods into forensic
evidence collection, analysis, and presentation. These
innovative methods fill some of the gaps in the author’s
proposed taxonomy.

6.1. Evidence Collection
Traditional methods of collection of evidence have
been improved by the implementation of new electronic
evidence tagging and tracking devices, as described in
Section 4.2 of this paper. Previously unavailable forms

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

of evidence are created by the use of personal portable
technologies, including mobile phones and vehicle
tracking devices, such as GPS (Global Positioning
System) navigation systems or vehicle tracking systems.
During the ‘identification of eye-witness’ phase of
the forensic process (figure 2), the use of recorded GPS
and communications data information could be adopted
to find potential witnesses and directly appeal to them by
the mobile phone SMS, mail or personal call. The use of
GPS and communications data information in real time
could also be adopted for sending Short Message Service
(SMS) text messages to people passing through the area
of an incident to appeal for witnesses. This could be
compared to the existing practice of putting up signs at
road traffic accident or crime scene locations to appeal
for witnesses.
The use of mobile devices to contact witnesses and
collect visual and evidence information raises numerous
ethical and legal issues. There is certainly a case for
research to be undertaken investigating these issues,
running concurrently with any technical development
work in these fields.

6.2 Evidence Analysis and Processing
The author believes that the use of mobile devices
has the potential to enhance the dissemination of spatial
information about a crime or incident scene. Mobile
devices could be used to augment the actual incident
scene with location specific information in a variety of
media forms. Users visiting the scene could be equipped
with a mobile device and a spatial position tracking
device. The system would track the user’s position and
orientation in order that relevant information can be
passed to the user via the mobile device. The information
displayed on the device could consist of various media
forms (e.g. digital images, video, audio, textual
information, 3D virtual environments, web browser
based information). It could brief the user about each
item of evidence, describing exactly where and in what
state that evidence was found using text, images or other
digital media as necessary. It could also potentially
explain conclusions that may be drawn from the
evidence items.
In the case of documenting a murder weapon for
example, this could include such information as a
description or image of the weapon, dimensions
describing exactly where it was found (with photos),
details of any DNA evidence found on it, details of
finger print evidence, along with any other information
considered as relevant in the specific case. The device
would, in essence, document the real scene giving rise to
an ‘In-Situ Documented Reality’ technology using the
terms from the taxonomy.
Developed further as Evidence Management
Systems (EMS) and Evidence Presentation Systems
(EPS), mobile devices have the potential to be used
during the crime investigation in order to record the
evidential information as it is collected.

Ex-Situ
In-Situ
Ex-Situ

Use of
Video and
Photos

Take Jury
to Scene
Calculation, correlation,
CCTV movements/
activities, identifications,
laboratory/psychological
analyses, other forensic
techniques.

In-Situ
Ex-Situ
In-Situ

Collection

Analysis

Presentation

Phase of
Forensic
Process
Labelled
video and
photos

Computer
generated
AV
Evidence

EPS by
PDA at
Scene

EPS by AR
at Scene

CG Animations
and Virtual
Reality EPS

DNA/Fingerprint lab
analyses; hard disk analysis;
Evidence management
technologies eg
SOCRATES suite,
LOCARD, Holmes2

EMS by PDA at
Scene, Socrates
SOCKET

EMS
accessed
from VR
Model

Key and Description of Terms:
Novel Ideas in Bold Italics
AR = Augmented Reality;
AV = Augmented Video,
‘Documented Reality’ = use of locationbased description overlaying scene,
EMS = Evidence Management System,
EPS = Evidence Presentation System

Augmented
Reality
Example

EMS by AR
at Scene

Phone/GPS/Device
Data logs; CCTV
footage; Witness
evidence, SMS
information, location
Physical Scene
Evidence

Reality

Digitally Tagged
Evidence Items, Evidence
collection technologies
SOCRATES suite,
LOCARD, Holmes2

Documented Reality

Technology
Mixed Reality

Virtual Reality

Figure 3. A Proposed Taxonomy of Forensic Science Evidence Display
This would then allow the briefing of officers,
scientists and witnesses (both expert and eye witnesses)
in the current state of evidence completeness. Such an
EMS has the advantage over previously described
systems of offering automatic in-situ crime scene
briefing, allowing users to experience the scene firsthand whilst having any scene alterations and details of
the evidence fully explained, in a spatially relevant
context, by the device.
The use of these devices as in-situ presentation
systems could help to improve the formation of theories
from the evidence (evidence analysis) through better
information dissemination. These systems could also
record and replay evidence for archiving, dissemination
and even training purposes, thus fulfilling the role of a
full Evidence Management Systems (EMS).

6.3 Evidence Presentation
This section will therefore mainly address evidence
presentation uses. It begins with documented reality and
moves along the technology continuum defined in the
taxonomy.
Crime and incident scenes are both sensitive and
transient environments. From the time when a crime or
incident occurs, many aspects of the environment in
which it occurred will change. Lighting/weather
conditions changing, liquids drying, people and objects
moving, plants growing and finger prints being wiped
away are just a few examples.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

It is expected that the use of mobile devices to
display context sensitive forensic information, in the
manner proposed above, could remove some of the
prejudicial problems described in Section 4.3 of this
paper. Such a system would have the ability to visualise
features of the scene as they were initially found at the
time of the incident. Giving detailed on-site information
to investigators and triers of fact would allow a better
understanding of events. This would in turn lead to a
fairer trial. The user would also have control of
movement around the scene and access to the media on
the mobile device which could give them all the
information they require in order to understand a range
of evidential items.
Also new technologies are continuing to evolve
which the author believes could improve on the realism
of such 3D reconstructions and give jurors and triers of
fact a greater depth of immersion in the virtual incidents.
One of the problems with building virtual models of
environments is the difficulty in creating realism. Most
incident reconstructions would concentrate on accurate
modelling of the parts of the scene which are crucial to
the incident, with little or no time spent on the rest of the
surrounding environment. Modelling surroundings
accurately would be time consuming and may be deemed
unnecessary.
However it may be the case that increased realism of
an environment would be useful. It could provide
additional reference points for witnesses, jurors and
judiciary to use to help them understand the complex
spatial information being represented. It may also aid

witnesses in pinpointing positions of relevant objects,
people or vehicles during a reconstruction [2].
Augmented Reality (AR) technology would allow a
courtroom audience to visualise accident details and
locations with greater realism of the physical landmarks
at the scene, increasing their feeling of presence. If the
video footage can be described as ‘Ex-Situ Reality’, then
this augmented video footage is ‘Ex-Situ Augmented (or
Mixed) Reality’, and would fit into the taxonomy in
Figure 3 as such.
This is a more technology intensive variation of the
mobile device system described above, in which
dynamic images of the real world would be overlaid with
computer-generated three-dimensional representations of
evidence using AR technology. It would then be possible
to revisit the scene of a crime, weeks, months or years
after the event and to see virtual evidence items in their
original location and state. This system may be described
in terms of the taxonomy in Figure 4 as ‘In-Situ
Augmented (or Mixed) Reality’. A view from a
prototype of this system is shown in the inset to Figure 3.
It would also be possible to overlay dynamic, computergenerated witness statements or proposed chronological
event scenarios onto the real world environment.
This would also potentially act as an aid in the
‘presentation of the complete theory’ phase of the
forensic process diagram (Figure 2) and could in turn
pave the way for greater use of computer crime/incident
reconstruction technologies by the reducing costs
involved in their production.
Such an AR system could remove the prejudicial
problems discussed previously in this paper. The
subsequent changes in the incident scene could be
overlaid by objects as they were at the time of recording,
thus allowing the incident scene to be replayed as it was
at the time of initial investigation.

the incident is yet undecided. These technologies could
keep an investigative team fully in touch with
developments in a case and be of assistance in forming
theories about events.
• Use of the public and their own mobile devices,
and data relating to those devices, to identify suspects
and witnesses; or to create new means of transference of
information to track and identify witnesses and suspects.
• The application of new technologies in the
production of reconstructions to give increased accuracy
or speed of the reconstruction process and to reduce costs
involved.
• The application of digital technologies for the
training of officers and forensic staff involved in the
whole physical and digital crime scene investigation
phases.
Inevitably tools will be developed that exploit the
novel technologies discussed in this paper, bringing
about greater speed and accuracy in forensic data
collection and analysis; and greatly enhanced methods
for realism in recreated crime and accident scene
evidence presentations.
As these tools become integrated into forensic
processes there will be a need for thorough empirical
testing of the impact and effectiveness of their
application.
It is worth noting that the majority of the
technologies discussed in this paper would probably be
developed initially as presentation methods. This is
because the direct presentation process is probably seen
as the most straightforward way to utilise such new
technology within the forensic field.

8. References
[1]

7. Conclusions
This paper has highlighted stages where novel
digital and mobile technologies may bring improvement
to the forensic process. It underlines the fact that, until
recently, 3D forensic reconstruction techniques have
been used (along with other multimedia technologies)
mainly to present forensic evidence in the courtroom.
The technologies have been targeted in this area due to
their success in communicating highly complex,
technical spatial and temporal evidential information to
the general public.
The proposed taxonomy of current usage of new
technologies highlights their minimal uptake in the
forensic process. The suggested novel uses for the
technologies fill many of the gaps highlighted by the
taxonomy in Figure 3 with the proposed novel
technologies being highlighted in bold italics.
The main challenges identified for the future
research of the use of digital and mobile technologies in
forensics are:
• The application of digital technologies earlier in
the forensic process when the final ‘complete theory’ for

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

Schofield, D. and Goodwin, L. Using Graphical
Technology to Present Evidence, In Electronic Evidence:
Disclosure, Discovery and Admissibility (ed. Mason, S.).
2007, LexisNexis, London 2007.
Schofield, D. Gates of Perception: Augmenting
Understanding of Forensic Evidence. In Proceedings of
the Scientific Frontiers Conference 2003; British
Association of Human Identification (BAHID),
November 2003.
Burns, D.C. When Used in the Criminal Legal Process
Forensic Science Shows a Bias in Favour of the
Prosecution. In Science and Justice, The Journal of the
UK Forensic Science Society, Volume 41, Number 4, pp
271 – 277, 2001.
Schofield, D., Noond, J., Goodwin, L. and Fowle, K.
Accident Scenarios: Using Computer Generated Forensic
Animations, In Journal of Occupational Health and
Safety (Aus NZ), Volume 17, Number 2, pp 163-173,
April 2001.
Noond, J; Schofield, D. Visualising the Scene Interactive Evidence: Litigation Graphics and Virtual
Reality, In Proceedings of Expert Evidence: Causation,
Proof and Presentation, Monash University, Italy, July
2002.
March, J, Schofield, D, Evison, M and Woodford, N.
Three-Dimensional Computer Visualisation of Forensic
Pathology Data, In American Journal of Forensic

[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

Medicine and Pathology, Volume 25, Number 1, pp 6070, March 2004.
BBC News. Driver Bragged about Killing Policeman. In
BBC News Online, 13th Nov 200, available from URL:
http://new.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/england/2460325.stm.
Daily Telegraph. We Know Who Killed The New Year's
Day Party Girls, In The Daily Telegraph, UK, 26th
October 2003.
James, S. H. and Nordby, J. J. (Eds.). Forensic Science –
An Introduction To Scientific and Investigative
Techniques. CRC Press, 2003
Lee, H., Palmbach, T., Miller, M. Henry Lee’s Crime
Scene Handbook. Academic Press, 20013
Saferstein, R. Criminalistics – An Introduction to
Forensic Science. Pearson, 7th Edition, 2000.
Palmer, G. A Roadmap for Digital Forensic Research,
Technical Report DTR-T001-01DFRWS, Report from
the First Digital Forensic Workshop (DFRWS) 2001,
Nov. 2001.
Procise, C and Mandia, K. Incident Response
Investigating Computer Crime. McGraw Hill Osborne
Media, 2001.
Reith, M., Carr, C. and Gunsch, G. An Investigation of
Digital Forensic Models. In Int. Jnl. Digital Evidence,
Volume 1, Number 2, Fall 2002.
Carrier, B. and Spafford, E. Getting Physical With the
Digital Investigation Process. In Int. Jnl. Digital
Evidence, Volume 2, Number 2, Fall 2003.
Schofield, D. Virtual Visualisations: Recent Advances in
Forensic Evidence Analysis and Presentation. In
Criminal Justice Management, pp 22-23, January 2002

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

[17] UNISYS. What is HOLMES 2? available from URL:
http://www.holmes2.com/holmes2/whatish2/.
[18] Anite. Solutions for the Public Sector: Evidence
Management – SOCRATES. available from URL:
http://www.aniteps.com/products/evidence_management.
asp.
[19] Advantage System Solutions. LOCARD Evidence
Tracking System – From Crime to Court, available from
URL: http://www.locard.co.uk/.
[20] Metropolitan Police. Mobile Data Trial. available from
URL:http://www.met.police.uk/doi/infraprog.htm.
[21] Boyd, C. and Forster, P. Time and Date Issues in
Forensic Computing. In Digital Investigation. Volume 1
pp18-23. Elsevier. Jan 2004.
[22] Lazaro, PGC; Forensic Computing from a Computer
Security Perspective; MSc Thesis in IT. Linkoping
University Electronic Press. available from URL
http://www.ep.liu.se/exjobb/isy/2004/3588/exjobb.pdf.
[23] Lederer, F.I. and Solomon, S.H. Courtroom Technology
– An Introduction to the Onrushing Future. In
Proceedings of Fifth National Court Technology
Conference (CTC5). National Centre for State Courts.
Session no. 103: Evidence Technology in the High-Tech
Courtroom. September 1997.
[24] Goodwin, L. M. Visualising Vehicle Accidents Evidence Uncertainty, Presentation and Admissibility;
Ph.D. Thesis, University of Nottingham, 2007.
[25] Milgram, P. and Kishino, F. A Taxonomy of Mixed
Reality Visual Displays, In IEICE Transactions on
Information Systems. Volume E77-D, Number 12. 1994.

