Design and Implementation of a Multidimensional Zoomable Electronic Catalog
Monrawee Chainchainirattisai, Paul Janecek
Asian Institute of Technology (AIT), Thailand
{monrawee_c@yahoo.com, paul_janecek@ait.ac.th}

a) Outer grid of quality/price

b) Inner grid of rating/category

c) Focus on inner grid cell

Figure 1 Zooming into the electronic catalog

Abstract

Consumers select products based on a combination
of decision criteria and preferences, such as price,
quality, appearance, origin, and popularity. However,
current interfaces for electronic catalogs do not
adequately support the multi-criteria searching,
browsing, and comparison tasks typical of consumer
“bargain hunting” behavior. This paper presents the
design and implementation of a visual interface for a
large electronic catalog that represents products as a
collection of images in a compact, zoomable,
multidimensional grid. At the overview level, the spatial
dimensions represent the price and quality tradeoffs that
typically guide buying behavior. As a user zooms into
regions of interest, the spatial dimensions are
overloaded to represent additional decision criteria,
such as product category and ratings. An empirical
evaluation found that users preferred this new visual
interface to a traditional tabular interface on measures
of confidence, usability, and satisfaction, especially for
multi-criteria comparison tasks.
Keywords--- Zoomable User Interface (ZUI),
electronic catalog visualization, multidimensional
visualization

1. Introduction
This paper presents the design, implementation, and
evaluation of an interactive zoomable visual interface for
“bargain hunting” in a large electronic catalog. The
prototype supports multi-criteria search, browsing, and
comparison amongst the 14,000+ products in the “One-

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Tambon-One-Product” (OTOP) catalog of local artisans
in Thailand.
Current interfaces for electronic commerce
commonly present products and search results in ordered
lists or tables. These layouts are effective for simple
single-criteria product search, where users can rapidly
scan through and compare the results along the
dimension of interest. However, lists and tables are
much less effective for the multi-criteria search and
comparison tasks typical of consumer buying behavior.
Interactive visual representations of information
such as Spotfire [1] and TableLens [2] provide multidimensional overviews of large collections that can
reveal patterns and suggest promising directions for
search. However, while these interfaces are powerful
tools in the hands of analysts, they are too difficult for a
typical consumer.
The prototype described in this paper was
specifically designed to support non-technical consumers
to hunt for bargains (i.e., price-quality tradeoffs)
amongst the diverse products in the OTOP catalog. The
results of empirical evaluations found that users strongly
prefer this zoomable user interface (ZUI) to traditional
tabular interfaces, especially for multi-criteria
comparison tasks.
This paper is organized into the following sections:
section 2 describes the design and implementation of the
prototype; section 3 summarizes the results of the user
evaluation; and section 4 compares this work with
related research on visual interfaces for multidimensional search and comparison. The final section
presents our conclusions and directions for future
research.

2. Design and Implementation
This section describes the iterative design and
development of the prototype. First, we describe the data
associated with the OTOP catalog and our initial
interviews and testing with online shoppers. We then
describe the layout, information structure, and interaction
of the prototype in detail. Finally, we briefly describe
the software architecture used to develop the prototype.

2.1. One Tambon One Product (OTOP)
The content of our electronic catalog is the
collection of products in Thailand’s “One-Tambon-OneProduct” (OTOP) program. The Thai government
initiated the OTOP program to help rural artisans market
and sell traditional products created with local materials,
such as silk and ceramics. Products are sold primarily in
stores and markets across Thailand, as well as several
websites. Although tourists do purchase OTOP products,
they are not currently the primary market.
We obtained a copy of the OTOP catalog as a
database from the Thailand Ministry of Commerce. The
products in the catalog are organized into 6 major
categories: textiles, weaving, wood, ceramics, and food.
Each product comes from one of the over 7,700 subdistricts (“Tambons”) in Thailand, which are grouped by
province. Products have basic details, such as a price,
name, image, and description, as well as two quality
measures: star level {1-5}, and grade {D2, D1, C, B, A}.

2.2. Layout
We developed early mockups using techniques such
as scatterplots and histograms, similar to visualizations
such as Spotfire [1] and Polaris [3]. However, feedback

from our target users found these visualizations too
intimidating to imagine using for casual shopping. The
consensus from our users was that the most important
factor that guided them while shopping was the product
image, followed by price and quality. Furthermore, they
wanted the overall shopping experience to be enjoyable.
Based on this feedback, we sought a design with
some similarities to the physical experience of shopping
in a market. Iterative designs and feedback from tests
with users eventually led us to the design shown in
Figure 2, which consists of four linked regions: a
filtering section at the top where users can specify their
search criteria; a zoomable spatial grid view in the
middle that shows an overview of all products meeting
the criteria; a product detail view at the bottom that
shows the details of the selected product; and a tabular
view on the right that acts as a shopping basket.
The user initially sees an overview of the products,
and can interactively filter, browse, and select products
using the linked regions of the interface. The screenshot
in Figure 3 shows an example where the user has
zoomed into the cell of the spatial grid containing
products in the 3-star/250-500 Baht price range, and has
placed three products in the “basket.”
Filtering Criteria
Spatial Grid
View

Tabular
View
(Basket)

Product Detail View

Figure 2 Layout of prototype
(template on left, mockup on right)

Figure 3 Multidimensional zoomable grid: outer grid for star level/price, inner grid for rating/category

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

2.3. Information Structure

2.4. Interaction

Each of the four regions of the interface provides
visibility and control over different aspects of the
catalog. The filtering region allows the user to restrict
the products shown in the spatial grid by selecting
categories, a price range, or a location in Thailand. The
spatial grid organizes and displays the entire OTOP
catalog along four dimensions: price, star level,
category, and grade level.
Table 1 gives a much more detailed description of
the data represented in the views [4]. The Data column
(D) shows the data type for each attribute: Nominal (N),
Ordinal (O), and Quantitative (Q). The next column lists
functions used for Filtering (F) information shown in the
views: sliders (sl>), menus (mn>), pointing (*p), and
selection (*s). The remaining columns show the visual
encodings for the Grid, Detail, and Tabular views.

The grid view is a spatially constrained zoomable
user interface (ZUI) that expands an area of interest to
show greater detail by simultaneously compressing other
areas of the view (see Figure 4). The effect gives the
impression of a fisheye view distortion. At the overview
level, the x- and y-axes of the grid are mapped to quality
(i.e., star levels from 1 star in the leftmost column to 5
stars in the rightmost column) and price (e.g., 0 to 500
Baht). When a region of the grid is selected, it expands to
reveal an inner grid with another set of x- and y-axes
mapped to grade (i.e., D2, D1, C, B, A) and category
(e.g., food, textiles).

Table 1 Visual encoding of product attributes:
Input Data types (D), Filtering functions (F), and
the Grid/Detail/Tabular views
Product
Attribute
Price
Star level
Category
Grade
Location
Name
Image
Description

Spatial Grid
Detail
Tabular
X Y
R X Y R X Y R
Q sl>
I*z1
L
*fs L
O
I*z1
L
*fs L
N mn>
I*z2 C*z2
C
O
I*z2
L
N mn>
T
N
T
T
N *p*s
I
I
N
T

D

F

The Spatial Grid view represents products as
Images (I) that are positioned in the appropriate region of
the grid. The x- and y-axes are mapped to star level and
price on the outer grid (*z1), and grade and category for
the inner grid (*z2) (see Figure 4). The category is also
encoded in the inner grid view using Color (C): blue for
textiles, green for weaving, yellow for wood, red for
ceramics, and pink for food. The same colors are used in
the Filtering and Tabular section.
An important constraint on the design of the spatial
grid is how to represent large numbers of products at
different levels of zoom. Instead of reducing the size of
the images to fit in the changing size of the grid, we
decided to show a representative sample of the products
in each cell of the grid at the overview level, and show
progressively more images as the user zoomed into a
cell.
When the user points (*p) at the image of a product
in the grid view, the image in the grid view is magnified
and additional information is displayed in the detail view
at the bottom of the interface. The Detail view shows
the star level, price, and grade attributes using Length
(L), and the product name and description using Text
(T).
The Tabular view is used as a basket for displaying
details for products that have been selected (*s). The
product details are listed in columns that can be sorted
(*fs) on price and star level.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 4 Transition between states

2.5. Implementation
The prototype was developed as a Java applet, and
the spatial grid view was developed with the Piccolo
libraries from the University of Maryland. Piccolo
supports the development of 2D structured graphics with
visual effects, such as zooming with animation. The
fisheye view distortion in the spatial grid view is inspired
by the Fisheye Calendar interface implemented using
Piccolo [5]. The architecture for the spatial grid is
shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5 Spatial grid view objects layout and
class hierarchy
XYNode (extends PCanvas): The applet creates an
instance of this node to contain and handle all objects in
the spatial view.
XYLensNode (extends PNode): This component is
added to the XYNode to mange the tabular layout of all
child nodes. The child node that is in focus will be
expanded both vertically and horizontally, and the
remaining space is divided amongst the other children
equally. The animation of zooming in and out is a feature
of Piccolo.
QualityNode (extends PNode): This component is
responsible for rendering the small pictures inside the

grid cell. The images have a fixed size and are positioned
from left to right, top to bottom.

3. Evaluation and Discussion
This section describes the results of an experiment
comparing the zoomable catalog with a more traditional
tabular interface.

Table 2 Subjective effectiveness of interfaces in
comparison tasks (n=18, ** significant)
# Attributes
Compared
1
2
3

Spatial
(SB)
4.39
4.67
4.33

Tabular
(TC)
4.06
2.56
1.89

t
0.90
6.77
11.25

Sig.
(2-tailed)
0.381
**3.29E-06
**2.68E-09

3.1 Methodology
The main objectives of the experiment were to test
the performance and usability of the system, as well as
the participant’s understanding of the overall structure of
the content. The experiment was a within-subject design,
where each participant completed a set of tasks with both
interfaces. The experiment was counterbalanced so that
half of the participants used the spatial grid interface
first, and the other half used the tabular interface first.
Eighteen people agreed to participate in the
experiment, and all participants conducted the
experiment on the same equipment. Each participant was
given a 7-minute tutorial on how to use the interface and
then given time to explore the catalogs to ensure that
they understood how to use the interface.
The participants were then asked to complete the
three sets of tasks with an interface and then fill out a
questionnaire
The tasks were divided into three groups:
Task 1: Product comparison. Participants were
asked to compare products on one, two, and three
attributes.
Task 2: Overview of a collection. Participants were
asked questions about the whole collection, such as
which star levels most products are in.
Task 3: Unstructured task (exploration).
Participants were asked to find a product according to
his/her preferences. Finding a wedding gift for a friend
was given as an example.
The independent variables for the experiment were
interface type (spatial, SB; tabular, TC), task type (1-3),
and participant type. The dependent variables were
accuracy, completion time, mouse distance, number of
clicks, and satisfaction.

Figure 6 Subjective effectiveness of interfaces
in multi-criteria comparison tasks
Table 3 User satisfaction with interfaces
(n=18, ** significant)
Task
Quick to learn
Easy to use
Quick to find
item
Confidence for
Overview (T2)
Attractive
interface
Confidence for
Comparison (T1)
Would like to use
frequently
Confidence for
Exploration (T3)
Fun to use

Spatial
(SB)
3.56
3.94
4.11

Tabular
(TC)
4.50
3.83
3.22

t
-3.31
0.40
2.85

Sig.
(2-tailed)
**0.004
0.695
**0.011

3.89

2.67

2.88

**0.010

4.33

3.17

3.21

**0.005

4.00

2.83

3.38

**0.003

4.00

2.89

3.45

**0.003

4.28

3.00

3.75

**0.001

4.67

2.67

7.14

**1.65E-06

3.2. Evaluation
The performance of the participants on the tasks was
analyzed using a Paired Sample T-Test. The results are
summarized in Tables 2 and 3, and Figures 6 and 7. We
found no significant difference in performance between
the two interfaces in measures of accuracy, completion
time, and mouse-distance traveled. On the other hand,
the spatial interface scored significantly higher than the
tabular interface on subjective measures, especially in
multi-criteria comparison tasks.
Figure 7 Usability satisfaction with spatial (SB)
and tabular (TC) interfaces

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

The results for other subjective rankings of the
interfaces are shown in Table 3 and Figure 7. The
measures are ordered by increasing preference for the
spatial interface. Users found the tabular interface
significantly quicker to learn to use, but neither interface
was significantly easier to use. The spatial interface was
ranked significantly higher than the tabular interface on
every other measure, from “quick to find item” to “fun to
use.” The users were also asked to rank their confidence
using the interfaces to complete the three tasks
mentioned earlier (i.e., comparison, overview, and
exploration).
The spatial interface was ranked
significantly higher for all tasks, especially the
exploratory task.

3.3. Discussion of results
The results from the experiment showed a
statistically significant preference for the spatial
interface over the tabular interface in dimensions such as
fun, attractiveness, confidence, and perception of speed.
The preference for the spatial interface grew stronger as
the tasks became more difficult, such as when comparing
products on multiple attributes, and in exploratory
search. Furthermore, users found the spatial interface
“easy …” and “fun to use,” which is extremely important
for the intended audience of non-technical bargain
hunters.
These subjective results are very encouraging,
however we were surprised to find that there was no
advantage in quantitative performance measures such as
accuracy and completion time. Given that the spatial
view provides a 2-D overview of the collection, we
expected that users would be more effective with the
spatial view for the more difficult multi-attribute
comparison tasks.
Our observations during the experiments and postexperiment interviews suggest that the accuracy and
completion times using the spatial view were limited by
the design of the overview representation. Our current
implementation shows a limited number of images in
each cell, which represent significant examples from the
distribution of products in that cell (e.g., lowest price /
highest quality, highest price / highest quality, average
price and quality), but does not visually suggest the
number of products in each cell.
This lack of visual cues for population magnitude
had an impact on the accuracy because users attempted
to answer questions from the overview without zooming
in to inspect the details. For example, the second task
asked users to identify the quality level with the highest
number of products. The following comments from two
users are typical:
ST6

“This question is easy. I can find the correct
answer immediately by just looking at the cell
with many thumbnails, right? This cell has only
one sample, so it is not the answer. This box has
many small pictures, so the answer is here.”

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

ST1

“Oh, how can I know the answer? I must zoom
in to count items in every cell. Um, I forget …
whether I already [counted this cell] or not.
OK, let’s go back and start counting again.”

In the first case (ST6), the subject misinterpreted
the sample of images as a representation of product
density. In the second case (ST1), the subject understood
the meaning of the sample, but the regular pattern of
samples made it easy to lose track of the progress
through the search space. Future versions of the
interface must address this problem.

4. Related Research
Previous research in electronic catalogs has focused
on techniques for supporting the customer’s decisionmaking process. Many electronic catalogs simply support
keyword and attribute-based searches, similar to
information retrieval interfaces [6]. Critique interfaces,
on the other hand, provide an example solution and allow
the user to refine their preferences based on a
modification to the example [6,7].
Interactive visualization interfaces represent
collections of products visually using techniques such as
scatterplots, barcharts and histograms [1,3], and
expanding graphical tables [2,8,9] that allow the user to
see and interactively identify products of interest.
Visualizations can be considered a type of critique
interface, where navigation along an axis towards more
preferred products in a visual representation is an
implicit critique of the products [6].
A comparative evaluation of the effectiveness of
three multidimensional visualizations for product
comparison (i.e., TableLens [2], SpotFire [1], and
Focus/InfoZoom [9], and) found several limitations of
each approach [8]. Users of TableLens had difficulty
solving tasks comparing three or more attributes because
of hidden variable names, decoding the color codes and
finding the right filtering and grouping strategies. The
main problem with SpotFire was that it biased users
towards attempting to accomplish tasks with the
scatterplot even when it was unsuitable for the given
task. Infozoom had troubles determining the existence of
relationships between two attributes because of the
narrow row height in the compressed view and misuse of
the overview mode. Thirty percent of users looked for
relationships between rows in the overview, forgetting
that in this mode the rows show the value of attributes
independently in ascending order. This is similar to the
problem users had in our experiment with the overview.

Conclusions
This paper has presented the design and iterative
development of the interface for an electronic catalog
based on a zoomable spatial grid. This design supports
multi-criteria comparisons by nesting additional axes
within the zoomed grid cells. An empirical evaluation
found that users significantly prefer this interface to

traditional tabular interfaces, especially in multi-criteria
tasks. We were surprised to find that there was currently
no advantage in performance for the spatial interface,
and have identified potential areas for improvement.

[4]

[5]

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

C. Ahlberg and E. Wistrand. IVEE: an information
visualization and exploration environment. In
Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization (InfoVis ’`5). IEEE, 66–73. October, 1995.
R. Rao, and S. K. Card. The Table Lens: Merging
graphical and symbolic representations in an interactive
focus + context visualization for tabular information. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIbCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI c`d). ACM Press,
1–7. April, 1994.
C. Stolte, D. Tang, and P. Hanrahan. Polaris: A system
for query, analysis, and visualization of multidimensional
relational databases. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer braphics, 8(1):52–65, 2002.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

S. K. Card, and J. Mackinlay. The structure of the
information visualization design space. In Proceedings of
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (InfoVis
’`e). IEEE, p. 92. 1997.
B. Bederson, A. D. Clamage, M. Czerwinski, and G.
Robertson. DateLens: A fisheye calendar interface for
PDAs. ACM Transactions on Computer Human
Interaction (TOCHI), 11(1):90-119, 2004.
R. Burke. Interactive critiquing for catalog navigation in
e-commerce. Artificial Intelligence Revue, 18(3-4):245–
267, 2002.
P. Pu, and L. Chen. Integrating tradeoff support in
product search tools for e-commerce sites. In
Proceedings of the 6th ACM conference on Electronic
commerce (EC ’05). ACM, 269–278. 2005.
A. Kobsa. An empirical comparison of three commercial
information visualization systems. In Proceedings of
IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (InfoVis
2001). IEEE. 2001.
M. Spenke, C. Beilken, and T. Berlage. FOCUS: The
interactive table for product comparison and selection. In
Proceedings of ACM Symposium on User Interface
Software and Technology (UIST ’`6). ACM, 41–50.
1996.

