Investigating the Action of Complex Highway Noise Barriers by Means of Sound
Field Visualization
D J Oldham and C A Egan
Acoustics Research Unit, University of Liverpool, L69 3BX. Liverpool. UK
{ djoldham@liv.ac.uk, CAEgan@liv.ac.uk }
Abstract
The performance of a simple noise barrier is
determined by its height relative to the heights of the
noise source and receivers. There have been many
attempts to overcome this limitation by modifications to
the barrier top edge. These generally take the form of an
absorbent top or the introduction of additional
diffracting edges. However, relatively minor variations
in geometry have sometimes been found to result in
drastic changes to barrier performance. In this paper the
Boundary Element Method is employed to calculate the
sound field in the vicinity of complex barrier tops and
sound field visualization techniques are used with these
data to investigate how the sound field varies with
frequency and dimensional changes. It is shown that for
some top edge configurations local resonance effects
have a significant effect on the attenuation afforded by
the barrier.
Keywords--- sound field visualization, noise
barriers.

barriers with modified top edges can achieve a
performance similar to that of simple barriers of
considerably greater height. There are thus potential cost
savings in addition to reduced visual intrusion. However,
there
One objective of the EU sponsored project
Holiwood is the development of a traffic noise barrier
system using thermally treated European hardwood, a
sustainable material, to replace other energy and resource
consuming materials such as concrete, aluminium and
plastics. The advantages of thermal treated hardwood
include excellent durability and dimensional stability.
These advantages, coupled with the general suitability of
timber for the manufacture of complex forms, mean that
this material may be suitable for the practical realisation
of novel barrier top edge treatments.
This paper is concerned with one proposed method
for enhancing barrier performance which is the provision
of extra diffracting edges as shown in Figure 1. The
research seeks to explain the variation in the
effectiveness of such configurations as reported from
previous research.

1. Introduction
It has become commonplace to build noise barriers
at critical points along highways to screen adjacent areas
from the worst effects of the noise pollution. Noise
barriers are normally sufficiently massive as to ensure
that the dominant path of sound from noise source to the
receiver is via diffraction over the barrier top. The
performance of simple traffic noise barriers is then
determined by their height relative to the heights of the
noise source and the receiving position.
Various techniques have been proposed to enhance
barrier performance by means of modifications to the top
edge including the use of absorptive material on the
barrier face or edges, shaping of the barrier edges or face
to deflect sound energy or to promote destructive
interference. [1] The improvement gained is typically of
the order of 1-3dBA. Although this is small, the use of

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 1 Multi-edge Barrier Configurations

2. Multiple edged barriers
Multiple edged barriers have been the focus of
investigations using the boundary element method by
Crombie [2] and Hothersall and Crombie, Hothersall and
Chandler-Wilde [3]. Crombie et al presented insertion
loss spectra for various multiple edged barriers, along
with the mean insertion loss of these barriers. They
found that multiple edged barriers could provide a
significant increase in barrier depending on the particular
configuration and whether absorbing material was
applied.
In his comprehensive review of work on noise
barriers, Watts [1] reports that multi edge noise barriers
without absorptive treatment can give 2 dBA attenuation.
Ishizuka and Fujiwara [4] employed two
dimensional BEM models to investigate the performance
of several shapes of noise barriers with differing surface
conditions. They found that a multi edge barrier similar
to that of Watts, gave only 0.2 dBA attenuation.
In a recent study Egan and Oldham [5] found that
the insertion loss due to the addition of edges was
actually negative. If complex barrier forms are to find
practical application then it is important that the reasons
for these contradictory results are found and those factors
which ensure a positive value of insertion loss are fully
understood. In this paper we explore the use of sound
field visualization as a means to gaining greater insight
into the action of multi edge barriers.

investigate the sound field in a systematic manner with
different spatial resolutions to suit the particular
objectives.
The BEM is more convenient for exterior sound
radiation problems [14]. In acoustics, the BEM requires
the acoustic variables within the acoustic domain to be
expressed as a surface integral over the boundary of the
domain. There are two different formulations for the
BEM: (a) the direct [9, 15] and (b) indirect methods [11,
12]. The difference between them is a result of the
choice of primary variables [16]. The primary variables
for the direct BEM are the acoustic pressure and acoustic
velocity and the primary variables for the indirect BEM
are the difference in acoustic pressure and the difference
in normal gradient of acoustic pressure across the
boundary.
The governing differential equation for linear acoustics
is the Helmholtz equation:

(1)
Where k is the wave number and p is the sound pressure.
The boundary integral equation [17] can be developed
for the direct method using Helmholtz equation
(equation 1), Green’s second identity, and the
Sommerfeld radiation condition.

(2)

3. Modeling sound fields
The earliest theoretical work on diffraction at the
edge of noise barriers was based upon simple theories
relating to idealized geometries and required
approximations to be made when applying them to
practical situations. These approximations proved
successful for predicting the acoustical performance of
simple plane barriers but were inadequate for dealing
with more complex barrier forms. More recently the
advent of cheap and powerful computing systems has a
enabled numerical techniques based upon fundamental
wave theory to be to be applied. These have the potential
to model the localized interaction of a sound field with
complex barrier configurations and hence may enable a
better understanding of the processes involved when
sound encounters a complex diffracting edge.
The two most commonly used numerical methods
for solving acoustical problems are finite element
methods [6-8] (FEM) and the boundary element [9-13]
(BEM). The FEM solves the response in the acoustic
domain itself by computing the mass and stiffness of the
acoustic domain. The BEM solves the acoustic quantities
on the boundary and the solution within the acoustic
domain (or air) can then be computed from the solution
on the boundary. With the BEM, once the solution on
the boundary has been solved and stored in memory, it is
possible to calculate the sound field parameters at any
point. With regard to sound field visualization, this
enables the use of different field point meshes to

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

The kernel in equation 2 or the Green’s Function is:

(3)

Where r is the distance between the collocation
point P and the integration point Q on the surface.
Equation 3 is the expression for a point monopole source
in three dimensions.
Hothersall [18], in a comprehensive review of the
use of mathematical modelling to investigate the
problem of noise barriers, has identified the earliest
application of the BEM as that of Seznec [19]. He
examined several barrier shapes, all of 2m height, on a
flat ground in two dimensions at a frequency of 500Hz.
Hothersall, Chandler-Wilde [20, 21] and Hajimirzae [20]
and Hothersall, Crombie and Chandler-Wilde [21] have
applied the BEM to various shapes of noise barrier in
two dimensions. An example of the use of sound field
visualization is the work of Piacentini, Invernizzi and
Pannese [22] who studied different barrier shapes using
three dimensional BEM and presented contour maps
showing the effect of the top edge on the sound field
behind a barrier.

4. Development of the computer model

marked for the low frequency (long wavelength) case of
Figure 3.

The main calculations in this work were carried out
using SYSNOISE. The use of a commercially available
BEM modeling package offers a rapid means of
implementing a numerical modeling system. Therefore,
the SYSNOISE [23] software package , which is part of
the LMS Virtual.Lab Advanced Numerical Acoustics,
has been selected for use in this work. This is marketed
by LMS International of Leuven, Belgium. The LMS
Virtual.Lab Advanced Numerical Acoustics is an
advanced solution for accurately simulating the acoustic
performance of systems involving complex physical
phenomena. The solution package includes the Boundary
Element Method (BEM), Finite Element Method (FEM)
and Infinite Finite Element Method (IFEM).
Simple 2D meshes were produced to keep
computation times short. As the objective was to
compare the performance of different top edge
treatments a further simplification was to assume a
perfectly reflecting ground plane which enabled the use
of symmetry with the source positioned in the plane of
symmetry as shown in figure 2.

Figure 3 Sound field behind a simple 2m high
barrier at a frequency of 200 Hz.
Interference patterns can be seen in the shadow
region of the barrier in the form of stiations. These arise
from interference between sound arriving from the
barrier top and sound from the barrier top reflected in the
ground plane.

Figure 2 SYSNOISE Mesh

5. The simple barrier
The potential of sound field visualization to
demonstrate the action of a simple barrier can be seen in
figures 3 and 4 which show the sound pressure variation
in the vicinity of a barrier at a frequencies of 200 Hz and
2000 Hz respectively. The two sound fields, although
both indicating a sound shadow region behind the
barrier, are very different. In the case of the low
frequency case of Figure 3, the shadow region is not as
sharply defined as that in Figure 4. This is consistent
with basic diffraction theory. The effect of sound
reflected from the source side of the barrier can also be
seen in the form of interference fringes. These are very

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 4 Sound field behind a simple 2m high
barrier at a frequency of 2000 Hz.

illustrative to examine the frequency response of a multiedge system.

25

20

15

A tte n u a tio n d B

The pressure values shown in Figures 3 and 4 are
decibel rms values i.e. averaged over a complete
frequency cycle. The BEM calculation is based upon the
assumption of a sinusoidal tone and hence, as an aid to
understanding the dynamic response it is possible to use
these values in a sinusoidal term where the phase at any
point is a simple function of the distance of that point
from the source. If the source phase is varied
systematically it is possible to produce an animation that
illustrates the propagation of the sound from the source.
Figure 5 shows a single frame from such an
animation for the simple plane barrier at a frequency of
200 Hz. The wave nature of the sound can be clearly
seen from the systematic pattern of the shading. The
decrease in intensity with distance from the source can
also be seen in terms of the reduction of the density of
the shading. It should be pointed out that when viewed
on a computer monitor colours are employed which
makes the visual interpretation much easier.

10

5

0

-5

-10

0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Frequency Hz

Figure 6 Additional Attenuation due to extra
edge as a function of frequency

Figure 5 Sound field behind a simple 2m high
barrier at a frequency of 200 Hz showing
development of the wave motion.

6. Multi-edge barrier
As stated above, although the effectiveness of multi
edge barriers has been the subject of recent investigation,
there is disagreement between the findings of different
researchers. However, all the results reported have
related to the broadband performance in terms of a
typical A weighted traffic noise spectrum. It is

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 6 shows the frequency response (10Hz
resolution) at a single point due to a 2m high barrier with
an additional edge of length 0.5m situated 0.1 m from the
main barrier element. The receiver point was situated in
the ground plane to avoid the effects of interference due
to reflections in this plane as seen in figures 3 and 4. The
vertical axis relates to the insertion loss or extra
attenuation compared to the simple barrier resulting from
the addition of the extra edge. In this context positive
values mean that the extra edge is providing some
benefit and negative values mean that the situation is
actually worse. From examination of Figure 6 it can be
seen that whilst the extra edge improves conditions at
most frequencies, there are some frequencies where its
effect is deleterious.
As stated above, results are normally presented as
single figure broadband traffic noise elated to a typical A
weighted traffic noise spectrum. The A weighted traffic
noise spectrum, although broadband, has a peak in the
region of 500 to 1000Hz. Thus if a particular multi edge
configuration results in negative attenuation over this
range of frequencies it may result in a net broadband
attenuation which is also negative.
As an aid to understanding what is happening the
sound field in the vicinity of the barrier top was
visualized at frequencies of 590 Hz and 1860 Hz
corresponding to the frequencies at which the negative
attenuation was observed as shown in figures 7 and 8.

barrier tops and sound field visualization techniques are
used with these data to investigate how the sound field
varies with frequency and dimensional changes. It is
shown that for some top edge configurations local
resonance effects have a significant effect on the
attenuation afforded by the barrier.

Figure 7 Sound field behind a 2m high barrier
with additional edge at a frequency of 590.
Figure 7 shows the rms sound pressure variation
expressed in decibels and it can be seen that in the region
between the additional edge and the main barrier element
there is a well defined pattern of pressure variation. The
pattern corresponds to that of a simple open-open tube at
its resonant frequency. This is consistent with the
dimensions of the system as the extra edge has a length
of 0.5m which would suggest a resonance frequency of
680Hz. However, the boundary conditions differ from
those of a simple tube as a result of the complex nature
of the sound field which can be seen in Figure 7 which
explains why the observed effect can be seen at a
frequency of 590 Hz.
The mechanism underlying this effect can be seen
most clearly from examination of an animation of the
sound field progression at this frequency. Figure 8 shows
a single frame from such an animation. The wave nature
of the sound can be clearly seen from the systematic
pattern of the shading. When the full animation is
viewed, the progression of the wave from the source
directly to the barrier top and also via the space between
the additional edge and the main barrier element can be
seen. A strong phase relationship can be seen which is
the reason for the resonance.

7. Conclusions
There have been many attempts to overcome the
height related limitation of a simple barrier by
modifications to the barrier top edge. These generally
take the form of an absorbent top or the introduction of
additional diffracting edges. However, relatively minor
variations in geometry have sometimes been found to
result in drastic changes to barrier performance. In this
paper the Boundary Element Method is employed to
calculate the sound field in the vicinity of complex

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 8 Sound field behind a 2m high barrier
with additional edge at a frequency of 1860 Hz
showing development of the wave motion.

8. Acknowledgements
The results presented were developed within the IPSME project Holiwood. This project is carried out with
the financial support from the European Community
within the Sixth Framework Program (NMP2-CT-2005011799). This publication reflects the authors view. The
European Community is not liable for any use that may
be made of the information contained therein.

12.

9. References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.
10.

11.

Watts, G.R., Barrier design to reduce road traffic
noise. Proceedings of the Institution of Civil
Engineers, 2002. 53(2): p. 79- 86.
Crombie, D.H. and D.C. Hothersall, The performance
of multiple noise barriers. Journal of Sound and
Vibration, 1994. 176(4): p. 459-473.
Crombie, D.H., D.C. Hothersall, and S.N. Chandlerwilde, Multiple-edge noise barriers. Applied
Acoustics, 1995. 44(4): p. 353-367.
Ishizulka, T. and K. Fujiwara, Performance of noise
barriers with various edge shapes and acoustical
conditions. Applied Acoustics, 2004. 65: p. 125 141.
Egan, C.A., V. Chilekwa, and D.J. Oldham, An
investigation of the use of top edge treatments to
enhance the performance of a noise barrier using the
Boundary Element Method. ICSV13, 2006.
Craggs, A., Acoustic Modelling: Finite Element
Method, in Encyclopedia of Acoustics,, M.J. Crocker,
Editor. 1977, John Wiley and Sons Inc: New York. p.
165–172.
Cook, R.D., D.S. Malkus, and M.E. Plesha, Concepts
and Applications of Finite Element Analysis. 3rd ed.
1989, New York.: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Zienkiewicz, O.C. and R. L. Taylor, Basic
Formulation and Linear Problems 4ed. The Finite
Element Method. Vol. 1. 1989, London: McGraw
Hill Book Company.
Seybert, A.F. and T.W. Wu, Acoustic modelling:
boundary element method, in Encyclopedia of
acoustics. 1997, Wiley-Interscience.
Wu, T.W., The Helmholtz Integral Equation, in
Boundary Element Acoustics, Fundamentals and
Computer Codes., T.W. Wu, Editor. 2000, WIT
Press: Southampton.
Hamdi, M.A. and J.M. Ville, Development of a
Sound Radiation Model for a Finite-Length Duct of
Arbitrary Shape, . AIAA Journal, 1982. 20(12): p.
1687–1692.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

13.
14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.
20.

21.

22.

23.

Hamdi, M.A. and J.M. Ville, (1986) Sound Radiation
from Ducts: Theory andExperiment, Journal of
Sound and Vibration, 107, 231–242, 1986.
Bathe, K., Finite Element Procedures. 1996, New
Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.
Herrin, D.W., T.W. Wu, and A.F. Seybert, Practical
Issues regarding the use of the Finite and Boundary
Element Methods for Acoustics. Building Acoustics,
2003 10(4): p. 257 – 279.
Wu, T.W., The Helmholtz Integral Equation, in
Boundary Element Acoustics, Fundamentals and
Computer Codes T.W. Wu, Editor. 2000, WIT Press
Southampton, UK.
Vlahopoulos, N., Indirect Variational Boundary
Element Method Acoustics. Boundary Element
Acoustics, Fundamentals and Computer Codes, ed.
T.W. Wu. 2000, Southampton, UK: WIT Press.
Seybert, A.F., et al., An Advanced Computational
Method for Radiation and Scattering of Acoustic
Waves in ThreeDimensions. Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 1985. 77 p. 362–368.
Hothersall, D.C., The Mathematical Modelling of the
Performance of Noise Barriers. Building Acoustics,
1994. 1(2): p. 91-104.
Seznec, R., Diffraction of sound around barriers:
Use of the boundary elements technique. Journal of
Sound and Vibration, 1980. 73(2): p. 195-209.
Hothersall, D.C., S.N. Chandler-Wilde, and N.M.
Hajimirzae, Efficiency of single noise barriers.
Journal of Sound and Vibration, 1991. 146(2): p.:303
321.
Hothersall, D.C., D.H. Crombie, and S.N. ChandlerWilde, The performance of T profile and associated
noise barriers. Applied Acoustics, 1991. 32: p.:269
287.
Piacentini, A., M. Invernizzi, and L. Pannese,
Computational acoustics: noise reduction via diffract
by barriers with different geometries. Computational
Methods in Applied Mechanical Engineering, 1996.
130: p. 81-91.
LMS Sysnoise. 2006, LMS International
http://www.lmsintl.com/SYSNOISE.

