Robotic modeling and simulation of palletizer robot using Workspace5
Nory Afzan Mohd Johari, Habibollah Haron, Abdul Syukor Mohamad Jaya
Department of Modeling and Industrial Computing
Faculty of Computer Science & Information Systems,
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 UTM Skudai, Johor, Malaysia
afzanijan@yahoo.com, habib@utm.my,syukor_2781@yahoo.com
Abstract
Employment of robots in manufacturing has been a
value-added entity in a manufacturing industry. Robotic
simulation is used to visualize entire robotic application
system, to simulate the movement of robot arm
incorporated with components consist in its environment
and to detect collision between the robot and
components. This paper presents result of a project in
implementing a computer based model to simulate
Okura A1600 palletizer robot. The application uses
Okura A1600 robot for palletizing bags at the end of the
production line and focuses on pick-and-place
application. The project objective is to generate a
computer simulated model to represent the actual robot
model and its environment. The project simulates the
robot’s first four joints, namely as the Waist, Shoulder,
Elbow and Waist and focuses on the position of the
robot’s end effector, regardless its orientation.
Development of the model is using Workspace5 as a
simulation tool. Two types of methodology are used,
which are the methodology for developing the robotic
workcell simulation model and the methodology for
executing the robotic simulation. The output of the
project will be a three-dimensional view of robot arm
movement based on series of predefined Geometry
Points, layout checking and robot’s reachability by
generating working envelope, collision and near miss
detection, and monitoring on the cycle time upon
completing a task. The project is an offline programming
and no robot language is generated.
Keywords: Robotic modeling, Simulation, CAD,
Workspace5

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

1. Introduction
Employment of robots in manufacturing has been a
value-added entity for the company in gaining their
competitive advantages. Zomaya [1] describes some
features of robots in industry, which are decreased cost
of labor, increased flexibility and versatility, higher
precision and productivity, better human working
conditions and displace human working in hazardous
and impractical environment.
Farrington et al.[2] states that robotic simulation is
different from traditional discrete event simulation
(DES) in five ways in terms of some features and
capabilities. Robotic simulation covers the visualization
of how the robot moves through its environment.
Basically, the simulation is heavily based on CAD and
graphical visualization tools. Other type of simulation is
numerical simulation, deals with dynamics, sensing and
control of robots. It has been accepted that the major
benefit of simulation is reduction in cost and time when
designing and proving system (Robinson [3]).
Robotic simulation is a kinematics simulation tool
which primary use are as a highly detail, cell-level
validation tool (Farrington et al. [2]) and for simulating a
system whose state changes continuously based on the
motion(s) of one or more kinematic devices (Roth [4]). It
is also a tool to verify robotic workcell process
operations by providing “mock-up” station of robots
application system, in order to check and evaluate
different parameters such as cycle times, object
collisions, optimal path, workcell layout and placement
of entities in the cell with respect to each other.
This paper presents how to generate a computer
based model of a robotic palletizing system in order to
monitor and evaluate entire robotic application system
through simulation. The simulation focused to the robot
first four joints of the robot, namely as the Waist,
Shoulder, Elbow and Wrist.

This paper is divided into five sections. Section 2
presents the current robotic application system. Section 3
discusses the methodology for the robotic workcell
development and simulation. Some simulation and
results are presented in Section 4 and conclusions are
drawn in Section 5.

The palletizing process follows a standard
movement patterns consists of seven steps that represent
path of the robot arm moving from the pick-up station
towards the pallet and back to the pick-up station. Figure
2 shows the movement pattern.

2. The Robot and the Robotic Palletizing
System
This section presents the robot and its application
system of the current system. The application uses Okura
A1600 robot for palletizing bags at the end of the
production line and focuses on pick-and-place
application. The robot will pick bags at the pick up point
and place the bags onto a pallet.
The robot model is multi-articulated four-axis
pneumatically powered Okura A1600 Palletizer. It has
the fastest cycle times in robot class, which is up to 1600
cycles per hour, with high reliability and low
maintenance requirements. The robot is capable to
handle capacity up to 140kg. It also provided with high
accuracy, which is 1mm of repeatable position precision.
The robot consists of a few components, namely as
the Base, Rotor/Link1, Lower/Link2, Upper arm/Link3,
Link lever/Link4, Flange/Link5, Motor D-axis1 and
Motor D-axis2. Positioning of the robot is based on its
Hand Coordinates System. Hand coordinates employ
three-dimentional coordinate system based on the three
axis (X, Y and Z).
The robotic palletizing system consists of Okura
A1600 robot palletizer, conveyor system for transporting
bags and pallets, pallet dispenser, guarding that provides
boundary for robotic workcell and control panel for
supervision and control with human-machine interface.
Figure 1 shows the robotic workcell.

Figure 2. The movement pattern
Each pallet will consists of ten layers with five bags
at each layer. The bags are arranged based on specific
bags arrangement. Figure 3 shows the bags arrangement.

Figure 3. Bags Arrangement

3. Methodology

Figure 1. Okura A1600 robotic palletizing system

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

This section present the Workspace5 as a simulation
tool and the methodologies in developing the model and
execution of the simulation. Workspace5 is PC-based
robot simulation software that supports threedimensional visualization. Some features of Workspace5
are collision and near miss detection, CAD
functionalities that are similar to ACIS graphics kernel
as AutoCAD, reach checking for optimization in robot
placement, and offline programming.

There are two types of methodology being applied,
which are the methodology for developing robotic
workcell simulation model by Cheng [5] and the
methodology for robotic simulation by Grajo et al. [6].
Figure 4 shows the methodology by Cheng [5] and
methodology by Grajo et al. is shown in Figure 5.

i) Creating part models
Part model is a low-level or geometric entity. The
parts are created using basic elements of solid modeling
features of Workspace5. These parts consist of the
components of Okura A1600 and the devices in its
workcell such as conveyor, pallet and pick up station.
ii) Building device models

Figure 4 A methodology for developing robotic workcell
simulation models by Cheng [5]

Phase 1:
Define the problem

Phase 2:
Design the study

Phase 4:
Formulate inputs,
assumptions, and process
definition

Phase 3:
Design the conceptual
model

Phase 5:
Build, verify, and validate
the simulation model

Phase 6:
Experiments with the
model and look for
opportunities for Design of
Experiments

Phase 8:
Define the Model Life
Cycle

Phase 7:
Documentation and
Presentation

Device models represent actual workcell component
and categorized into two; robotic device model and nonrobotic device model. Building device model starts from
positioning the base of part model as the base coordinate
system. Okura A1600 consists of five links, which are
Rotor/Link1, Lower/Link2, Upper arm/Link3, Link
lever/Link4 and Flange/Link5. These links are attached
accordingly to its number by using the attachment
feature of Workspace5. Each attached link is subjected
to Parent/Child relationship.
iii) Positioning device models in layout
The layout of workcell model refers to the
environment that represent the actual workcell. As for
this case, the coordinates system being applied is the
Hand Coordinates System of Okura A1600. Placement
of the model and devices in the environment is based on
the actual layout of the workcell.
iv) Defining devices’ motion destination in layout

Figure 5. A methodology for robotic simulation by Grajo
et al. [6]

3.1 The Methodology for Developing Robotic
Workcell Simulation Model
Robotic workcell simulation is “a modeling-based
problem solving approach that aims to sufficiently
produce credible solutions for robotic system design”
(Cheng [5]). His methodology consists of six steps:

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

The motion attributes of device model defines the
motion limits of the joints of the device model in terms
of home, position, speed, accelerations, and travel. In
Workspace5, each joint is considered part of the
proceeding link. As in Okura A1600, joint 1 is a waist
joint which links between the Base and the Rotor/Link1,
joint 2 is a shoulder joint which links between the
Rotor/Link1 and the Lower/Link2, joint 3 is an elbow
joint which links the Lower/Link2 with the Upper
arm/Link3, joint 4 is a wrist joint that links the Upper
arm/Link3 with the Link lever/Link4, and joint 5 is a
gripper joint, which links the Link lever/Link4 with the
Flange/Link5. Each joint has its own motion limits. Once
the joints have been defined, Workspace5 will
automatically defines the kinematics for the robot.
v) Device behaviour and programming
Device motion is refers to the movement of robot
arm during the palletizing process. The movement is
determined by a series of Geometry Points (GPs) that
create path of motion for the robot to be followed.

Positioning the GP and the series is based on the
movement pattern and the bags arrangement.
The GP coordinates are entered by using the
Pendant features of Workspace5. There are three ways in
creating the GP, which are by entering the value for each
joint, enter the absolute value of X, Y and Z, and by
mouse clicking. As for this project, the most appropriate
way to acquire the accurate position is by entering the
absolute value of X, Y and Z of a GP. 74 GPs have been
identified during the development.
vi) Executing workcell simulation and analysis
The simulation focuses only at the position of the
robot arm, not including its orientation. After
programmed, the device model layout can be simulated
overtime. Execution of the simulation and analysis is
using the features of Workspace5. The simulated model
is capable to view the movement of robot arm, layout
checking, robot’s reachabilites, cycle time monitoring
and collision and near miss detection.

3.2. The Methodology for Robotic Simulation
The methodology consists of eight phases but the
project only executes up to seven phases:
i) Phase 1: Define the problem
Problem identification is defined during the
preliminary analysis of problems’s background. Current
system have no computer based model that represent the
robotic application. Thus, it is impossible to monitor and
evalute the performance of the robotic palletizing
system.

Modeling the robot application focuses on three
activities, which are building the robot, motion path
programming of the palletizing process and run the
simulation. Building the robot’s model is heavily based
on the geometrical data of Okura A1600 using the CAD
features of Workspace5. The dimension is refers to the
CAD drawing of Okura A1600.
Few spatial data needs to be considered in
determining the motion path:
a) Point at the pick up station where the robot will pick
the bag,
b) Five points that represent an arragement of bags in an
odd numbered layer.
c) Five points that represent an arragement of bags in an
even numbered layer.
Position of points is in x, y and z coordinate. Since
each pallet consists of ten layers of bags with five bags
on each layer, ten incremental value of z are needed.
v) Phase 5: Build, verify, and validate the simulation
model
During this phase, development of the robotic
workcell is based on the methodology proposed by
Cheng [5]. This is an iteractive phases which aim to
improve the model’s precision and motion.
Validation towards the model is based on the
visualization of system layout and robot’s cycle time in
completing a task. The layout generated using
Workspace5 is compared to the actual system layout.
Figure 6 shows the system layout in Workspace5.

ii) Phase 2: Design the study
The study is limited to the project scopes. This
phases acquire appropriate decisions for tools and
methodology that are going to be used. Besides, a proper
planning and milestone need to be done.
iii) Phase 3: Design the conceptual model
The conceptual model is using the current
application of the robotic system. This phase acquires
collection of data of the parameters for the robotic
workcell development. These data include layout of the
robotic applications, geometry configuration of the
robot, robot motion parameters and the robot cycle time.
iv) Phase 4: Formulate inputs, assumptions, and process
definiton

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 6. The system layout in Workspace5
During preliminary data gathering, a movie that
shows the actual robot performing a task in one day
operation is recorded. The model is assumed to represent
the actual system once operated at the same movement

of actual system and capable to perform at the similar
cycle time as in the movie.
vi)

Phase 6: Experiments with the model and look for
opportunities for Design of Experiments

This phase is similar to the step six in the
methodology by Cheng [5]. A simulation is run in order
to visualize the arm movement and analysis on collision
detection. Execution of the simulation is using the
features of Workspace5 for simulation. Workspace5
allows layout checking in order to prepare other devices
within the robot’s reachability. It also capable to
generate working envelope for any namely two joints.
During simulation, a cycle time is displayed. The
simulation allows collision and near miss detection
among robot joints and between the joints and any object
within the workcell.
This project is an offline
programming. Neither robot language is generated nor
impelementing at actual workcell.

Figure 7. The working envelope
b) Cycle time

This phase gathers and documents all results
generated from the simulation. A written report provide
better understanding of the experiment’s executions and
analysis.

Cycle time is refers to the total time taken by the
robot in completing a task. During simulation, the cycle
time is displayed at the bottom of the screen on the status
bar. A simulation log is also generated. There is a slight
difference in the cycle time of the real process and
simulation, which is 11s. Therefore, the model robot is
performed as similar as the real robot with an error rate
is 1.39%

4. Simulation and Result

4.2. Collision Detection

This section presents the execution of simulation to
the first four joints of the robot, namely as the Waist
(joint 1), Shoulder (joint 2), Elbow (joint 3) and Wrist
(joint 4). It focuses only the position of the wrist, which
is the value of x, y and z, regardless its orientation, which
is the value of roll, pitch and yaw.

Workspace5 is capable to checks for any collision
or near miss among the robot joints or between the robot
joints and devices in the workcell. Example of the result
is “no collision found” as shown in Figure 8.

vi) Phase 7: Documentation and presentation

4.1. Validation of the Robot Model
Validation towards the model is done by layout
checking and measuring the cycle time of the robot’s
performance.
a) Layout checking
The working envelope shows the reachability of
robot arm that represent the limits of robot operation and
can be used safety purposes. Workspace5 has capability
in calculating the working envelope of the robot. Figure
7 shows the envelope generated from the three first
joints of the robot.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 8. The collision report

4.3. Animation
An animation during simulation can be created. The
animation is in .AVI format. Figure 9 shows the view of
an animation.

Figure 9. The animation

5. Conclusion
Robotic simulation is a modeling-based approach
for analyzing performances of a robotic workcell.
Unlike tradition discrete event simulation, robotic
simulation emphasizes on detail study of robot behavior
such as motion and interaction among other components
in its environment. Robotic simulation provides highlydetailed three-dimensional visual layout of a workcell.
Some simulation packages are incorporated with
collision detection capabilities that allow user to identify
any interference between robot and objects. It also
provided with cycle time monitoring to verify how long
a robot will complete a given task. Programming a robot
with minimal cycle time will ensure higher productivity
of a production. Compared to DES, robotic simulation
packages have a capability to translate a programming
made for the simulated model into the real robot
programming language.

References
[1] Zomaya, A.Y., Modeling and Simulation of Robot
Manipulators: A Parallel Processing Approach, World
Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd, Singapore, 1992.
[2] O.M. Ulgen, S. John, C. Gene, S. David, R. Matt, W.
Gemet, “Increasing the Power and Value of Manufacturing
Simulation Via Collaboration with Other Analytical Tools: A
Panel Discussion”, Int. Proceedings of the 31st Conference on
Winter Simulation, IEEE, Dec. 1999, pp. 749-753.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

[3] P. Robinson, “Robotics Education and Training: A Strategy
for Development”, Emerald Group Pub. Ltd, Journal of
Industrial Robot, vol. 23, no. 2, 1996, pp. 4-6.
[4] N. James and B. Roth, “On the Kinematic Analysis of
Robotic Mechanisms”, The International Journal of Robotics
Research, SAGE Pub., vol. 18, no. 12, 1999, pp. 1147-1160.
[5] F.S. Cheng, “A Methodology for Developing Robotic
Workcell Simulation Models”, Proceedings of the 32nd
Conference on Winter Simulation, IEEE, Dec. 2000, pp. 12651271.
[6] E.S. Grajo, A. Gunal, D. Sathyadev, and O.M. Ulgen, “A
Uniform Methodology for Discrete-event and Robotic
Simulation”, Proceeding of the Deneb Users Group Meeting.
Deneb Robotic. Inc. pp. 17-24.

