A HUMAN FACE RECOGNITION SYSTEM USING
NEURAL CLASSIFIERS
Xiaoyin Xu , Majid Ahmadi
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering.
University of Windsor
Windsor, Canada
Abstract—Traditional subspace methods for face recognition,
from the original Eigenfaces technique to the recently
introduced Laplacianfaces method, measure the similarity
between images after projecting them onto a face subspace. In
this paper, we present a robust face recognition system that
uses a neural classifier and Laplacianfaces method. Computer
simulation shows that the proposed algorithm has better noise
immunity and yields higher recognition rate compared with
several conventional face recognition algorithms
Introduction

Due to the increasing need of personal identification,
automatic face recognition has gained much attention in
recent years. Machine recognition of faces has several
applications, ranging from static matching of controlled
photographs to dynamic matching of surveillance video
images [4, 5].
Several methods for automatic face recognition have
been presented, which can be classified into three groups:
template-based approaches, statistical approaches and neural
network approaches. Since the 1990s, statistical approaches
have been dominant. This approach is often used in signal
processing, pattern classification and computer vision
problems as an efficient method for both dimension
reduction and finding the direction of the projection with
certain properties. Traditional statistical methods, namely
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [6], Fisher
Discriminant Analysis (FDA) [7, 8, 9] have been
implemented. However, both PCA and FDA only consider
the global structure of the subspace. A new subspace
approach to face analysis, Laplacianfaces [10, 11], has been
proposed recently, which aims to preserve the local structure
of the image space.
Our goal is to design a robust face recognition which
requires the ability to recognize identity despite many
variations in appearance that the face can have in a scene. In
the research of automatic face recognition, an important
means is to combine the specialty and advantage of many
approaches to achieve higher performance than each

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

approach respectively. Therefore we develop a novel
method in which we firstly use Laplacianfaces to reduce the
dimensionality of the face space and project the original
image onto a lower-subspace. Then in the second stage,
neural network (NN) [12], as a nonlinear alternative with
good generalization, has been proposed for face
classification.
In this paper, we begin with a description of the
Laplacianface model and its shortcomings in Section II.
Section III develops a new method of neural network and
Laplacianfaces for face recognition. Extensive computer
simulation results on different algorithms are presented in
Section IV in case of noise immunity. Finally, some
comments and concluding remarks on the proposed system
will be addressed.
I.

LAPLACIANFACES METHOD

PCA and most other appearance-base face recognition
methods aim to preserve the global structure; however,
Laplacianfaces seeks to preserve the local structure by
constructing a nearest-neighbor graph. And by doing so, it
overcomes the shortcomings of the more primitive
dimensionality reduction techniques such as the
aforementioned eigenfaces approach in Section I.
The basic framework of Laplacianfaces is as follows.
Suppose we have n d-dimensional training vectors, forming a
matrix X = [ x1 ,... xn ] and the projection of this matrix onto
the subspace is Y = [ y1 ,... yn ] . The objective function of
this algorithm is as follows:

min ∑ ( yi − y j )2 Sij
ij

(1)

where Sij is the low-dimensional presentation of one ddimensional sample
matrix.

S

xi and

the matrix

S

is a similarity

n

C = ∑ ( xi − u )( xi − u )T , u =
i =1

exp(− x − x
i
j
Sij = 
 0

ε

(6)

is defined as follows:
II.

where

1 n
∑ xi
n i =1

2

2

/ t ), xi − x j

<ε

(2)

Otherwise

is sufficiently small and ε > 0 .

The transformation vector W that minimizes the
objective function is given by the minimum eigenvalue
solution to the generalized eigenvalue problem:

XLX TW = λ XDX T W
Where W

is

the

projection

(3)
matrix, Dii =

∑S

ji

LAPLACIANFACES AND NEURAL NETWORKS

In many recognition systems, the methodology used is
the statistical approach. Although this paradigm has been
successfully applied to solve different problems in pattern
classification, it doesn’t express structural information.
Therefore, to achieve a better recognition performance, we
construct a novel recognition algorithm that combines the
NN and Laplacianfaces. The advantage of such scheme over
the Laplacianfaces method comes from the discriminative
nature, strong learning ability and good generalization of NN
[13]. The number of input variables is reduced through our
feature selection; therefore, there is no overfitting problem
for our design of the neural network. A systematic
methodology for our system to deal with high-dimensional
feature vectors is presented, as shown in Fig. 1. Experimental
results are demonstrated in Section IV.

j

and L = D − S .
T

can
In the face recognition applications, XDX
sometimes be singular. Suppose we have n images in the
training set, which is much smaller than the number of pixels

m in each image. Because the rank of XDX T is at most n ,
T
T
while XDX is a m × m matrix, it means XDX is
singular. To overcome this difficulty, PCA is usually applied
first to the training set to reduce the dimension of the input
images.

Principal Component Analysis is a well-established
dimensionality reduction technique based on extracting the
desired number of principal components of the multidimensional data. PCA aims to extract a subspace in which
the variance is maximized. Its objective function is as
follows:
Figure 1. Schematic diagram for our neural Laplacianface mthod
n

max ∑ ( yi − y )2 , where y =
w

i =1

1 n
∑ yi
n i =1

(4)

Therefore, the projection matrix W pca can be calculated by
solving the eigenvalue problem as follows:

CW pca = W pca Λ
where

C

is the covariance matrix of the whole data:

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

(5)

III.

EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

For different testing purposes, two sets of experiments
are conducted on three popular databases. All the faces are
pre-cropped and normalized. The first experiment is
conducted to compare the recognition performance achieved
by our method with that of Laplacianfaces, PCA method,
Fisherfaces and 2D PCA [14] method, which were all
performed using a nearest-neighbor classifier. In the second
experiment, the recognition robustness of the proposed
system for noise immunity is investigated while compared to
the Laplacianfaces method. The details of these experiments
are described below.

A. Benchmarks and Performance Evaluation
In this study, three face databases were tested. The
optimal recognition results of different algorithms are
shown in the tables below. The corresponding dimensions
of the face subspace are also called optimal face subspace
for each method.
1) To verify the effectiveness of the proposed face
recognition system, especially for frontal face images
,comparative experiments are conducted on YALE database.
YALE database contains 165 images of 15 subjects under
varying lighting condition, facial expression and
with/without glasses. In our experiment, six images per
subject were used for training. The whole database was
considered to be the testing set.The recognition results are
shown in Table 1.
TABLE I.

PERFORMANCE COMAPRISON ON YALE

Approaches

Dimensionality
Reduction

Recognition Rate

Proposed Method

60

99.2%

Laplacianfaces

54

97.3%

PCA

70

92.0%

Fisherfaces

14

94.3%

2D PCA

8

93.3%

TABLE III.

PERFORMANCE COMAPRISON ON ORL

Approaches

Dimensionality
Reduction

Recognition Rate

Proposed Method

120

92.5%

Laplacianfaces

120

90.0%

PCA

70

96.0%

Fisherfaces

30

96.25%

2D PCA

6

92.5%

B. Evaluation of Noise Immunity
Noise usually results from image sampling, recording,
transmission, etc. The ability of a face recognition system to
deal with noise is very important to the real-world
applications. The goal of the second experiment is to
evaluate the noise immunity power of the propose hybrid
method and Laplacianfaces for face recognition by adding
Gaussian noise into testing images .In this paper we consider
additive Gaussian white noise with zero mean and some
variance σ ranging from 0 to 0.50. The image examples
contaminated by different degree of Gaussian noises are
shown in Fig. 2.

2) The UMIST Face Database consists of 564 images of
20 people. Each covering a range of poses from profile to
frontal
views.
Subjects
cover
a
range
of
race/sex/appearance. 19 random images from each class
were chosen to form a new database and 9 of them were
used to be the training samples. As the recognition results
shown, ,for our algorithm, Laplacianfaces and PCA, the
error rates decrease as the dimensionality of the face
subspace increases, while there is no significant improvent
for Fisherfaces and 2D PCA.
TABLE II.

PERFORMANCE COMAPRISON ON UMIST

Approaches

Dimensionality
Reduction

Recognition Rate

Proposed Method

66

97.2%

Laplacianfaces

66

95.0%

PCA

54

91.3%

Fisherfaces

20

95.0%

2D PCA

8

92.1%

3) ORL database contains 40 subjects with 10 images
each. Five poses of each subject were used to form the
training set. Comparative results are shown in Table III. It
is found that our system still ourperforms the original
Laplacianfaces on this databse.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 2. Examples of testing images from three subjects: from left to
right, Guassian noises are added with mean=0.0, variance=0, 0.01, 0.05
0.1,0.5 and 1.0 respectively.

The number of hidden layers of NN was set to 20 and the
dimension after projection was chosen as 70 for both the
hybrid and Laplacianfaces method. Fig. 2 shows the
recognition performance achieved by adding different degree
of Gaussian noises to training images against ORL, YALE
and UMIST databases. The results show that our proposed
recognition system accomplishes better noise immunity
power than Laplacianfaces on all three databases.

contaminated by Gaussian noises. A hybrid method is
introduced in this paper which considers both the underlying
structure of the subspace and the design of a good
classification approach. The characteristics of our proposed
method not only give better face representation and
recognition performance than other conventional approaches,
but also let it outperform other methods in noisy conditions.
The simulation results demonstrate that the proposed system
is insensitive to different conditions, such as scale, posture,
illumination, noise, and facial expressions, and very suitable
for recognizing frontal face images.
Figure 3. Recognition Accuracy versus Noise Variance on YALE

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]
Figure 4. Recognition Accuracy versus Noise Variance on UMIST

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]
Figure 5. Recognition Accuracy versus Noise Variance on ORL

IV.

CONCLUSIONS

In this work, we have obtained promising results in face
recognition when using the proposed system in the datasets

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Yale
Univ.
Face
Database,
http://cvc.yale.edu/projects/
yalefaces/yalefaces.html, 2002.
ORL face database, http://www.cam-orl.co.uk, 1994.
UMIST
face
database,
http://images.ee.umist.ac.uk
/danny/database.html.
R. Chellappa, C. Wilson, “Human and machine recognition of faces:
a survey,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 83, no. 5, pp. 705-740, May 1995.
D. Valentin, H. Abdi, A.J. O’Toole, and G.W. Cottrell,
“Connectionist models of face processing: a survey,” Pattern
Recognition, vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 1209-1230, 1994.
M. Turk and A.P. Pentland, “Face recognition using eigenfaces,”
IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 1991.
P.N. Belhumeur, J.P. Hespanha and D.J. Kriegman, “Eigenfaces vs.
fisherfaces: recognition using class specific linear projection,” IEEE
Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 19, no.7,
pp.711–720, July 1997.
A.M. Martinez and A.C. Kak, “PCA versus LDA,” IEEE Trans.
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 228–
233, Feb. 2001.
W. Zhao, R. Chellappa, and P.J. Phillips, “Subspace linear
discriminant analysis for face recognition,” Technical Report CARTR-914, Center for Automation Research, University of Maryland,
1999.
X. He and P. Niyogil, “Locality preserving projections,” Proc. Conf.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2003.
X. He, S. Yan, Y. Hu, P. Niyogi, and H.J. Zhang, “Face recognition
using laplacianfaces,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 328-340, March 2005.
S. Haykin, Neural Network: A Comprehensive Foundation, 2rd ed.,
Prentice Hall, 1999.
M.J. Er, S. W, J. Lu and H.L. Toh, “Face recognition with radial basis
function neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Neural Networks, vol. 13, no.
3, pp. 697-710, May 2002.
J. Yang, D. Zhang, A.F. Frangi, and J.Y. Yang, “ Two-dimensional
PCA: a new approach to appearance-based face representation and
recognition,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
vol. 26, no. 1, January 2004.
D. Graham and N. Allinson, "Characterizing virtual eigensignatures
for general purpose face recognition," Face Recognition: From
Theory to Applications, ser. NATO ASI Series F, Computer and
Systems Sciences, vol. 163, pp. 446--456, 1998.

