Interactive 3D Forensic Visualisation: Virtual Interactive Prototype
Eddie Soon Eu Hui, Asst. Prof. Roberts Hedley, Dr. Daniela Leva
Limkokwing University, University of East London, Limkokwing University
{eddie@limkokwing.edu.my , H.Roberts@uel.ac.uk, daniela@limkokwing.edu.my }
Abstract
This paper focuses on virtual reality application
utilising a design approach to produce an interactive
prototype for the usage of visualization and
reconstruction of forensic research. This involves
different levels of 3D simulation and animation resulting
in variations of outputs. This proposed interactive
prototype would serve as a guide to research the process
of developing predefined outcomes of forensic training
and archiving particularly in Malaysia. The research
looks into developing a virtual forensic lab that serves as
an online community of forensic researchers, and has
potential to grow over time. The virtual lab also serves
as a database library of existing forensic cases that are
translated to a digital form. The application also
generates new object-oriented environments enabling
new conditions and situations that are not based on
existing archive cases. This paper focuses on the
methodology of the prototype creation.
Keywords --- Interactive, 3D Simulation and
Animation, Reconstruction, Visualization

1. Introduction
Because they are ephemeral, scenes of crime present
difficult data visualization problems. In all but the most
exceptional circumstances, a scene must be examined
quickly, and then returned to its original state [1]. This
creates obstacles for crime scene investigators as well as
forensic examiners as they have very little time to record
as much information as possible at a scene before the
scene is cleared-up or contaminated. This typically
involves making detailed on-site measurements, and the
use of conventional video and photography, for
subsequent analysis. From then on, the analysis can take
various physical or digital forms to be processed.
With reference to the many areas of forensic
research, this research concentrates on the areas of
spatial and environmental studies, simulated within a
digital representation. The source materials and data
gathered from a crime scene can better be analysed and

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

visualised by re-simulating the scene in a virtual
environment, particularly utilising 3D. By having a
virtual camera walkthrough in 3D space, one can better
conduct testing and simulation animation to research on
more than one practical possibility of how events within
a scene can be visualised. This approach offers several
advantages over traditional methods.
The outcome of the research is a prototype
application that is based on a first person perspective
GUI within a digital representation of a Forensic Lab.
The user can navigate around the scene and interact with
3D elements within the scene in real time. Objects within
the scene will be scripted to react based on proper
dynamics setup, in addition of limited AI perceived
conditional sampled data sets. The prototype runs on the
JAVA platform and it will be scripted with ANARK®.
The proposed application will be labelled Virtual
Interactive Prototype (VIP).

2. Literature Review
The underlying technologies and principles of VR
have evolved over the last 30 years. Ivan Sutherland first
wrote about a computer-generated illusion: ‘The screen
is a window through which one sees a virtual world. The
challenge is to make that world look real, act real, sound
real, feel real.’ It has taken over the past two decades or
so for computer graphics (CG) industry to become a
commercialised industry to provide for virtual realities,
and the gap to realize that goal is almost sealed.
The research outlines four key elements in
supporting the architecture of VR. The elements are
classified into Virtual World, Immersion, Interactivity
and Application.

2.1. Element of Time and Space
“Virtual reality can be defined as the component of
communication which takes place in a computergenerated synthetic space and that embeds humans
(actors) as an integral part of the system.” [2]
Virtual reality has a great deal of flexibility in how
time and space can be treated. The control of time can

range from having no concept of it (viewing a static
scene or object), to holding time constant, to letting it
flow at the same rate as our regular daily experience.
VR can even allow the user to manipulate time in both
direction and speed or allow them to jump to a particular
point in time. Similarly, a VR application can treat space
in a variety of ways: space can be limited to a small area,
such that anything the user might want to manipulate or
observe is within range of the tracking technology, or
space can be vast, literally unlimited. Finally, space can
literally be given a different shape than in our universe.

2.2. Forensic Technology
Bramble, Compton and Klasén (2001) [3] stated the
feasibility of forensic image analysis an activity that
forms part of most forensic evidential examinations such
as documents, handwriting, firearms, shoemarks,
fingerprints, etc. With reference to the 12th International
Forensic Science Symposium, Klasén (1998) [4], the
changes in forensic image analysis techniques in many
areas of forensic science whereby primary evidence type
such as CCTV, facial images, crime scene imaging and
3D imaging was benchmarked to be recognized.
According to the author, information for this review has
been requested from 246 forensic institutions and
laboratories across the world primarily through a
proforma questionnaire. It is reported here that over the
intervening three years this trend has continued apace
and today digital imaging technology has now penetrated
almost all areas of forensic science activity. Clearly,
there is a strong link with other technologies, such as
image capture, information technology and digital
evidence, and these closely related technologies are
considered where they either indicate a trend or have an
impact on the process of image analysis.

2.3. Scene Reproductions
“The latent print examiner can "reconstruct" the
position of a suspect's hand on a door; the serologist can
sometimes "reconstruct" the stabbing victim's position
from stain patterns on clothing; the medical examiner
can "reconstruct" the wounding of a human body. A
more precise look at reconstruction, however, requires
that we distinguish between the terms reconstruction, recreation, and reenactment.” [5] All three terms are
similar in meaning, yet sophisticated in its interpretation.
The following sub-chapter describes the terms
reconstruction, re-creation, and reenactment in a more
elaborative manner. The difference of each of the terms
focuses on the details of the research.
2.3.1. Reconstruction
Based from a profound research by crime scene
reconstruction experts, the term reconstruction is quite
frequently associated to profiling, psychology and
analysis. Basically, the term reconstruction literally

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

means ‘putting together again’, like pieces of evidence or
information to form a whole theory. Some of these
pieces might be either missing, or some fragments might
fit together in more than a single combination.
As defined by accident investigators, reconstruction
is "the effort to determine, from whatever information is
available, how the accident happened. It involves
studying the results of the accident, considering other
circumstances, and applying scientific principles to form
opinions relative to events of the accident which are
otherwise unknown or are the matter of dispute". [6] This
clearly shows that reconstruction concentrates on
evidence to reproduce a representation of the actual
scene itself. Every detail is important to be considered
here as the reconstruction would deemed incomplete if
not all the evidence is recorded.
2.3.2. Reenactment
This brings us to the subject of reenactment. The
word "reenactment" means to act out or perform again. It
has nothing whatsoever to do with scientific principles.
The distinction between reconstruction and reenactment
is a critical one. [5]
Originally criminal reenactments by police
investigators were performed in the presence of suspects
in an effort to encourage confessions. [7] Forensic
animation is the "hot" topic now and we offer high tech
3D animations to help your case. Our philosophy is
based on the idea that a picture is not only worth a
thousand words, but can be worth a BIG settlement. Our
animations are photo-realistic (they look real) they put
the jury in the drivers seat (so to speak) for accident
reconstructions, crime scene recreations, and they're
great for product liability cases. (we have a demo tape
that shows off these effects) The most effective way to
get your point across lies in the most basic of all
presentations; show and tell - and what we offer is the
high tech version of the preschool standard.
2.3.3. Recreation
The word re-creation means to form anew,
especially in the imagination, to recollect and reform in
the mind. This might be what advocates do in the
courtroom with the spinning of tales and flights of fancy,
but re-creation is not the turf of the criminalist. [8] As a
court case may take several years to be available for trial,
the crime scene is sure to have undergone tremendous
physical changes and the evidence would not be able to
be preserved. Therefore, preserving exact measurements
to enable crime-scene recreation can prove critical to
successful prosecution. Managing substantial recovery of
data collection from the scene should prove useful. This
can be in both physical and digital representations, as
long as the data proves accurate and precise.

2.4. Forensic Virtual Applications
This sub-chapter describes the 3D animation and 3D
Simulation methods of forensic virtual application
presentation sets.
2.4.1. 3D Animation
Forensic 3D Animation can be referred to as a
graphical demonstration of the theory that results from
using virtual models. What turns an animation into a
forensic animation is the "The forensic Process ". This
process depends on accuracy. All objects must obey the
laws of physics and conform to a set of facts that are
determined by a reconstructionist or forensic expert. For
instance, the forensic process for accident reconstruction
starts with the accident investigation. [5] The creation of
working models that are uniquely adjustable, in order to
answer questions about how something looked or moved
in the past or future.
From this data a recreation is created that fits all the
existing facts. A forensic expert calculates the placement
of vehicles before, during, and after an accident and
come up with data representing the movement of all the
players in the final animation.
The animator takes this information, builds 3D
models of the environment and vehicles and visually
creates the scene based on all required data. Any
photographs available will also aid in the construction of
the scene in 3D. The most crucial element to consider in
detailing is scale and proportion.
2.4.2. 3D Simulation
What is environmental simulation? [3] described it
as “…an attempt to represent environmental reality…”
One of the most important aspect to consider in a 3D
simulation lies within its environmental properties. To
study how could Virtual Reality simulation techniques be
incorporated in environmental simulation, it is important
to outline the nature of environmental simulation,
criticism of current environmental simulation techniques,
and the requirement of the future technique.
• CG data can be simulated based on certain
guidelines as categorized into the following
process:
• Creating the physical scene from blueprints,
photos or scale drawings.
• Creation of the objects within the scene, such as
people and vehicles.
• Describing the movement of the objects in the
scene
The importance of environmental simulation is
being crucial for almost all environmental design
professions for presenting simulations of reality to the
observer (client) to predict his responses of the real
situation. A solution to complex engineering and forensic
challenges are as follows:
• Measure and plot scenes that cannot be reached
in person
• Measure and analyse complex objects or
structures

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

•

Measure and document large areas quickly

Rhodes et. al. [7] illustrates
environmental simulation process.

the

flow

of

Figure 1: A typology of environmental
simulation techniques
The chart clearly outlines the breakdown of the
simulation flows based on perceptual and conceptual
data. Perceptual data can be defined to be more towards
experimental based compared to Conceptual data that is
of an abstract basis. Both Perceptual and Conceptual data
consists of its own static and dynamic elements.

3. Methodology
The prototype application simulates a virtual scene
that enables 3D elements to be manipulated in virtual
space. This is based on a covariance matrix of preset
object-oriented representation in 3D space. The primary
interest is of this study is to define how efficient is the
relationship of subject space in a virtual environment.
Scene objects are based on a proper scale construction
with the correct aspect ration with reference to the real
world. Thus, a better sense of space and depth can be
understand as the user manipulates the perspective and
angle controls. By having the user to navigate within the
scene and interact with the elements within the scene
construction, the research experiments on the data
collection process to measure the effectiveness of the
prototype application, as well as to define effective
methods to test the interactive design of the prototype
application.

3.1. Experimental Design Process
The research looks into the preparation on the
interactive prototype application. The first stage of the
prototype creation is to work on planning the virtual
scene. Mind-maps and a checklist are rather constructive
to plan all the elements to be present in the scene. A
sketch or schematic representation should follow. Then,
all the drawings/blockings should be converted into a
layout with 3D objects. The 3D objects will then be
applied proper textures to simulate the realistics of the
scene. After this stage, the polygon models are animated,
lit, and scripted into a Graphics User Interface (GUI)
shell representation for testing. A sample group of

forensic trainees are to test the application to define the
effectiveness of the prototype.
3.1.1. Experiment preparation (Interactive Prototype)
Pre-production: Planning
• Staging VR blueprint/script/storyboard
• Layout VR workflow (outcome variables)
Production: Execution
• Constructing the scene: Modeling, Texturing
• Scripting elements variables: camera, lighting,
volume, workstation
Post-production: Processing Interactive Application
• Alpha testing
• Analysis on output obtained
• Debugging script and revert back to analysis
Beta testing: closed beta stage, open beta stage
• The testing stage will experiment on the
following breakdowns.

Figure 2: Typology of the Research Experiment
Process
The experiment process outlines two types of
approaches: Conditional and Conclusive. Conditional
data obtained through observation and identification is
based on individual assumptions and interpretation.
Conclusive data is based on analysis conducted to
measure predefined results.

perception, research findings begin to inform the
designer about the nature of its many forms. The eyes
receive spatial information that is, both in frequent
velocity, far in excess of that received by any other
organs.
3.2.2. Identification
Identification resolves the study of patterns based on
physical and psychological perspectives. To identify a
subject matter is to make known the connection of the
subject to a known explanation of sorts. This leads to the
understanding of conceptual space. The aesthetics of the
predefined dimensions make up the complete analogy of
the phenomena.
As opposed to the psychological dimension of
behavioural space and the tactility and measurability of
physical space, conceptual space is that which we
perceive and visualize. The design of space is, initially, a
mental concept and any resultant response is primarily
experienced through visual perception. However, a formoriented approach to design is still prevalent, in which
space can be literally ignored for, if considered, exist as a
kind of waste product after design.
3.2.3. Analysis
There are three different definitions for the key word
‘analyse’ as described by [9] that can be adapted into
Forensic research.
• Analysis, referrers to the determination of the
composition of a substance.
• Analyte or Target Analyte, determines the
substance to be identified or measured.
• Analytical, is referred to the branch of
chemistry dealing with techniques that yield any
type of information.
The research integrates the above-mentioned
methods to measure the experiment outcomes.

3.2. Evaluation Procedures
“The depth of spatial understanding in primitive and
ancient still perplexes modern science.” [2] The
principle concern of designing virtual environment is to
look into spatial studies. A method of study includes
observation, identification and analysis.
3.2.1. Observation
The means of observing relates to personal
interpretation of how one defines the objective and
subjective matter before them. From an observation
standpoint, the reflected data apprehended depends
indirectly on situational specifications. Certain aspects to
consider when performing an observation are height,
level, angle and distance.
As a consequence of experimental psychology
studies, space has become more dynamic and ‘tangible’.
As a result of attempts to understand the mechanics of

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 3: The experimental phase of the data
collection process
The conceptual framework towards the forensic
investigative process involves the following aspects
based on preliminary analysis.
• Formulate hypotheses on the state of the world
that caused the case,
• Collect evidence on the basis of these
hypotheses,
• Correlate actual evidence with hypotheses,

•

Adjust hypotheses, and repeat the process until
the consistency state of the knowledge about the
case is sensibly high.

Figure 4: Conceptual Framework of Forensic
Investigation Process

sketches and drawings, motion graphics, animation and
video.
The base strategy of the prototype creation process
is referred to the Waterfall Model. As the nature of the
prototype differs in certain aspects, the VIP creation
process has been modified to cater for a more effective
design solution.
The building blocks of the content within the GUI
cater for the accuracy and precision of the virtual data.
The VR environment is perceiver and creator at the same
time, in a world where the objects of perception are
created by actions. The basis to consider within the
spatial designs is as follows:
• The amount of preparation necessary by the
reconstructionist and animator
• The level of detail in the animation,
• The number of scenarios to be created (different
animations).
The design solution will be based on the following
process.

Complex arguments ought to be separated in small ones.
Our initial hypothesis A can be decomposed in subhypotheses, whose verification is simpler; this
decomposition will be denoted by:
A = A1 + A2 + A3, + … + An
A = n(An+1)

3.3. Experiment Procedures
In exploring spatial studies, we are able to see or
envision from a variety of viewpoints. These alternative
points of view give us flexibility in representing our
visual thoughts and perceptions. Each type differs,
however, in its capability to facilitate the development of
ideas.

Figure 6: UI Controls Pipelines
Based on the above-mentioned logical components
of the prototype setup, the interactive application is
constructed based on an independent architecture design
visualization that is capable of future development. As
the research only focuses on designing the interactive 3D
UI authoring section, the backend of the system can be
adapted into any simulation engine.

Figure 5: VIP Experimental Design Construction
Sets

3.4. Designing a Virtual Environment
The nature of the interactive prototype serves as a
design solution to forensic research with the applications
of VR elements. These elements are made up of
multimedia components particularly focusing in 3D
Imaging. The core elements are photographs and images,

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Figure 7: VIP | Anark® System Architecture
The research looks into designing the system
architecture of the interactive prototype independent as
not to rely on the programmers to construct the backend
of the application pipeline. Having planned a concrete
workflow to define the specifications of the integration
of the pipeline elements, UI artists and programmers can

agree upon a certain contract to synchronise the graphic
and script elements to merge independently.

4. Case Analysis
Using the precision and infinite adjustability of the
computer-generated scene, simulations can be helpful in
these areas:
Demonstrate of events otherwise impossible to
visualize.
• Scene no longer exist as it was
• Key physical evidence missing
• Timing issues too complex to re-construct
• Desired vantage point impossible to film or
video
4.1. “What-if” Analysis
There are many types of models, and they can be
classified in many ways. Models can be static or
dynamic, mathematical or physical, stochastic or
deterministic. [10]
A data model instance may be one of three kinds –
conceptual schema, logical schema and physical schema.
There are two primary model types – optimisation and
simulation. Optimisation models are prescriptive, but
simulation models are descriptive. The purpose of a
simulation model is to mimic the real system so that its
behaviour can be studied. By utilising the simulated
object-oriented scenes within VIP, a modeler can
perform experiments that are impossible, unethical, or
prohibitively expensive in the real world.
Every simulation model has two main components.
Firstly, it must include a representation of the physical
world relevant to the problem under study. It represents
the factors that characterize the physical and institutional
setting. Secondly, a simulation model must portray the
behaviour of the actors in the system. In this context,
behaviour means the way in which people respond to
different situations, how they make decisions.
4.2. Simulated Visual Analytics
Visual Analytics is defined as the formation of
abstract visual metaphors in combination with a human
information discourse (interaction) that enables detection
of the expected and discovery of the unexpected within
massive, dynamically changing information spaces. [11]
Commonly associated with the term Information
Visualisation or even Scientifi Visualisation, Visual
Analytics is commonly used to study life science or even
engineering issues such as mapping, scientific drawings
or even data ploting. It is deemed accurate and precise up
to a visual standpoint, but not entirely accurate and
precise in actual physical measurements in real-world
dynamic situation based on numerical calculation
representations.
The nature of VIP is targeted more towards the
category of training simulation. Training simulation
types can be classified into three categories – Live
Simulation, Virtual Simulation and Constructive
Simulations. Training simulations deemed to be very

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

focused and specific, inclusive of sets of pre-defined
objectives.

Conclusions
The experiment objectives are to create a real-time
virtual simulation environment and to experiment on the
level of the simulation in terms of dynamics and
kinematics elements. This involves scripting animation
sets within the interactive prototype application.
The nature of VIP is to have the user in a firstperson perspective in a self-controlled walkthrough
environment. This is mainly to simulate the feeling of
having the experience of walking through the real scene.
The prototype application serves as a training ground for
forensic agents to practice their skills.
Future development of the prototype application is
to utilise similar system architecture of VIP to be adapted
into larger system environments with a larger virtual
community cluster outside of the forensic field.

References
[1]

Virtual Environments for Scene of Crime Reconstruction
and Analysis T.L.J. Howard, A.D. Murta and S. Gibson
Advanced Interfaces Group, Department of Computer
Science, University of Manchester, Manchester M13
9PL, United Kingdom
[2] Porter, T. (1997) “The Architect’s Eye”, Chapman &
Hall, London.
[3] Bramble, S., Compton, D., Klasén, L., Forensic Image
Analysis, Version 2, 13th INTERPOL Forensic Science
Symposium, Lyon, France, October 16-19 2001,
October 2001
[4] Klasén L, Image Analysis, Proceedings of the 12th
Interpol Forensic Science Symposium, Co-ordinating
Laboratory Reports on Evidence Types, Frank RS and
Peel HW, 1998, p. 261-302
[5] D. H. Garrison, Jr., Shooting Reconstruction vs Shooting
Reenactment, Originally published in the Association of
Firearm & Toolmark Examiners Journal, April 1993
[6] Baker, J.S., Traffic Accident Investigation Manual, 2nd
ed., Northwestern University Traffic Institute: Evanston,
Illinois, 1975, p. 319
[7] Rhodes, H., Clues and Crime, Murray: London, 1936, p.
56
[8] Chisum, W.J., "Crime Scene Reconstruction," California
Department of Justice Firearm/Toolmark Training
Syllabus, reprinted Association of Firearm & Toolmark
Examiners Journal, Vol. 23, No. 2, April 1991, pp. 74551
[9] Brenner, J. C., Forensic Science Illustrated Dictionary,
CRC Press Inc., 2003, ISBN 0-8493-1457-7
[10] Sterman, John D., A Skeptic’s Guide to Computer
Models, 1991
[11] Wikipedia,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_Analytics/

