Designing a Computer Game to Teach Einstein’s Theory of Relativity
David Carr, Terry Bossomaier, Ken Lodge
Centre for Research in Complex Systems (CRiCS), Charles Sturt University
dcarr@csu.edu.au, tbossomaier@csu.edu.au, klodge@csu.edu.au
Abstract
This paper describes an ongoing project to build a computer application that presents Einstein’s Theory of Relativity in an interactive game environment. With the current interest in the use and study of how computer games
can help teach and educate, so-called ‘serious games’, the
resulting game is expected to have value for educators in
communicating the concepts of Relativity to high school
students as well as introducing the topic to a wider audience. The focus of this paper is on the initial design and
building of an Asteroids-styled game and describes features of the physics, graphics and animations, and play
mechanics. Directions for future development and studies
are discussed.
Keywords—serious games, games to teach, physics, relativity, relativistic visualisation

1

Introduction

Albert Einstein’s Theory of Relativity [1] is one of the
most important results of modern physics, and today part
of everyday science and technology. Yet despite its significance, knowledge and understanding of the theory remains the domain of the trained physicist. While this lack
of comprehension is undoubtedly due in part to the difficult
mathematical formalisms and counterintuitive results, it is
believed a lack of communication is also at fault.
In recent times computers have enabled researchers to
simulate relativistic effects, including visual representations of how things would look in relativistic scenarios.
In [11], Weiskopf et al contend that such simulations can
assist in communicating the aspects of relativity to the
layperson. Current leading-edge relativistic visualisations
techniques include non-interactive image [12] and movie
[9] generation, and more recently interactive techniques
[11] [8]. To date however these have been purely visual
simulations, and provide limited scope for demonstrating
the other aspects of relativity such as time dilation and energy content of bodies.
In recent years there has been a lot of interest and attention on how computer games teach their players and
convey knowledge [3]. Following work on relativistic vi-

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

sualisations, we postulate that presenting relativity in a
computer game application could enhance learning and
enable communication of a wider range of relativistic effects than possible with just visualisations. One of us
(D.C.) has built an initial prototype relativistic game based
on a classic game template. The design of the game and
visualisations of relativity will be the focus of discussion
in this paper; studies of the effectiveness of the game for its
target application will be the subject of future publications.

2

Serious games

‘Serious Games’ is an emergent field in the computer
games industry and education research area. Its focus is
the study and development of methods for using games and
game technologies to teach (in classrooms and for recreational learning) and building games whose purposes are
not solely entertainment. Well-designed computer games
are actually exceptionally good at teaching players how to
play them, due to the way the game structure is used to
present situated challenges and motivating goals [3]. The
central question of Serious Games is whether and in what
ways this can be harnessed to train learners in knowledge
that is applicable to domain problems outside of the game.

2.1

Using games to teach physics

Many games incorporate physics in their gameplay. A
physics simulation is often used to define the behaviour of
objects in the game world, and can be the entire focus of
the game, as in the case of simulation games. A detailed
and believable level of physics simulation can be a way of
drawing in players and creating more depth to the gameplay, by enabling players to apply their own play style to
how they interact and solve problems in the game environment. Players can also learn the behaviour of a welldesigned consistent physics simulation and learn to predict
the outcomes of given actions.
In the case of the game presented in this paper, we are
interested in the ways that a game can teach the player
about physics principles. In this case, the goal is that the
physical simulation of the game serve to illustrate how objects interact, and give players practise at anticipating and

predicting outcomes, to build mental models of physics behaviours.
An interesting example of an educational physics game
is Supercharged! [10], which teaches electromagnetism
and how charged particles interact. The gameplay is built
around the Maxwellian principles of electrostatics, which
are quite different to the Newtonian physics traditional
games. This we feel is similar to our game approach,
which varies the ‘normal’ classical mechanics with relativistic principles, to produce a markedly different behaviour and gameplay style.

3

Say we have a object with a known length at rest, x0 ,
and want to know its length as measured when travelling at
speed v. Defining the length to be found as x(v), then the
relation between them is given by

As v approaches the speed of light c, so x(v) will tend
to be smaller than x0 —a contraction of space with increasing speed. Likewise if we have a measure of time t0 in the
rest frame, and want to know what corresponding amount
of time t(v) passes in the moving frame,

The Special Theory of Relativity

Einstein’s Theory of Relativity [1] has two parts. This
discussion will focus only on the part of the Theory known
as Special Relativity, which is concerned with the invariance of the speed of light when measured by observers in
relative motion, and named for the ‘special’ case of bodies
moving without acceleration. According to special relativity, as a moving observer increases in speed, the speed at
which that observer sees light travelling remains constant;
however, its time slows down, its mass increases, and space
contracts.

3.1

Results of special relativity

The description of an ‘event’ in space and time is given
by the three space coordinates x, y and z and time value
t. We consider a first coordinate system denoted K, and
a second coordinate system K 1 which is axis-aligned with
K and travelling with a velocity v along the x-direction of
K, and ask: what are the values (x1 , y 1 , z 1 , t1 ) of an event
with respect to K1, when the magnitudes (x, y, z, t) of
the same event with respect to K are given? In order to
preserve the second postulate, the relations that solve this
problem are:
x1 = (x − vt)γ
y1 = y
z1 = z
t1 = (t − (βx)/c) γ
where
β=
γ=

x
c
1

1 − β2

This system of equations is known as the “Lorentz
transformation”. From the Lorentz transformation equations we can describe the behaviour of measurements of
lengths of space and time as follows:

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

1 − β2

x(v) = x0

t(v) =

t0
1 − β2

With increasing speed v, t(v) will be a somewhat longer
time than t0 , therefore time is dilated. Finally, for an object of mass m0 , the kinetic energy is no longer given by
mv 2 /2 but by
mc2
1 − β2
Which results in a somewhat larger value for the kinetic
energy as velocity increases. If the energy content (given
by E = mc2 ) is taken to include kinetic energy, it is sometimes said that mass increases with increasing speed, which
is described by the following equation:
m(v) =

3.2

E
=
c2

m0
1 − β2

‘Relativistic mass’ and relativistic F = ma

With this definition for ‘relativistic mass’ we can write
a relativistic version of Newton’s second law, F = ma,
which relates the vectors force F and acceleration a by an
object’s mass m. Unlike in the Newtonian situation, where
m is a scalar and F and a are parallel, this is not always
the case in the relativistic situation! To express this fact,
we need to use matrix notation, where v is the velocity
vector and β = vc . The acceleration is given by
a=

F − (F · β)β
mγ

We see that in the general case the acceleration produced is not parallel to the direction of the force. We consider a “transverse mass” mt , and a “longitudinal mass”
ml , which have the following magnitudes:
mt = mγ
ml = mγ 3

It is not hard to see that it’s easier to accelerate a mass
sideways to its motion, than it is to accelerate along the
direction of its motion—that is, the relativistic mass has a
directional dependence! This is one reason that the concept
of a velocity-dependent mass is actually discouraged (see
[4], [5]). With this in mind, the treatment in this paper will
nevertheless be using ‘relativistic mass’ since it enables
correspondence with the Newtonian equations to retained.

4 Relativistic visualisation
The story Mr Tompkins in Wonderland written by
George Gamow [2] aims to introduce relativity in an accessible, illustrative way, using the exploration of a world
where the speed of light is reduced to 30mph. This causes
the effects of special relativity to become apparent in everyday activities, such as where Mr Tompkins observes
Lorentz contraction of a passing bicyclist. While Gamow’s
writing is a novel presentation of relativity and treats the
topic in an engaging and entertaining way, the illustrations
and details of the story—assuming that what was described
by relativity (such as Lorentz contraction) would also be
seen—are unfortunately incorrect. In fact, when travelling
at velocities that are a significant proportion of the speed
of light, other effects dominate to cause changes to an object’s apparent size, shape and colour. These are the subject
of the scientific field of relativistic visualisation [7][12].
Space does not permit a full treatment of what would really be ’seen’ by a relativistic observer in this paper—but
it is important to make the distinction that the game being
presented does not present a relativistic visualisation in the
sense of what would be ‘seen’. See [11] and [8] for examples and details of the implementation and application of
current cutting-edge special and general relativistic visualisation techniques for research and teaching.
An important aspect of introducing interactivity to visualisations is the treatment of the accelerated observer.
Since special relativity deals only with inertial frames of
reference, it may seem that general relativity is required.
However, from a result first presented in Rau et al in [6],
accelerations can be treated by finding a co-moving inertial frame for the instantaneous velocity at each required
moment in time.

like a scaling; it does not change the physics [7].

5

Our game design is a re-imagining of the classic Asteroids video arcade game incepted by Atari in 1979
(see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asteroids (arcade game)
for general description). Here the main departure from the
classic Asteroids game design is the inclusion of a relativistic physics engine. The game is implemented in C++
for Microsoft Windows operating systems and uses the Microsoft DirectX 9.0c API for graphics calls.
The original Asteroids is a two-dimensional game. The
player controls a spaceship, maneuvering around the game
screen which is populated with drifting ‘asteroids’. The
primary spaceship controls consist of thrust, left (counterclockwise) and right (clockwise) rotation, and a fire button. The objective of the game is to shoot and destroy
the asteroids, which earns the player points, while avoiding collision with the fragments. When shot, each initial
large asteroid splits into two medium-sized rocks, and each
medium asteroid splits into two small ones.
The original Asteroids was a very popular video game
in its time, and has been recreated in several official and
unofficial versions. Many of these different versions add
or change features of the original game, as does ours. After Squire et al [10] we take the approach of having the
concepts we wish to communicate to learners ingrained in
the game mechanic, so that learners will learn the concept
to beat the game. Asteroids was chosen as a game template
to develop with relativistic physics due to the gameplay
being based around the interactions of inertial objects. The
spaceship is treated as a free-moving inertial body; the
application of thrust by the player applies a force upon the
ship along the direction of its current facing (the effect of
drag/friction or other retarding effects is negated here). By
the equation relating force, mass and acceleration (detailed
in section 3.2), the player ship in Asteroids was thought
to be an ideal way of communicating the concept of ‘relativistic mass’, as its inertia and handling will change with
speed as compared to the classical case.

5.1
4.1

‘Slow light’ concept

One difficulty with describing relativity is the immensely fast nature of the speed of light. In Mr Tompkins
[2], introduces the concept of ‘slow light’, which has become a recurring theme in relativistic visualisations and is
also used in our game. By assigning a value for the speed
of light that is much slower, we are able to illustrate the effects of relativistic travel using familiar real-life scenarios,
such as the street scene. Changing the speed of light acts

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

Design of the game

Game mechanics

The game that has been developed is essentially Asteroids with dual physics simulation models (so-called
physics ‘engines’): one for describing the motions of objects under the laws of Classical mechanics, and the other
with the laws of Relativistic mechanics. This results in different interpretations of the laws of inertia, and elastic collisions (implemented in the game but beyond the scope of
discussion in this paper). Our game offers players a choice
of game modes, so it can be played with the effects of one

Figure 1: The game being played under the Classical mechanics model.

Figure 2: The game being played under the Relativistic mechanics model.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

physics system and then the other, demonstrating and contrasting the differences in the behaviour of objects.
In the case of the Relativistic system, the concept of
‘slow light’ (described in the previous section) is utilised,
so that game objects can be animated travelling at comprehendible rates on the screen and relativistic effects emphasised and exaggerated. We enable the speed of light to
be set to differing values—most pertinently being a value
that is easily attainable by the spaceship under Classical
mechanics, so that relativistic effects enter into the game
experience readily.
The primary effect and difference of playing under the
Relativistic physics engine, is that objects increase in inertial mass with velocity. This affects the handling of the
player spaceship avatar: as it becomes more massive with
speed, it takes a greater effort by the player in order to
effect direction changes. Also, consistent with special relativity, no object can attain or exceed the speed of light—it
effectively becomes a ‘speed limit’ for all objects in the
game. The Lorentz contraction of space for fast-moving
objects is also present in the game. This results in objects
shapes being distorted both visually (they appear shortened
along their direction of travel), as well the interpretation of
their boundaries for determining collisions.

5.2

Game graphics

For the purposes of visual representation, the game
screen is treated as a static observer frame of reference.
Therefore, game objects such as the player ship, asteroids
and projectiles are in relative motion to the observer frame.
Figures 1 and 2 show screenshots of a game in progress,
being played under classical and relativistic mechanics respectively. Note the text readouts in the upper-left corner
of the screen, which expresses the absolute velocity of the
player spaceship when played under classical mechanics,
and proportional velocities and mass in the relativistic case.
In the relativistic example, the Lorentz contraction of
fast-moving objects is readily visible for objects travelling
at speeds approaching the ‘slow light’ limit. (As previously
discussed, this should not be viewed as a literal representation of a relativistic scene.) In addition, a ‘trail’ graphical
effect has been implemented to help emphasise and give
a visual cue to the object’s proportional relativistic mass.
Objects in motion have been programmed to leave a ‘ghost
trail’ of afterimages in their wake; the length of the trail
varies proportionately with the object’s relativistic mass
ratio. Thus, objects moving at a significant proportion of
the speed of light are not only shown compressed along
their direction of travel, but also with a trail effect intended
as a visual device to give the player a sense of the increased
inertia of the object. These effects are shown more clearly
in the expanded Figure 3.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

6

Discussion

In its current state, the game described offers a play experience based on the template of the classic Asteroids,
with a twist of variant game modes that play to different
models of physics. We feel that the presentation of the classical and relativistic models together in the game provide
a clear illustration of some of the aspects of relativity and
the ways that they differ from the classical physics. This
project is ongoing to continue to develop and improve the
game, and ultimately to test to what extent playing a game
such as this can help learners to intuit relativistic principles
by an evaluative study.
Proposed additions to the game mechanics to increase
the pedagogical value of the game include:
• At present, the dilation of time described by relativity is not included in any demonstrative form. One
way to incorporate this into the game would be by
introducing a time-dependent object(s) to the game,
such as a ‘ticking time bomb’ object.
• The game could be extended to incorporate switching of the observer frame of reference, to illustrate
the role of the Lorentz transformation between inertial frames. The static observer frame could switch
to a frame co-moving with the player’s ship, and
back; each different frame would present a different
perspective of the graphical display of the game.
• Further exploration of the use of graphical cues to
communicate game and object states is planned. The
current relativistic mass ‘trail’ effect could be augmented or replaced with other graphical effects, such
as expanding the object’s outline, which might be
more effective for communicating these notions.
In addition there are other improvements planned aimed
at increasing the game’s appeal. These include deploying more colourful graphics, creating more variety in game
play and configurability, and the possible introduction of
statistics tracking both for learning objectives and the entertainment value of ‘best score’, etc. Other game designs
might also be explored, that focus on aspects of relativistic principles that the Asteroids template is less suited to
(such as frame switching or prediction of elastic collisions
as puzzle solutions).
In the longer-term it is also planned to merge the game
mechanics techniques developed here with the 3D methods
for ‘true’ relativistic visualisation. This will be a step to
create interactive virtual worlds that not only look but behave according to relativistic principles, as well as provide
potentials for future ‘serious game’ design projects.

Figure 3: Expanded view of game objects exhibiting Lorentz contraction, and the ‘trail’ effect visual device.

7

Conclusion

In this paper we have briefly described some of the principles and results of Einstein’s theory of relativity, and
presented a computer game design that enables users to
observe and play with these principles from special relativity. We take the approach of incorporating the physics
principles into the game mechanics themselves, so that the
learner interacts directly with the concepts and should develop an intuitive understanding of them by the experience
of playing the game. The modification of a classic arcade
game template is discussed, and the ways that a relativistic
model of game physics gives strikingly different behaviour
from the classical model are shown.
The building of the game presented is still an ongoing
project and directions for future development have been
given. Scientific evaluation of the game with learning cohorts is planned to measure its potential as a pedagogical
tool for teaching relativity. These details and results will
be the subject of future publications.

Acknowledgements
This work is funded by a Charles Sturt University Postgraduate Research Studentship (CSUPRS) scholarship.

References
[1] Albert Einstein. Relativity: The Special and General
Theory. Methuen & Co Ltd., 1999 edition, 1924.
[2] George Gamow.
Macmillan, 1940.

Mr Tompkins in Wonderland.

[3] James Paul Gee. What Video Games Have to Teach
Us About Learning and Literacy. Palgrave Macmillan, 1st edition edition, May 2003.
[4] Philip Gibbs, Jim Carr, and Don Koks. Does mass
change with velocity? http:// math.ucr.edu/ home/
baez/ physics/ Relativity/ SR/ mass.html, 2002.
[5] Lev B. Okun. The concept of mass. Physics Today,
42(6):31–36, June 1989.

Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV 2007)
0-7695-2928-3/07 $25.00 © 2007

[6] Rene T. Rau, Daniel Weiskopf, and Hanns Ruder.
Special relativity in virtual reality. In H.-C. Hege
and K. Polthier, editors, Mathematical Visualization
(Proc. VisMath ’97), pages 269–279, Heidelberg,
1998. Springer Verlage.
[7] Craig M. Savage and Antony C. Searle. Visualising
special relativity. The Physicist, 36:141, July/August
1999.
[8] Craig M. Savage, Antony C. Searle, and Lachlan McCalman.
Real time relativity.
arXiv:
physics/0607223, July 2006.
[9] Antony C. Searle, Craig M. Savage, Paul A. Altin,
Francis H. Bennet, and Michael R. Hush. Through
Einsteins eyes. Australian Physics, 42(3):84–86, August 2005. Journal article on TEE website & CD.
[10] Kurt Squire, Mike Barnett, Jamillah M. Grant, and
Thomas Higginbotham. Electromagnetism Supercharged!: Learning physics with digital simulation
games. In Proceedings of the 6th Internation Conference on Learning Sciences. International Society
of the Learning Sciences, 2004.
[11] Daniel Weiskopf, Marc Borchers, Thomas Ertl, Martin Falk, Oliver Fechtig, Regine Frank, Frank Grave,
Andreas King, Ute Kraus, Thomas Mller, Hans-Peter
Nollert, Isabel Rica Mendez, Hanns Ruder, Tobias
Schafhitzel, Sonja Sch¨ar, Corvin Zahn, and Michael
Zatloukal. Visualization in the Einstein year 2005: A
case study on explanatory and illustrative visualization of relativity and astrophysics. In IEEE Visualization 2005 Proceedings, 2005.
[12] Daniel Weiskopf, Daniel Kobras, and Hanns Ruder.
Real-world relativity: Image-based special relativistic visualization. In T. Ertl, B. Hamann, and A. Varshney, editors, IEEE Visualization 2000 Proceedings,
pages 303–310. ACM Press, October 2000.

