2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Expansion of Communication in Media Art through the Intelligent Interaction
Seung-hyun Lee and Tae-Yong Kim
GSAIM, ChungAng University, Korea
{seng7675@hanmail.net, kimty@cau.ac.kr}
technical standardization, the person encountered mass
media art works loses the value, and the writer is forced
to give meaning. Eventually, we have to study what the
nature of interaction within works is regardless of the
existence of interaction, and we cannot help presenting
the methodology of "how" in the process of looking for a
new breakthrough. In this paper we study the possibility
of extension on Artificial Intelligence Technology
leading the rich experience and thinking of spectator
using more completed skills through the form of
alternative Intelligence Interaction escaping the initial
form. Furthermore, technology is not only a tool but also
has a possibility of function as a nature, and it presents
where a range is.

Abstract
Media art can be defined as 'a computer-based
creative activity' in narrow sense or 'a general art using
technology' in broad sense. It is a common opinion that a
unique artistry through the media in the aesthetic
dimension and empirical dimension in eliciting the
participation of the audience is an important issue. In
this Media art ‘Interaction’ with the audience cannot be
overemphasized. Because a work of art is presented in
half of the unfinished work and a spectator completes the
work as half of the originator. The participation of
audience in history more than 40 years of Media art,
interactive works has been expanded more and more.
However, feedback pre-made by the author's intention
and technology is the limit for them to communicate with
the audience. Therefore, the new level of feedback needs
to reach the level of interaction that the author and
audience sympathize through the works deeply. And
works should have a superior intelligence and do
rational action based on the present situation. This is the
core of this paper. For considering this aspect, we need
to see it differently such that technology is only a tool,
presents the skill as the nature of the art, and try to
critically consider the possibility of the skill.

2. Characteristics of Media art
First, before discussing Media art, let's see the flow
from the beginning of the 20th century to now and
discuss the characteristics of New media.
th

Table 1. The stream of art from early 20
Century to recent[1].
Period
Genre of new art
Distinguishing mark
of time
After the industrial
The combination of
revolution,
art and science:
Early
combination of
Futurism,
in the
technology and
Constructivism,
20th
engineering that is
Dadaism, Light art,
century
contained in the art
Kinetic art
and industry.
Introduction of
After
scientific mechanisms
the
The era of New
in production as well
World
media art
as a work of art.
War II
The advent of art
Electronic art, TV art
using new media,
(invention of TV,
the use of concept
creation of TV
what is called
sculpture), Video
Since
Technology art.
art(used since 1972),
the
Holography art,
1960s
The use of concept of
Computer art,
Telegraph art and
Computer Graphic
Satellite art that
art, Multimedia art
become possible from

Keywords--- Artificial Intelligence Art, Media art,
Interaction, Art and Technology

1. Introduction
New media with the development of e-media in 20th
century was vitality in the arts that have the interaction
as typical characteristics. Based on the magical power
reproducing more effectively and realistically the
compression of time and space through the various
experiments, New media art and design have been
developed with the creative implementation around the
world since 1995. However, the realization of
'availability of interact' of the new aesthetic paradigm
encountered the limit of communications in the recent
many Media art works.
The works in responding to artist's limited realization
have a limited relationship between works and the
audience that cannot contain rich meaning. This is the
current situation. It presents the problem that due to the

978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.86

77

similar insights with the audience will show the
restoration of the value for the entertainment, joy, and
fun as the art. Let us review the primary artists and
works showing the aspects of interactivity.

instrument for
communication.
Such a
‘Communication art’
changes into Network
art, Net art,
Telematics art, Web
art and Internet art in
information
revolution
Recent
trends
after
the
1990s
to the
21st
century

High vision art,
Virtual Reality art,
Information art,
Cyber art,
Digital art, Media
art, Hyper art,
SciTech art,

Interactive art come
to key word of
Modern art.
Fig.1 Daniel Rozin, Wooden Mirror, 1999[3].
The "Wooden mirror" is a work of world famous Daniel
Rozin at ITP department in primary digital school of art
in the US(Fig.1). It is that if a person walks the front of
the work, the sensors embedded in the wooden board
make the profile detect the audience's movement. The
wood chips make a jolly sound striking each other. When
the audience take a action in front, the wooden mirror
illuminates them sounding ‘clinking’. Professor Rozin
said digital art’s attractive is “although I made it, don’t
know the last form”[3].

Media art have become known "Media art" generally in
recent time since 1990. It was called the Technology art
prior to that time, Video Art before or Kinetic Art in the
headwaters. It just goes back to 50 years. Media art
makes virtual world we never seen before using the
technique. It is not a drawing but compounding our
senses. As you can see the above table, the keyword of
Media art and Modern art of the recent 21th century is
the Interactive art, which is a digital interactive art. As
interaction is a translation of ‘Interactivity’, 'Inter' means
relationships between objects, and 'Activity' signifies the
activity, action, and effects. This interaction makes
revolutionary change in art, artist, and acceptance of the
spectator.
As a work of art, New media art is not the completed
process but given the process, and if the artist is a
prescribed drafter or provider of the context, the
interaction between works and spectators will be
highlighted more than anything else[2].

2.1. Examples of Interactive art works
The features of Interactive art are connectivity,
concentration, interactive, transformation and generation.

Fig.2 Lynnhershman, Deep Contact: The First
Interactive Sexual Fantasy Videodisc,1989[4].

Table 2. The features of Interactive art[1].
The features of Interactive art
Occurring between the personal and
Connectivity
system → Internet
Concentration on the remote user →
Concentration
Virtual reality
Interactive
The reaction against user's interactive
Transformation Conscious transformation of the user
Visual results users can see through the
Generation
system

The next interactive piece, "Deep Contact", directly
involves the body of the viewer who were required to
touch the computer screen(Fig.2). Viewers choreograph
their own encounters in the vista of voyeurism by
actually putting their hand on a touch sensitive screen.
This interactive videodisc installation compares intimacy
with reproductive technology, and allows viewers to
have adventures that change their gender, age and
personality[4].
Participants are invited to follow their instincts as
they are instructed to actually touch their guide Marion
on any part of her body. Adventures develop depending
upon which body part is touched. The leather clad

In these Interactive arts, works are presented in half of
the unfinished work and the audience completes the
work as half of the originator. And then the art having

78

protagonist invites "extensions" into the screen and the
screen becomes an extension of the participant's hand.
Touching the screen encourages the sprouting of
phantom limbs that become virtual connections between
the viewer and the image. A surveillance camera was
programmed to be switched "on" when a cameraman's
shadow is seen. The viewer's image instantaneously
appears on the screen, displacing and replacing the image.
The videodisk is an ODC glass DRAW disk composed of
about 60 segments. It plays on a Pioneer LDP 6000
player which can be driven by the computer over a serial
port[4].

2.3. Ideal interaction
What is the ideal interaction in a work of art? What is
the deep and meaningful communication with users?
Marshall Mcluhan knew the importance of electronic
media early days, and spoke ‘global village’ is the
resonance place that primitive people communication in
the cave. This sympathetic place that qualified equal
realm between the subject and the object is anyone can
be subject of communication and that natural
communication space where someone’s words become
development by others. But to achieve this 'resonance',
we need a fundamental change in the communication.
What needs to be emphasized is the intimacy by 'touch
sense' between the subjects of communication.
According to Mcluhan, this change comes from the
extension of the entire sensorium through media
technology. Most ideal communicative methods to
human, in other words, understand total field-awareness
using the whole sensorium and making the intimacy.
Also media and technology can help the formation of the
intimacy[7].
Active Interactive art, the user and work create its own
meaning in close and organic relationship and it makes
its own feedback through the prepared algorithm from
artist. And the prototype becomes different beyond
imagination according to user’s interaction resulting in
changing to a new form of endless feedback.

2.2. Restraints of understanding in works
The works of Media art including previous works exist
interaction between the work and audience. If the
audience touches, approaches or manipulates the work,
the work expresses something according to audience’s
action. The audience can have a mutual understanding
with intention of artist through the audience’s action and
the work’s reaction. Therefore we can call it interaction
by common analysis.
However, can we regard it as deep understanding? The
reaction range of the work made by the artist was
calculated. Though it is thought as open work, the real
situation is that it comes to understand with audience in
calculable state. Like this works have the plane surface
and limited characteristics that are connected meaning to
the interface from audience, to the feedback from
interface and to the audience from feedback again.
Professor Rozin said “although I made it, don’t know the
last form” is digital art’s attractive, however, actually it
is true that almost works of Media art including the work
are formed of limited connection by limited feedback
that can be guessed. Surely the one-dimensional-changed
work is beautiful, but the typical fantasy has limitations
if experiencing an abundance and profundity of
impression is what a user wants.
Like Van Gogh drew dirty shoes feeling them beautiful,
each single person has different aesthetic point of view.
Therefore, it is natural trend from modern times to the
presents, aesthetic point of view including media art is
becoming various[13]. Besides a French philosopher
Deleuze said the ‘difference’ what minors said ‘no’ make
is the main point. It is the substance of his philosophy
that appeared new formation by difference and then
made variety by new formation and it is very
valuable[14].
Like this variety in art command aesthetic meaning
has huge part and media art also needs various and
natural feedback to have deep understanding with users.
Therefore for the following question ‘Is it possible that
immersion causes sympathy experience in works of
Media art with existent ideal interaction?’As the first
step in our analysis, we will inquire that what the ideal
interaction is, and then approach about “how”
methodologically.

3. Technology as an art itself, Intelligent
Interaction
In the early 20 century, Martin Heidegger rejected the
idea "techniques are the means for a purpose". He
criticized the definition that a technique is as a tool. In
other words, Heidegger asserts that 'Unconcealment'
reveals a hidden thing to the realm of truth. And
technology comes to presence in the realm where
revealing and unconcealment take place, where truth,
happens. He asserts art is the most exposed area that
unconcealment of technology, and techniques in art are a
bringing-forth in the concealed roots[5].
Like this, the role of the technique provides not only a
tool or means, but also an interaction itself between the
nature and the human being. The way of this thought
expands the art technique to the Intelligence Interaction
possibility.

3.1. Intelligent Interaction
As mentioned previously, Media art of the new era
needs to have a momentum by accompanying with a new
paradigm about technique and a sound criticism. In order
to build a concrete relationship between the user and the
work, the completed technique must be equipped so that
the user may not have an impression that the feedback is
prearranged. As much as we put the latest technique, we
can't deny only the formal limitation would be overcome

79

but also the way of expression would be broaden.
Therefore the work should be smarter so that the user can
taste the real interactivity.
Then, what is the Intelligence Interaction? Origin of the
word `intelligence ' came from Latino “Intelligentia”
which means insight, comprehension and consideration.
This word implicates that a human penetrates the given
situation (insight), understands it (comprehension) and
figures out the way to solve it (consideration). However
the function of the human being’s brain is closely related
to the ration when someone tries to find the ideal
solution. In this paper, we would like to study about
Intelligence Interaction with the procedure of ‘behavior’
and ‘thought’ by focusing on both adverbs ‘humanly’
and ‘rationally’. Intelligent Interaction is continuously
developed without prearranging program and able to
have a structure via audience’s opinion or external
environmental interface. Therefore the artist does not
make a completion of the work but acts like a system
creator who makes the basic rules. And then his work
suggests a possibility that enables to build a concrete
relationship between the work and the viewer. The
viewer can experience the close communication with the
work in the whole new world by developing the pathway
that is not predictable or fixed without anticipating
anything about the work.

Fig. 3 Michel Bret, Marie-Hélène Tramus and
Alain Berthoz, Dance with Me, 2004. Virtual
dancer interacting with a spectator[10].

Fig. 4 Diagram showing how sensors are
connected to the network inputs and how the
network outputs are connected to the
actuators[10].

3.2. Studies and works of art about Intelligent
Interaction
The efforts that can sustain this proposal are on the
track. ‘Synthetic Character project that is lead by
Professor Bruce Blumberg dedicated in the MIT
University Media lab focuses on synthesis character
development based on the artificial intelligence. The
team investigates the computer synthesis character that
can act like a human being with theories named,
neuroscience, ethology and artificial intelligence.
Media artist Naoko Tosa who is an exchange research
fellow in MIT Center for Advanced Visual Studies is
working on the electronic products’ communications that
synthesis of art and technique, especially, she is focusing
on between emotional intelligence and rationality as well
as consciousness and unconsciousness. ‘Unconscious
flow’ one piece of her work can measure the audience’s
unspoken, physical data with two mermaids like- a lie
detector. For example, if two people have a positive
feeling, two mermaids swim friendly. If not, they
disregard each other. This interactive character entitled
‘Newro Baby’ can recognize eight emotions such as
pleasure, sadness, surprise and so on[9].

It is the works of virtual interactive figure that
cooperated Michel Bret (neurophysiologist) with two
other computer artists in the works(Fig.3). Virtual actor
who has intellect moves by audience although acts in
self-control with function “perception – motion –
reaction”. Virtual worker’s motion is connected with
audience who adhere to sensor on waist. Computer
Analyzing the data on real time adjusts information
about audience through the sensor. Virtual worker has
balancing movement with audience, but if the spectator
tries to unbalance the virtual walker, she will attempt to
regain her balance by developing autonomous strategies
in real time. These strategies are the result of a previous
training phase. The artists designed a virtual character to
obey biomechanical laws and endowed it with reflex
behavior patterns that help it maintain its balance on the
ground. Furthermore, neural networks enable the virtual
character to react to the spectator’s movements in an
“intelligent”
way.
Also
cognitive
Modeling
Language(CML) extends behavioral models by
controlling what a virtual actor knows, how it acquires
the knowledge and how it uses the knowledge in order to
plan its actions[10].
Berthoz, one among the authors, calls this counterpart
the “doppelganger”. The doppelganger is characterized
by the fact that it is a mirror-image, yet it keeps the
separate identity of an autonomous being. For a while
dancing with the virtual existence, the audience has an
80

illusion as if sympathize with the real player. These
effects will capture the attention of spectators and in an
instant make possible deep immersion, so experience by
screen will be expansion up to virtual reality. From this
piece of work, we realize that What is important is the
opening art and cognitive science to a whole new range
of possibilities for the exploration of virtual life[10].

3.3. Possibilities in the art itself of Intelligence
Interaction
Methods of Artificial Intelligence are randomized
Methodology(decision-making for provide a model in an
uncertain situation), Navigation techniques (effective
selection of the best solutions among the exponentially
increasing 'number of class'), Fuzzy logic (overcome the
logic of polarization), Artificial neural network
(influenced by the structure of nerve cells), Genetic
algorithm (the modeling of the breeding of species)and
Chaos theory, etc[8]. According to the recent trends,
these methods will be able to apply to the following
areas.
1) The Social Interaction artworks based on network.
2) Video-based works using computer vision
technology.
3) Interactive art with the multimodal sensing and the
context aware technology.
4) Combination of performance with multi-media using
the network.
Among artificial intelligence theories that were
mentioned above, we made a work that virtual character
interact intelligently with the audience using computer
vision technology. In order to build a concrete
relationship between the user and the work, we control
that the virtual character rolls with a punch unexpected
situation while it performs complex tasks of the author.
To do so, the character behavior control system receives
the information from the Sensor system(audio and visual
sensor) and generates the behavior of the character and it
can be shown to the audience by being reflected in the
virtual space[15].
Sensor system for a character which acts in the virtual
space is classified according to sensing environment and
the purpose.
- Virtual environment recognition system.
- Character interaction system.
- Real-world recognition system.
- User interaction system.
Because the real-time Image Analysis System is added
on the “intelligent” action of the character, surrounding
space of the audience become integrated and replaced
with virtual reality system. As a result, these effects lead
the attention of spectators and the instantly deep
immersion. So the domain of the screen was able to
expand up to virtual reality.

Fig. 5 Karl Sims, Galápagos, 1997,
Installationsansicht[11].

Fig. 6 Mutations cause various differences
between the offspring and their parents[11].
Karl Sims, studied computer graphics at the MIT
Media Lab and Life Sciences as an undergraduate at MIT,
artist of common knowledge as video installation works
of exhibit at the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris.
“Galápagos”, one of his works, is an interactive media
installation that allows visitors to "evolve" 3D animated
forms(Fig.5). Galápagos is an interactive Darwinian
evolution of virtual "organisms." Twelve computers
simulate the growth and behaviors of a population of
abstract animated forms and display them on twelve
screens arranged in an arc. The viewers participate in this
exhibit by selecting which organisms they find most
aesthetically interesting and standing on step sensors in
front of those displays. The selected organisms survive,
mate, mutate and reproduce. Those not selected are
removed, and their computers are inhabited by new
offspring from the survivors. The offspring are copies
and combinations of their parents, but their genes are
altered by random mutations. Sometimes a mutation is
favorable, the new organism is more interesting than its
ancestors, and is then selected by the viewers. As this
evolutionary cycle of reproduction and selection
continues, more and more interesting organisms can
emerge [11].
Like this the audience can get an intimacy, delightful
and play from joining actively Intelligent media art, and
then can have extended experience that over boundary or
some area from perfect immersion with works.

Fig. 7 The control system using computer
vision technology.
If attempts in the artwork are increased explosively
using the intelligence, the depth and variety of
communication will be possible. Therefore, the
81

integrated or live together symbiotically. It will help
forward to make various cultural transformation.
As a word of Hannes Leppoldseder, We realized the
future has arrived that programmers become artists. So
we request the forward-looking attitude to artists for the
topic of how to describe works as a developed
technology(media) beyond logic technology only in a
way that represent substance. Also to programmers, we
ask them to consider deep introspection for the topic of
how to sublimate technology in art and artistry. And we
believe the practical use of Artificial Intelligence will be
more valuable by the medium of art and technology.
Granting an opportunity of new challenge that make
an artwork together through the setting the audience in a
work. According to that, the artist and the audience can
be met the hidden philosophy change the structure of the
world. For Media art, has infinite of possibilities, now
we suggest a regression into a principle as a meeting
point between technology and substance in the dream of
changing the paradigm.

representation of information, we have to consider
technology in a way that it is not simply a means beyond
the logic and effect and we have to consider how art
media art (interaction design) and technology (media)
itself can be reached on the level of superior through
technology.
It can be proved by the following fact that extension as
the art itself is ‘Technique of Intelligence Interaction’.
To quote Marshall Mcluhan’s word, “The medium is
the message”, the message is determined by the medium
as a means of communication[7]. According to his
remarks, these two elements are impartially important as
media itself as meaning of the message. Therefore, the
present condition created contents by the media, it will
be possible that intelligence interaction becomes the art
itself.
Bill Viola, who is one of the first and certainly the
leading video artists, says that “technique is one of the
keys that are based on all of the activity of art. Technique
is at once the method to communicate our idea and an
obstacle. it's the reason that the suspense from them
gives the life to the work of art.” From this passage, we
get the basis that Intelligence interaction can be used for
the center of artworks to give vitality.
Lastly, a new artist model centering on technology can
be proposed as following. Hannes Leopoldseder says that
media art’s creative process and the spirit are dominated
by the computer culture. To quote his phrase, “The
culture of computer makes new types of beauty and
artists who are computer programmer. In the culture of
computer, 'art' is replaced by 'program' gradually. Hence
it requires a 'Renaissance artist' that has broad knowledge
and sensibility such as new types of Leonardo da Vinci.
In the artwork, artistic concept and talent are important
part and not to mention logical and mathematical
thinking. And in that sense, artist's formality of
institutive category is eliminated partially at least”[12].
We can recognize from this proposal that programmer’s
domain may enlarge the artist’s territory.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the (Information
Technology Research Center, MIC) and Seoul R&BD
program, Korea.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]

4. Conclusions
It has passed over 40 years after Media art was born.
But it's not simple to grasp the facts of it. It's reliable that
Media art is the combination of media technology and art
and sets the goal at interactivity. The audience for work
already completed is required to participate as an active
performer in the steps of program and process of work
rather than bystander(voyeur) or expropriator. Well fitted
and superior technology is essential not for parading of
technology but for the purpose of an extended
communication of users. We suggest Intelligent
Interaction as a method of ideal interaction. Through
feedbacks between a spectator and a work of art that has
intelligence, expropriators gaze into a target actively and
susceptibility and their deep memories will be extended.
In addition, through interaction between human and
artwork that has intelligence, new creative method can be

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]
[15]

82

Michael Rush, “New Media in Late 20th-Century Art”,
Thames & Hudson, 1999
Christiane Paul, “Digital Art (World of Art)”, Thames &
Hudson, 2003
Dana Plautz, “New Idea Emerge when collaboration
Occurs”, LEONARDO, Vol. 38, No. 4, 2005, pp. 304
http://www.lynnhershman.com
Martin Heidegger, “The Question Concerning
Technology, and Other Essays”, Harper Perennial, 1982
Alvaro Moreno, “Artificial Life and Philosophy”,
LEONARDO, Vol. 35, No. 4, 2002, pp. 401–405
Marshall McLuhan and W. Terrence Gordon,
"Understanding media : the extension of man", The MIT
Press, 1994
Henry Brighton, "Introducing Artificial Intelligence",
Totem Books, 2008
http://acg.media.mit.edu/people
Michel Bret, Marie-Helene Tramus and Alain Berthoz,
“Interaction with an Intelligent Dancing Figure”,
LEONARDO, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2005, pp. 46–53
http://www.karlsims.com
Hannes Leopoldseder, “Ten Indications of an Emerging
Computer Culture”, Ars Electronica: Facing the Future,
A survey of Two Decades, ed. by Timothy Druckrey,
1999, pp.67-70.
Kevin Hart, "Postmodernism: A Beginner's Guide", One
world Publications, 2004
Gilles Deleuze, Difference and Repetition, Columbia
University Press, 1995
J. Y. Chung and Hyun S. Yang, "Integrated Control
Architecture Based On Behavior and Plan for Mobile
Robot Navigation," Robotica, July 1997

