2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

A Zoomable Shopping Browser Using a Graphic-Treemap
Mao Lin Huang1, Quang Vinh Nguyen2, Viet Cuong Vo1, Junhu Wang3
1
Faculty of Engineering & Information Technology, University of Technology, Sydney
2
School of Computing and Mathematics, University of Western, Sydney
3
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
{maolin@it.uts.edu.au, vinh@scm.uws.edu.au, vietcuong.vo@student.uts.edu.au,
j.wang@griffith.edu.au}
OnDisplay, Poet Software, Vignette, and others (see [1]
for more detail). For catalog interface, various methods,
that can support product search and navigation, have
been developed, such those at [2, 3, 9]. Also, the impact
of different shopping metaphors on the effectiveness of
online stores in terms of click-through and conversion
rates was analyzed in [4, 8].
While these product catalogs can effectively assist
the seller/buyer in managing, searching and accessing
product information through the WWW, they usually do
not provide a graphic user interface that gives a buyer a
sense of information “space” when he/she is exploring
the large product hierarchy. Instead they only mostly
provide the buyer a series of textual lists placed in
separate pages. Each list in a page shows only one level
of the product hierarchy (see Figure 1). The buyer has to
click through many pages to browse down/up the product
hierarchy in finding appropriate products he/she need.
Thus, the entire structure of the product hierarchy is split
into many small pieces that could be very difficult for the
buyer to perceive the overall structure of the product
hierarchy by reading these textual lists. In fact, the
effectiveness of this navigation mechanism in terms of
click-through and human cognitive process was lower.
In this paper, we propose a method that uses
Treemaps visualization to enhance the presentation of
online product catalogs and address the above problems.
We aim to develop high-quality catalog interfaces in
terms
of
aesthetical
niceness,
readability,
understandability and comprehension by integrating
graphics (product pictures) into Treemaps.
We applied two types of Treemaps: 1) Slice-andDice Treemaps [5], 2) Squarified Treemaps [6], into our
on-line catalogue system to address the “small window”
problem allowing buyers to navigate large product
categories dynamically. The user can interactively
explore the huge product hierarchy online by clickingthrough the multiple levels of the Treemaps to zoom
down to a particular subset of the product category.
We also introduce an e-commerce framework of
Visual Online Shops that use Treemaps visualization as
an interface allowing buyers to navigate through the

Abstract
Effective and efficient navigation and representation
of the entire structure of the product catalogue is one of
the important factors for on-line market. This paper
proposes an application using Treemaps visualization to
enhance the functionality of online product category. We
aim to develop high-quality catalog interfaces in terms of
readability, understandability and comprehension by
integrating graphics into Treemaps. We applied two
types of Treemaps: 1) Slice-and-Dice Treemap, 2)
Squarified Treemap, into the on-line catalogue to
address the “small window” problem allowing buyers to
overview and navigate large product categories
dynamically. We also use a history bar that locates on
the top of each category and sub-category to provide a
2.5-dimensional view of contextual information.
Keywords--- graph visualization, treemaps, zoomable

user interface, product catalogue, shopping-cart
technology.

1. Introduction
One of the major elements of online e-commerce is
the online product catalogue. It provides sellers with a
content management system that stores, indexes,
aggregates, normalizes, and distributes product
information. It also provides potential buyers with an
interactive interface that offers a multimedia
representation of the product information as well as
classification and navigation services.
An important precondition to the success of ecommerce systems is the construction of appropriate
customer interfaces, from which an online product
catalogue can be displayed. There are many extensive
research works have been done on both components of
the online product catalog: 1) the content management
and 2) the catalog interface. For content management, a
number of products have been developed and used at
commercial website such as CardoNet, Interwoven,
978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.13

449

an enclosure manner, similarly to Venn diagram. It starts
with a rectangular space and subdivides it recursively.
The initial rectangle represents the root node of the tree.
That space is divided into a number of horizontally
aligned sub-rectangles, each representing a child of the
root node. Typical Treemaps, on each recursive call, the
direction of subdivision is rotated: horizontal, then
vertical, then horizontal.
This way of representing a tree gives two main
benefits. The first is that the main connectivity
relationship of the tree, ancestry, is shown with
unambiguous graphical relationships. Children of a node
are enclosed within that node and parents of a node
contain that node. The other benefit is that there is no
wasted space in the diagram. The entire original
rectangle has been filled with smaller rectangles.
Treemaps provide an overall view of the entire hierarchy.
This technique optimizes the use of all available space.
As a result, it makes the navigation of large hierarchies
much easier especially when quantitative variable is
concerned.

large product hierarchies with a sense of information
space. The Graphic-Treemap uses an enclosure
hierarchical visual representation method to addresses
the product navigation problem which allows buyers to
view the overall context and visually browse through the
large product catalog within a limited display region.

3. Online Shopping Framework
The proposed online shopping framework is made up of
several components and interconnections among them
that can be described in Figure 2; details are below:
•

Figure 1: eBay Australia Online Auction Shop – A typical
example of using traditional online product catalog for online
e-business that provides buyers with a series of textual lists
placed in separate pages for navigation. Each list in a page
shows only one level of the product hierarchy.

2. Related work and motivation
The original use of the Treemap visual layout was
developed by Johnson and Shneiderman [5] as a way to
more easily get a feel for the hierarchical structure of file
systems.
The traditional approach to displaying tree structure
is to use node-edge diagrams. A set of visible graphical
edges are drawn in the diagram to link nodes from the
parents to their children, such as [3]. The nodes present
the data while these edges are used to present
hierarchical relationships among data items. This works
very well for small trees. However, when the same
approach is used for large trees with more than hundreds
of nodes, the display quickly becomes cluttered with
nodes and lines. There are two obvious solutions to this
problem; zoom out on the nodes so all of them can fit on
the display, or let the user pan around a full size tree.
Neither of these is very satisfactory because of the loss of
overall hierarchical structure and navigational landmarks
in the visualization.
Unlike the traditional layout approach, Treemaps
techniques [5-7] represent hierarchical structures using
450

Interactive Treemap Visualization:
An interactive Treemaps technique that
automatically displays the overall or a subset of
product category. It integrates the graphics (product
pictures) into the Treemap display that allows buyers
to have a brief overview of what products for each
category. From this, he/she can interactively
navigate the large product hierarchy by drilling
down or moving up. It addresses the “small
window” problem because the space are utilised.

Figure 2: The framework of Online Shopping.

•

Product Database:
A relational database used to store product
information, including all data fields and attributes
associated with a particular product that are available
for sale in the online shop.

•

Product Catalog:
A content management system that assembles,
indexes, aggregates and normalizes product
information from the product databases, and quickly
distributes the product information.

•

Product Detail Display:
A web page generated on the server side by a
scripting language (we use Adobe Flex Builder in our
implementation) It retrieves the appropriate product
entry from the database table in corresponding to the
mouse-click on a particular rectangle in the Treemaps
visualization. It then displays selected attributes of
one or more products in the right side of the page.
The Browser supports drag-and-drop to let users
directly add products to the shopping cart.
Each selected product displays an associated
picture and users can easily add the items into
shopping cart by using the left side mouse to drag the
product picture over the shopping cart picture and
drop it in. This procedure is repeated if the user wants
to add more items of the same product into shopping
cart.

•

Figure 3: Screen snapshot of an Online Grocery Shop with an
interactive Graphic-Treemap Browser, displaying 16 subcategories and over 200 items.

4. Zoomable Shopping Browser
The Graphic-Treemap allows the user to view
multiple categories and subcategories of items in a
zoomable environment. It then uses a simple but yet
effective navigation mechanism semantic zooming +
historical-bar to move around the space of product
category.
Graphic-Treemap was built using Adobe Flex, an
open source framework for building rich Internet
applications that get delivered via the Flash Player or to
desktops via Adobe AIR. The data items and structures
are defined by XML.
To start using Graphic-Treemap, the user opens a
URL of Online Grocery Shop, and the Treemap will lay
out the top level overall hierarchy of the product
category and display it in a space-filling manner as
shown in Figure 3, using either a Squarified Treemap or
Slice-and-Dice Treemap.
By using the enclosure layout of hierarchical
structure, the pictures of product are displayed in a
flattened manner. The advantage for this is that users
looking at pictures are primarily interested in subcategory of products, such as meat or sea food.
As the user moves the mouse, the image of item the
mouse is over is highlighted. Then when the user doubleclicks, the corresponding item details will be brought up
and an enlarged picture of the product will be displayed
in the right side of the virtual menu, see Figure 4.
The bottom right hand frame displays a Virtual
Shopping Cart, showing the user how many products are
already chosen and the total value of their selections so
far. Each product occupies one row. Different orders for
the same product are amalgamated on the one row.
A user can interactively add the current displayed
product into the shopping cart by simply dragging down
the enlarged picture of product, from the virtual menu,
over the shopping cart and dropping it, see Figure 5.

Virtual Shopping Cart:
This shopping cart is responsible for controlling
the buyer selection of products and the checkout
operation. It shows how many products are already
chosen and the total value of the chosen products in
the cart so far.

•

Purchase Confirmation
The component displays a purchase form asking
buyers to fill in their delivery details (including
name, address, suburb, state, country and email
address). All these fields must be completed for the
order to go ahead. The user completes the transaction
by clicking on a button labeled "Purchase". The
details of the order are sent via email to the email
address given on the form. It then retrieves the
product database, re-calculate the product stock and
modify the in-stock field of those relevant product
entries.
• Online Payments
In this project, online payment is not a research
focus. Therefore, we are not going to discuss it in
further detail. There are many existing online
payment systems are available, and the
implementation for each one is different. In this
framework, we use a dummy function that can be
replaced with an interface to a chosen online
payment system.

451

4.2. History Bars for Navigation
Our Shopping Browser design builds upon the
treemap layout and the navigational scheme. Based on
these techniques, we contribute customized techniques
for visually navigating and interacting with the product
category.
In this application, we propose a novel approach,
2.5D treemaps, to tree visualization. The 2.5D treemaps
aim at highlighting the child-parent relations of the
hierarchy without losing the overall contextual
information. This enables the user to visualize large data
set within constrained space. The intuition is to make the
depth of the tree an additional dimension.
We display a History Bar on the top of each
particular category or sub-category that takes advantage
of a “2.5-Dimensional” representation for displaying
contextual information, see Figure 6.

Figure 4: Screen snapshot of a display when the user doubleclicks on the item “Hamburger Patties” the details of the item
and an enlarged picture of the product are displayed in a virtual
menu displayed in the right side of the screen.

Figure 5: Screen snapshot of a display when the user dragging
down the enlarged picture of “Grapes”, from the virtual menu,
over the shopping cart. We can see that the corresponding row
is added into the shopping cart.

4.1. Integrating Pictures into Treemaps

Figure 6: Screen snapshot of a display when “Tub Ice Cream”
is selected. We can see that three levels of the History Bar
clearly illustrate the hierarchical structure of the category:
GroceryMenu -> FrozenFood -> Others -> TubIceCream.

To increase the readability, understandability and
comprehension of visual representation, we integrated
graphics into the Treemaps to replace the traditional
approach: textual labeling.
We associated one image for each product and tried
to use the most typical picture for the different types of
the same product that reduce the duplication of the use of
images.
“A Good Picture is Worth Tens Thousand Words”.
The use of images to represent the physical figure of
products is a straight forward way to identify things. It
does not require any pre-knowledge of human language.
Thus the interfaces designed using image identification
are appropriate to be used in any country without the
obstacle of difference in cultural and language
backgrounds.

The user can click on the right-side circle of a
History Bar to move down or up one level of the
hierarchical structure, see Figures 7 and 8. In addition,
the user can click on a sequence of history bars to zoom
in all the way into that a particular product image, or to
zoom out all the way from the product to the top level of
the category.
Graphic-Treemap supports mouse drag-and-drop to
let users directly explore product images by interactively
turn over pages of the virtual menu, see Figure 9.

452

Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented our online product catalogue
visualization and browser using Treemap techniques.
The product catalogue is visualized within a small
display area, and can be used for assistant of product
browsing. This visual component enables users to view
the entire catalogue as well as quickly browse a
particular product item. The combination of Treemap
layout algorithms with image view provides users with a
visual aid for the aesthetical view of entire catalogue
with fast and effective product navigation. Although this
project is still at its early stage, we believe that this
technique is very valuable for quick navigation, and also
for improving the understanding of users to the online
product categories in e-commerce.

References
[1]

Neumann, A., “A Better Mousetrap Catalog”, Business
2.0, 2000, pp. 117-118.
[2] Callahan, E., Koenemann, J., “A Comparative Usability
Evaluation of User Interfaces for Online Product
Catalog”, 2nd ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce,
2000, pp. 197-206.
[3] Huang, M. L., Zhuang, K., “Navigation Product Catalogs
Through OFDAV Graph Visualization”, International
Conference on Distributed Multimedia Systems
(DMS’2002), CA, 2002, pp. 555-561.
[4] Huang, M. L., Nguyen, Q. V. and Lai, W. "Creating
Visual Browsers for Large-Scale Online Auctions",
Chapter 27: E-Service Intelligence - Methodologies,
Technologies and Applications, Springer Publisher, pp.
579-600.
[5] Johnson, B. and Shneiderman B, “Tree-Maps: A SpaceFilling Approach to the Visualization of Hierarchical
Information Structures”, in Proc. the 1991 IEEE
Visualization 1991 (Piscataway, NJ, USA), IEEE
Computer Society; pp. 284-291.
[6] Bruls M., Huizing K., and van Wijk J.J., “Squarified
Treemaps”, in Proc. Joint Eurographics and IEEE TCVG
Symposium on Visualization 2000 (Vienna, Austria),
Springer; 33-42.
[7] Bederson, B.B., Shneiderman, B., and Wattenberg, M.,
“Ordered and Quantum Treemaps: Making Effective Use
of 2D Space to Display Hierarchies”, ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG) 2002; 21(4): 833-854.
[8] A Comparative Study of Four Hierarchy Browsers using
the Hierarchical Visualisation Testing Environment
(HVTE) Andrews, Keith; Kasanicka, Janka, Information
Visualization, 2007, 81-86.
[9] S. Walters, F. Jayakanth, “Hierarchical Browsing
Interface: A case study with India Business insight
Database”, In Proc. of Workshop on Multimedia and
Internet Technologies, DRTC, Bangalore, 2000.
[10] Rivadeneira, W. and Bederson, B. B., “A Study of
Search Result Clustering Interfaces: Comparing Textual
and Zoomable Interfaces”, University of Maryland
HCIL, Technical Report HCIL-2003-36, October 2003.

Figure 7: Screen snapshot of a display when the right-side
circle of “Frozen Food” is clicked. A semantic zoom in is
occurred that the detail of sub-category “Frozen Food” is
enlarged and fully displayed.

Figure 8: When clicking again on the right-side circle of
“Frozen Food”, a semantic zoom out is occurred that the
context is returning back to the top level hierarchy.

Figure 9: A display of turning over the pages of virtual menu
through the mouse drag-and-drop interactions.

453

