2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Study on Art Gallery Based on 4-coloring

Wang Kelun

Ren Hongxiang, Wang Shuang

Mathematics Department
Dalian Maritime University
Dalian, China
dmu_rhx@163.com

Marine Dynamic Simulation ＆ Control Laboratory
Dalian Maritime University
Dalian, China

any simple polygon after triangulating could be 3-colorable,
further more, the same type of colors could cover the whole
simple polygon[9].
Avis and Toussaint have proved that ⎢⎣ n / 3⎥⎦ vertices
always could be fixed on within O(n \log n) time for any
simple polygon with n vertices, so as to make one of the
vertices visible to any vertex of the simple polygon. So the
vertices could cover the whole simple polygon[2].
We know that ⎣⎢ n / 3⎦⎥ guards are necessary for some
polygons (such as comb polygon), and it does not need
guards for most polygons (for example, the orthogonal
polygon only needs for guards[10]).So researchers try to the
minimum number of guards for any simple polygon.
Unfortunately, Aggarwal, Lee and Lin have proved that
finding the minimum number of guards for any simple
polygon is NP-hard[1, 12]. Thus, researchers turn their
attention to study the accurate boundary of minimum guard
number and/or related algorithms for some special art
galleries.
In this paper, based on the relationship between the
adjacent triangles of the triangulated polygon, we propose
the 4-coloring rules for the triangulated simple polygon, and
present the conditions that the triangulated simple polygon
can be covered by ⎣⎢ n / 4 ⎦⎥
vertices, that is, present the
conditions that a triangulated simple polygon with n vertices
could be covered by ⎢⎣ n / 4 ⎥⎦ vertices.

Abstract—It isn't the best result on the art gallery based on the
3-coloring in resolving the most of simple polygons, through a
analysis of the simple polygon triangulation in the relationship
between adjacent triangles, using the dual relation between
triangulation and binary tree, this paper puts a forward 4coloring on the polygon triangulation, and analyze and
research the case which has been 4-coloring. we can obtain
some results that the condition of any type of colors could
cover the whole polygon, and the condition that at least one
type of colors could cover the whole polygon (namely the art
gallery only need for monitors), we also analyzing the reason
which failed to cover the whole polygon, and presenting the
condition which couldn't be 4-colored.
Keywords- art gallery; 4-coloring

I.

INTRODUCTION1

With the development of computer/communication
technology, there have been a lot of “visibility problems” in
its application area, such as: the collision detection of
geometry solid in virtual reality technology, the coverage of
the antenna (terrain) in (mobile) communication network,
the optimal distribution of sensors in the sensor network,
modern society security monitoring and so on[1-8]. These
visibility problems can be come down to the art gallery
problem or its variants.
The art gallery problem is the real-world problem of
guarding an art gallery with the minimum number of
security cameras that can each rotate to obtain a full field of
vision[6]. The art gallery can be simplified to a planar
triangulated simple polygon, and the guards will be installed
on vertices of simple polygons. Thus every vertex (guard)
could cover all the triangles which incident to the vertex
(guard). And then art-gallery problem is that how many
vertices are there needed for covering the whole polygon. In
1975, Chv'atal proved (the art gallery theorem): for any
polygon with n vertices, ⎣⎢ n / 3⎦⎥ guards are occasionally
necessary and always sufficient[6]. Base on Meisters's
double ears theorem, Fisk gives a concision proof on the art
gallery theorem, and prove that the corresponding graph of

II.

In this paper, we will closely follow the graph
theoretical terminology and notation in [13-15].
A k-coloring of a graph G = (V, E) is an assignment of k
colors to each vertex in V, such that adjacent vertices are of
different color (in this case, we call G to be a k –coloring
graph). We know that any triangulated simple polygon is a
3-coloring graph.
For a triangulation of a given polygon with n vertex, it
can construct a binary tree with n-2 nodes[3] (it is called the
dual graph of the triangulation): each triangle of the
triangulation corresponds to one vertex of the binary tree, the
adjacent triangles corresponds to an edge of the
corresponding vertices of the binary tree.
Definition 1. In a triangulated polygon, if two triangles
share a common edge, we call the two triangles are adjacent;
if these two adjacent triangles form a convex quadrilateral
(or permit an angle to be 180 degrees), we call the two
triangles are convex adjacent (see Fig.1(a)), we call the

Foundation item: Major State Basic Research Development Program
(‘973’Program, No.20 09CB320805); University Research Project of
Liaoning Province Education Department (No.2008084); Open Subject
Program of the State Key Laboratory of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University;
Young Teacher Research and Key Project Fund of Dalian Maritime
University (DLMU-ZL-200820).

978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.25

DEFINITIONS AND 4-COLORING RULES

255

adjacent relation between the two triangles is ``A" for short;
If they form a concave quadrilateral, we can say the two
triangles are concave adjacent (see Fig.1(b)), we call the
adjacent relation between the two triangles is ``B" for short.
1

convex adjacent. This polygon is complete successful 4coloring one.
2

1

1
1

3

2

4

(a)

(b)

3
2

4

4

Figure 2. A whole convex adjacent of 9-polygon triangulation
which is 4 –colored

Figure 1. Convex adjacent and concave adjacent
between two triangles and their coloring

According to the proof of Theorem 1, if the binary tree,
the dual graph of a triangulated polygon, is a path, then the
relationship of any two adjacent triangles are convex
adjacent. Thus, the polygon will be complete successful 4coloring. Thus the following result is hold:
Corollary 1. If there is a convex adjacent road in the
dual binary tree of a triangulated polygon, then the region of
the triangulation corresponding to the convex adjacent road
is complete successful 4-coloring.
From Corollary 1, we get that a triangulated polygon is
complete successful 4-coloring (that is, ⎣⎢n / 4⎦⎥ guards are
sufficient for the triangulated polygon if the dual binary tree
of the triangulated polygon could be covered by several
convex adjacent roads.
Applying 4-CR to some triangulated simple polygon, the
result may be that any type of colors can not cover the
polygon, as there exists the case that convex adjacency join
with concave adjacency in a triangulation. For example,
applying 4-CR to the pentagon in Fig.3, there exists an area
that can not be covered by the color 4.

According to the adjacent relation between adjacent
triangles, we propose the 4-coloring rules (4-CR for short)
in coloring vertices of the triangulated polygon as follows
(see Fig.2, where 1,2,3,4 are four different colors):
R1: Two vertices are connected by any edge or diagonal
can not use the same color.
R2: If two adjacent triangles are convex adjacency, in
which the fourth vertices will be colored by the fourth
different color (see Fig. 1(a)).
R3: If two adjacent triangles are concave adjacent, first
of all, we color two vertices which is adjacent by a diagonal
with two different colors, then two vertices which is not
adjacent by a diagonal with the third color (see Fig.1(b)).
Obviously, as long as traversing dual binary tree of the
triangulated polygon can we have the 4-coloring.
If any two adjacent triangles in a triangulated polygon
are concave adjacent, based on 4-CR, this polygon actually
used 3 colors; If there are triangles which are convex
adjacent, based on 4-CR, four colors must be used. In this
paper, we pay attention to the triangulations of a simple
polygon with convex adjacent triangles.
Definition 2. A triangulated polygon is called to be
complete successful 4-coloring with 4-CR if each color of
the vertices can cover the polygon; A triangulated polygon
is called to be successful 4-coloring with 4-CR if there are at
least one color of the vertices can cover the polygon; A
triangulated polygon is called to be failed 4-coloring with 4CR if any color of the vertices can not cover the polygon.
It is clear that c guards are sufficient if a triangulated
polygon is (complete) successful 4-coloring.
III.

3

2
3

2

4

v0

v0

v3
v1

v1

v2
v3

v4

v2
(a)

(b)

2

MAIN RESULTS

2

1

4
3

3

Theorem 1. For a triangulated polygon, if adjacent
relationship of any two adjacent triangles are convex
adjacent, then it is complete successful 4-coloring.
Proof: Since any two adjacent triangles form a convex
quadrilateral if any two adjacent triangles are all convex
adjacent in a triangulated polygon, each vertex can cover the
whole convex quadrilateral. That is, each type of colored
vertices can cover the related convex quadrilateral. So, the
vertices with the same color can cover the whole polygon.
The polygon is complete successful 4-coloring.
Fig.2 gives an example of a triangulated polygon
colored with 4-CR. The triangles in the polygon are all

v4

1

1

1

4
(c)

(d)

Figure 3. Two triangulated pentagons and their 4-coloring

Given two different pentagons shown in Fig.3(a) and
Fig.3(b), and color them by 4-CR (see Fig.3(c) and
Fig.3(d)). From Fig.3(b) and Fig.3(d) we can see that the
colors of vertices v1,v4 are different and the line connecting
v1 and v4 falls on the internal of the pentagon. And we can
also see that the vertex v4 (with color 4) can cover v1,

256

moreover can cover the whole pentagon. For a triangulated
pentagon with an convex adjacency and a concave
adjacency, if there are two vertices (see Fig.3(b), v1 and v4 )
colored by the same color and not in a same quadrilateral,
the line connecting them is in the pentagon, then we call
these two vertices to be a {\it pair of visible vertices}.
In Fig.3(a) and Fig.3(c), v2 and v4 are colored with
different colors, not in a same quadrilateral, and the line
connecting those falls on the external of the pentagon. v4
can't cover the whole pentagon since it can't cover vertex
v2. Such two vertices are called to be a pair of invisible
vertices.
As is mentioned above, if a vertex together with any
vertex of a triangle are all visible pairs, then the color of this
vertex must cover the whole triangle. When a convex
adjacency connects to a concave adjacency, there will be an
invisible pairs which is denoted as concave-convex (AB).
And if the neighboring relationship is the convex- concave convex (ABA), we can make conclusions as follows:
Theorem 2. If the polygon triangulation exist a
subregion in which the neighboring relationship is convexconcave- convex, then this subregion can be completely
successful 4 - coloring. Corollary one: If there is an item of
all convex adjacent sub pass in a binary tree which is dual
with a polygon triangulation, then this sub pass in the dual
subregion of triangulation can be whole and successful 4colored.
Proof: According to the definitions of convex adjacency
and concave adjacency on two adjacent Triangles, and the
relation between polygon triangulation and binary tree, we
can get the relationship between the convex-concave convex neighboring relationship and the binary tree.
Given the general example whose neighboring relations
is convex-concave-convex as above, we can see that the
vertex pairs (v0, v3), (v4, v1) in the pentagons v0v1v2v3v5,
v1v2v3v4v5 are invisible pairs, and the vertex pairs (v1,v2),
(v4, v3) are visible pairs in the hexagons v0v1v2v3v4v5 .
Together with the dyeing process, we can easily conclude
that any of color can cover the whole hexagon, and the
invisible vertex pairs can be eliminated when the
neighboring relationship are convex-concave-convex
(ABA). That is, If the polygon triangulation exist a
subregion in which the neighboring relationship is convexconcave-convex, then this subregion can be completely
successful 4-coloring.
1
v5
4
v4
4
v0

v3

3

v5
2

v6
v2
v0

v1

4

v4
v3

1

3

2

1

Figure 5. Neighboring relations is convex-concave-concave-convex
which dual binary tree is chain

Through Corollary 1, Theorem 2, Theorem 3, we can get
inferences as follows.
Corollary 2. If the polygon triangulation can be
completely covered by subregions in which the neighboring
relationships are among convex (A...A), convex-concaveconvex (ABA), convex-concave- concave-convex (ABBA)
then this subregion can be completely successful 4-coloring.
Corollary 3. If the polygon triangulation can be
completely covered by subregions in which the neighboring
relationships are among convex (A...A), convex-concaveconvex (ABA), convex-concave- concave-convex(ABBA),
then this subregion can be successful 4 - coloring.
If the polygon triangulation can't be completely covered
by subregions in which the neighboring relationships are
among convex (A...A), convex-concave-convex (ABA),
convex-concave-concave-convex (ABBA), that is the
invisible point pairs can't be eliminated. We can make a
conclusion as follows:
Corollary 4. If the total number of colors of point a in
all point pairs (a, b) is less than 4, then the polygon can be
successful 4 -coloring; if the number is equal to 4, then the
polygon is unsuccessful 4 -coloring.
Figure 6 is unsuccessful 4 -coloring.

3

v2
v1

concave-concave-convex, then this subregion can be
completely successful 4 - coloring.
Proof: The invisible vertex pairs can be eliminated when
the neighboring relationship are convex-concave- concave –
convex (ABBA).That is each type of color can cover the
whole simple polygons (As shown in Fig.5). Given the
general example whose neighboring relations is convexconcave- concave -convex as above, we can see that the
vertex pairs (v0, v5), (v3, v6) in the pentagons v0v1v2v5v6 ,
v2v3v4v5v6 are invisible pairs, the vertex pairs (v0, v2) , (v0,
v6) , (v3, v5) , (v3, v2) are visible pairs in the hexagons
v0v1v2v3v4v5v6 , and the vertices colored by 1 can cover the
entire polygon. Together with the dyeing process, we can
easily conclude that any of color can cover the whole
hexagon, and the invisible point pairs can be eliminated
when the neighboring relationship are convex-concaveconcave-convex (ABBA). That is, if the polygon
triangulation exist a subregion in which the neighboring
relationship is convex-concave-concave- convex (ABBA),
then this subregion can be completely successful 4 coloring.

2
2

Figure 4. Neighboring relations is convex-concave-convex
which dualbinary tree is chain

Theorem 3. If the polygon triangulation exist a
subregion in which the neighboring relationship is convex-

257

[3]

2
1

3

2
4

1

4
3

1

[4]

4
2

3

1

[5]

2

[6]

4

2
Figure 6. A unsuccessful 4-coloring polygon

[7]

If the polygon can be completely successful 4 -coloring,
then the points can cover the whole polygon, of which the
total number, no more than ⎣⎢n / 4⎦⎥ , is least of all. If the
polygon can be successful 4 -coloring, then the usable
points can cover the whole simple polygon, of which the
total number is least of all, and the result is better than 3 coloring, that is, the number of the points covering the
whole polygon is no more than ⎣⎢n / 3⎦⎥ .
IV.

[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]

CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have proposed a new 4 -coloring which
is better than 3-coloring for some special polygon
triangulation. The method provides a new thought of
establishing k -coloring and researching the conditions of
(completely) successful k -coloring (that is, the number of
the points covering the polygon is ⎣⎢n / k ⎦⎥ .

[12]
[13]

[14]

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[15]

A. Aggarwal, The art gallery problem: Its variations, applications,
and algorithmic aspects, Ph. D. Thesis, Johns Hopkins Univ.,
Baltimore, 1984.
D. Avis, G. T. Toussaint, “An efficient algorithm for decomposing a
polygon into star-shaped polygons,” Pattern Recognition, 1981,
13(6): 395-398.

258

D. M. Berg, V. M. Kreveld, Computational geometry: algorithms and
applications, 2nd ed, Berlin: Springer, 2000.
M. Cardei, J. Wu, “Energy-efficient coverage problems in wireless
ad-hoc sensor networks,” Computer Communications, 2006, 29: 413420.
K. Chakrabarty, S. S. Iyengar, H. Qi, “Grid coverage for surveillance
and target location in distributed sensor networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Computers, 2002, 51(12):1448-1453.
V. Chvatal, “A combinatorial theorem in plane geometry,” Journal of
Combinatorial Theory Ser. B, 1975, 18(1): 39-41.
A. Efrat, S. Har-Peled S, J. S. B. Mitchell, “Approximation
algorithms for two optimal location problems in sensor networks,”
The second International Conference on Broadband Networks, 2005:
714-723.
S. Eidenbenz, “Approximation algorithms for terrain guarding,”
Information Processing Letters, 2002: 99-105.
S. Fisk, “A short proof of Chvátal's watchman theorem,” Journal of
Combinatorial Theory Ser B, 1978, 24(3):374.
J. Kahn, M. Klawe, D. Kleitman, “Traditional galleries require fewer
watchmen,” SIAM J. AlgebraicDiscrete Methods, 1983, 4: 194-206.
A. Howard, M. J. Matari, G. G. Sukhatme, “An incremental selfdeployment algorithm for mobile sensor networks,” Autonomous
Roots, 2002, 13(2):113-126.
D. Lee, A. Lin, “Computational complexity of art gallery problems,”
IEEE Trans. Information Theory, 1986, 32(2): 276-282.
M. Marengoni, B. A. Draper, A. Hanson, “A system to place
observers on a polyhedral terrain in polynomial time,” Image and
Vision Computing, 2000, 18: 773-780.
A. T. Murray, K. Kim, J. W. Davis, “Coverage optimization to
support securitymonitoring,” Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, 2007, 31: 133-147.
J. O\'rourke, Computational Geometry in C, 2nd Ed., Cambridge
University Press, 1998.

