2009 Sixth International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Synthesis Vis: A Web Site Supporting
Collaborative Information Visualization
LUO XiongFei1,2, WANG HongAn1, LIU Wei1, TENG DongXing1, YANG Tian1,2,
LIAO ZaiFei1,2, TIAN Feng1
1:Institute of Software

2:Graduate University
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China
{lxf, wha}@iel.iscas.ac.cn; water_wei@263.net, tengdongxing@ios.cn, yang_tian@mails.gucas.ac.cn,
liaozaifei@gmail.com, tf@iel.iscas.ac.cn
programmers. End user tools for sophisticated visualizations
such as Tableau [5] and Spotfire [6] still require expertise,
installation and training. Furthermore, few tools support easy
publishing to the web. A non-developer blogger who wishes
to write about an interesting data set, for instance, is
currently limited to static charts.
This paper describes a web site, Synthesis Vis, which
addresses challenges of end user construction and the unique
environment of open web-based collaboration. The main
reason for us to select web-based development is that webbased visualization has obvious social and collaborative
superiorities. Synthesis Vis allows users to contribute data,
create visualizations of that data, and share visualizations.
Our aim in this paper is to describe the design of the site. We
will focus on decisions that affected our two overarching
goals: enabling end-user creation of visualizations and the
social aspects of collaborative information visualization.
The organization of the paper reflects this division.
Section II is the important related work on collaborative
information visualization. Section III is an overview of the
Synthesis Vis web site and its basic functions. Section IV, V
and VI present respectively the data, visualizations, views
considerations in the site and the collaborative design
features available. Sections VII cover the social/collaborative
features available for sharing view. Section VIII presents
preliminary results on usage. Finally, the last section
concludes the paper.

Abstract—This paper describes the design and deployment of
Synthesis Vis, an intranet web site where various users may
contribute data, create interactive visualizations, and share
visualizations. The goal of the site is to support collaboration
around information visualizations at a large scale by fostering
a social style of design process. Moreover, the site serves as a
collaborative information visualization tool for individuals,
providing a medium to share visualizations among users. To
support this goal, the site includes novel mechanisms for enduser creation of visualizations and collaboration in the design
process of those visualizations. The early usage of Synthesis Vis
verifies the design and deployment of Synthesis Vis for
collaborative information visualization.
Keywords-information visualization, cooperative design,
social data analysis, communication-minded visualization

I.

INTRODUCTION

Information visualization technologies leverage the
human visual system to support analysis and communication
of large amounts of information. Card et al. [1] describe how
visualization supports the process of sensemaking, in which
information is collected, organized, and analyzed to form
new knowledge and inform further action. Their emphasis is
on the ways visualization exploits an individual’s visual
perception to facilitate cognition.
However, visual analysis and decision making often
involve not only perceptual and cognitive processes, but
social processes [2]. People may disagree on how to interpret
data and contribute contextual knowledge that deepens
understanding. As participants build consensus or make
decisions they learn from their peers. Furthermore, some data
sets are too large to be explored by a single person. In this
spirit, a recent report [3] considers the design of
collaborative visualization tools as a grand challenge for
visualization research.
F. B. Viégas et al. [4] present that there are two main
roadblocks to overcome before a collaborative visualization
tools is fulfilled. First, the creation and publishing of
interactive visualizations remains accessible only to
specialists. While frameworks such as Flash and Java
Applets ease development, they do not help non978-0-7695-3789-4/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2009.61

II.

RELATED WORK

There is a lot of work on collaboration in visualization
systems [7] [8] [9]. Long-standing research has explored
techniques for collocated collaboration and synchronous
distance work. However, less research attention has been
devoted to collaborative design about the visualizations.
A number of commercial systems began to explore the
idea of collaborative communication around data. Several
web sites (e.g., Data360 [10], DabbleDB [11] and Swivel
[12]) allow users to upload and graph data. All of these rely
on static standard business graphics, however, and so do not
tackle end-user construction that arises in the context of
sophisticated interactive visualizations.

443

DEVise [8] is an early exploration into the benefits of
sharable visualizations. It offers customizable visual
mappings and sharable views, as well as basic annotation
functionality. Although designed to run in a browser it was
not designed to be publicly accessible and most of its
visualizations were relatively static.
Sense.us [2] and Many Eyes [4] are probably research
projects that come closest in spirit to Synthesis Vis. Sense.us
is a web site supporting asynchronous collaboration across a
variety of visualization types. The site supports view sharing,
discussion, graphical annotation, and social navigation and
includes novel interaction elements. Many Eyes is a public
Web site where users may upload data, create interactive
visualizations, and carry on discussions. The goal of the site
is to support collaboration around visualizations at a large
scale by fostering a social style of data analysis. However,
these two sites can not support the collaborative design
process of information visualization and also not realize
multi-visualizations in a web page.
III.

To navigate the continuously growing collections of
visualizations and data sets, the site contains navigating tree
including pages subscribed by the user.
After the site designed and developed in October 2008, it
was deployed in several industries. The early usage verifies
the design of Synthesis Vis for collaborative information
visualization.
IV.

EASE OF USE

Data is the basic of all activity on Synthesis Vis. In the
course of implementing enterprise information system, there
are always various data sources, such as, relational database
and Microsoft Excel file. Seldom one can grasp all of these
data of an enterprise. Therefore, we support the user to
upload management files of data sets.
The fact that users can upload management files of their
own data offers a number of potential benefits. The benefits
to individuals are clear, since others can visualize the data
only if users who know the data clearly upload management
files. One might also hope for a collective benefit: a user
might upload management file for one set of data, and then
another user could select the data from this configure content
and generate new visualization. Otherwise, Synthesis Vis can
extract data in real time manner. This is very important for
enterprise data because these data are generally changed and
increased every day with enterprise operation.
Gaining these benefits, however, means balancing
complex and conflicting constraints on the design. The fact
that data, which will be uploaded to the site according to
management files, is used by end users means that the data
model needs to be easily understandable, with a format that
is appropriate for non programmers. At the same time, the
format needs to be flexible enough to express the data
structures used by visualizations such as ThemeRiver and
graph layout algorithms.

A BRIEF OVERVIEW OF THE SYNTHESIS VIS SITE

One model for identifying modules of contribution is the
information visualization reference model [1] [13], a general
pattern for describing visualization applications. The model
decomposes the visualization process into data acquisition
and representation, visual encoding of data, and display and
interaction. Each phase of this model provides an entry point
for collaborative activity. Contributions involving data
include uploading data sets, cleaning or reformatting data,
moderating contributed data (e.g., to safeguard copyright or
privacy concerns), and affixing metadata (e.g., providing
keyword tags). Additional contributions of varying
granularity lie in the application of visual encodings.
Examples include matching data sets with existing
visualization components, editing visual mappings to form
more effective visualizations, and authoring visualization
software components (See Fig 1) [14]. Both Swivel [12] and
Many Eyes [4] enable contribution of data sets and visual
mappings. The primary focus of this paper, however, is how
collaborative design, exploration and view sharing can
effectively be conducted. And Synthesis Vis site provides
mechanism of select data, construct visualizations, and share
either data sets or visualizations. Each of these activities is
described in detail in subsequent sections.

A. The Data Model
The core data model used by Synthesis Vis is a table: that
is, a set of rows and every row has these same named
columns. Each column has a data type, which currently can
be string, date or numeric. The reason why use the data
model of table is tables are simple and well understood by
end users. The site also supports data that comes in the form
of structured Microsoft Excel. Microsoft Excel is used
popularly in enterprise so that this file format should be
supported.
Each data set, whether a table or structured Microsoft
Excel, is associated with a collection of metadata. Some
metadata, such as source of the data and description of the
data is provided by the user.
B. Managing Data
The management information about datasets is currently
stored on our server in xmls format that has proven to be
efficient and simple. These management files are consist of
hierarchical structure. The root file is called project file
(Fig 2 shows the xsd file of this project file) and the leaf file
is called entities file (Fig 3 shows the xsd file of this entities

Figure 1. The Information Visualization Reference Model [14]

444

file). Moreover, the project file includes at least one entity
file.

Server. This situation of various database types often
happens in different enterprises of different industries, even
in the same industry. Although the type of data source is
changed, we only just need to reconfigure these management
files, as mentioned in the section IV.B. There is no need for
programming, even no need for compiling Synthesis Vis site.

Figure 2. The xsd file defines the schema of project file. The task of this
project file is organizing entities. For example, these entities files of
representing the same type of data may be organized by a project file.

Figure 4. The web page for data configuration. Using this page, the user
can choose the data set, reformat data and affix metadata.

V.

VISUALIZATIONS

Synthesis Vis relies on a pure web-based model in order
to reach the largest possible audience and decrease the
maintenance load in an enterprise. While visualizations have
existed on the web for more than a decade, these
visualizations generally have been constructed offline and
then separately published to the web. For our Synthesis Vis,
visualizations can also be constructed and published by users
without ever leaving the browser. Although a browser-based
environment imposes some constraints, it is critical to the
goal of scaling our audience.
The visualization technology in Synthesis Vis consists of
a set of individual components that represent different
display techniques. To create a visualization, a user
combines a component with a data set, in a manner described
below (see section V.B). Once created, the visualization is
given its own URL (Uniform Resource Locator). Every user
can visit the visualization by the URL.

Figure 3. The xsd file defines the schema of entities file. It shows that the
entities file should include specified content, such as data source, attribute
and sql string. Synthesis Vis will extract data from these specified data
source automatically according to this content.

The mentioned data set will be uploaded when the
visualization using it is presented. We choose this method
rather than save data sets in the server because most data is
come from information systems of enterprise and they will
change every day.
C. Working with Data
The user can activate the web page of configure data to
get the data for visualization. Firstly, the user may choose the
data source, data entity and data method. Secondly, the user
can set the field for reformatting the data. Finally, the user
may affix metadata for the data, such as matching the field
name as alias (See Fig 4).
We also provide a function to watch the original version
of the data in plain table form. At the bottom of the configure
page is a preview button. And when the user finishes these
configure steps, he may click the preview button to preview
the data. If he finds the data is not what he wants, he may
reconfigures.
For we have implemented a data access module which
can access the data from various data source, it is easy for
the user to change the data source. We found this function is
valuable especially when we transferred from a relational
database, e.g., oracle, to another database, e.g., Microsoft Sql

A. Visualization Components
Synthesis Vis provides more than twenty different types
of basic visualization components (see Fig 5 for a
subsection). These components includes a mix of standard
business graphics (dashboard and bar charts), well
established academic techniques (e.g., ThemeRiver), and a
few experimental components (e.g., fisheye timelines). Each
of these visualization components was implemented as a
separate class, which inherit from a base class, to keep every
derived class to take over attributes and behavior of the base

445

technique is used to analyze a long time series, provides
good overviews for large-scale information and details for
these focus objects. Meanwhile, the correlation between
complex information and properties of objects are easily to
be acquired.
B. Visualization Mapping
A visualization is created by matching a dataset with a
visualization component. Of course not all visualizations
display the same type of input data. A visualization
component of tank, for example, requires a textual column to
define its oil name, six numerical columns to define its safe
storage, max volume, current volume, plan volume,
comparable volume than the begin of this year, comparable
volume than the begin of this month, and these numerical
columns also map to height of fluid and color of trend or
alarm. And a ThemeRiver requires one datetime column and
several numerical columns (one for each width), several
optional corresponding textual columns for labels. The same
dataset might be used to drive multi-visualizations, offering
different perspectives on the data. To set up this mapping,
the visualization component needs to be able to express its
data needs in a precise manner. In Synthesis Vis, a
visualization component’s data needs can by specified by the
user. The web page of edit the visualization (see Fig 6)
mapping allows the user to choose one component to
visualize the dataset and also allows the user to choose these
visual attributes, such as location, size, color.

Figure 5. A tiny cross-section of visualizations for oil refinery industry
created by users by way of matching their own data with our visualization
components. From left to right and top to bottom: A tank visualization
component on 6 data about oil storage, a meter gauge on total rate of
becoming commodity in oil, a meter gauge on current storage of heavy oil
bought from foreign country, a pressure gauge on a important manufacture
device, a line chart on the data of entering factory of naphtha during 30
days, a Gantt chart on the operation of a tank, a ThemeRiver showing
output data of multi-product in a month, a fisheye timelines showing large
mounts of time-series data in the manufacture process of oil refinery
industry.

class. Since we lack the space to discuss every single
component separately, we will suffice with a short overview
of some of our more experimental visualization components.
1) Gauge: One of the most common types of statistics
data for industries is simply a list of numbers, such as
material stock and eligible ratio of products. Such numbers
are often easily displayed via standard gauge. It helps the
manager to make current manufacture situation clear.
2) ThemeRiver: Based on the design of ThemeRiver
[15], we included a ThemeRiver visualization component in
Synthesis Vis in order to display various time series data
needed to be compared and show trends. The “river” flows
from left to right through time, changing width to depict
changes in temporally associated data. Colored “currents”
flowing within the river narrow or widen to indicate
decreases or increases in the number in the associated items.
The river is shown within the context of a timeline.
3) Fisheye timelines: Many time series data have a long
time span: the history of gasoline manufacture recorded
generally by second, for example, can be continued to
several days, production logistics data, product line
operation data and so forth. To display this type of data, we
included a fisheye timelines [16]. This visualization

Figure 6. The web page of visualization mapping. Using this page, the
user can choose visualization component and visual attributes.

Synthesis Vis supports two web page statuses: one is
view status and the other is edit status. By the way of
switching view status to edit status, Synthesis Vis supports
the actual viewers of the final visualization to fast browse
through different dimensions on a dataset. For example,
matching a table of one datetime column and multiple
numerical columns with a ThemeRiver allows the end user to

446

select columns and columns’ order to display on the y axes
from the collection of all possible columns. After applying
the edit result, this visualization will display automatically
according to the new edit information. This function makes it
possible to change the data shown in the visualization on the
site immediately. It is actually improve the WYSWYG
ability for Synthesis Vis. And if the viewer is not satisfied
with this visualization, he may reconfigure this mapping
immediately without the switch of status. Moreover, if the
viewer finds the visualization of current visual component
can not satisfy his need of data analysis, he may also change
the type of visual component. Take a single numerical table
as an example, matching this table with a Line graph allows
the end user to observe the data magnitude. However, when
the viewer wants to get ratios of each column, he may
choose the Pie Chart.
VI.

After the user configure the output parameter of provider
component and the input parameter of consumer component,
the correlation of visualization components in this
visualization is set up. At the same time, Synthesis Vis
supports the coordinated real-time interaction mechanisms.
Whenever a user interaction takes place, Synthesis Vis will
process it in a coordinated manner in order to keep the views
coherent.
VII. SOCIAL FEATURES
So far we have concentrated collaborative design features
on the Synthesis Vis. In this section we discuss some of
collaborative features of sharing visualization.
These sharing features include save a visualization
component to the component library, publish a visualization
(may consists of several visualization components) to the
web site and output the whole site to another enterprise of
the same industry for these visual analysis requirements are
almost similar. After sharing, other users can choose these
visualization components, visualization for their design.
Certainly, these users also can modify this visualization
according to their need.

VIEWS

There are two requirements for coordinated multiple
view visualization for enterprise applications. One is the
need of visual analysis of data from various information
application and the other is the need of analyze different
dimensions of multidimensional data.
Coordination determines that when the user interacts with
one of the views, every other view must be updated. The
coordination minimizes the additional cognitive effort
intrinsic to multiple views environments. These
characteristics allow the user to explore a complex set of data
items by presenting different aspects of the same data and
improving or facilitating perception, interpretation,
correlation and exploration [17].

VIII. EARLY USAGE
After Synthesis Vis designed and developed in October
2008, it was deployed in several industries, such as oil
refinery industry (see Fig 8), chemical industry, and beer
industry. Users are satisfied with the collaborative
information visualization. With this site, they can create
visualization in the every place with network connecting the
enterprise intranet. Moreover, they can share the
visualization and carry data-driven exploration.

A. Layout for Multi-View
Synthesis Vis supports the choosing of the layout
template. After the user chooses the template (see Fig 7), his
selected visualization components will consistent with the
chosen layout style. We found this idea of layout is valuable
because of the convenience brought to the user.

Figure 8. The sample visualization for usage of Synthesis Vis in a oil
refinery enterprise.

Users have been in touch with us with a series of requests
for new features. Visualization views, for instance, would
like to be able to embed interactive visualizations on the
manufacture executive system for better instructing their
operation. Visualization builders would like to add new
visualization techniques to the site.

Figure 7. The web page of choosing layout template. Using this page, the
user can choose layout template for multi-visualization.

B. Linking and Brushing
Synthesis Vis connects different visualization
components in a visualization by way of parameter relation.

447

IX.

[16] Luo XF, Wang HA, Tian F, Dai GZ and Teng DX, “FisheyeLines: A
Temporal Data Visualization Technique,” Proceedings of The 4th
Joint Conference on Harmonious Human Machine Environment,
2008.
[17] P. I. A. Godinho, B. S. Meiguins, A. S. Goncalves Meiguins, R. M.
Casseb do Carmo, M. de Brito Garcia, L. Hernandez Almeida and R.
Lourenco, “PRISMA - A Multidimensional Information Visualization
Tool Using Multiple Coordinated Views,” 11th International
Conference on Information Visualization, 2007.

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

We have described Synthesis Vis web site, which
provides a set of visualization creation and publishing tools
to a large audience. And we have discussed many choices in
the current design. We also have described how flexible
collaborative capabilities are woven into all of visualization
components, visualization and whole site. Finally, we verify
the design and deployment of Synthesis Vis by the early
usage of Synthesis Vis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This project is supported by the National High-Tech
Research and Development Plan of China under Grant No.
2006AA04Z182; the National High-Tech Research and
Development Plan of China under Grant No.
2007AA040702; the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant No. 60703078; the National Basic
Research Program of China under Grant No.
2006CB303105; the National High-Tech Research and
Development Plan of China under Grant No.
2007AA04Z113.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision To Think, MorganKaufmann, San Francisco, 1999.
J. Heer, F. B. Viégas, and M. Wattenberg, “Voyagers and Voyeurs:
Supporting Asynchronous Collaborative Information Visualization,”
Proc. of CHI 2007. 2007.
J. J. Thomas, and K. A. Cook, Illuminating the Path: The Research
and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics, 1st ed., IEEE
Computer Society. 2005.
F. B. Viégas, M. Wattenberg, F. van Ham, J. Kriss and M.
McKeon, “Many Eyes: A Site for Visualization at Internet Scale,”
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 13,
no. 6, pp.1121-1128, 2007.
Tableau, http://www.tableausoftware.com, retrieved 04-30-2009.
Spotfire, http://spotfire.tibco.com, retrieved 04-30-2009.
V. Anupam, V. Bajaj, D. Schikore, and M. Schikore, “Distributed and
collaborative visualization,” Computer, vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 37-43,
1994.
M. Livny, R. Ramakrishnan, K. Beyer, G. Chen, D. Donjerkovic, S.
Lawande, J. Myllymaki and K. Wenger, “DEVise: integrated
querying and visual exploration of large datasets,” Proc. ACM
SIGMOD’97, pp. 301-312, 1997.
S. Roth, “Visualization as a Medium for Capturing and Sharing
Thoughts,” Capstone in Proc IEEE InfoVis 2004, pp. xiii, 2004.
Data360, http://www.data360.org, retrieved 04-30-2009.
DabbleDB, http://www.dabbledb.com, retrieved 04-30-2009.
Swivel, http://www.swivel.com, retrieved 04-30-2009.
J. Heer, and M. Agrawala, “Software Design Patterns for Information
Visualization,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, vol. 12, no. 5, Sep/Oct 2006.
J. Heer and M. Agrawala, “Design considerations for collaborative
visual analytics,” IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology, 2007.
S. Havre, B. Hetzler and L. Nowell, “ThemeRiver: visualizing theme
changes over time,” IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
2000, pp.115-123, 2000.

448

