DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01946.x
Eurographics / IEEE Symposium on Visualization 2011 (EuroVis 2011)
H. Hauser, H. Pfister, and J. J. van Wijk
(Guest Editors)

Volume 30 (2011), Number 3

Flowstrates: An Approach for Visual Exploration of
Temporal Origin-Destination Data
Ilya Boyandin1 , Enrico Bertini2 , Peter Bak3 and Denis Lalanne1
1 University

of Fribourg, Switzerland
of Konstanz, Germany
3 IBM Haifa Research Lab, Israel

2 University

Abstract
Many origin-destination datasets have become available in the recent years, e.g. flows of people, animals, money,
material, or network traffic between pairs of locations, but appropriate techniques for their exploration still have
to be developed. Especially, supporting the analysis of datasets with a temporal dimension remains a significant
challenge. Many techniques for the exploration of spatio-temporal data have been developed, but they prove to be
only of limited use when applied to temporal origin-destination datasets. We present Flowstrates, a new interactive
visualization approach in which the origins and the destinations of the flows are displayed in two separate maps,
and the changes over time of the flow magnitudes are represented in a separate heatmap view in the middle.
This allows the users to perform spatial visual queries, focusing on different regions of interest for the origins
and destinations, and to analyze the changes over time provided with the means of flow ordering, filtering and
aggregation in the heatmap. In this paper, we discuss the challenges associated with the visualization of temporal
origin-destination data, introduce our solution, and present several usage scenarios showing how the tool we have
developed supports them.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS):
interfaces—H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: Interaction styles—

1. Introduction
Numerous datasets representing entities moving between geographical locations are being produced nowadays. Many of
these datasets are collected in the form of origin-destination
data (or “spatial interactions”), meaning that only the origins and the destinations of the flows and the flow magnitudes are known, but not the exact movement routes. The
analysis of geographical movement data is particularly important, since “much change in the world is due to geographical movement” [Tob05]. However, the full potential
of such data remains largely unreleased, because tools and
techniques which support their exploration, and especially
the analysis of the changes over time, still have to be developed [Rae09, AAD∗ 10, MGLS97]. Making a visualization tool which can support the analysis of temporal origindestination data is the main focus of our work.
One of the most widely used representations of origindestination data are flow maps [Tob87, Har99]. These are
visualizations which represent entities flowing between geoc 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

D.2.2 [Design Tools and Techniques]: User

graphical locations on a map overlaid with lines connecting
the flow origins with the destinations. Flow maps are aimed
to support analysts in finding answers to spatial questions
such as: Where are the largest and the smallest flows? Where
on the map are the origins and the destinations? In which direction do the migrants go? What is happening in a specific
location?
However, additional important questions and tasks which
flow maps were not designed for arise when exploring
datasets with a temporal dimension. These tasks are concerned with the analysis of both the spatial and temporal
dimensions of the data and the relationships between them.
The requirement for the technique we are developing is to
support both spatial and spatio-temporal tasks (see the full
list of the tasks in section 2.1). For the spatial tasks the technique has to make use of a representation on a geographic
map. Being well familiar to everybody, maps allow to reason
about the geographic patterns of the movement as opposed to
non-geographic representations (more details in section 3.1).

972

I. Boyandin et al. / Flowstrates: An Approach for Visual Exploration of Temporal Origin-Destination Data

However, it is hard to augment a geographic map with temporal origin-destination data in a meaningful and readable
way. There are several alternatives to embedding the temporal data directly into a flow map, e.g. small multiples, animation, or creating an abstract view. They are discussed in
detail in section 2.2.
In this paper we propose Flowstrates, a “hybrid” solution
which brings together a geographic and a temporal representation and overcomes some of the deficiencies of the abovementioned approaches providing means for the analysis of
spatio-temporal patterns in origin-destination datasets. Our
technique is discussed in more detail in section 3.

2. Problem definition, tasks and design alternatives
The problem we address in this work is focused on the representation of a specific, though very common, type of data.
Origin-destination data is a collection of flows of entities between geographic locations, where each flow is characterized by the following features:
• Origin: a geographic location (e.g. a country or a city)
• Destination: a geographic location
• Magnitude: a numerical value characterizing the number
or the amount of entities flowing from a specific origin to
a specific destination
• Type: a nominal value describing the type of the entities
flowing (e.g. people, men or women, types of goods, etc.)
• Time: a precise date, or a time period (e.g. year) during
which the flow magnitude was measured
Our goal is to find a way of representing such data in an
integrated and natural fashion in order to help data analysts
to explore and analyze them efficiently.

• T5: Comparing flows between different origin-destination
pairs or comparing flows of two locations for a specific
time period
• T6: Examining changes over time for a specific location
• T7: Examining a specific time range (over several periods)
in a specific location
• T8: Finding when there were peaks/significant changes in
the flow magnitudes for a specific origin/destination pair
• T9: Comparing temporal changes of the flows of two locations
These tasks are compatible with the taxonomy for
the analysis of spatio-temporal data proposed by Andrienko [AA06] in which our tasks can be classified as
lookup (T2, T7), pattern identification (T1, T4, T6, T8),
comparison (T5, T9), and relation-seeking (T3). When compared to the low-level analysis task taxonomy proposed by
Amar et al in [AES], there is also a mapping between the
tasks: Retrieve Value (T2), Find Extremum or Anomalies
(T1, T8), Characterise Distribution (T4, T6, T7), Correlate
(T3, T5, T9). The Filter, Sort and Cluster tasks are not in
our list, but they are very much related to the higher-level
T1, T8 and T4. We deliberately left out graph topology
tasks [LPP∗ 06], as we wanted to concentrate on the relationships between the flow origins, destinations, and the changes
over time of the flow magnitudes.
Our tasks are less general than the above-mentioned taxonomies, but they are more focused on the problem of the
analysis of one specific type of data which we address, and
are therefore better suited for providing baseline requirements for our work.
2.2. Design alternatives

In this section we discuss the list of user tasks which we
selected for our tool to support, deriving it from our discussions with practitioners and researchers, from analytic reports [UNH10, KP99], other visual analysis task taxonomies
(which are discussed below), tasks which existing related
techniques (in particular, flow maps [Har99]) support, as
well as from our own experience with the analysis of various datasets [BBL10]:

Considering the tasks listed in the previous section, we can
conclude that the major challenge is how to bring together
the spatial and temporal dimensions in a way which makes
it possible to explore the relationships between these two aspects of the data. In this section, we discuss what we believe
are four important design alternatives to address this problem. This is not meant to be a thorough discussion of the
prior work in the domain (which you can find in section 6),
but rather an overview of the approaches which can be used
with the currently available techniques and which we considered for our implementation.

• T1: Finding where the largest and the smallest flows are
for a specific time period
• T2: Locating the origins and the destinations of the flows
and determining their directions for a specific time period
• T3: Examining possible effects on the neighborhood of
what was happening in a specific location in a specific
time period
• T4: Examining the "big picture" (an overview of the
whole dataset) or focusing on a region or a specific location for a specific time period

Small multiples. Different time periods can be represented in separate flow maps and put next to each other in a
small multiples display to allow to see the changes over time.
Small multiples can be immensely useful for representing
changes for a relatively small number of objects or when displaying images for a small number of time periods [AA06].
One of our requirements, though, reflected in the task T4,
was to provide an overview for longer time periods. Also,
because of the smaller size of the individual images it is difficult to see the details and to compare flows between the

2.1. User tasks

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

I. Boyandin et al. / Flowstrates: An Approach for Visual Exploration of Temporal Origin-Destination Data

973

Figure 1: Flows of refugees are shown between East Africa and Western Europe. Flows having their origin in Sudan are
highlighted. The heatmap shows the flow magnitudes by year and origin-destination. By following the lines of the heatmap
it is possible to see the flows’ origins, destinations and the changes of the magnitudes over time. Different temporal patterns
are visually salient, such as a consistently high number of refugees from Sudan to the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, a
marginal decrease to Denmark, Norway and Germany, and an increase to Ireland and Italy.

years in small multiples of flow maps [BBL10]. Thus, this
solution is not scalable: the more small multiples are represented, the more difficult it is to see the details. Moreover,
significant flows which are often short (e.g. for migrations)
become even shorter and more difficult to see.

Non-geographic, abstract view. A non-geographic view
can present a good overview of the development in time,
but questions involving the spatial arrangement can be difficult or impossible to answer. Thus, the spatial and spatiotemporal tasks listed above cannot be fully supported.

Animated flow maps. Animation can be used to show
how flows of subsequent time periods change [BEW95]. In
certain situations animations may be more effective than
static graphics [APP11, HR07], but not when they are too
complex to be accurately perceived [TMB02]. An animated
flow map showing thousands of flow lines could hardly be
accurately perceived as it would be too difficult to keep track
of changes in it.

Both embedding and non-geographic view have their advantages. Being able to see the flow origins and destinations
on a map is important to observe spatial patterns. Using an
abstract temporal view allows to better visualize changes
over time without having to fit the visualization in a map.
Flowstrates, the solution which we propose, takes advantage
of these two alternatives bringing them together in a simple
yet elegant way.

Embedding temporal data into a flow map. A direct
embedding into a flow map would mean representing the
temporal changes by mapping temporal data to each of the
visual features of the flow lines (color, size etc). Such a solution would be feasible for datasets with a very small number
of flows, but for a flow map with a substantial number of
flows it would only multiply the clutter caused by the line
intersections which conventional flow maps already suffer
from. A more sophisticated way of embedding might be able
to overcome this problem though.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

3. The Flowstrates
In Flowstrates the origins and the destinations of the flows
are displayed in two separate maps. As it is not necessary
to show the exact flow paths (they are usually not known
in origin-destination datasets), we can reroute the flow lines
in any way. So we represent the temporal information in an
abstract view (a heatmap in which the columns correspond
to different time periods) and draw the flow lines so that
they connect the flow origins and destinations with the cor-

974

I. Boyandin et al. / Flowstrates: An Approach for Visual Exploration of Temporal Origin-Destination Data

“What are the neighbors of a location/area?”, “Which areas
constitute a region?” etc.
Why two separate maps? Displaying the flow origins
and destinations in two different maps allows to:

Figure 2: Selecting origins using lasso: When a selection is
made, the heatmap is updated, so that only the flows between
the selected origins and destinations are displayed.

• clearly show the flow directions (origin → destination)
• use any appropriate representation for the temporal data
without being constrained by having to fit it into a map
• focus on different regions for the origins and destinations
and perform visual queries for them in two separate maps
(see 3.2 for details)
• augment the two maps with aggregated information for
both origins and destinations at the same time (e.g. showing the outgoing and incoming totals by coloring the
countries).
These advantages come at a price. Compared to a conventional flow map, the distances between the origins and destinations, the flow routes and orientations cannot be naturally
visualized in Flowstrates (see section 7). Despite that, the
two-map solution is advantageous in situations when these
properties of the flows are less important for the analysis
than the temporal changes of their magnitudes.

Figure 3: Selecting a year: Here the year 2001 is selected
in the heatmap header, so the countries in the geographic
maps are colored according to the total magnitudes of the
outgoing and incoming flows in 2001. The heatmap rows
are sorted by the maximum (over time) total magnitudes for
the origin countries, and by the max magnitude in each row
within the same origin country.

responding rows of the heatmap, as if the flows were going
through it (see Fig. 1).
In other words, considering the problem, the tasks we
want to support, and the available design alternatives, we
made the following design choices:
•
•
•
•

Represent locations on geographical maps
Use two separate maps for origins and destinations
Show the temporal information in a separate abstract view
Visually link the geographic and temporal views

3.1. Design considerations
In this section, we give a detailed discussion of the reasons
for making the design choices and of their implications.
Why maps? Maps are well familiar to everybody. They
allow to reason about the geographic patterns of the movement as no other representation by naturally providing answers to questions such as: “What is the spatial distribution of the locations?”, “How far are they from each other?”,

Why links? The idea to show the locations and the temporal changes of the flow magnitudes in separate views and
to visually link the corresponding origins and destinations
across the views was inspired by the semantic substrates approach for the interactive exploration of complex graphs proposed by Shneiderman and Aris in [SA] (see section 6 for a
discussion of semantic substrates).
The visual linking can be very useful in some situations.
For instance, in Fig. 4 without the links, only with the ability
to highlight a row in the heatmap or a country in the maps,
it would be only possible to see flows from one origin at a
time (when a country is selected in the origins map) or the
origin of one flow at a time (when a row is selected in the
heatmap). With the links we can clearly see what the origins
of a several hundred flows in the heatmap are. Color-coding
and coloring countries in the maps and highlighting the corresponding segments in the heatmap instead of drawing lines
would also be possible, but then we would be limited in the
ability to use coloring to show country totals in the maps
(Fig. 3).
Why an abstract temporal view? Separating the geographic and the temporal views allows to present the changes
over time of the flow magnitudes in a way which is most
suitable for the analysis of temporal patterns. The temporal view can be manipulated by the user, e.g. it can be filtered, reordered, aggregated. Still, the connections between
the geographical locations and the rows of the temporal view
representing flows are maintained, so that the analysts can
track down the relationships between the spatial and temporal aspects of the data. In addition, this clear separation between the spatial and the temporal representations provides
flexibility in terms of the initiation of the task. The analyst
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

I. Boyandin et al. / Flowstrates: An Approach for Visual Exploration of Temporal Origin-Destination Data

can begin the exploration from the temporal view and then
use the spatial representation to understand where the events
took place. Conversely, the user can begin from a specific
region of interest and then isolate the temporal patterns pertaining to the region of interest. Refer to section 4 for more
details on the exploration strategies.
Why heatmap? We chose the heatmap as the temporal
data representation for two main reasons. First, it can seamlessly represent the temporal changes of the flow magnitudes
at different zoom levels, thus, providing support for task T4.
Second, the same color scheme as in the heatmap (for the
images in this article we chose ColorBrewer’s OrRd and
RdBu [BH09]) can be used to show the totals of the outgoing
and incoming flow magnitudes in the origin and destination
maps. Hence, the totals in the geographic maps can be compared to the individual values in the heatmap.
The design of Flowstrates can, however, accommodate a
number of alternative temporal views, e.g. multiple time series. Lam et al [LMK07] compared the effectiveness of using
multiple line graphs and heatmaps for analyzing overviews
over large datasets and found that heatmap was more efficient for finding the maximum values and comparison, but
less efficient for finding the graph with the maximum number of peaks. Horizon graphs [HKA09], which are more
space-efficient than time series, could be also used in place
of the heatmap. It is not clear, though, how well they would
support changing the zoom level. Another alternative would
be to plot time series of the changing flow magnitudes in a
single row as in TimeSearcher [KHS02]. The temporal view
would then require much less space vertically, but it would
not give a good overview and would make linking it to the
geographic maps much more difficult.

3.2. Interaction techniques
Flowstrates are meant for interactive exploration. Unlike
OD-matrices which represent exactly one flow in each
heatmap cell, in Flowstrates every flow takes the whole row
of the heatmap. Thus, much more screen real estate is used
to represent the same number of flows. Hence, for many
datasets it is impossible to display all the flows simultaneously without filtering or aggregating them. If we want the
analysts to still be able to explore the data in every bit of
detail, then we need to provide means of interaction for controlling filtering, zooming and aggregation. Currently, our
implementation supports the following techniques:
Visual querying and filtering. A subset of locations can
be selected in the origin and destination maps (either filtering
by name or using the lasso tool, as shown in Fig. 2). When
a selection is made, the heatmap is updated, so that only the
flows between the selected locations are displayed. Had we
used only one map, making a separate selection of origins
or destinations directly on the map would probably be more
difficult for the user. Due to the separation of the origins and
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

975

destinations in Flowstrates, we can provide support for such
queries in a straightforward way.
The user can also select a time period. In this case, the outgoing and incoming totals of the regions for this time period
are displayed in the maps (Fig. 3).
Zooming and panning. All the three views (the origin
map, the heatmap and the destination map) can be zoomed
and panned independently. Hence, the user can focus on different regions for the origins and the destinations and select
the most relevant part of the heatmap.
Heatmap row ordering. Different ordering strategies are
supported: by the maximum/average flow magnitudes, by
similarity to a selected heatmap row, or by the geographic
positions of the flow origins and destinations. When using
the latter ordering method the flows sharing the same origins or destinations are grouped together in the heatmap, so
the colored flow lines form “bundles” which are very easy to
follow (Fig 4).
Heatmap row aggregation. The flows represented in the
heatmap can be aggregated using different grouping functions. They can be grouped, for example, by their origins (so
that each heatmap row represents the total magnitudes of the
outgoing flows of each of the origin), by destinations, by the
geographical regions of the origins or the destinations, or by
any other flow attribute. This way we can analyze the data
on different aggregation levels, or in other words, change
the spatial resolution.
A single static view can rarely give the whole detailed information of the data being analyzed. Most temporal origindestination datasets are no exception. Hence, providing the
users with the appropriate interactive exploration techniques,
which allow to analyze the data in every detail by focusing on specific regions of interest, or by performing an automated summarization producing an overview, is very important. This is what we tried to achieve with the interaction
techniques which we incorporated in our Flowstrates implementation.
4. Exploration strategies
Flowstrates supports three basic exploration strategies which
address the user tasks described in section 2.1. The first two
strategies are both concerned with the observation of the patterns in the heatmap and differ in the initiation of the task:
from location to time, or from time to location. The last one
is about the comparison of either locations or time periods.
S1: Location −→ Spatial or temporal pattern. Select a
location or a region in the origins map, then find out what
is going on in the heatmap or in the destinations map. This
strategy supports tasks T6, T7 and T8 (described in 2.1).
S2: Temporal pattern −→ Location. Find something
interesting in the heatmap, select the time period and then

976

I. Boyandin et al. / Flowstrates: An Approach for Visual Exploration of Temporal Origin-Destination Data

Figure 4: Flow line coloring: The flow lines of a selection of countries are colored by the flow origins, using a qualitative
color map. The heatmap rows are sorted by the vertical positions of the origins, so that flows from the same origins are grouped
together. This makes it easy to see the parts of the heatmap which represent the flows originated in the selected locations. Iran
is selected in the origins map, therefore the lines from Iran are highlighted and are more opaque than the others.

Figure 5: Flow aggregation: Here all the individual flows between the world’s countries were aggregated by the geographic
region of the origin country, so that we could see the totals of the magnitudes of the flows originated in each region. We selected
Southern Asia in 2008 in the heatmap, thus the maps are colorized showing the outgoing totals for the countries of Southern
Asia and the incoming totals for the countries the flows from Southern Asia went to in 2008. Here we also sorted the heatmap
rows by the average magnitude in each row. In 1995, there was apparently a problem with the data acquisition, because flows
for many countries are missing.

find out where it was happening in the two geographic maps.
This strategy supports tasks T1, T2, T3, T4 and T5.
S3: Comparison of two locations. Select two locations
or regions in the origins map and compare the temporal
changes of the flows of these locations in the heatmap and
their respective destinations in the destinations map. This
strategy supports task T9.

Of course, these strategies are stereotyped on purpose. In
a real-life scenario analysts would generally combine them
in order to solve their exploration tasks and gain new knowledge about the data. We will show how these three strategies
can be applied in the case studies in the next section.

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

I. Boyandin et al. / Flowstrates: An Approach for Visual Exploration of Temporal Origin-Destination Data

977

Figure 6: Refugees from Ethiopia: The enlarged heatmap shows the differences between the pairs of subsequent years (red
shows an increase and blue a decrease in the number of refugees). The rows are sorted by the average number of refugees (over
the whole range of years). Ethiopia is selected so that we only see flows from this country. Somalia is highlighted, therefore the
flow Ethiopia→Somalia is more opaque than the others. The blue rectangle drawn over the heatmap highlights an interesting
“staircase” pattern. Here we first used the geographical maps making visual queries to select countries. Then we used the
heatmap to find the curious temporal pattern, referred back to the geographical maps to see where the other relevant locations
are and found out that most of them were neighboring countries.

5. Case studies
In this section we illustrate how Flowstrates can be used to
analyze real-world temporal origin-destination datasets applying the exploration strategies presented in section 4.
5.1. UNHCR Refugee Dataset
The refugee dataset which has been collected by the UN
Refugee Agency contains numbers of people who find asylum in one of the world’s countries after leaving their country of origin [UNH10]. The dataset contains data for the
last 35 years, and for each of these years there are several
thousands of triples: origin, destination, number of refugees.
These data can tell stories about millions of “forcibly displaced persons”: people who had to leave their homes and
find refuge in a foreign country. With Flowstrates it is possible to see the dynamics of the changes in the refugee flows.
Suppose, we want to analyze the largest flows from
Ethiopia. Let us begin the exploration with strategy S1 (in
section 4). We zoom in to Ethiopia in the origins map, select the country (or simply use the name filter), then sort
the heatmap rows by the flow magnitudes (Fig. 6). Now we
look at the heatmap to find something curious that was happening and then where it was happening, thus switching to
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

strategy S2. In 1987, most refugees from Ethiopia were in
neighboring Somalia, but between 1988 and 1992 the number of Ethiopian refugees in Somalia drastically decreased.
We can better see it in the heatmap showing the differences
between the years. From 1988 to 1990 it was increasing in
Sudan (second row). In 1991, it decreased in Sudan and increased in Kenya, another neighboring country. This is the
reason why we can see the “staircase”. Apparently, many
refugees from Ethiopia were leaving Somalia from 1988 to
1990 and most of them were going to Sudan. In 1991, many
were forced to flee again, this time from Sudan (probably,
because of the severe drought and food shortage), and went
to Kenya.
5.2. Commuters in Slovenia
This dataset contains the numbers of people who commute
to work between the towns and villages in Slovenia. There
are about 17 thousand flows for the years from 2000 to 2008,
so we can explore the temporal development of these flows
with Flowstrates.
In Fig. 7 you can see the result of the comparison of
the flows to Ljubljana and Maribor, the two largest cities in
Slovenia. Here, we use strategy S3 (see section 4). First, we
select Ljubljana and Maribor in the map of destinations so

978

I. Boyandin et al. / Flowstrates: An Approach for Visual Exploration of Temporal Origin-Destination Data

Figure 7: Commuters in Slovenia: to Ljubljana and Maribor, the two largest cities. Here we see the differences between the
number of commuters in each pair of subsequent years (hence, there are no values for 2000). Red corresponds to an increase
and blue to a decrease in the number of commuters. Only the most significant flows are shown here (filtered by the average
magnitude). The numbers of non-commuters (the half-blue rows of the heatmap labeled as Maribor to Maribor, and Ljubljana
to Ljubljana) were decreasing from 2001 to 2005 and increasing significantly from 2006 to 2008, whereas the number of
commuters from almost all the other places were steadily increasing all the time. The flows to Ljubljana come from more distant
locations than the flows to Maribor, which all come from nearby towns and villages.

that only the flows to these two cities are shown. Then we
use a flow magnitude filter to show only the flows having
the largest average magnitudes (over time). In the heatmap
we chose to show the differences of the magnitudes between
each pair of subsequent years and not the actual numbers of
commuters, because we want to better see where they were
increasing and decreasing.
What we can see in the heatmap in Fig. 7 is that for most
places the numbers of people commuting from them to both
Ljubljana and Maribor were steadily growing. However, the
numbers of non-commuters (rows of the heatmap labeled
as Maribor to Maribor, and Ljubljana to Ljubljana) were
decreasing from 2001 to 2005 and increasing significantly
from 2006 to 2008.
In Fig. 7 we also highlighted the flows to Maribor in order
to see in the map of origins where the largest flows come
from geographically (strategy S2). The largest flows to the
capital Ljubljana come from more distant locations than the
largest flows to Maribor which all come from nearby towns
and villages.

6. Related work
The complexity and multidimensionality of spatio-temporal
data pose significant challenges, including the scalability to
the number of moving objects, locations and resolutions of
time and assessment of complex research questions involving space, time and the characteristics of the moving objects

at the same time. Research has been addressing these challenges from many different perspectives.
Geographic flows. One of the most often used representations of entities moving between geographical locations
are flow maps [Tob87, Tob05, PXY∗ 05, Guo09] in which the
flows are represented as lines or arrows with their widths
proportional to the flow magnitudes. Flow maps only show
cumulative movements which took place at a particular time
period, but can be extended to animated flow maps which
show the changes over time [BEW95]. An alternative nongeographic visualization of origin-destination data is ODmatrix [Voo55] in which the flow magnitudes are represented by the cell colors in a heatmap with the rows corresponding to the origins and columns to the destinations.
OD-maps is a promising geographic approach proposed by
Wood et al in [WDS10] in which the map is divided into a
regular grid in which each cell is used as a small replica of
the whole map. The aggregated incoming flows from the corresponding grid cells of the large map are shown as colored
squares in each of the small maps. This approach allows to
represent datasets with enormous numbers of flows, avoiding the clutter caused by the flow line intersections which
conventional flow maps suffer from. However, as the other
approaches described in this section, OD-maps were not designed for the analysis of origin-destination data with a temporal dimension.
Temporal changes of geographic flows. Many different
techniques for the analysis of spatio-temporal data have been
developed so far, e.g. space-time cube [Kra03], time-series
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

I. Boyandin et al. / Flowstrates: An Approach for Visual Exploration of Temporal Origin-Destination Data

graph linked to a map, change maps. Only few of them
can, though, be applied directly to origin-destination data.
Becker et al [BEW95] show how animation can be used
to analyze network traffic data from many time periods. A
thorough discussion of the usage of a small multiples display for representing and analyzing stork migration trajectories can be found in [AA06]. Weaver et al propose an alternative representation for the exploration of spatio-temporal
patterns with the use of calendar layouts [WFR∗ 06]. Mosaic
diagrams were introduced in [AA08] for displaying spatiotemporal patterns in traffic situations. A set of multiple small
calendar-like views representing temporal data are displayed
in a regular rectangular grid on top of a geographic map.
In general, not much has been written on the exploration
of temporal changes in origin-destination data. Marble et
al [MGLS97] noted in 1997 that the limitations of the data
and the empirical difficulties encountered in their analysis have restricted researchers to the examination of flows
within a single time period. This situation has not changed
much since then, and there is still a strong need for techniques capturing the spatio-temporal aspects simultaneously.
This is the particular problem we addressed in our work.
Visually linked views. The idea of drawing visual links
across different views of related data is thoroughly discussed
in VisLink [CC07] and utilized in several other systems, e.g.
Caleydo [WPL∗ 10].
Before coming up with the idea of Flowstrates, we were
very much inspired by Aris and Shneiderman’s work on semantic substrates [SA, AS07] for supporting the interactive
exploration of complex graphs. Substrates are rectangular regions in which the nodes are placed according to a selection
of their attributes. Two or more substrates can then be displayed simultaneously on the screen allowing to analyze different properties of the graph. Then, for a selection of nodes
in one substrate their connections to the nodes in another can
be shown across the substrates, thus visualizing the relationships between the nodes and different attributes.
Flowstrates borrow from semantic substrates the general
idea of representing different aspects of the same data in separate views and showing visual links across the views. But
in our work we address a more specific problem and propose
a technique which is less general, but better suited for temporal origin-destination data. As far as we can say, the idea
of representing the flow origins in one geographical map and
the destination in another is new.
7. Limitations
One limitation of Flowstrates arises when too many lines are
shown between the geographic maps and the heatmap. Too
many intersecting lines become tedious to follow. This happens unless only a few locations are selected from either side
of the heatmap. A partial solution is to use the heatmap row
ordering by vertical positions of the origins (as in Fig. 4).
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

979

But this only works on one side, either for the origins or for
the destinations. A more sophisticated line crossings minimization algorithm could give better results, but would still
require a specific ordering of the rows of the heatmap, thus
limiting the possibilities for reordering. A radical solution
is to only display the flow lines for a few selected or highlighted nodes.
Not being able to see the flows on one map as with conventional flow maps (i.e. a single map with the flow lines
drawn between each origin and destination) can also be considered a limitation. With Flowstrates the orientation of the
flows is not realistic and the distances between the origins
and destinations cannot be estimated from the lengths of the
flow lines as in a conventional flow map. To partially compensate this limitation, a conventional flow map could be
displayed on demand showing the flows for a specific time
period selected by the user. Alternatively, an additional column could be added to the heatmap showing the length of
the flows.
8. Conclusion
In this article we presented Flowstrates, a technique for the
visualization and exploration of temporal origin-destination
data. The design of this technique is based on the task analysis and on a study of design alternatives. Flowstrates does
not only represent spatial and temporal aspects of the data,
it also highlights the relationships between these two dimensions and facilitates the interactive exploration by querying,
filtering, various ordering and grouping techniques. In the
article we illustrated how Flowstrates can be used to analyze
real-world datasets.
In the nearest future, we plan to collect more user feedback and run a user evaluation. We are currently in contact
with several geographers who are very enthusiastic about using Flowstrates for the analysis of their data after trying out
the preliminary visualizations which we produced with our
current implementation. As soon as our tool is ready for it,
we are going to run a think-aloud evaluation (with the tasks
described in section 2.1) to gather qualitative feedback from
the users, to find out which types of the tasks are better supported by our tool, and to elicit the types of patterns users
can discover and the process they follow using Flowstrates.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Natalia and Gennady Andrienko,
Jo Wood and Jason Dykes for their insights and fruitful discussions, the anonymous reviewers for their detailed suggestions for improving the paper, Miha Konjar for helping
us to obtain and interpret the Slovenian commuters dataset,
and Tanja Boyandin for careful reading and correcting the
paper. Funding from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF), grant no. 200012-122159, is also gratefully acknowledged.

980

I. Boyandin et al. / Flowstrates: An Approach for Visual Exploration of Temporal Origin-Destination Data

References
[AA06] A NDRIENKO N., A NDRIENKO G.: Exploratory analysis
of spatial and temporal data : a systematic approach. Springer,
2006. 2, 9
[AA08] A NDRIENKO G., A NDRIENKO N.: Spatio-temporal aggregation for visual analysis of movements. In Visual Analytics
Science and Technology, 2008. VAST’08. IEEE Symposium on
(2008), IEEE, pp. 51–58. 9
[AAD∗ 10] A NDRIENKO G., A NDRIENKO N., D EMSAR U.,
D RANSCH D., DYKES J., FABRIKANT S. I., J ERN M., K RAAK
M., S CHUMANN H., T OMINSKI C.: Space, time and visual analytics. International Journal of Geographical Information Science 24, 10 (2010), 1577–1600. 1
[AES] A MAR R., E AGAN J., S TASKO J.: Low-Level components
of analytic activity in information visualization. In Proceedings
of the 2005 IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (INFOVIS’05) (Minneapolis, MN, USA), pp. 15–15. 2
[APP11] A RCHAMBAULT D., P URCHASE H., P INAUD B.: Animation, small multiples, and the effect of mental map preservation in dynamic graphs. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 17, 4 (2011), 539–552. 3
[AS07] A RIS A., S HNEIDERMAN B.: Designing semantic substrates for visual network exploration. Information Visualization
6 (December 2007), 281–300. 9
[BBL10] B OYANDIN I., B ERTINI E., L ALANNE D.: Using flow
maps to explore migrations over time. Geospatial Visual Analytics Workshop in conjunction with The 13th AGILE International
Conference on Geographic Information Science (2010). 2, 3

[Kra03] K RAAK M.: The Space-Time cube revisited from a geovisualization perspective. In Proceedings of the 21st International Cartographic Conference (ICC) (2003). 8
[LMK07] L AM H., M UNZNER T., K INCAID R.: Overview use
in multiple visual information resolution interfaces. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 6 (2007),
1278–1285. 5
[LPP∗ 06] L EE B., P LAISANT C., PARR C. S., F EKETE J.,
H ENRY N.: Task taxonomy for graph visualization. In Proceedings of the 2006 AVI workshop on BEyond time and errors
novel evaluation methods for information visualization - BELIV
’06 (Venice, Italy, 2006), p. 1. 2
[MGLS97] M ARBLE D. F., G OU Z., L IU L., S AUNDERS J.: Recent advances in the exploratory analysis of interregional flows.
Innovations in GIS 4 (1997), 75–88. 1, 9
[PXY∗ 05] P HAN D., X IAO L., Y EH R., H ANRAHAN P., W INO GRAD T.: Flow map layout. In Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization (INFOVIS’05) (2005),
pp. 29–29. 8
[Rae09] R AE A.: From spatial interaction data to spatial interaction information: Geovisualisation and spatial structures of migration from the 2001 UK census. Computers, Environment and
Urban Systems 33, 3 (2009), 161–178. 1
[SA] S HNEIDERMAN B., A RIS A.: Network visualization by semantic substrates. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12. 4, 9
[TMB02] T VERSKY B., M ORRISON J., B ETRANCOURT M.:
Animation: can it facilitate? International Journal of HumanComputer Studies 57, 4 (2002), 247–262. 3

[BEW95] B ECKER R., E ICK S., W ILKS A.: Visualizing network
data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 1, 1 (1995), 16–28. 3, 8, 9

[Tob87] T OBLER W.: Experiments in migration mapping by computer. The American Cartographer 14, 2 (1987), 155–163. 1, 8

[BH09] B REWER C., H ARROWER M.: Colorbrewer: Color advice for maps. http://colorbrewer2.org, 2009. 5

[Tob05] T OBLER W.:
Display and analysis of migration tables. http://www.geog.ucsb.edu/~tobler/
presentations/shows/A_Flow_talk.htm, 2005. 1, 8

[CC07] C OLLINS C., C ARPENDALE S.: VisLink: revealing relationships amongst visualizations. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 6 (Dec. 2007), 1192–1199.
9

[UNH10] UNHCR, T HE UN R EFUGEE AGENCY, D IVISION OF
P ROGRAMME S UPPORT AND M ANAGEMENT: 2009 global
trends: Refugees, asylum-seekers, returnees, internally displaced
and stateless persons, 2010. 2, 7

[Guo09] G UO D.: Flow Mapping and Multivariate Visualization
of Large Spatial Interaction Data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 15, 6 (October 2009), 1041–
1048. 8

[Voo55] VOORHEES A.: A general theory of traffic movement.
Institute of Traffic Engineers (1955), 46–56. 8

[Har99] H ARRIS R.: Information graphics : a comprehensive illustrated reference. Oxford University Press, New York, 1999.
1, 2
[HKA09] H EER J., KONG N., AGRAWALA M.: Sizing the horizon. In Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’09 (Boston, MA, USA,
2009), p. 1303. 5
[HR07] H EER J., ROBERTSON G.: Animated transitions in statistical data graphics. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 13, 6 (2007), 1240–1247. 3

[WDS10] W OOD J., DYKES J., S LINGSBY A.: Visualisation of
origins, destinations and flows with OD maps. Cartographic
Journal, The 47, 2 (2010), 117–129. 8
[WFR∗ 06] W EAVER C., F YFE D., ROBINSON A.,
H OLDSWORTH D., P EUQUET D., M AC E ACHREN A.: Visual analysis of historic hotel visitation patterns. In 2006 IEEE
Symposium On Visual Analytics Science And Technology (2006),
IEEE, pp. 35–42. 9
[WPL∗ 10] WALDNER M., P UFF W., L EX A., S TREIT M.,
S CHMALSTIEG D.: Visual links across applications. Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2010 (June 2010). 9

[KHS02] K EOGH E. J., H OCHHEISER H., S HNEIDERMAN B.:
An augmented visual query mechanism for finding patterns in
time series data. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Flexible Query Answering Systems (London, UK, UK,
2002), FQAS ’02, Springer-Verlag, pp. 240–250. 5
[KP99] K REMPEL L., P LÜMPER T.: International division of labor and global economic processes: an analysis of the international trade in automobiles. Journal of World-Systems Research
V, 3 (1999), 487–498. 2

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

