DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01937.x
Eurographics / IEEE Symposium on Visualization 2011 (EuroVis 2011)
H. Hauser, H. Pfister, and J. J. van Wijk
(Guest Editors)

Volume 30 (2011), Number 3

The Undistort Lens
John Brosz, Sheelagh Carpendale, and Miguel A. Nacenta
Department of Computer Science, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada

Abstract
Detail-in-context lens techniques can be useful for exploring visualizations of data spaces that are too large or
have too much detail to fit in regular displays. For example, by bending the space in the right way we can bring
together details from two separate areas for easy comparison while roughly keeping the context that situates each
area within the global space. While these techniques can be powerful tools, they also introduce distortions that
need to be understood, and often the tools have to be disabled in order to have access to the undistorted data.
We introduce the undistort lens, a complement to existing distortion-based techniques that provides a local and
separate presentation of the original geometry without affecting any distortion-based lenses currently used in the
presentation. The undistort lens is designed to allow interactive access to the underlying undistorted data within
the context of the distorted space, and to enable a better understanding of the distortions. The paper describes
the implementation of a generic back-mapping mechanism that enables the implementation of undistort lenses for
arbitrary distortion based techniques, including those presented in the lens literature. We also provide a series of
use-case scenarios that demonstrate the situations in which the technique can complement existing lenses.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): H. [H. Information Systems]: Information Interfaces
and Presentation—H.5.2 User Interfaces

1. Introduction
As our understanding of the possibilities and benefits of
detail-in-context viewing improves, more variations continue to arise. However, these information exploration techniques are still usually achieved through some type of distortion and while the accompanying distortions may have
become more sophisticated, they are also frequently complex. Into this interactive milieu, we introduce the undistort
lens. The undistort lens is an interactive technique that provides access to the undistorted data from within a distorted
visualization.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

Consider the following scenario: we want to use a map
(Fig. 1A) to find the best route between two distant small
towns that are hundreds of miles from each other. This is a
typical detail-in-context problem, since a map scale that allows us to recognize and see the towns (the detail) would be
too big to fit on any screen, and a scale that makes the distance between the towns fit within a reasonable space (the
context) could make the towns invisible or indistinguishable
from other similar objects. There are a number of visualization techniques based on distortion that can help us solve this
problem. For example, magnification lenses can be placed on

882

J. Brosz & S. Carpendale & M. A. Nacenta / The Undistort Lens

tion as our context, and removing the context will make our
task difficult.
The undistort lens is a simple and elegant way to address this problem. Instead of temporarily disabling distortion, forcing the traveler to commit to memory the two representations and establishing relationship between them on
the go, the undistort lens provides an undistorted representation of the interest area that can be compared concurrently
with the distorted context. Figure 1C represents the use of
the undistort lens in the town route scenario. The magnification lenses (Elements I and II of Fig. 1C) make the towns
visible, but it is difficult to trace a route through their dropoff areas (e.g., III). The undistort lens displays an area of the
undistorted map through a rectangular offset window (VI),
that is connected through a line with the area being undistorted (V). The undistort lens also provides an outline of the
undistorted area within the distorted space (IV) which can
help us relate the elements visualized in the undistorted area
to the distorted representation.
In this paper we present the undistort lens: a technique
that can be used interactively within any complex multiscale
viewing environment, regardless to the complexity of the
current distortion, to provide access to the original undistorted visualization. The next section outlines the related
work. This is followed by the details of the inverse mapping
algorithm and the implementation. In Section 5 we illustrate
the versatility of the undistort lens through several examples
of its use with a variety of different distortion viewing techniques.

Figure 1: (A) Finding specific towns in this large map is difficult. (B) Detail-in-context magnification lenses reveal the
towns but obscure the railway connections. (C) An undistort lens clarifies the railway connections in the transition
region between the magnification lenses. The arrows point
out the magnification lenses (I & II), a road obscured by the
lens’ drop-off (III), the selected region to undistort (IV), the
undistort lens connection (V), and displayed undistorted information (VI).
top of the towns to enlarge the areas where detail is needed
while retaining the context (Fig. 1B).
Unfortunately, the same distortion that helps us fit detail
and context in a constrained space also makes certain tasks
difficult; in the case of these magnification lenses, the dropoff areas deform the map in ways that make it difficult to
decide if a road or railway will connect the towns or not.
This can be circumvented by temporarily disabling the magnification lenses, but this is likely to confuse us even more,
since disabling a lens will make the town impossible to locate and will force us to recognize the distorted shapes of the
roads that we were following from their undistorted shapes.
In other words, we were relying on the distorted representa-

2. Related Work
Since the undistort lens is a technique that both belongs
to and complements the existing lens and detail-in-context
viewing techniques, we provide a brief overview of these
techniques to set the context for this research.
Early in the information presentation and exploration research, two eloquent arguments were made about the importance of context in information work. One is Spence and
Apperley’s [SA94] discussion of the importance of spatial
memory in information search, which suggested that there
are benefits to displaying full context even if it must be compressed. The other is Furnas’ [Fur86] explanation of how it
is common practice for people to set information they are interested in the context that they deem most important. From
this Furnas suggested use of a degree-of-interest (DOI) function to create what he termed Fisheye views that set selected
regions in an appropriate context. The research community’s
response to these ideas has been many and varied, giving rise
to all kinds of viewing and interaction possibilities most of
which create some type of focus and context view and make
use of some form of spatial distortion.
The following are some examples of multi-scale focus and
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

J. Brosz & S. Carpendale & M. A. Nacenta / The Undistort Lens

context presentations. Bifocal display [SA94] and the rubber sheet stretching metaphor [SSTR93] provide methods
for distorting 2D space. Graphical Fisheye views [Fur86] apply Furnas’ fisheye concepts to simple vector graphics. Table
Lens [RC94] applies distortion viewing concepts to tabular
data. PerspectiveWall [MRC91] and DocumentLens [RM93]
use 3D perspective to create focus and context views of predominately 1D data and of large documents respectively.
Accordion Drawing [MGT∗ 03, SHM06] extends the rubber sheet concept to offer guaranteed visibility. Carpendale
et al. [CCF95], Keahey et al. [KR96] and Shoemaker and
Gutwin [SG07] offer constrained lenses that provide independent local magnification lenses and limit the spread of
distortion into the rest of the context. Carpendale and Montagenese [CM01] introduced Elastic Presentation Framework (EPF) giving an algorithmic basis for unifying these
approaches, making it possible to include any number of
them in a given interface. DTLens [FS05] introduced local magnification lenses to multi-touch tables. More recently Sigma Lenses [PA08] combined the concept of Magic
Lenses [BSP∗ 93] with EPF to create a greater variety of integrated visual lens types. Melange [EHRF08], also looked
at the EPF basis but considered the interaction metaphor of
making regions smaller or of pushing regions away from
view. This, similarly to folding in EPF, made it possible to
juxtapose different regions of information that might initially be quite far apart. The undistort lens relates most
closely to Magic Lenses [BSP∗ 93], offering its own brand
of magic to invert existing distortions.
In parallel with the development of the new focus and
context viewing techniques there has been an ongoing discussion about the effect of distortion on comprehension
[CCF97a, Fur06, MELS95]. In additional studies [Gut02,
CG03, SG05] have shown that distortion viewing has both
positive and negative effects. This has contributed to the discussion about whether the use of distortion outweighs the advantages of the focus and context presentations. Within this
context, we explore the use of a layered interaction that integrates the ability to invert distortions, providing an undistort
lens that can operate interactively in conjunction with all existing distortions.

883

Figure 2: The base of the undistort lens can either be directly under the distorted area (a) or connected (b) with a
line between the region of interest and the undistort lens’
display. The region shown within the undistort lens is indicated by an outline (c).

Figure 3: Undistort lenses can have a rectangular, square,
or circular shape.
tort lens provides access to original data within a multi-scale
viewing environment.

3. The Undistort Lens

The visual design of the undistort lens corresponds to its
function of providing undistorted data within its distorted
context. Similarly to other lenses, it has a base or region of
connection to the current visual presentation and a focus or
region that presents the undistorted visuals that directly correspond to the visuals indicated by the base. The focus or
the undistorted region ((a) in Figure 2) presents the undistorted view of the underlying data that is within the base.
Figure 2 shows how the undistort lens can display an undistorted region directly over the distorted area (a) or offset and
connected through a line to the region of interest (b).

The primary concept of the undistort lens is to provide interactive access to the original undistorted data no matter what
the state of the current distortion. The problem that motivates
the undistort lens is that, although distortion-based visualizations can be disabled to reveal the undistorted data, we wish
to examine a chosen section of the data free of distortions
without necessitating the removal of a complex viewing configuration. As noted in Section 1 the added functionality of
undistort can enhance the interactive exploration possibilities when combined with magnification lenses. The undis-

In our implementation, the shape, both base and focus, of
the undistort lens can be switched between rectangle, square,
or circle (Figure 3) through small buttons attached to left of
the lens. Note that an undistort lens can easily be created
in any arbitrary shape; we have chosen these three simple
shapes because they are commonly-used in lens-related literature. The undistort lens provides an outline of its base
within the distorted space of the current visualization. This
indicates the area the undistorted lens is presenting, supporting a better understanding of the relationship between the

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

884

J. Brosz & S. Carpendale & M. A. Nacenta / The Undistort Lens

base and the focus. Also, it is possible to independently adjust the size of the undistort lens area and the level of magnification within the undistort lens. This scale adjustment is
accessible through a slider on the right of the undistort lens.
Supporting changes of scale within the undistort lens allows
presentation of the full range from the original visualization
with no non-linear distortions, to a highly magnified small
area. This freedom allows it to be also used in a similar manner to either an overview or a radar view [GRG96]. Finally,
the area of interest within the current visualization is selected
by choosing the center of interest and then dragging to establish either the radius of the circle or the position of a corner
of the square or rectangle from the base of the undistort lens.

4. Implementation
The main challenge for the implementation of the undistort
lens is the back-mapping algorithm. Although an undistorted
version of the data space is available for most distortionbased transformations, the undistort lens must be able to
refer specific points in the arbitrarily distorted space to
their undistorted counterparts. It is necessary that this backmapping works for any arbitrary distortion-based technique,
including lenses covered in survey papers [LA94, CM01,
CKB09] as well as recent variations such as sigma lenses
[PA08] and melange [EHRF08]. To further illustrate undistort’s flexibility, we also introduce new distortion factors
such as lens rotation and lens wedges, combining these with
lens folding [CCF97b].
Distortion techniques describe mappings from the original data to the distorted presentation. Essentially, these mappings are functions that transform locations on the original
data space (x, y) into locations in the distorted space (x∗ , y∗ ).
Distortion techniques use a variety of functions to achieve
these deformations of the original data into distorted viewing presentations. However, in order to relate a specific point
on the distorted presentation to the point in the original data,
we need the inverse function that maps (x∗ , y∗ ) to (x, y). This
inverse mapping is not trivial because a separate formula
would have to be independently derived for each distortion
technique. Such a derivation is not possible in many cases,
since analytic inverse formulas do not exist for all distortionbased transformations [LA94, SSTR93].
To address this challenge we closely approximate this inverse mapping through a rendering technique very similar to
that devised by Cowperthwaite et al. [CCF99], which was
in turn based on Hanrahan and Haeberli’s technique [HH90]
for directly painting textures on projected 3D objects.
The inverse mapping technique works in two steps. First
we encode the position of each pixel of the undistorted space
into the colour channels of an equally-sized image. This
means that by looking at the colour values of the pixel at
(x, y) we can recover the exact value of x and y. Second,
we distort this auxiliary image through the same process

Figure 4: Left: width coordinates encoded into red (top) and
green (bottom) channels of a lookup texture. While normally
combined into a single image, these channels have been presented as separate images to make changes in the red channel easily visible; blue and alpha channels are not shown.
The black bands in the green channel mark where 8-bit overflow causes an increment in the red channel. Right: width
lookup texture channels after deformation by top-left quarter of a Sinusoidal map projection [Sny97].

Figure 5: Lookup textures (x-map and y-map, left column)
encode x and y coordinates in RGB image values. Data is
distorted by a function f , that is also applied to the lookup
textures (middle column). To find the original coordinates of
a point (i, j) on the distorted presentation (red circle, right
column) we examine the channel values of pixel (i, j) in the
x-map and y-map to determine the undisorted x and y respectively.
that transformed the original data into a distorted presentation. This transformation deforms the auxiliary image, but
the colour of the distorted pixels preserves the information
of their original location in the undistorted space. If we want
to find out the original location of any position in the distorted space, we can lookup the colour value of its coordinate in the distorted auxiliary image. Decoding this colour
value provides the original coordinate from the undistorted
space.
Since we want to be able to apply undistort to very large
images, we need enough colour bits to encode any coordinate. To achieve this, we use two auxiliary images, one for
the horizontal coordinate and one for the vertical. We call
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

J. Brosz & S. Carpendale & M. A. Nacenta / The Undistort Lens

885

these images the horizontal and vertical lookup textures. Because each image has 4 channels (Red, Green, Blue, Alpha)
of 8 bits each, we can encode coordinates of a space of up
to (232 )2 pixels. Figure 4 displays the red and green channels
of a horizontal lookup texture before (left) and after (right)
distortion; the blue and alpha channels are not shown since
they are not used due to the image being less than 216 pixels
wide. Figure 5 summarizes the back-mapping process with
horizontal and vertical lookup textures.
Backmapping is used in our interface to calculate the center of the undistorted content shown by the undistort lens,
which is the backmapped location of the point of interest (V
in Figure 1). To draw the outline of the area shown by the
undistort lens in distorted space we take the original (undistorted) coordinates of points displayed along the inside edge
of the undistort lens, apply the distortion f to these points,
and draw them within the distorted presentation.

Figure 6: An undistort lens used with a Melange-like space
fold.

5. Undistort in Action
We introduced this paper with a scenario that used undistort
with two EPF Gaussian lenses, showing how undistort could
interactively offer scaled views of the lenses’ distorted regions clarifying the positions of the roads and railway lines.
In this section we illustrate how undistort can work with
other distortions and show four additional uses: to explore
and compare alternate distortions arising from map projections; to ease touch-up editing; when re-aligning magnification lenses for better juxtapositions; and in collaborative
scenarios.
To illustrate undistort in use with different types of distortions, Figure 6 shows undistort in use with Melange type
lenses. Melange uses rectilinear distortions to create radically folded views where regions of the map that were previously far apart can now be seen adjacently, albeit with
the distortion between them providing an indication of the
amount of information that exists between the two focal regions. The Melange lens employs shading to make the distinctions between focal, and thus scaled only, regions and
regions of distortion. Note how undistort also removes the
shading giving a clear view of the selected distorted region.
Figures 7 and 8 show undistort with sigma-type lenses.
Sigma Lenses expand distortion lenses to include varied
use of transparency. Here undistort is applied across both
non-linear distortion and transparency. Figure 9 introduces
a wedge lens. A wedge lens can combine the advantages of
a Manhattan Lens with that of a blended lens. In this figure
the lens has been chosen to fit the angle between the fork in
the railways, employing the Manhattan’s abrupt drop-off to
the bottom and to the right and using a Gaussian blend on
the left. The undistort lens is oblivious of these changes in
type of distortion used and presents the area from the top of
the focal region down the steep side to include part of the
context.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 7: A sigma-type lens is positioned over the north sea
with an undistort lens centered on Olso.

Figure 8: An undistort lens is used to clarify the details on
Great Britain which was currently less clear on the side of a
sigma-type lens.
High magnification exploration is also an important scenario, especially as more and more extremely high resolution images are made available. For example, this high resolution exploration involves examining the details in digitally
preserved artworks. Here the high resolution detail is necessary to make out features of interest such as fine detail, brush
strokes, paint composition, tapestry weave, etc.
In exploring extremely high resolution imagery with a detail and context lens, even with lenses designed for this pur-

886

J. Brosz & S. Carpendale & M. A. Nacenta / The Undistort Lens

Figure 9: A wedge lens positioned to fit the angle formed by
a fork in the railway. An undistort lens presents a region on
either side of a sharp, Manhattan-style drop-off.
Figure 11: A simple example of annotation where a point
is marked (red) in an area magnified by a context and detail
lens (top). Then lens is then moved but the red marker retains
its position with respect to the underlying image despite the
change in the distortion (bottom).

Figure 10: Exploration of high magnification imagery (The
Arnofini Portrait by Jan van Eyck, oil on oak, 1434) with an
EPF detail and context lens and an undistort lens. The detail
and context lens features 10X magnification and a power
function dropoff with a parameter value of 2 as per [CLP04].
One undistort lens is used to clarify the position of the high
magnification area in the original scene, the other is used to
make text legible.

pose such as those described by Carpendale et al. [CLP04],
it still can be difficult to maintain useful context. For instance in Figure 10 if we consider the 10X magnification detail+context lens on its own, the context is greatly distorted
making comparisons between the magnified reflection in the
mirror to the rest of the scene difficult. The addition of the
circular undistort lens and the independent adjustment of its
magnification level provides a simple means of comparison
without interfering with the focus area. An additional rectangular undistort lens is used to make text in the context
area legible at a middle-level magnification. While use of a

multiplicative lens on top of another lens [CLP04] can also
provide this middle-level magnification, adjustments to the
lower lens are propagated to the upper lens consequently discouraging exploration with the middle magnification as any
such changes causes the loss of the current focus. The undistort lens in contrast acts independently allowing any its parameters (magnification, shape, position, point-of-interest)
to be changed without causing disruption to the high magnification focus of the detail and context lens.
5.1. High Resolution Image Editing
Since undistort can directly access the underlying visualization, it can also be used for editing. Figure 11 shows a simple red-marker annotation to denote the location of a point.
Figures 12 and 13 illustrate complex touch-up editing as described below.
A task that can benefit from the undistort lens is that of
digital touch-up. Removing or adjusting small details in pictures is common among professional and amateur photographers. Due to the high-resolution of current cameras, digital touch-up usually requires switching between two levels
of magnification: a highly magnified level where individual pixels can be clearly discerned; and the magnification
level at which the image is likely to be viewed as a whole.
Changing and picking out individual pixels requires high
magnification, but low magnification is required to ensure
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

J. Brosz & S. Carpendale & M. A. Nacenta / The Undistort Lens

887

Figure 12: A photograph is edited to remove a cloud. Edits performed at high magnification should be examined at normal
magnification to ensure that they blend in. Left: original. Middle: poorly blended edit. Right: well blended edit.

Figure 13: Mock-up of editing with a 4X magnification detail and context lens with assistance from an undistort lens. Left:
original image; middle: poorly blended local editing; right: well blended local editing. A grid has been super-imposed to reveal
the detail and context lens as shading causes greater disruption to colour values necessary for photo editing.
that the changes appear seamless over the macro context of
the changed area. Figure 12 shows an image being touched
up to remove a small cloud from a large city skyline.
Rather than switching between magnifications, this task
can be accomplished with a combination of a detail-incontext lens and an undistort lens. As shown in Figure 13,
the detail and context lens provides an area of high magnification where local editing operations can take place. The
undistort lens is used to check the global context of the local
area without tying up the screen space necessary to present
another copy of the image. Additionally the use of undistort’s backmap (colour-based lookup) for annotation allows
pixel operations to be performed on the original image when
specified in image space.

5.2. Map Projections
Undistort lenses can be used to examine map projections.
All projections of a spherical surface (e.g., the earth) onto
a plane introduce distortions. To address these distortions
a wide variety of cartographic projections exist with different trade-offs between the preservation of area, scale, angle,
and shape [Sal06]. In this scenario, rather than undoing distortion, undistort lenses support exploration, understanding,
and comparison between different cartographic projections
as shown in Fig. 14. The undistort lens’ ability to present
the same area and the outline of area’s shape on the original projection allows direct comparison between different
projections and can lead to a better understanding of the biases of these projections without losing global context, and
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

without having to resort to other visual artifacts such as grid
lines.
We can also use the undistort lens to undo the effects of
displaying a world map on a sphere. Figure 15 depicts a representation of the earth where Japan appears skewed and thin
due to the current orientation of the globe (facing the Indian
Ocean). In this case, the undistort lens shows a cylindrical
rendition of the area.
5.3. Folded Lens
Sometimes with detail-in-context lenses it is desirable to reposition the foci to align the information in the lens foci
with either other foci or other regions of the context. This
re-positioning of a magnified focus has been referred to as
folding [CCFS95, CM01]. Since a folded lens has moved its
focus across the context, it is a distortion-based deformation
that makes certain parts of the data disappear under a fold.
Figure 16 shows an example of folded lenses where the displacement of the focus areas forces the occlusion of drop-off
regions. Folded lenses provide a compromise solution when
the focus area needs to be displaced a large distance from
its original location (e.g., to compare two distant areas of
interest side by side), but still preserve a partial connection
with their context. Figure 16 exemplifies this by showing a
comparison of the distances between stations in two different areas of a railway line, without losing all the context of
how the rail line continues into the rest of the map.
Naturally, the large drop-off region of the folded lens generates substantial distortion but, as Fig. 16 illustrates, we can

888

J. Brosz & S. Carpendale & M. A. Nacenta / The Undistort Lens

Figure 14: Exploring the differences between a Winkel Tripel projection and the original image data (a cylindrical projection).

ful in showing a lens’ content to a collaborator, providing the
right viewing orientation for the collaborator. This rotation
will introduce a twist within the distorted region of the lens.
Figure 17 shows a single rotated lens with the word ’city’
now aligned to the right hand side. Lenses can provide rotation and translations that accomplish this while preserving
connections to the global context (Fig. 18).

Figure 15: Use of the undistort lens to present a cylindrical
projection next to a 3D globe.

then apply an undistort lens to explore this area without having to lose the location of the folded lenses. The undistort
lens can also be positioned to reveal areas that fall under the
fold; moreover, by examining the shape of the undistort base,
a better understanding of the distortion and the folded parts
can be achieved.
5.4. Collaborative multi-user detail and context
In collaborative environments (e.g., collaborative tabletop
information visualization [KCSG04, IC07]) it is often necessary to adapt the content to the different positions and orientations of people. To support this we introduce a distortion
lens variation in which the lens focus can be rotated, while
maintaining the same information content. This can be use-

The undistort lens complements these collaborative environments in three main ways. First, undistort lens(es) can be
placed to allow one person to view the area’s original data
without interfering with somebody else’s distortion analysis of the area (e.g., Figures 17 and 18). Second, undistort
lenses can be rotated themselves to facilitate the analysis of
the undistorted data. Third, undistort lenses and their bases
can assist in assessing the current orientation relative to the
context of rotating lenses.
6. Conclusion
Distortion-based techniques such as detail-in-context magnification lenses, sigma lenses, and Melange can be helpful
to address detail-in-context problems where a single uniform
presentation of the data space is not sufficient to effectively
use the data. In this paper we have introduced the undistort
lens, a technique that complements distortion-based techniques to address the problems that they introduce.
The undistort lens provides an auxiliary undistorted visualization of an area of interest that is visually linked to the
context of the distorted data space created by a distortionbased technique. The technique enables the exploration of
an area in its original undistorted form without having to
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

J. Brosz & S. Carpendale & M. A. Nacenta / The Undistort Lens

889

Figure 16: Two 4.5 magnification lenses that have been folded over to compare two separated areas of a map. Two undistort
lenses assist in understanding the distortions, reading labels, and revealing obscured areas.

disable the distortion, and allows comparison of the distorted
and undistorted presentations. We demonstrate through a series of examples how the undistort lens can be applied to
scenarios where the distorted space is not sufficient, and for
situations where a better understanding of a distortion can be
useful (e.g., spherical projections).
Finally, we also contribute the description of a backmapping algorithm that enables the implementation of
undistort lenses for any arbitrary distortion techniques. We
believe that the addition of undistort lens capabilities to existing distortion-based representations can contribute to their
usefulness by helping address some of the problems generated by distortion.

Figure 17: A detail-in-context lens where the focus can be
arbitrarily oriented. The undistort lens can clarify data’s
original orientation.

Acknowledgements
Three of the images used in this work were provided by
outside sources: The Blue Marble: Land Surface, Ocean
Color and Sea Ice was provided by NASA’s Visibile
Earth http://visibleearth.nasa.gov/view_rec.php?
id=2430. Chataways’s Map of Greater Winnipeg Enlarged
and Revised Edition 1917 and Map of Western Canada Manitoba, Alberta, Assiniboia, Saskatchewan and Part of British
Columbia, Showing System of Land Survey and Lines of the
Canadian Pacific Railway Company (1893) used were obtained through a Creative Commons attribution license from
http://www.flickr.com/photos/manitobamap.
We would like to thank the reviewers for their insightful comments as well as for support from the Natural Sciences and Engineer Research Council (NSERC), iCORE,
and Smart Technologies Inc.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 18: A detail-in-context lens that automatically orients towards the nearest screen edge based on how the lens
has been folded. The undistort lens and its frame make clear
the orientation of the focus of the detail and context lens relative to the context.

890

J. Brosz & S. Carpendale & M. A. Nacenta / The Undistort Lens

References
[BSP∗ 93] B IER E. A., S TONE M. C., P IER K., B UXTON W.,
D E ROSE T. D.: Toolglass and magic lenses: The see-through
interface. In Proceedings of Siggraph 93 (Aug. 1993), ACM,
pp. 73–80. 3
[CCF95] C ARPENDALE S., C OWPERTHWAITE D. J., F RACCHIA
F. D.: 3-dimensional pliable surfaces: for the effective presentation of visual information. In Proc. of the ACM Symp. on User
Interface Software and Tech: UIST (1995), ACM, pp. 217–226.
3

[IC07] I SENBERG P., C ARPENDALE S.: Interactive tree comparison for co-located collaborative information visualization. IEEE
Trans. Vis. and Comput. Graphics 13, 6 (2007), 1232 –1239. 8
[KCSG04] K RUGER R., C ARPENDALE S., S COTT S. D.,
G REENBERG S.: Roles of orientation in tabletop collaboration:
Comprehension, coordination and communication. Computer
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 13 (2004), 501–537. 8
[KR96] K EAHEY T., ROBERTSON E.: Techniques for non-linear
magnification transformations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symp.
on Information Visualization ’96, (Oct. 1996), pp. 38 –45. 3

[CCF97a] C ARPENDALE S., C OWPERTHWAITE D., F RACCHIA
F.: Making distortions comprehensible. In Proc. of IEEE Symp.
on Visual Languages: VL (Sept. 1997), IEEE, pp. 36–45. 3

[LA94] L EUNG Y. K., A PPERLEY M. D.: A review and taxonomy of distortion-oriented presentation techniques. ACM Trans.
Comput.-Hum. Interact. 1 (June 1994), 126–160. 4

[CCF97b] C ARPENDALE S., C OWPERTHWAITE D. J., F RAC CHIA F. D.: Extending distortion viewing from 2D to 3D. IEEE
Comp. Graph. Appl. 17, 4 (July/Aug. 1997), 42–51. 4

[MELS95] M ISUE K., E ADES P., L AI W., S UGIYAMA K.: Layout adjustment and the mental map. Journal of Visual Languages
& Computing 6, 2 (1995), 183 – 210. 3

[CCF99] C OWPERTHWAITE D. J., C ARPENDALE M. S. T.,
F RACCHIA F. D.: Editing in elastic presentation spaces.
Tech. Rep. TR 1999-11, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC,
Canada, Oct. 1999. 4

[MGT∗ 03] M UNZNER T., G UIMBRETIÈRE F., TASIRAN S.,
Z HANG L., Z HOU Y.: Treejuxtaposer: scalable tree comparison using focus+context with guaranteed visibility. ACM Trans.
Graph. 22 (July 2003), 453–462. 3

[CCFS95] C ARPENDALE S., C OWPERTHWAITE D. J., F RAC CHIA F. D., S HERMER T.: Graph folding: Extending detail and
context viewing into a tool for subgraph comparisons. In Graph
Drawing: GD (1995), Springer-Verlag, pp. 127–139. 7

[MRC91] M ACKINLAY J. D., ROBERTSON G. G., C ARD S. K.:
The perspective wall: Detail and context smoothly integrated. In
Proc. of the SIGCHI conf. on Human factors in comp. systems
(1991), pp. 173–180. 3

[CG03] C ARL A. S., G UTWIN C.: Finding things in fisheyes:
Memorability in distorted spaces. In Graphics Interface (2003),
pp. 67–75. 3
[CKB09] C OCKBURN A., K ARLSON A., B EDERSON B. B.: A
review of overview+detail, zooming, and focus+context interfaces. ACM Comput. Surv. 41 (Jan. 2009), 2:1–2:31. 4
[CLP04] C ARPENDALE S., L IGHT J., PATTISON E.: Achieving
higher magnification in context. In Proc. of the ACM Symp. on
User Interface Software and Tech: UIST (2004), ACM, pp. 71–
80. 6
[CM01] C ARPENDALE S., M ONTAGNESE C.: A framework for
unifying presentation space. In Proc. of the ACM Symp. on User
Interface Software and Tech: UIST (2001), ACM, pp. 61–70. 3,
4, 7
[EHRF08] E LMQVIST N., H ENRY N., R ICHE Y., F EKETE J.D.: Melange: space folding for multi-focus interaction. In Proc.
of the SIGCHI conf. on Human factors in comp. systems (2008),
ACM, pp. 1333–1342. 3, 4

[PA08] P IETRIGA E., A PPERT C.: Sigma lenses: focus-context
transitions combining space, time and translucence. In Proc. of
the SIGCHI conf. on Human factors in comp. systems (2008),
ACM, pp. 1343–1352. 3, 4
[RC94] R AO R., C ARD S. K.: The table lens: merging graphical
and symbolic representations in an interactive focus + context
visualization for tabular information. In Proc. of the SIGCHI
conf. on Human factors in comp. systems (1994), ACM, pp. 318–
322. 3
[RM93] ROBERTSON G. G., M ACKINLAY J. D.: The document
lens. In Proc. of the ACM Symp. on User Interface Software and
Tech: UIST (1993), ACM, pp. 101–108. 3
[SA94] S PENCE R., A PPERLEY M.: Data base navigation: an office environment for the professional. Behaviour and Information
Technology 1, 1 (1994), 43–54. 2, 3
[Sal06] S ALOMON D.: Transformations and Projections in Computer Graphics. Springer-Verlag, 2006. 7

[FS05] F ORLINES C., S HEN C.: Dtlens: multi-user tabletop spatial data exploration. In Proc. of the ACM Symp. on User Interface Software and Tech: UIST (2005), ACM, pp. 119–122. 3

[SG05] S KOPIK A., G UTWIN C.: Improving revisitation in fisheye views with visit wear. In Proc. of the SIGCHI conf. on Human
factors in comp. systems (2005), ACM, pp. 771–780. 3

[Fur86] F URNAS G.: Generalized fisheye views. In Proc. of the
SIGCHI conf. on Human factors in comp. systems (1986), ACM,
pp. 16–23. 2, 3

[SG07] S HOEMAKER G., G UTWIN C.: Supporting multi-point
interaction in visual workspaces. In Proc. of the SIGCHI conf. on
Human factors in comp. systems (2007), ACM, pp. 999–1008. 3

[Fur06] F URNAS G. W.: A fisheye follow-up: further reflections
on focus + context. In Proc. of the SIGCHI conf. on Human
factors in comp. systems (2006), ACM, pp. 999–1008. 3

[SHM06] S LACK J., H ILDEBRAND K., M UNZNER T.: Prisad: A
partitioned rendering infrastructure for scalable accordion drawing (extended version). Information Visualization 5 (2006), 137–
151. 3

[GRG96] G UTWIN C., ROSEMAN M., G REENBERG S.: A usability study of awareness widgets in a shared workspace groupware system. In Proceedings of the 1996 ACM conference
on Computer supported cooperative work (1996), CSCW ’96,
ACM, pp. 258–267. 4
[Gut02] G UTWIN C.: Improving focus targeting in interactive
fisheye views. In Proc. of the SIGCHI conf. on Human factors
in comp. systems (2002), ACM, pp. 267–274. 3

[Sny97] S NYDER J. P.: Flattening the Earth, 2 ed. University of
Chicago Press, 1997. 4
[SSTR93] S ARKAR M., S NIBBE S. S., T VERSKY O. J., R EISS
S. P.: Stretching the rubber sheet: a metaphor for viewing large
layouts on small screens. In Proc. of the ACM Symp. on User
Interface Software and Tech: UIST (1993), ACM, pp. 81–91. 3,
4

[HH90] H ANRAHAN P., H AEBERLI P.: Direct WYSIWYG painting and texturing on 3d shapes. In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 90
(1990), vol. 24, ACM, pp. 215–223. 4

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

