DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-8659.2011.01931.x
Eurographics / IEEE Symposium on Visualization 2011 (EuroVis 2011)
H. Hauser, H. Pfister, and J. J. van Wijk
(Guest Editors)

Volume 30 (2011), Number 3

An Evaluation of Visualization Techniques to Illustrate
Statistical Deformation Models
J. J. Caban1 , P. Rheingans2 and T. Yoo1
1 National
2 University

Library of Medicine, NIH, USA
of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC), USA

Abstract
As collections of 2D/3D images continue to grow, interest in effective ways to visualize and explore the statistical
morphological properties of a group of images has surged. Recently, deformation models have emerged as simple
methods to capture the variability and statistical properties of a collection of images. Such models have proven
to be effective in tasks such as image classification, generation, registration, segmentation, and analysis of modes
of variation. A crucial element missing from most statistical models has been an effective way to summarize and
visualize the statistical morphological properties of a group of images. This paper evaluates different visualization
techniques that can be extended and used to illustrate the information captured by such statistical models. First,
four illustration techniques are described as methods to summarize the statistical morphological properties as
captured by deformation models. Second, results of a user study conducted to compare the effectiveness of each
visualization technique are presented. After comparing the performance of 40 subjects, we found that statistical
annotation techniques present significant benefits when analyzing the structural properties of a group of images.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS):
Visualization and Uncertainty Visualization

1. Introduction
The large amount of anatomical variability often observed
among healthy human subjects has created great interest in
the analysis and understanding of morphological properties.
Over the years, statistical models have proven to be effective methods to capture the properties of groups of images
delineated by common characteristics. However, given the
large inter-image variability often found within input data,
as well as the complexity of most non-linear deformations,
statistical models are often limited at enabling accurate exploration, analysis, and comparison of morphological deformation properties.
Those limitations have underscored the need for visual
representations that can effectively illustrate the structural
and morphological statistical properties of groups of images.
This paper explores different visualization techniques to effectively show morphological properties as captured by statistical deformation models (SDMs). Recently, SDMs have
emerged as a promising approach to capture the overall morphological information of a collection of 2D/3D images.
SDMs use deformation fields – such as those obtained from
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

I.3.8 [Computer Graphics]: Applications—

non-linear registration techniques – to capture the structural
characteristics of a group of images.
In medical imaging, Rueckert et al. presented the original
method for generating SDMs and demonstrated how they
can be used to estimate the average model of a particular
class [RFS03]. Albrecht et al. presented a technique to generate SDMs with minimum bias towards the reference image
and demonstrated how such models can be used to enhance
model-based registration [ALV08]. Over the last several
years, many other techniques have been proposed and used
to capture morphological properties including deformationand tensor-based morphometry models, relational deformation models, and many others [CWP∗ 01, LKJ∗ 06]. In general, all of those deformation models can be described as
variations of SDMs. Despite the recent popularity of SDMs,
effective ways to explore, visualize, and summarize the
large amount of structural information contained within such
models have not been studied. Analyzing and visualizing the
average model does not provide enough information to reach
definite conclusions about the deformation properties of a
particular group.

822

J. Caban, P. Rheingans & T. Yoo / An Evaluation of Visualization Techniques to Illustrate Statistical Deformation Models

Figure 1: Results of using four illustration techniques to show the statistical morphological properties of an SDM model generated from the
lumbar vertebrae of 20 subjects. (a-b) Results of using likelihood volumes to illustrate the probabilistic properties of a group of images. (c-d)
Results of using deformable grids to show statistical deformation properties and characterize regions with high variability. (e) Results of using
spherical glyphs to annotate the variability of different areas of the vertebra. (f) Results of using line-based glyphs to illustrate deformation
range and morphological variability.

Over the last two decades, a number of annotation and
illustration techniques have been proposed in the fields of
scientific and information visualization [PWL97, WPL96,
PCS05]. Some of those existing techniques can be extended
to work with SDMs and function as methods to summarize
structural deformation properties. This paper evaluates four
visualization techniques that have been extended to meet the
requirements and needs of statistical morphological analysis. First, likelihood volumes are introduced as a method to
display the probabilistic properties of a group. Second, three
existing uncertainty visualization techniques – deformable
grids, spherical glyphs, and line glyphs – are extended to
work with SDMs to show the structural variability as captured by the model. Finally, a user study is conducted to
measure and compare the effectiveness of each visualization
technique.
2. Previous Work
In scientific visualization, a large number of illustration techniques have been proposed to convey uncertainty information within 2D and 3D images. Some of those techniques
are uncertainty glyphs, procedural annotations, pseudocolorings, box plots, summary plots, probabilistic animations, and pointillism-based techniques [PWL97, WPL96,
PCS05, PKR06, GR04]. Note that most techniques have primarily focused on illustrating the uncertainty that might occur within a single image.
Saunders et al. presented a method to visualize the statistical properties of high-quality simulation data by simultaneously visualizing the mean diameter and the standard
deviation of nanoparticles within a single image [PCS05].
Their method used pointillism, circular glyphs, and color
variations to convey statistical information. Wittenbrink et
al. introduced uncertainty glyphs to visualize uncertainty in
winds and ocean currents [WPL96,PWL97]. They were able
to illustrate multiple metrics simultaneously including the
direction, magnitude, mean direction, and length of the currents. However, their technique only worked with a single
vector field. Cedilnik and Rheingans introduced procedu-

ral annotations including grids to show uncertainty information [CR00]. In addition, Grigoryan and Rheingans presented a point-based technique to visualize surfaces along
with uncertainties [GR04]. The general idea was to displace
points according to their uncertainty values. Potter et al. introduced a summary plot which overcomes some of the limitations found with box plots [PKR06]. Kindlmann proposed
a new set of glyphs – superquadric glyphs – to overcome
some of the asymmetry and ambiguity problems of regular
glyphs [Kin04].
Uncertainty visualization techniques have also been used
for direct volume rendering. Kniss et al. presented a visualization technique which takes into account uncertainty
within the underlying data [KUS∗ 05]. Ljung and Persson introduced probabilistic animations as a technique to display
the uncertainty, error, and misclassification often introduced
by transfer functions [LP07].
A key component of any visualization technique is to
compare and measure its effectiveness at achieving what
it was designed to do [Nor06]. Given the need for thorough and methodologically sound methods to compare visualization techniques, user studies have been accepted as
suitable approaches to measure the effectiveness of different
illustration techniques. During the last several years many
research projects have tried to measure the potential benefits and limitations of different visualization techniques
[KHI∗ 03, TM04, HIL∗ 05, Nor06]. For example, North and
Shneiderman analyzed how multiple coordinated visualizations can enable users to rapidly explore complex information [NS00]. Laidlaw et al. presented a user study that compared the effectiveness of six visualization methods to illustrate two-dimensional vector fields [LKJ∗ 05]. Bair and
House presented the results of two controlled studies comparing the effectiveness of layered surface visualizations under various texture conditions [BH07].
In our effort to identify visualization techniques that can
illustrate the information captured by statistical models we
introduce likelihood volumes for SDMs as a technique to
show the probabilistic aspect of different regions of the
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

J. Caban, P. Rheingans & T. Yoo / An Evaluation of Visualization Techniques to Illustrate Statistical Deformation Models

823

model. In addition, we extend deformable grids, spherical
glyphs, and line glyphs to work with SDM models.
3. Statistical Deformation Models
Given a set I = {I1 , I2 , I3 , ..., In } with n linearly registered
images, an SDM is built by performing a statistical analysis
of the deformation fields required to map each input image
Ii ∈ I to a common coordinate system [RFS03]. In medical
imaging, the morphological differences between individual
subjects or the structural differences caused by the progression of a particular disease cannot be estimated by a simple
linear transformation. Often, the estimation of individual local transformations for every voxel I(x, y, z) is required to
align two images. Given an image Ii and reference image
IR , a non-linear image registration technique estimates a displacement vector vxyz for each voxel. The collection of displacement vectors vxyz forms a deformation field D′ with a
dense feature correspondence between the two images under consideration. From the registration results, the inverse
field D can also be estimated with the displacement information required to map image features from the reference
image IR to the input image Ii . By registering each image
Ii ∈ I with the common coordinate system defined by IR ,
a set D = {D1 , D2 , D3 , ...., Dn } can be estimated. The resulting set D contains n displacement vectors vxyz for every
voxel IR (x, y, z). That group of vectors can be used to extract the statistical properties and determine how a particular
region can deform. By treating each point as an independent random variable, a multi-variate distribution N (µ , Σ)
can be estimated to create a probability density function
(PDF) representing the local variability of the data. Since
non-linear registration techniques cannot guarantee a one-toone correspondence between the two images, super-voxels
or patches can be used to more effectively estimate morphological changes of a particular region. In particular, an image
can be divided into n patches P = {p1 , p2 , ..., pn }, where pi
is a patch grouping k3 voxels and N (µ , Σ) pi a PDF with the
statistical properties of that region.
4. Approach
Once an SDM is generated, the model can be described as
an image consisting of a large collection of PDFs defining the morphological properties of each region I(x, y, z)
or patch pi ∈ P. SDM models have been used to generate the average model of a particular class, enhance image segmentation, and improve model-based registration
[RFS03,ALV08]. However, users are interested in analyzing
the information contained within the deformation models to
better understand the characteristics of a group, which structures are related, and which regions present similar patterns.
Such analysis can be done by creating effective visualization
and illustration techniques capable of summarizing the statistical deformation properties of a group of images into a
single picture. This section presents four techniques that can
be used to illustrate the information captured by SDMs.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 2: (top) Sample of one of the synthetic datasets used to test
the different illustration techniques. Note that since the images are
in order, we can easily see the deformation pattern of this collection.
(bottom) Results of using four illustration techniques to show the
statistical properties of our SDM model which was generated from
42 different 3D images. Results of using (a) Likelihood Volumes, (b)
Deformation Grids, (c) Line Glyphs, and (d) Spherical Glyphs.

4.1. Likelihood Volume for SDMs
SDMs are effective at capturing the overall changes, variability, and characteristic aspects of the class under consideration. Directly from an SDM model, we can generate a
probabilistic image which can be used to illustrate the likelihood of different structures and highlight areas that are more
stable within the class under consideration. Such visualization techniques have significant applications in image registration, segmentation, and feature matching given that the
stable areas of an image can be used to specify locations
from where image features can be extracted and used to enhance image analysis.
A likelihood volume is generated as follows: First, an
empty 3D image ILV of equal or greater size as the global coordinate system IR is created and initialized to zero. Then, by
looping through each voxel or patch pi ∈ P of the SDM under consideration, each PDF N (µ , Σ) pi is evaluated to obtain the deformation range of the area under consideration.
In particular, since each normal distribution N pi includes the
expected deformation vector v = (µx , µy , µz ) and its variance
Σˆ = (σx , σy , σz ), we can estimate all possible spatial locations (voxels) that the current region pi can deform into. During the evaluation process, the image ILV is then used to accumulate the number of visits each spatial location I(x, y, z)
receives. Finally, the image ILV can be illustrated using regular rendering techniques to show the probabilistic properties

824

J. Caban, P. Rheingans & T. Yoo / An Evaluation of Visualization Techniques to Illustrate Statistical Deformation Models

of a group of images. In particular, likelihood volumes can
be used to illustrate the deformations that are more likely to
occur and areas that have the highest probability of being
included within any new image belonging to the same class.
Figures 1(a-b) show the results of visualizing an SDM of
the vertebra using likelihood volumes. The SDM was trained
using 20 CT images of the spine. The results show how
likelihood volumes can be used to analyze the probabilistic properties of this particular anatomy. In addition, the images show how specific parts of the vertebra can vary among
different subjects. Figure 2a shows the results of using likelihood volumes to illustrate the statistical properties of an
SDM trained on 42 volumes of deforming cubes. Note that
likelihood volumes are effective at showing areas shared by
most cubes as well as illustrating the extent of the deformation fields.
Likelihood volumes have several advantages over other
visualization methods. First, the complete set of PDFs can
be used to estimate the likelihood volume. Second, the volume can be automatically extracted from an SDM without
the necessity of analyzing any of the images used to generate the model. In other words, we can generate a volume
directly from the abstract representation of an SDM which
shows the stable and most variable regions of the group.
There are a few disadvantages of likelihood volumes.
First, it can be challenging to perform simultaneous visualization of the likelihood model and a member volume of
the SDM. Such a limitation can be solved by using a twolevel volume rendering approach [HMBG01]. Second, it can
be hard to estimate the average deformation directly from a
likelihood volume. Third, the actual shape of the structure
under consideration can be lost.
4.2. Deformation Grids for SDMs
To enable exploration, analysis, and comparison between an
SDM and a given volume, it is important to create tools
that can preserve shapes while illustrating statistical properties. An effective visualization technique should also permit simultaneous illustration of a volume while annotating it
with information obtained from the SDM. The annotations,
however, must not overshadow the underlying model or introduce misleading information. Also, effective annotation
techniques must provide insights about the variability of the
class under consideration.
We demonstrate how statistical deformation information
can be conveyed using deformation grids. Previously, deformation grids have been used in image registration to show
the specific transformation required to map features from
one anatomical model to another subject. Similarly, in uncertainty visualization, deformation grids have been described
as procedural annotations that can be used to show data variability [CR00]. We have extended deformable grids to work
with statistical deformation models.

The general idea of deformation grids for SDMs is to
overlay a grid pattern over the volume data and distort the
lines in such a way that the underlying statistical deformations captured by the SDM can be illustrated. Areas with
high deformation will have a wavy shape representing the
range of the statistical deformation while areas with small
deformations will be almost straight.
A deformation grid for SDMs is generated as follows.
First, given a parameter d with the distance between two grid
lines, a 2D or 3D grid is generated. When annotating the statistical properties with 3D grids, an opacity-based technique
is used to reduce the intensity of the grid along the z direction. Such intensity modulation is done to avoid visual
clutter which can cause confusion. Second, a set of parameters s = (sx , sy , sz ) is specified to describe the sampling along
each axis. At this step, every grid point that is a multiple of
sx or sy or sz is distorted to convey the statistical information as provided by the deformation model. For instance, to
distort vertical lines, the PDF of each voxel that is a multiple of sy is evaluated. Then, every even point is distorted to
show the negative deformation range while every odd location is distorted to show the positive deformation. Note that
the same process is done for each axis which enables the
creation of deformation grids to analyze SDM models. The
actual parameters µ and σ of each PDF become parameters
that control the distortion and appearance of the annotation
grids.
The biggest advantages of this method are that it can be
easily computed, does not require complex filtering of the
SDM model, and it can quickly illustrate the general statistical deformation described by a model. However, there are
also a few disadvantages. First, deformation grids for SDMs
only show the statistical information within the grid lines.
Second, if the parameter d with the distance between two
grid lines is smaller than the variability of the data, deformation grids can become dense and hard to understand.
Figures 1(c-d) show the results of visualizing an SDM of
the vertebra using deformation grids. We can see that there
are specific regions within the vertebra that can deform significantly. Also note that different line properties can be used
to better fit the user’s preferences and requirements. Figure
2b shows the results of using deformation grids to illustrate
the statistical deformation properties of a collection of 42
cubes. Figure 3 shows two illustrations obtained by using
deformation grids to visualize the statistical morphological
properties of a longitudinal dataset of the brain and a collection of femur heads. From the results we can see that deformation grids can be sucessfully applied to 2D or 3D images.
4.3. Line-based Glyphs
Glyphs have been widely used in scientific visualization
to show uncertainty of data [PWL97]. We have picked
two glyph-based methods to show statistical deformation
of a volume: line-glyphs to show deformation range and
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

J. Caban, P. Rheingans & T. Yoo / An Evaluation of Visualization Techniques to Illustrate Statistical Deformation Models

825

Figure 1(f) shows the results of illustrating the deformation range of a region of a vertebra using line glyphs. From
the annotation we can analyze the range of the morphological deformations that can occur within the lower part of the
lumbar vertebrae (L1). Figure 2c shows the results of using
line glyphs to illustrate synthetic data. In this example, the
lines show the range of the deformation along the boundaries of the cube.

Figure 3: (top) A set of longitudinal images of a patient with lowgrade gliomas which are often analyzed by physicians to measure
deformation properties. (center) Sample annotations that can be
used to summarize and analyze the statistical deformation properties of a group. (bottom) [a-c] Sample of the femur dataset also used
within the survey.

spherical-glyphs to show data variability. Those glyph-based
visualization techniques have been chosen because they are
intuitive visualization methods, do not distract the viewer
from the overall understanding of the data, and can effectively show how a voxel or a specific region behaves.
Given the set of voxels under consideration, the PDF
N (µ , σ 2 ) pi describing each spatial location pi can be evaluated. By using the average transformation µ = (µx , µy , µz )
and the covariance matrix Σˆ = (σx , σy , σz ) the range of the
deformation can be estimated. The range for a region pi can
be described as R(pi ) = µx ± σx , µy ± σy , µz ± σz . That range
represents how the super-voxel under consideration behaves
and the possible locations within which that voxel or region
can be found in similar images. By evaluating each PDF and
estimating its range, a line glyph can be generated for each
voxel or region of interest, thus illustrating the deformation
properties of the model under consideration.
We found that line glyphs can be used to illustrate the
range of the deformations as well as to analyze the relationship between different objects. In medical imaging such
visualization has the potential for allowing physicians to explore the data and compare normal and abnormal models.
Given the large amount of deformation a voxel can undergo,
we found that glyph-based annotations are more effective
when a subset of the PDFs are considered by specifying an
ROI, intensity range, or boundaries.
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

4.4. Sphere-based Glyphs
Frequently, users are interested in knowing the overall variably of a particular region instead of knowing detailed information about the specific range of that region. We have
extended spherical glyphs to work with statistical deformation models to convey information about the statistical variance. By evaluating the corresponding PDF N (µ , σ 2 ) pi for
the region pi under consideration, we can estimate the range
R(pi ) = µx ± σx , µy ± σy , µz ± σz and by computing the magnitude of such a vector, we can get the variance of each
voxel. Then, by mapping the variance to the size of a glyph,
it is possible to illustrate the overall variance of a volume
without introducing too many artifacts or information to the
visualization system.
Figure 1(e) shows the results of visualizing an SDM of the
vertebra using spherical glyphs. This annotation technique
can be used to show variability and the likelihood of observing structural deformations within a particular region. In this
illustration, we can see that the pedicles of the vertebral arch
(bridges between the posterior and anterior structures) have
a higher variability among normal subjects than the body of
the L1 vertebrae. Figure 2d shows the results of using spherical glyphs to illustrate synthetic data. Figure 3(bottom)[c]
shows the regions of the femur that are more likely to change
among human subjects.
5. User Study
Visualization and illustration techniques have a direct impact on the user’s ability to understand data and statistical
models. We have conducted a user study to examine the effectiveness of our statistical illustration techniques and to
obtain quantitative measurements to compare the different
annotation techniques. The primary goal was to test our hypothesis that: statistical illustration techniques improve the
accuracy and confidence of user judgments over those using
raw images when analyzing statistical morphological deformations.
The user study consisted of three main sections. First,
the Introduction where detailed information and explanation
about each individual annotation technique was given. The
main purpose of this section was to teach subjects about each
of the visualization techniques. Second, a User Preferences
section where 20 illustrations were shown and users were
asked to score each annotation. In each question, a collection
of images were shown together with the four corresponding

826

J. Caban, P. Rheingans & T. Yoo / An Evaluation of Visualization Techniques to Illustrate Statistical Deformation Models

visualization techniques illustrating the statistical deformation properties of the group under consideration. Users were
then asked to score each of the annotations techniques using
a Likert scale with five choices ranging from poor to excellent. Figure 2 shows one of the synthetic examples used to
capture the user preferences. See the supplemental material
included with this paper for sample questions.
The third section was the User Performance section designed to compare how well subjects can infer the deformation properties of a group of images based on either the raw
data or a single annotation. To capture and compare the effectiveness of each technique, 15 images representing different SDMs of synthetic and medical datasets were presented
and users had to determine the morphological properties of
the group under consideration directly from a single visualization. Annotations such as the illustrations in Figures
2(bottom) and 3(bottom) were presented and users had to answer a question about the statistical deformation properties
of the group under consideration. For instance, from a single
illustration from Figure 2(bottom) users had to understand
that the input cubes were only deforming left and right and
the center of the cubes were deforming more than any other
region. In addition, to test how accurately users can infer the
deformation properties of a group from raw images, groups
of images – like the longitudinal dataset shown in Figure
3(top) – were shown and users had to pick the anatomical
region that presented the largest morphological deformation.
Figure 3 shows some of the real-world images used within
this section.
To further compare the differences between visualization
techniques, the time required to answer each question and
the user’s confidence in the solution were recorded. All the
questions within each section were displayed in random
order to avoid any learning effect. In addition, a mix of
synthetic and real-world medical 2D/3D images was used
throughout the user study. For more information about the
structure of our user study, the design, the datasets, and sample questions please see Section A of the supplemental material.
To complete our user study, 65 individuals from the department of Computer Science and the Medical Center were
randomly selected and invited electronically to participate in
our user study. The online survey was accessed by 51 unique
subjects. Eleven subjects did not complete the entire survey
and their partial answers were not included in our analysis.
In total, forty participants completed the survey, thirty computer scientists and ten non-engineers with expertise in medical research.
6. Results
To measure the effectiveness of each illustration technique,
compare their efficiency, and quantify the effects of a given
approach with respect to other annotation techniques, the
survey was analyzed using multiple statistical techniques.

First, each variable was tested for homogeneity by using
Levene’s test [Lev60]. Then, analysis of variance (ANOVA)
was used to better capture the differences among the four
visualization techniques and obtain significance values.
All our tests started with our null hypothesis stating that
the use of any of our statistical illustration techniques do not
provide any significant speedup in analyzing morphological
properties of a collection of images and do not affect the
user’s overall performance. Then, the significance value p
was estimated to measure the probability of the result agreeing with the null hypothesis. For values of p < 0.05, the null
hypothesis was rejected.
One of our first statistical measurements was estimated
within the introduction of the survey. On average, we found
that participants spent 3:40 minutes reading, learning, and
understanding the annotation techniques. In particular, we
found that on average users spent 56.18s reading about deformation grids, 62.62s with likelihood volumes, 50.56s on
line glyphs, and 51.67s with spherical glyphs. After analyzing the data, we did not find any significant different between
the time used by computer scientists and non-computer scientists. Similarly, we did not find any significant difference
between the time spent in each individual technique. Such
findings might suggest that each illustration technique or the
explanation of each approach had similar complexities.
6.1. User Preference
The first core metric captured within our user study was the
users’ preferences. We found that on average users tend to
prefer likelihood volumes over any other annotation technique. In particular, we found a statistically significant difference [F(3,153) = 3.54, p<0.01] between likelihood volumes and the other illustration techniques.
Figure 4(top) shows the overall user preferences for all
the different visualization techniques. From the plot we
can quickly see the significant differences between likelihood volumes and other annotation techniques. In addition,
we can see that the preferences for deformable grids, line
glyphs, and spherical glyphs are virtually the same. Figure 4(bottom) includes a table with the post-hoc analysis
comparing the different illustration techniques. By analyzing the preferences across our two groups – engineers and
non-engineers – we found similar results, but at the same
time some interesting patterns.
First, a significant difference between computer and noncomputer scientists was found in relation to how much
they prefer deformable grids [F(1,15) = 7, p<0.02]. On
a scale from one to five, on average, computer scientists
liked deformable grids 0.83 more than non-engineers. Figure 4(center) shows some of the results when comparing the
user’s preferences across population. Another clear pattern
is that both populations seem to prefer likelihood volumes
over any of the other illustration techniques with a significance value of p < 0.001. Finally, from our results we can
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

J. Caban, P. Rheingans & T. Yoo / An Evaluation of Visualization Techniques to Illustrate Statistical Deformation Models

827

Figure 5: Plots with 95% CIs of the user preferences when analyzing synthetic data versus medical images. We found that spherical
glyphs are promising in the medical imaging domain. Specifically,
from a significance test we found a P-value of 0.001 when comparing the user preferences between synthetic and medical images.

Vis Technique (I)
Deformation Grids

Likelihood Volumes

Line Glyphs

Spherical Glyphs

Vis Technique (J)
LV*
LG
SG
DG*
LG*
SG*
DG
LV*
SG
DG
LV*
LG

Mean Diff
-1.33750
-0.08125
0.09375
1.33750
1.25625
1.24375
0.08125
-1.25625
-0.01250
0.09375
-1.24375
0.01250

P-value
0.000
0.900
0.854
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.900
0.000
1.000
0.854
0.000
1.000

Figure 6: Plot of the overall user performance. We found that,
on average, users are more accurate when exploring and analyzing
statistical deformation properties with deformation grids.

Figure 4: (top) Plot of the average user preferences and the
95% confidence intervals (CIs). We found that, on average, users
tend to prefer likelihood volumes. (bottom) Plot of the user preferences across population. We found a significant difference between
how much computer scientists prefer deformable grids over nonengineers subjects.

6.2. User Performance
In the second section of the survey, we wanted to measure
performance by capturing the user’s accuracy. In our experiments, the accuracy was defined as the average number of
correct answers per user per technique.

also see that computer scientists tend to like each technique
more than those subjects in the other group.

To more effectively measure the benefits of each individual annotation technique, in this section the analysis and exploration of raw data was included as one technique. The
inclusion of raw data helps with the overall analysis of how
well statistical annotation techniques can assist during the
examination of large collections of images.

We also wanted to measure how the user’s preferences
change when exploring synthetic data versus medical images. Figure 5 shows some of our results. When medical images were being analyzed, there was a significant improvement [F(1,69) = 10, p<0.01] in favor of spherical glyphs.
Among the other visualization techniques the preferences remained about the same.

Figure 6 shows the overall user performances for each individual technique. We can see that on average users performed much better with deformation grids than with any
other annotation technique. On average we found that users
were 63.3% more accurate with deformation grids than analyzing the raw data, 38.3% more effective than when using spherical glyphs, 13.3% better than using likelihood vol-

c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

828

J. Caban, P. Rheingans & T. Yoo / An Evaluation of Visualization Techniques to Illustrate Statistical Deformation Models

When comparing the confidence level across population,
we found similar patterns. First, all subjects were more confident with their answers when using likelihood volumes.
Second, when comparing both groups, non-engineers were
slightly more confident in all their answers that did not involve deformation grids. From our results we can see that the
confidence level was somewhat biased towards their preferences. In particular, participants always felt more confident
using the technique they preferred the most.

Confidence: Overall
5.00
4.50
4.00

Confidence

3.50
3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
Deformation Grids

Likelihood Volumes

Line Glyphs

Spherical Glyphs

Raw Data

Visualization Technique

Time: Overall
160
140

Average Time

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Deformation
Grids

Likelihood
Volumes

Line Glyphs

Spherical Glyphs

Raw Data

Visualization Technique

Figure 7: (top) Plot illustrating the average user confidence per
annotation technique and the 95% CIs. (bottom) Plot illustrating the
average time required to answer questions about each annotation
technique. Note that analyzing raw data was clearly the technique
that required the most effort to answer.

umes, and 8.3% more precise than using line glyphs. From
the results we can see that on average there is a significant
performance benefit when using deformation grids over likelihood volumes, spherical glyphs, and raw data. For example, a significant difference between deformation grids and
likelihood volumes was found [F(1,130) = 7, p<0.04]. For a
complete set of results and post-hoc analysis, please see the
supplemental material.
We further analyzed the overall performance across population. From the results we found that regardless the user’s
background, subjects performed much better with deformation grids than any other technique. From our experiments
across population, we also found that the top three techniques to analyze morphological properties of a collection
of images were similar for both groups. First, Deformation
grids, then Line glyphs, and then Likelihood volumes.
6.3. Confidence
For each question, the users’ confidence level with their answer was also captured. Figure 7(top) shows some of our
results. On average, users were more confident with questions involving likelihood volumes and least confident with
questions involving spherical glyphs and raw data.

6.4. Time
The third metric captured throughout the survey was the time
to answer each question. With the time results, we were able
to analyze which questions and/or techniques seem to take
more time to interpret and appear to have different levels
of difficulty. Figure 7(bottom) shows some of our results.
First, on average the amount of time required to analyze a
set of images and determine their morphological deformation properties took a significant amount of time when compared with any other statistical annotation technique. Second, line glyphs seem to be the annotation technique where
users were able to identify the statistical deformation properties the quickest, closely followed by deformation grids.
We found that on average users spent 45.72s on each question about deformation grids, 54.80s with problems regarding likelihood volumes, 34.33s with line glyphs, 59.11 on
spherical glyphs, and 112.95 analyzing a single question
with raw images.
An interesting pattern found when comparing populations
was with deformable grids. Non-computer scientists used on
average 31.4s to answer a question related to deformable
grids while computer scientists used 50.5s. If we relate those
times with the user’s preferences and accuracy, we can see
that non-engineers were able to more accurately and quickly
pick the correct solution for an annotation technique that
they did not prefer at all. This underscores the possible benefits and overall effectiveness of deformation grids.
7. Discussion
In general, our user study was very effective at illuminating
the possible advantages and limitations of each individual
annotation technique and providing a significant amount of
information about the impact of each annotation technique
in different subjects.
In Section 6.1 we saw the differences in user’s preferences across population. In particular, in Figure 4(center)
we saw a significant difference between computer and noncomputer scientist in relation to how much they prefer deformable grids. This inclination to prefer grids might be the
result of an engineering background. Engineers from many
different fields frequently employ grids as a frame of reference to assist during the analysis and interpretation of 2D/3D
plots [Smi06], bioengineers often use grids to show registration results [GKT∗ 08], graphic researchers regularly use 3D
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

J. Caban, P. Rheingans & T. Yoo / An Evaluation of Visualization Techniques to Illustrate Statistical Deformation Models

829

cubes and grids to better emphasize perspective, depth, and
positioning [SAG∗ 05]. We believe that such a background
in engineering made computer scientists prefer, understand,
and appreciate grids more than our non-engineering group.
In addition, we saw that regardless the user’s background,
likelihood volumes was the preferred illustration techniques.
This inclination to prefer likelihood volumes might be related to the visual results commonly produced by that specific annotation technique.

tional preference questions to capture preference changes
over time. We found that by the end of the survey the preference order became (a) likelihood volumes, (b) deformation grids, (c) spherical glyphs, and (d) line glyphs. In other
words, we found that by considering experience as a variable and comparing how the user’s preferences changed after
more understanding of the techniques, the user preferences
for spherical glyphs and deformation grids significantly increased.

When comparing the user’s preferences between synthetic
and real-world images we found a clear tendency to prefer
spherical glyphs when analyzing medical images (See Figure 5). This might emphasize the importance of not occluding internal structures in medical images. Our results suggest
that the differences in user preferences between synthetic
and medical images might be directly related to how well
the annotation technique preserves internal structures. Since
our synthetic data was mostly composed of 3D shapes, the
internal structures were not significant when compared to
medical images of the brain or other anatomical regions. In
further analysis, we found that regardless the subject’s background, most users preferred spherical glyphs in medical images as much as they liked likelihood volumes.

As part of the extra preference questions, we modified
our glyphs annotation techniques to also include color. Now
variability measurements were not only shown by the size of
the glyph, but also by color. In this experiment, we found a
significant increase in propensity to favor spherical glyphs.
The average rank of spherical glyphs with colors became
4.1/5.0. Since this evident increase in preference towards
colored spheres was not clear before our survey, the user
study did not include enough questions to provide a definite
answer about the effectiveness of color-mapping in statistical annotation techniques. However, based on the data gathered during the last portion of the survey, it appears color
plays a crucial role on annotation of statistical deformation
models.

Section 6.2 showed the performance results. From our results we found that there was an statistically significant difference between using deformation grids over any of the
other methods. If we compare these results with the users’
preference, we can observe some interesting patterns. First,
in Figure 4(bottom) we saw that regardless the subject’s
background, deformation grids were the least preferred annotation technique and likelihood volumes were the overall
favorite method. However, by comparing their preference
with their performance, we almost can see an inverse correlation. On average, subjects performed much better with
deformable grids than likelihood volumes.

We also compared and analyzed the correlation between
the time to answer a question and the accuracy of the answer.
We found that on average, there is no significant correlation
and the more time users spent analyzing the questions did
not translate into more accurate answers.

An interesting trend observed in our results was that the
least favorite annotation technique becomes the method with
which every subject performs the best. Second, if we just
consider likelihood volumes, line glyphs, and deformation
grids, the order happens to be the opposite when comparing
preferences and performance. These findings may be related
to the effect of visual appeal versus usability. In particular,
over the years, researchers have noticed that techniques that
are more appealing to the human eyes are not necessarily the
most usable approaches. For instance, recent experiments in
human-computer interaction (HCI) have found that the perception of the system’s aesthetic affect the users’ evaluations
of usability [BBMT06]. In addition, previous work has also
found that subjective evaluations of usability and aesthetics
are highly correlated [TKI00]. Based on those facts, we believe that the significant inclination toward favoring likelihood volumes was related to the aesthetics aspects of that
technique.
After the third section of the survey, we asked addic 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

8. Conclusions
Our user study was very effective at providing specific information about our statistical annotation techniques. Overall, we found that procedural annotation techniques such as
deformation grids can provide – within a single image –
good insights about the statistical morphological properties
of a group of images. In addition, when dealing with 2D/3D
shapes, we found that illustration techniques such as likelihood volumes present a good method to show morphological
changes. The user study also served as a tool to demonstrate
once again that the most appealing visualization techniques
are not necessarily the most effective methods.
There are always an infinite number of factors we can
measure, test, and compare. Part of our future work includes
an in-depth analysis of annotation techniques for 2D versus
3D images, a comprehensive study of the effect of colors in
statistical annotation techniques, and a thorough evaluation
about how glyph attributes (size, shape, position, and sampling) can affect the user’s preferences and performance.
9. Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their comments and suggestions. We also would like to
thank all the participants that took valuable time to complete
our user study.

830

J. Caban, P. Rheingans & T. Yoo / An Evaluation of Visualization Techniques to Illustrate Statistical Deformation Models

References
[ALV08] A LBRECHT T., L UTHI M., V ETTER T.: A statistical deformation prior for non-rigid image and shape registration. IEEE
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR)
(2008), 1–8. 1, 3
[BBMT06] B EN -BASSAT T., M EYER J., T RACTINSKY N.: Economic and subjective measures of the perceived value of aesthetics and usability. ACM Transaction of Computer and Human
Interaction 13, 2 (2006), 210–234. 9
[BH07] BAIR A., H OUSE D.: A grid with a view: Optimal texturing for perception of layered surface shape. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 6 (2007), 1656–
1663. 2
[CR00] C EDILNIK A., R HEINGANS P.: Procedural annotation of
uncertain information. In VIS ’00: Proceedings of the conference
on Visualization ’00 (2000), pp. 77–83. 2, 4
[CWP∗ 01] C HUNG M. K., W ORSLEY K. J., PAUS T., C HERIF
C., C OLLINS D. L., G IEDD J. N., R APOPORT J. L., E VANS
A. C.: A unified statistical approach to deformation-based morphometry. NeuroImage 14, 3 (2001), 595 – 606. 1
[GKT∗ 08] G LOCKER B., KOMODAKIS N., T ZIRITAS G.,
NAVAB N., PARAGIOS N.: Dense image registration through
mrfs and efficient linear programming. Medical Image Analysis
12, 6 (2008), 731 – 741. 8
[GR04] G RIGORYAN G., R HEINGANS P.: Point-based probabilistic surfaces to show surface uncertainty. In TVCG (2004),
vol. 5, pp. 564–573. 2
[HIL∗ 05] H OUSE D., I NTERRANTE V., L AIDLAW D., TAYLOR
R., WARE C.: Design and evaluation in visualization research.
Visualization Conference, IEEE 0 (2005), 117. 2

Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (2007),
vol. 13, pp. 1648–1655. 2
[Nor06] N ORTH C.: Toward measuring visualization insight.
IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 26, 3 (2006), 6–9. 2
[NS00] N ORTH C., S HNEIDERMAN B.: Snap-together visualization: Can users construct and operate coordinated views? International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 53, 5 (2000), 715–
739. 2
[PCS05] P. C OLEMAN S AUNDERS V ICTORIA I NTERRANTE S.
C. G.: Pointillist and glyph-based visualization of nanoparticles
in formation. In IEEE EuroVis Conference (2005), pp. 169–176.
2
[PKR06] P OTTER K., K NISS J., R IESENFELD R.: Visual summary statistics. In Tech report UUCS-07-004, University of Utah
(2006). 2
[PWL97] PANG A. T., W ITTENBRINK C. M., L ODHA S. K.:
Approaches to uncertainty visualization. The Visual Computer
13 (1997), 370–390. 2, 4
[RFS03] RUECKERT D., F RANGI A., S CHNABEL J.: Automatic
construction of 3-d statistical deformation models of the brain using nonrigid registration. IEEE Transactions of Medical Imaging
22 (2003), 1014 – 1025. 1, 3
[SAG∗ 05] S HIRLEY P., A SHIKHMIN M., G LEICHER M.,
M ARSCHNER S., R EINHARD E., S UNG K., T HOMPSON W.,
W ILLEMSEN P.: Fundamentals of computer graphics. In ISBN10: 1568812698 (2005), no. 2. 9
[Smi06] S MITH S. T.: MATLAB Advanced GUI Development,
1 ed. Dog Ear Publishing, LLC, 2006. 8
[TKI00] T RACTINSKY N., K ATZ A., I KAR D.: What is beautiful
is usable. Interacting with Computers 13 (2000), 127–145. 9

[HMBG01] H AUSER H., M ROZ L., B ISCHI G. I., G RÖLLER
M. E.: Two-level volume rendering. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 7, 3 (2001), 242–252. 4

[TM04] T ORY M., M ÖLLER T.: Human factors in visualization research. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 10, 1 (2004), 72–84. 2

[KHI∗ 03] KOSARA R., H EALEY C., I NTERRANTE V., L AID LAW D., WARE C.: User studies: Why, how, and when? In IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications (2003), vol. 23, pp. 20–25.
2

[WPL96] W ITTENBRINK C., PANG A., L ODHA S.: Glyphs for
visualizing uncertainty in vector fields. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 2, 3 (1996), 266–279. 2

[Kin04] K INDLMANN G.: Superquadric tensor glyphs. In Proceeding of The Joint Eurographics - IEEE TCVG Symposium on
Visualization (May 2004), pp. 147–154. 2
[KUS∗ 05]

K NISS J. M., U ITERT R., S TEPHENS A., L I G., TAS T.: Statistically quantitative volume visualization. In
IEEE Visualization Conference 2005 (2005), pp. 287–294. 2
DIZEN

[Lev60] L EVENE H.: Robust tests for equality of variances. In
Contributions to Probability and Statistics: Essays in Honor of
Harold Hotelling (1960), pp. 278–292. 6
[LKJ∗ 05] L AIDLAW D. H., K IRBY M., JACKSON C., DAVID SON J. S., M ILLER T., DA S ILVA M., WARREN W., TARR
M.: Comparing 2d vector field visualization methods: A user
study. Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11,
1 (2005), 59–70. 2
[LKJ∗ 06] L EOW A. D., K LUNDER A. D., J R . C. R. J., T OGA
A. W., DALE A. M., B ERNSTEIN M. A., B RITSON P. J.,
G UNTER J. L., WARD C. P., W HITWELL J. L., B OROWSKI
B. J., F LEISHER A. S., F OX N. C., H ARVEY D., KORNAK
J., S CHUFF N., S TUDHOLME C., A LEXANDER G. E., W EINER
M. W., T HOMPSON P. M.: Longitudinal stability of mri for mapping brain change using tensor-based morphometry. NeuroImage
31, 2 (2006), 627 – 640. 1
[LP07] L JUNG P., P ERSSON A.: Uncertainty visualization in
medical volume rendering using probabilistic animation. In IEEE
c 2011 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2011 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

