Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2009
H.-C. Hege, I. Hotz, and T. Munzner
(Guest Editors)

Volume 28 (2009), Number 3

Visualization of vessel movements
Niels Willems1 , Huub van de Wetering1 , and Jarke J. van Wijk1
1 Department

of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands

Abstract
We propose a geographical visualization to support operators of coastal surveillance systems and decision making
analysts to get insights in vessel movements. For a possibly unknown area, they want to know where significant
maritime areas, like highways and anchoring zones, are located. We show these features as an overlay on a map.
As source data we use AIS data: Many vessels are currently equipped with advanced GPS devices that frequently
sample the state of the vessels and broadcast them. Our visualization is based on density fields that are derived
from convolution of the dynamic vessel positions with a kernel. The density fields are shown as illuminated height
maps. Combination of two fields, with a large and small kernel provides overview and detail. A large kernel
provides an overview of area usage revealing vessel highways. Details of speed variations of individual vessels
are shown with a small kernel, highlighting anchoring zones where multiple vessels stop. Besides for maritime
applications we expect that this approach is useful for the visualization of moving object data in general.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS):
Generation

1. Introduction
Analysis of moving objects occurs in various areas, such
as biology, sociology, physics, or transportation. Data of
moving objects is often large and complex, and contain
fuzzy patterns. Therefore moving objects analysis focuses
on finding patterns, such as flocks, migration, or congestion [DWe08]. We focus in this paper on seafaring vessels
to visually inspect patterns related to area usage.
Nowadays, moving objects are easily tracked using the
Global Positioning System (GPS). In the maritime domain
professional vessels are equipped with the Automatic Identification System (AIS) [ITU01], which is an advanced GPS
device that broadcasts the vessel’s status. This status contains both vessel and trajectory information. Vessel information consists of identification numbers, a name, dimensions,
and a type, e.g. passenger ship or tanker. Trajectory information consists of position, time, velocity, course, rate of
turn, destination, expected time of arrival, draught, and navigational status, e.g. at anchor, moored, sailing, or fishing. A
captain is more aware of the situation around using the status
of neighbourhood vessels to prevent collisions.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

Computer Graphics [I.3.3]: Line and Curve

For surveillance purposes, AIS data is collected using a
sensor network and send to operators, such as Coast Guard
operators, who search for potential danger. Visual comparison of moving icons of the current situation and map overlays with area usage help them to find outliers. But, these
overlays may not exist, therefore we propose a method to
extract area usage from historical trajectory data. We focus
on two area usages at sea: sea lanes and anchor zones.
Area usage can be computed using kernel density estimation, which convolves points with a kernel, resulting in
smoothed data. Blurring the path of movement data does
not show the speed of the object along its path, therefore
we smooth data by taking speed into account. With a novel
multi-scale density visualization different features are revealed at each scale.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes related work. We introduce maritime terminology in section 3.
A density model for movement data is defined in section 4,
and visualized in section 5. Using real-world data we explore the capabilities of our method in section 6. Finally, we
discuss the benefits, drawbacks, and next steps in section 7.

960

Niels Willems, Huub v.d. Wetering & Jarke J. v. Wijk / Visualization of vessel movements

2. Related work
Moving object data is explored extensively using various approaches, such as displaying raw data, aggregated data, or
extracted features [AAe08]. Visual analytic approaches use
simple visualizations to explore raw data or aggregated data.
Density plots only cope with aggregated data and are visualized in various ways. We propose a convolution method
as kernel density estimation, but similar convolution approaches appear in graphics.
In visual analytics, moving object data is often used as
source data. Andrienko and Andrienko [AA08b] summarize
traffic trajectories by clustering and selection to provide a
clear and simple overview of traffic situations on a map. In
[AA08a] they propose a method for spatio-temporal aggregation of traffic, which allows the user to explore the usage
of a road network at various times simultaneously. Pedestrian trajectories are analyzed in [JFSe07] to find anomalies
using a wavelet approach.
A density represents a distribution of data. Kernel Density Estimation (KDE) [Sil92] is a mathematical method that
computes density by smoothing data points to reduce sampling artifacts. One of the objectives of KDE is to determine
hotspots of data points. The Dutch Hydrographic Office et
al. [Net04] published an example of accumulated vessel traffic, which is a density plot based on sparse human observations of vessels from an airplane during three years. Despite
the small number of observations a global overview is given,
but details are too noisy to be useful. A car accident distribution [And07] cannot be represented by only plotting points,
because overdrawing results in perceptually wrong estimations of the amount of accidents. In disease syndrome distributions [MRe08] sparse and dense areas are equalized by
relating the kernel size to the distance of the k nearest neighbour points. The level of attention of downloaded tiles in
Microsoft Virtual Earth is displayed using Hotmap [Fis07],
which is a 2D histogram that is implicitly smoothed, since
the user always loads neighbouring tiles.
A density D is a function of the form z = D(x, y) and visualized as a 2D height field by a straightforward color map,
contour plot, or terrain map. For quantitative analysis, a contour plot is preferred over a color map, since value estimation
by colors is perceptually hard. Since contour plots only use
isolines, color can be used for other purposes. For a terrain
map occlusion problems may occur. In 2D, the density plot
becomes visually more attractive by using shading, which
can be enriched to a contour map [vWT01].
The convolution computation in KDE is point-based, but
convolution along trajectories, or paths, is not well-known
in this context. In computer graphics similar computations
appear in convolution surfaces and motion blur. A convolution surface is an implicit surface defined by the iso-surface
of a convolution around a moving point. By weighing the
contribution [JT02] with a polynomial, analytical solutions
for non-uniform distributions can be found in a number of

cases. A similar convolution along a path appears in motion
blur [SPe02], where the luminance is spatially smeared out
along paths formed during the shutter time.

3. Terminology and definitions
In this section we briefly introduce geographical, navigational, and maritime terms and definitions.
A position (φ, λ) on the earth is specified with geographical coordinates latitude φ and longitude λ. The coordinates
φ and λ are given in degrees. Notice that geographical coordinates are independent from the radius of the earth R, which
varies in an elliptical shape between 6,357km and 6,378km.
For small-scale maps, like ours, (up to 1:5,000,000) the earth
can be approximated by a sphere, where large-scale maps require a more complex elliptical model [KK01].
A map projection (x, y) = m(φ, λ) maps geographic coordinates to a plane, and often has an inverse m−1 [Sny93].
Thousands of map projections with various properties exist. The main properties are preservation of angles (conformal, e.g., Mercator projection M), preservation of distance
(equidistant, e.g. equirectangular projection E), and preservation of area (equal area, e.g., sinusoidal projection S). No
map projection satisfies all these properties.
The intersection of the earth and a plane through its center
is called a great circle, such as the prime meridian or the
equator. The great circle distance dgc (p0 , p1 ) is the shortest
distance between two points on the earth and is measured
along the great circle through these points. Other circles on
the earth are small circles.
Vehicles that are not road bound, such as vessels and
airplanes, navigate using a compass to move to a destination. From the starting point one moves along a rhumb
line segment [Ale04], a line segment with a constant compass direction. A rhumb line segment p0 p1 is given by a
straight line segment equation in a Mercator projection and
has length |p0 p1 |. A natural parametrization RL(p0 , p1 , s)
between points pi for s ∈ [0, 1], is given by a dead reckoning [Fav40] principle, which constructs a rhumb line segment starting in p0 with the same direction as p0 p1 and
length s|p0 p1 |. A rhumb line segment may not follow a great
circle and hence its path may not be the shortest.
In areas with dense shipping, area usage is established by
rules. Sea lanes are mandatory for large vessels, with restrictions for draught and direction: high tonnage vessels sail in
lanes far from the coast line and lanes are bidirectional but
separated. Small vessels have to avoid contact with large
vessels, vessels are not allowed to move slowly, and lanes
should be crossed perpendicularly. In anchor zones vessels
drop anchor while waiting for a tug to enter a harbour. Other
area usages are oil platforms and wind parks; both should be
avoided with reasonable distance during a sea trip.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

961

Niels Willems, Huub v.d. Wetering & Jarke J. v. Wijk / Visualization of vessel movements

Slow

Slow

Fast

a)

4.2. Trajectory reconstruction

Fast

b)

Figure 1: Convolution. a) At constant speed. b) Accelerated.

4. Vessel density
This section describes the first part of our method: a model
for the contribution of a ship to the density in its neighbourhood as a result of sailing along a trajectory. In section 4.1 a
continuous density model is defined. Section 4.2 and 4.3 describe the computation of density from sampled trajectories.
In section 4.4, Euclidean space is left for geographical space
to compute a geographic density overlay.

In real-world data a continuous trajectory p(t) is irregularly
sampled in time resulting in positions p(t0 ), p(t1 ), . . . , p(tN )
and velocities vi = v(ti ) at time ti . For a reconstruction
of the trajectory using these samples, we assume that objects move over a straight line segment between consecutive
sample points. For line segment p0 p1 with p0 = p(t0 ) and
p1 = p(t1 ), we model the position x(t) on the line segment
at time t ∈ [t0 ,t1 ] by
p(t) = p0 + x(t)

p1 − p0
,
||p1 − p0 ||

(5)

where x(t) fulfills boundary conditions:
x(t0 ) = 0 ∧ x(t1 ) = ||p1 − p0 ||.

(6)

We assume that the acceleration is constant, and minimize
the following expression on the velocities in the end points:
˙ 1 ) − v1 )2 .
(x(t
˙ 0 ) − v0 )2 + (x(t

4.1. Density

(7)

This results in the following quadratic equation for x(t):

Consider an object o that moves in Euclidean space along a
continuous trajectory po (t), for t in time window [0, T ]. We
model the contribution of o at a point q in its environment,
e.g., the duration of o in q. This contribution is modeled with
a convolution where the signal at position r is δ(r − po (t))
with δ the Dirac delta function, and the response at position
q as a result of the object at position r is given by the kernel k(q − r). The contribution at time t at position q can be
written as
Co (q;t) =

R2

δ(r − po (t))k(q − r)dr.

(1)

Applying the convolution sifting property then simply gives
k(q − po (t)) for Co (q;t). The contribution Co (q) on point q
taken into account the whole trajectory of o then results from
integration over time:
Co (q) =

1
T

T
0

k(q − po (t))dt,

(2)

where T1 normalizes the contribution in time to enable comparison of contributions at different time scales. The total
contribution of a set of objects O at q is the sum of all individual contributions:
C(q) =

∑ Co (q).

C(q)dq,

a=

||p − p0 || v1 − v0
v1 − v0
.
∧ v = x(t
˙ 0) = 1
−
t1 − t 0
t1 − t 0
2

(4)

Q

where ρ is a scaling factor for unit conversion, e.g., from
a number of vessels per km2 to a number of vessels per
1000km2 . The density is often investigated on a logarithmic
scale log(D(Q) + 1), to display different orders of magnitude. Figure 1 shows the effect of taking a variable speed
into account for convolution along a line.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(9)

By inverting (8) we find t given the position x if we assume
that vessels do neither stop nor return, that is x(t)
˙ > 0:
√
2
t0 − v/a + v + 2ax/a, if a = 0;
t(x) =
(10)
if a = 0.
t0 + x/v,
4.3. Density computation
In this section we discuss methods to compute density. We
consider the reconstructed trajectories and focus on the computation of Co (q) in (2) for a single line segment p0 p1 in
a point q. If a kernel is independent of position and orientation of the line segment, then the integral becomes invariant under rigid transformation. Without loss of generality the
points can be written as
p0 = (x0 , 0) ∧ p1 = (x1 , 0) ∧ q = (0, y) with y ≥ 0 (11)
and the integral reduces to
C(q) =

The contribution sampled with a cell Q can be represented
by a density D given by the equation

(8)

where the reconstructed acceleration a and velocity v are

(3)

o∈O

D(Q) = ρ

x(t) = 12 a(t − t0 )2 + v(t − t0 )

1
T

t1

k((−x(t), y))dt.

(12)

t0

This integral is numerically approximated. So far we found
that a cone kernel suits our needs. For such an isotropic kernel with finite support and radius K where C(q) = 0 for
all q with ||q|| > K, the computational costs of C(q) can
be reduced, since for a line segment p0 p1 partially within
distance K of q, tighter integration bounds τi exist. Let X
be the interval on the x-axis where the distance to q is at
most K. If X ∩ [x0 , x1 ] = ∅ the integral is zero, otherwise
X ∩ [x0 , x1 ] = [a0 , a1 ] for some ai and the new integration
bounds τi = t(ai ) are given by (10).

962

Niels Willems, Huub v.d. Wetering & Jarke J. v. Wijk / Visualization of vessel movements

w
h
G-1 : (u,v) → (ϕ,λ)

H
v
a)

M : (ϕ,λ) → (x,y)

(u,v)
u

W

(ϕ,λ)

b)

c)

(x,y)

Figure 2: Computation in various spaces: a) grid space. b) geographic space. c) image space.

4.4. Geographic implementation
We move from an Euclidian coordinate system to a geographic coordinate system, to investigate movements of objects on the earth, in particular vessels. Density is computed
geographically, where we distinguish three kinds of spaces
(figure 2): grid space, geographic space, and image space. To
compute density using the input data for equal sized cells, we
regularly sample at equal distance in grid space, and hence
irregularly in λ and φ in geographic space. The data and grid
are displayed as an image by transforming all geographic
coordinates to a map using a map projection.
4.4.1. Rasterization
The density in equation (4) is computed in a grid of cells,
which represent equally sized blocks on the earth. An equal
area map projection prescribes a relation between positions
on the earth and a regular (u, v)-space, such that the area
on the earth of a shape in (u, v)-space stays invariant under
any translation in (u, v)-space. We use a sinusoidal projection S−1 (u, v) [Sny93] defined for meridian λ0 as
φ = v

(13)

λ = λ0 + u/ cos(v).

(14)

The sinusoidal projection is a combination of great circle angles in the v dimension and small circles in the u dimension.
A scaling factor σ(φ) given by
σ(φ) =

2πR
360◦

cos(φ),

(15)

defines the length on the surface of the earth per degree,
along a small circle at latitude φ. Notice that for φ = 0, we get
the length per degree for a great circle. To get intuitive parameters, the (u, v)-space is scaled horizontally with w/σ(0)
and vertically with h/σ(φ) resulting in cells of w km wide
and h km high. In this space we define a grid of W km wide
and H km high. To minimize the distortion of the rectangularity of the cells we introduce a standard parallel φ0 and
transpose the center of the grid to the origin. This results in
an adapted sinusoidal projection G−1 (u, v)

The sinusoidal projection is chosen for efficiency reasons.
Since every cell needs to be projected, the number of expensive function calls, such as trigonometric functions and
square roots, needs to be as small as possible. Other common
equal-area map projections, such as Bonne, Molleweide, Albers, and Lambert’s, are computationally more expensive.
4.4.2. Geographic vessel density
A real-world trajectory of a non-route bound object consists
of a sequence of rhumb line segments (see section 3) instead
of line segments. The computation of vessel density is implemented in procedure 1. For each rhumb line segment, the
density as displayed in equation (2) is computed for all grid
cells. For finite-support kernels only the cells in the Oriented
Bounding Box (OBB) at distance K to the rhumb line segment need to be considered.
Procedure 1 Vessel density()
D ← 0H,B {D becomes zero matrix}
for o ∈ Objects do
for i ∈ Trajectory segments [0, N) do
p0 ← po (ti ); p1 ← po (ti+1 )
for (u, v) ∈ OBB at distance K to p0 p1 do
{Get geographical coordinate of the cell center}
q ← G−1 (u, v)
{Assign density based on equation (2)}
D(u, v) ← D(u, v) +Cp0 p1 (q)
return D;
To compute the density of a rhumb line segment p0 p1 for
cell at position q, we assume the kernel small enough to
be considered flat. Therefore the integration in geographic
space uses tight integration bounds for Co (q) in (12) where
x0 , x1 , and y are given by
x0 = |p0 pk | ∧ x1 = |pk p1 | ∧ y = dgc (pk , q).

(18)

with pk on p0 p1 with smallest great circle distance to q.
5. Visualization

h
φ = φ0 + σ(0)
(v − 21 H)

(16)

w
λ = λ0 + σ(φ)
(u − 21 W ).

(17)

A density D computed in procedure 1 can be considered as
a height field to be visualized on a map using classical carc 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

963

Niels Willems, Huub v.d. Wetering & Jarke J. v. Wijk / Visualization of vessel movements

To get both an overview and a detail view, we separately
compute a density Dlarge with a large kernel and a density
Dsmall with a small kernel and display them simultaneously
in the same area. To speed up the computation, Dlarge is
computed on a lower resolution than Dsmall without noticeable loss of features. The density resolutions are synchronized by resampling Dlarge using bilinear interpolation.
Our visualization simultaneously displays both densities
by shading the color mapped Dlarge with a height map H of
the accumulated densities (figure 3c and 3d). Consider a cell
Q, then the color C(Q) is defined as
H(Q) = α Dlarge (Q) + β Dsmall (Q)

(19)

C(Q) = I p (H(Q)) ColorMap(Dlarge (Q)).

(20)

The intensity of the shading I p is obtained with Phong illumination [Pho75] of H, using one white light source at
infinity. The grid is georeferenced on a map using a map
projection. To speed up rendering, corners of a rectangle of
cells that are almost flat are map projected and the cells in
between are bilinearly interpolated.
6. Real-world data
In this section we explore the capabilities of our method with
data from the real world. In the first section we adapt an existing simplification method to reduce the size of data sets
with attributed trajectories; in section 6.2 we conduct a number of case studies; in the last section we discuss the advantages of vessel density.
6.1. Trajectory simplification
Depending on the velocity and course, trajectory messages
are broadcast up to every 2 seconds resulting in massive data
sets. We simplify the trajectories for the position and speed
dimensions with an adapted version of the accurate DouglasPeucker (DP) line simplification algorithm [DP73].
The original DP line simplification removes points within
a given position error bound ε. It is a recursive algorithm
for a pair of point indices (i, j) that computes an index k ∈
[i, j] such that pk has the largest distance to line segment
pi p j and checks if the distance d(k, i, j) of pk to line segment
pi p j is smaller than ε; if so, the line segment is accepted,
otherwise the procedure repeats for (i, k) and (k, j). We use
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

(%)
0.5
1
5

εv (knot)

tographic methods such as color mapping with a continuous color map (figure 3a) or a discrete color map (figure 3b)
which implicitly shows contours. These classical approaches
provide an overview of area usage, but the temporal aspect
of trajectories disappears in the smoothing. The temporal aspect appears when the data is smoothed with a small kernel, because less interaction between trajectories takes place.
Note further that slow vessels produce trajectories with a
higher density than fast moving ones, so density provides
an indication of the speed.

50
79.0
83.2
91.9

ε p (m)
100
80.4
84.9
94.0

250
80.8
85.3
94.8

Table 1: Amount of ignored data within error ε p and εv .

this same scheme twice to first accept points based on their
speed and subsequently simplify the line segments between
the accepted points based on geographic coordinates; to do
so we vary only the distance function d.
A good reconstruction requires points with extreme speed
in a simplified trajectory. In the DP scheme the following
distance is compared to error εv in the speed reconstruction:
d(k, i, j) = |x˙i, j (tk ) − vk |

(21)

where xi, j is given by (8) after replacing subscript 0 by i
and 1 by j. For all resulting accepted point indices (i, j) we
spatially simplify the path pi . . . p j within error ε p using the
DP scheme but with distance given by
d(k, i, j) = dgc (pk , r(k, i, j))

(22)

where dgc is the great circle distance and r(k, i, j) is the simplified position of the object on pi p j at time tk :
r(k, i, j) = RL(pi , p j ,

xi j (tk )
).
xi j (t j )

(23)

with RL the natural parametrization of pi p j (see section 3).
Table 1 shows the amount of ignored data for one data set
of one day consisting of 1460 vessel trajectories. The straight
line nature of vessel trajectories yields a reduction of 79%
for small errors, while speed reconstruction is preserved.
6.2. Application
We have implemented vessel density in a custom build geographical information system, which allows drawing on an
OpenStreetMap map [Ope]. Our prototype is developed in
Java with OpenGL (JOGL), and tested on a machine with an
Intel Core2 Duo T7300 (2.0 GHz) processor, 2 GB RAM,
NVidia Geforce 8600M GT, and Windows Vista (32 bits).
Figure 4a can be computed in 10 minutes per day of data,
containing 100,000 rhumb line segments, resulting in an
overlay of 2000 × 2000 pixels covering an area of 400 × 400
km. In this section we apply our method in various use cases.
6.2.1. Weather
The base case is investigation of shipping movement during
smooth weather. In figure 3 we show the entrance of Rotterdam harbour, where anchor zones pop up by the highlighted
dots of the individual trajectories. On a large scale the same
method results in similar patterns. In figure 4a we see that

964

Niels Willems, Huub v.d. Wetering & Jarke J. v. Wijk / Visualization of vessel movements

a)

b)

c)

d)
0

6 log #vessels / 1000km2

0

8 log #vessels / 1000km2

Figure 3: Vessel density on a logarithmic scale in front of the harbour of Rotterdam, The Netherlands, of a single day convolved
with a kernel of 1.5km. The multi-scale density is decorated with convolved trajectories with a kernel of 100m. a) Density with
continuous color mapping . b) Density with discrete color mapping. c) Multi-scale density with continuous color mapping. d)
Multi-scale density with discrete color mapping.

three north-south sea lanes appear. Furthermore, some maintenance vessels move slowly in a small area, typically around
an oil platform or a wind mill park, which can be observed
by the intense individual trajectories. Lastly, in the south the
ferry between Vlissingen and Breskens yields regular traffic
which can be observed by intense dots just before the sea
lane.
Shipping movements differ during a gale. In figure 4b, a
northwest gale of force 8 on the scale of Beaufort appears
during the day. In general, there are fewer shipping movements and sea lanes are less used compared to figure 3d.
Captains try to keep course, but from the twisty individual
trajectories we see that they drift slightly. Furthermore, anchor zones are less often used, and vessels slowly sail along
the wind towards the anchor zones to avoid rolling, as can be
observed by intense left-top to right-bottom trajectories.

6.2.2. Slow movers
Slow movers in sea lanes are not allowed. In this use case we
investigate if they appear anyway. In figure 4c the large kernel vessel density is displayed only for trajectory segments
where vessels move less than three knot. The density is displayed using a blue-red-blue color map to avoid too much
attention to high density. In figure 4c, filtered data of smooth
weather is shown and slow movers appear in a sea lane in
the lowerleft corner.

6.3. Discussion
A simple approach to compute densities is to convolve trajectories assuming a constant speed of all vessels, whereas
in our approach speed is taken into account. In figure 5 these
two approaches are compared. We notice three differences
when velocity is taken into account. First of all, slow movers
are highlighted as shown in the anchor zones. Secondly, the
north-south sea lanes differ, which means that the probability to meet a vessel in the right lane is higher than in the
left one. Lastly, our model fades distracting, large positional
sensor errors as shown in the green box. In the left picture
we see a trajectory that is hidden in the transparent lower
values of the color map in the right. Since in the reconstruction of the trajectory the begin and end speed are adapted to
the distance, the vessel hardly contributes for far erroneous
positions.
In general, our density shows speed variations with vessel data, but the slow and steady nature of vessel movements does not result in clear acceleration patterns. However, in other application domains more turbulent data sets
exist, such as car, airplane, or mouse trajectories, in which
acceleration patterns are expected to show up.
7. Conclusion and Future work
We have presented a novel method to compute and visualize moving objects in such a way that speed is taken into
account. In order to do so, we have defined a convolution
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

965

Niels Willems, Huub v.d. Wetering & Jarke J. v. Wijk / Visualization of vessel movements
0

11 log #vessels / 1500km2

sea lanes

mainte
mai
ntenan
nte
nance ves
nan
vessel
sel

Amster
Ams
terdam
dam

Rotter
Rot
terdam
ter
dam

anchor
anc
hor zo
zone
ne

The Netherlands

Vlissing
Vlis
singen
sing
en

Breskens
Bres
kens

a)

Antwer
Ant
werpp
wer
0

Belgium

7 log #vessels / 1000km2

yieldi
yie
lding
ldi
ng fer
ferry
ry
low

high

slow movers
wind
win
(NW 8 Bft)

normal traffic

turbulent anchor zones

b)

c)

possibly dangerous:
slow movers in sea lane

Figure 4: a) Vessel density of the Dutch coast: Trajectories of a week covering 160,000km2 , and convolved with kernels of 5km
and 200m. The picture represents 3.5GB of data. The anchor zone and yielding ferry inset are renderings of a day using kernels
of 1.5km and 100m. b) Vessel density of a stormy day: northwest wind with force 8 on the Beaufort scale change the movement
pattern of vessels. c) Vessel density of areas where vessels sail less than 3 knot during smooth weather.

method for a kernel density estimation, which returns the
proper contribution per moving point to the overall density.
Furthermore, we created an overview + detail visualization
using a multi-scale approach for simultaneously displaying
two densities with a small and large kernel, which reveal

c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

different features. Velocity adapted convolution is applied
in the maritime domain showing maritime significant areas
such as sea lanes and areas where vessels move slowly or
stop. Lastly, our method is applied to weather conditions,
which results in heavily changing patterns.

966

Niels Willems, Huub v.d. Wetering & Jarke J. v. Wijk / Visualization of vessel movements

balance between sea lanes

slow movers hidden

unbalance between sea lanes

slow movers pop up

sensor errors shown

a)

sensor errors fade out

b)

Figure 5: Comparison of convolution with 15 knot fixed speed (a) and velocity adjusted vessel density (b). The colored boxes
annotate some of the visible differences between the convolution methods.

We are investigating the following problems: Firstly, design of interactive tools for operators to enable comparison of densities for multiple times of day, multiple weather
conditions, or multiple ship types, for instance. Secondly,
combined visualization of densities and other trajectory attributes such as rate of turn, navigational status, and course.
Thirdly, cope with unreliable data: Sensors collecting AIS
data may be unavailable resulting in blind spots. Lastly, investigation of movement density in other domains.
Acknowledgements
We thank the reviewers for their comments and thank Thales
for their active participation, in particular Hans Hiemstra.
This work has been carried out as a part of the Poseidon
project at Thales Nederland under the responsibilities of the
Embedded Systems Institute (ESI). This project is partially
supported by the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs under
the BSIK program.
References
[AA08a] A NDRIENKO G., A NDRIENKO N.: Spatio-temporal aggregation for visual analysis of movements. IEEE VAST (Oct.
2008), 51–58.
[AA08b] A NDRIENKO G., A NDRIENKO N.: VISUAL 2008.
LNCS 5188. Springer, 2008, ch. A Visual Analytics Approach
to Exploration of Large Amounts of Movement Data, pp. 1–4.
[AAe08] A NDRIENKO G., A NDRIENKO N., ET AL .: Geovisualization of dynamics, movement and change: key issues and developing approaches in visualization research. Information Visualization 7, 3–4 (2008), 173 – 180.
[Ale04] A LEXANDER J.: Loxodromes: A rhumb way to go.
Mathematics magazine 77, 5 (Dec. 2004), 349–356.
[And07] A NDERSON T.: Comparison of spatial methods for measuring road accident ’hotspots’: a case study of london. Journal
of Maps (2007), 55–69.
[DP73]

reduction of the number of points required to represent a digitized
line or its caricature. Cartographica 10, 2 (Oct. 1973), 112–122.
[DWe08] D ODGE S., W EIBEL R., ET AL .: Towards a taxonomy
of movement patterns. Information Visualization 7, 3–4 (2008),
240 – 252.
[Fav40]

FAVILL J.: Primer of Celestial Navigation. 1940.

[Fis07] F ISHER D.: Hotmap: Looking at geographic attention.
IEEE TVCG 13, 6 (2007), 1184–1191.
[ITU01] ITU: Technical characteristics for an automatic identification system using time division multiple access in the vhf maritime mobile band. Recommendation ITU-R M.1371-1 (2001).
[JFSe07] JANOOS , F., S INGH , ET AL .: Activity analysis using
spatio-temporal trajectory volumes in surveillance applications.
IEEE VAST (Nov. 2007), 3–10.
[JT02] J IN X., TAI C.-L.: Analytical methods for polynomial
weighted convolution surfaces with various kernels. Computers
& Graphics 26, 3 (June 2002), 437–447.
[KK01] K ENNEDY M., KOPP S.: Understanding Map Projections. ESRI Press, 2001.
[MRe08] M ACIEJEWSKI R., RUDOLPH S., ET AL .: Contextualizing hotspots - a visual analytics approach. GIScience (2008).
H YDROGRAHIC
O FFICE
AND
[Net04] N ETHERLANDS
M INISTRY OF T RANSPORT, P UBLIC W ORKS AND WA TER M ANAGEMENT :
Vessel traffic on the north sea.
www.noordzeeloket.nl/Images/VesselTraffic_tcm14-2878.pdf.
[Ope]

O PEN S TREET M AP:. www.openstreetmap.org.

[Pho75] P HONG B. T.: Illumination for computer generated pictures. Commun. ACM 18, 6 (1975), 311–317.
[Sil92] S ILVERMAN B. W.: Density Estimation for Statistics and
Data Analysis. No. 26 in Monographs on Statistics and Applied
Probability. Chapman & Hall, 1992.
[Sny93] S NYDER J. P.: Flattening the Earth: Two Thousand
Years of Map Projections. University of Chicago Press, 1993.
[SPe02] S UNG K., P EARCE A., ET AL .: Spatial-temporal antialiasing. IEEE TVCG 8, 2 (Apr.-Jun. 2002), 144–153.
[vWT01] VAN W IJK J. J., T ELEA A.: Enridged contour maps. In
IEEE Visualization (Washington, DC, USA, 2001), pp. 69–74.

D OUGLAS D. H., P EUCKER T. K.: Algorithms for the

c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

