Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2009
H.-C. Hege, I. Hotz, and T. Munzner
(Guest Editors)

Volume 28 (2009), Number 3

Extended Excentric Labeling
Enrico Bertini, Maurizio Rigamonti, Denis Lalanne †
DIUF, University of Fribourg, Switzerland

Abstract
The paper presents an extension to the Excentric Labeling, a labeling technique to dynamically show labels around
a movable lens. Each labels refers to one object within the lens and is connected to it through a line. The original
implementation has several known limitations and potential improvements that we address in this work, like: high
density areas, uneven density distributions, and summary statistics. We describe the implemented extensions and
present a think-aloud user study. The study shows that users can naturally understand and easily operate the
majority of the implemented function but label scrolling, which requires additional research. From the study we
also gained unanticipated requirements and interesting directions for further research.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS):
interfaces—User Interfaces [H.5.2]: Interaction styles—

1. Introduction
Labeling in visualization consists in attaching text labels to
graphical marks to convey semantic information associated
to the objects observed on the screen. Typically, visual items
correspond to data items that, along with parameters used
for layout and visual features (e.g., color, size, shape, etc.),
contain some textual description or name that characterizes
the object. Examples are: names of persons, product codes,
book titles, geographical regions, id numbers, etc.
The problem of labeling has been studied since the first
days of information visualization. As described in [FP99]
the techniques can be broadly segmented into two main categories: static and dynamic. Static labeling aims at finding
one single labeling configuration to be applied to the whole
visualization once for all. Dynamic labeling instead treats
the labels as dynamic object that can appear and disappear
or change their location according to some specific user interactions or system states.
Fekete and Plaisant in [FP99] also present Excentric Labeling which consists in arranging the labels of the objects
under a movable lens in its neighborhood. As the cursor is
moved across the visualization the elements within the lens

† name.surname@unifr.ch
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

Design Tools and Techniques [D.2.2]: User

are dynamically labeled. The major benefit of this technique
is that it represents a form of transient visualization [JH07]
that reveals details of interest where and when they are
needed without requiring extra screen space. It is intuitive,
generic, and computationally non demanding. Together with
these benefits the technique presents some major limitations
and opportunities for improvements. The same authors suggest the following possible improvements (reworded here for
brevity): allow size and shape change of the focus area; summary glyphs to show the distribution of the objects; inheritance of graphic attributes from data points to labels; use of
labels as selection menus.
In this paper we present a first design and implementation of these requirements together with some additional
features. Their implementation and study stem from a real
need we encountered while developing a corporate intelligence exploratory visual tool. The following section briefly
describes the context of this project in order to provide some
background and motivation.
1.1. Background and Motivation
The idea of extending Excentric Labeling is born in the context of our project "The Risk Manager Dashboard" in which
we study novel interactive visualization techniques to understand how people use corporate assets within large or-

928

E. Bertini & M. Rigamonti & D. Lalanne / Extended Excentric Labeling

ganizations. More specifically, we developed a graph-based
visualization "inspired" to the well known RadViz visualization [HGP99] in which points and anchors connect through
springs and represents respectively software products and
company departments. The visualization helps security managers and administrators segment their application inventory
and eventually come up with novel administration strategies.

1.2. Contribution

Figure 1: RadViz inspired visualization from our project
(top-half view). Data is unevenly distributed.

1.3. Organization of the paper

Describing in more details the system and its functions is
beyond the scope of this paper. We deem important however
to describe how the extensions we propose stem from the
problems we have encountered using Excentric Labeling in
this environment. The first major issue is the need to cope
with very dense areas, where the number of labels is too
large. In our case study we have a total number of around
5000 data points (applications) of which more than 2000 are
clamped together around anchors A and B, as shown in Figure 1 † . Moreover, very dense and very sparse areas coexist
in the same visualization. In order to cope with these issues,
our extensions allows label scrolling and automatic area adjustment. Another issue is related to the interpretation of the
elements that fall within the area and their relationship with
the labels. In the proposed design we let the labels inherit visual features from their data items and provide local filtering
and ordering to focus on subsets of elements within the lens.
Overall, we noticed that the real value of the Extended Excentric Labeling is that it offers to the user a sort of "semantic hook" between visual items and the domain objects they
represent. In our context application names have a strong semantic value that helps a domain expert easily interpret the
nature of the trends inspected with the lens.
It’s important to stress that even if our proposal has been
tested only on one visual technique, it can be directly generalized to any other visualization where data items are represented by dot-based visual primitives; which is a wide proportion of the existing visualizations: scatter plots, node-link
diagrams, point maps, etc. Further, the tasks used in our evaluation presented below are generic enough to be considered
domain-independent.
† the real department names have been substituted with generic letters for privacy reasons

The first contribution of this paper is the description of technical and design solutions to some well-known limitations
of Excentric Labeling. Visualization practitioners would be
able, by reading the paper, to easily implement these extensions. Since the technical limitations and challenges of our
implementation are described, it can also serve as a starting point for infovis researchers to further advance the technique. A second contribution is our usability study, which,
along with the additional features we have designed, evaluates the basic functions of Excentric Labeling. The problems
highlighted in the study and the lessons learned can help future implementers avoid important mistakes. Our indications
for further research can inspire infovis researchers to explore
new designs and pursue novel interesting studies.

In the following sections we first provide some related work
to put our work in the whole context of data labeling. In
Section 3 we describe in details the extended features we
have implemented in the Excentric Labeling. Section 4 and
5 describe the usability study we conducted, its results, and
recommendations for further developments. Finally, Section
6 traces our future work and Section 7 presents our conclusion.
2. Related Work
As already mentioned in the introduction the existing labeling techniques can be classified in two broad classes:
static and dynamic. Static labeling is a very active area of
research that goes well beyond labeling in visualization environments. It is traditionally related to the problem of labeling in geographic maps, where there is a need to carefully choose what objects to label, where to place the labels,
and how to lay out them around the object of interest (e.g, a
street label usually follows the path of the street). As demonstrated by the "Map Labeling Bibliography" [Wol] the area
is still very active and very much concerned with global optimization algorithms that are typically NP-hard. Christensen
in [CMS95] frames the problem of point-feature label placement and provides an empirical comparison of several algorithms. More recently, Ali et al. discuss in [AHS05] requirements for labeling and classify a series of layout styles in the
context of 3D illustrations.
The problems addressed in this area are however not necessarily relevant when considering dynamic labeling. In dynamic labeling the problem is shifted from label placement
optimization at all costs, to the problem of using as efficiently as possible the time resource. In dynamic labeling the
designer is free to choose which subset of labels is relevant
"now", given a specific system configuration and user action.
As clearly described by Fekete and Plaisant in their taxonomy [FP99], dynamic labeling can be categorized in the folc 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

E. Bertini & M. Rigamonti & D. Lalanne / Extended Excentric Labeling

lowing classes: one label at a time, global display change,
focus + context, sampling, dynamic labeling.
To the best of our knowledge this categorization is still
valid and very few additional dynamic techniques have been
developed since then. Tatemura in [Tat00] describes a technique that combines focus + context and sampling to deal
with numerous labels within the focus area. The visualization reacts to pan and zoom interactions and to dynamic filtering. In relation to this last feature, the technique is slightly
related to our solution in that our extension comprises the
possibility to filter out the labels within an area according to
some filtering parameters.
Another recent related contribution is the "3D Explosion
Probe" [SCS04] which permits to show annotations to related parts in 3D models as the user explores it with a 3D
probe. The solution integrates advanced algorithms to let the
parts "explode" apart and reveal annotated scrollable text.
While the field of application of this techniques is rather
different from ours, we share the idea of using some kind
of scrolling to dynamically reveal text. In our solution we
adopt scrolling to cope with dense areas that would reveal
too many labels at once if not handled properly.

929

3. Extended Excentric Labeling
The Extended Excentric Labeling, as described in the introduction, introduces a series of innovations over its standard
implementation. Label scrolling and focus area adjustment
deal with high density areas and uneven distributions. The
user can scroll the list of labels when there are too many
items to display. The lens size can be manually changed or
adapts automatically to the local density to cope with uneven
distributions. With these techniques the user can easily get
rid of data density and devote more cognitive resources to
exploration, while maintaining a certain degree of flexibility
and precision. Summary statistics, inheritance of visual features, filtering, layout and sorting provide additional functionalities that facilitate inspection. A small glyph is positioned under or above the lens to provide summary statistics
on the area’s content. The labels inherit their visual features
(color and size) from the data points they refer to. This permits to speed up interpretation and linking between labels
and visual items. With filtering the user can filter out items
within the lens by specifying, through check boxes, the desired combination of values. Different layouts and label sorting strategies can be selected to find a trade off between link
crossing and a meaningful arrangement of the labels.

Google Earth [Goo] also presents a novel dynamic labeling technique. Small dots are used to represent one or more
photographs associated to a particular map location. When
the user clicks on a dot representing more than one picture,
the dots are displaced from their original position and their
labels are shown on the fly.
Dynamic Map Labeling is concerned with the specific
problems of generating labels as users pan and zoom in interactive maps. Been et al. discuss the problem in general
terms and provide a framework for desired quality parameters and potential algorithms [BDY06]. Recently, Mote proposed an optimization algorithm that permits to avoid the intensive preprocessing stage that is usually needed to achieve
smooth interaction in such maps [Mot07]. The work proposed in [LSC08] also permits fast computation of labels.
The solution uses a particle-based technique that permits to
avoid not only label overlap but also the obscuration of visualization objects.
Our solution also shares ideas with Magic Lenses
[SFB94], a tool developed in the larger context of User Interfaces and Computer Graphics that permits to apply specific functions and reveal additional information on circumscribed movable areas. Some extensions to the specific infovis domain exist, like for instance the Enhanced Dynamic
Queries [FS95] and the Sampling Lens [EBD05]. Our Extended Excentric Labeling can be considerer a sort of magic
lens in that it permits to apply filtering functions in a specified area and provides summary data pertaining to the object
under the lens.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 2: The "probe state" above shows only labels and
summary statistics. The "detail state" below provides additional details and interactive filtering.

The main challenge in implementing these features is to
preserve the original desirable properties of Extended Labeling, i.e., smooth interaction, ease of use, ease of implementation, and intuitiveness. We conceived the Extended Excentric Labeling trying to preserve them as much as possible.

930

E. Bertini & M. Rigamonti & D. Lalanne / Extended Excentric Labeling

The actual implementation does not require any complex algorithms and can be used smoothly on visualizations with
thousand of data items.
The inclusion of new features however makes interaction
a bit more complex. In particular, the focus area has two possible levels of detail: a probe state (see Figure 2 above) during which the tool updates the labels and the summary statistics on the fly, as the focus area is moved, and a detail state
(see Figure 2 (below)), activated by a mouse click, which
sticks the lens in the current position, provides additional details and activates the filtering function. Our own experience
and the results of our usability test (see the details in Section 4) confirm that increasing the number of functions and
providing two levels of detail is not harmful to the overall
usability.

scrolling speed function illustrated above, 3) and our desire
to provide interaction functionalities in the center of the lens
close to the focus point. It is also worth to mention that at
any moment only the links of the currently visible lists are
shown. Moreover, the user can stop scrolling at any time and
hover through the labels to highlight the link that connects
the label to its point.
We originally designed this solution in place of standard
scroll bars to keep scrolling functions and visual feedback
close to the focus area and the mouse pointer. This solution,
however, proved somewhat unnatural and presented major
interaction problems that are discussed in the section on the
usability study below.

3.2. Focus area adjustment
3.1. Label scrolling
In the original Excentric Labeling when the number of items
under the focus area is higher than a given threshold the labels are sampled and the total number of elements is shown
with a number on the top. To deal with this limitation we permit the user to scroll through the whole list of labels. Since
the labels are split into two series, one on the right and one
on the left side we allow independent scrolling on the two
sides.
Figure 3 illustrates how we designed the scrolling function. When the user sets the area in a position where the number of labels is higher than the threshold, the tool is provided
with interactive pie segments and indicators that show how
many labels are left below/above the list. The pie segment’s
size is proportional to the list size and it serves the function
of indicating the current position in the list; similarly to what
happens with traditional scroll bars.

Figure 3: The pie segments over the lens allow users to
scroll the list of labels.
By dragging the mouse up or down, to the left or to the
right, the lists can be scrolled. The speed with which the list
is scrolled depends from the distance of the pointer to the
center, by going farther the scrolling slows down.
This design is motivated by the following main factors: 1)
the need to minimize mouse displacement as the user initiate the scrolling tasks, 2) the fact that it lends itself to the

Uneven distribution of plotted items in real world visualizations is extremely common: packed areas with hundreds of
items coexist with sparse areas with few items [WLS98]. As
noted above, this problem is partially addressed by the scroll
function we have presented. Scrolling is not enough however, the area of the movable lens should adapt to the underlying density so that a small size is used when passing over
packed areas and a larger size when passing over sparse areas. This, not only has the benefit of reducing the number
of labels to be scrolled, but it also permits the focus area to
"wrap around" any clusters of data points one may find in
the visualization. Potential issues with the technique are: the
distracting effect of automatic adjustment and interference
on the judgment of the amount of overlap within the lens.
In our usability study (see Section 4), however, users did not
experience any major problems and could easily understand
the mechanism. In addition, we provided as well a manual
sizing option which turns off automatic adjustment and permits to change the area size manually. Both options have
advantages and disadvantages which are discussed below in
the study.
Automatic size adjustment is achieved by using an underlying density map as in [WLS98]. The screen space is split
in a NxM matrix of cells and each cell counts how many
data points fall inside. When the user moves the lens, the
algorithm calculates the average of the density values contained in a sampling window of fixed size around the cursor.
The average value is used to linearly map the size of the
focus area in a given range between a predefined maximum
and minimum (these parameters can be adjusted in a settings
panel).
Since the purpose of the density map is to deal with very
skewed distributions, we assume the values will always span
a range of some orders of magnitude. For this reason, by
default they are scaled through a logarithmic function and
then normalized in a range between 0 and 1. Without such
a scaling the final result would be a focus area that is either set to its maximum or minimum value, thus making the
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

E. Bertini & M. Rigamonti & D. Lalanne / Extended Excentric Labeling

931

ality that permits to see how the points under the focus area
are distributed according to one of the data dimensions. The
summary is implemented through a small bar chart (see Figure 2) positioned under (or above) the lens, according to the
mouse position, and permits to better orient the user while
probing the visualization. In our case study, it shows the distribution of the data points (software applications) according
to the number of anchors (enterprise departments) they are
connected to. An ordinal scale of blue shades, as found in
Color Brewer [Bre], is used to represent these values.
The same approach can be used without any modifications
in all the other domains where the data dimension is categorical or ordinal and the number of unique values is small
enough. In other cases, the same intuition holds: use a sort
of glyph to provide useful hints during data exploration.
Figure 4: The size of the lens automatically changes according to data density.

functionality useless. The sampling window is necessary to
obtain smooth adjustments. If only the single density value
under the cursor would be used, the lens size might change
abruptly provoking annoying effects.
The mechanism just described contains a number of discretionary parameters: 1) the matrix cell’s size, 2) the sampling window size, and 3) the max/min value of the focus
area. We are not able to suggest one common setting to be
used once for all, nonetheless we can provide some hints.
Cell size must be set in relation to granularity and time performance, taking into account that the density map must be
re-calculated only when the position of the points changes.
This is particularly relevant in that its re-computation does
not directly affect the excentric labeling per se but rather the
computation of a new configuration of the whole visualization. For all those visualizations where the position of the
points does not change with interaction this is not in fact a
problem. In our case, where re-computation is necessary, we
found that a size of 5x5 pixels produces smooth adjustments
and good performance. As for the sampling window size, we
noticed that a size that permits to include in the computation
3 cells per side, that is a square made of 3x3 cells, is enough
to avoid abrupt adjustments. Finally, the max/min lens size
is a parameter that strongly depends on the application. For
this reason we believe the best solution is to provide a reasonable default and then let the user adjust it if needed in a
separate settings panel.
3.3. Summary statistics and filtering
Excentric Labeling is useful in visualization environments
because it permits to quickly make sense of the patterns the
user observes on the screen and because it helps drawing
initial explanations and hints about their nature. Following
this line of thought we added a summary statistics functionc 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 5: Label filtering: only the labels of applications
used in 3 departments are shown.
When the user switches to the detail state, the bar chart
is split in order to represent summary data for each list on
the two sides of the focus area (see Figure 2). This detail
state comes together with the filtering function that permits
to isolate the labels that pertain to one or more categories
represented in the bar chart. Figure 5 illustrates the filtering
function in action: the applications used only in three departments are shown. The advantage of local over global filtering is that it permits to preserve and spot interesting patterns
on the unfiltered view first and then offload the pattern only
locally where detailed information is needed.
3.4. Inheritance of visual features
In many visualizations not only the position of the data
points is related to one or more dimensions of the original
data but also some other visual features like size, color, orientation, texture, etc. In our example, size is mapped to the
number of users who use the application and color to the
number of departments. In Excentric Labeling it is useful to
let these visual features be inherited by the labels. The original implementation already takes in consideration this idea
by coloring the labels according to the color of the object
they refer to. Here we draw upon this idea and let the label
inherit also the size feature. Figure 6 shows an example of
how font size changes according to items size. Besides its
limited resolution, since a small number of font sizes can

932

E. Bertini & M. Rigamonti & D. Lalanne / Extended Excentric Labeling

be effectively used, we found this mapping can be useful to
isolate interesting labels without visually link them to the
objects they refer to.
Size and color are among the most common and effective visual features used in visualization, therefore this same
implementation can be easily transferred to other domains.
Among the other common visual features used in visualization texture might also be used quite straightforwardly, shape
can generate some problems since it is difficult to let a label
inherit a shape from its data point, and orientation is definitely problematic due to the constraint that labels should be
aligned and horizontal to allow easy reading.
3.5. Layout and sorting
The original Excentric Labeling proposes three variants to
lay out the labels around the focus area: radial labeling, vertically coherent, and horizontally coherent. Radial labeling
avoids line crossing whereas the others use the vertical or
horizontal topological order of data points to sort the labels
and admit line crossing.
In our implementation we kept radial ordering as the basic algorithm to avoid line crossing. The ordering is obtained
by projecting a line from the center, to the data item’s position, to the lens’ border. The labels are then sorted according
to their projection on the circle. In addition we provide a
sorting strategy that takes into account one of the data dimensions mapped to the labels. In the examples we use the
ordinal colors but the same can be done with labels’ size.
In this way the labels are always ordered according to their
color scale but generate crossing lines. Figure 6 shows the
result of the two strategies on a specific instance: radial ordering on the top and data dimension ordering below.
Instability of labels and lines is one major problem of both
the original and the extended Excentric Labeling, and layout
and sorting clearly have an effect on them. Labels can easily swap from the right to the left side as the user moves the
lens. Similarly, in an ordered list the position of the element
can change abruptly. Animation is one potential solution to
alleviate this problem, in this work however we did not investigate the issue in more details.
4. Usability Test
The main subject matter of the evaluation we performed was
the usability and usefulness of the Extended Excentric Labeling. We conducted a subjective evaluation on 6 users,
which we considered a decent number to capture most of
the usability problems, feedbacks and tips. Tested users were
mainly computer scientists or highly experienced with computers. The evaluation took the form of think-aloud walkthrough on four well-defined tasks. We also used a post-test
questionnaire to capture satisfaction and perceived usability. We did not fix on purpose any independent variables or

Figure 6: Comparison of layout and sorting strategies: radial ordering on the top and data dimension ordering below.

conditions to be compared, but rather asked users to freely
change the available parameters and offered functionalities.
Before running the test, presented below, we performed a
trial test with one user which helped us to spot inconsistencies and ambiguities in the wording of the tasks and questions. The test followed the subsequent steps detailed below:
an introduction to the test, a quick training, a task-based experiment, and a questionnaire.
Introduction. We first described the Excentric Labeling as
being a lens that enable to investigate the content of a visualization by showing the labels of the objects under the lens.
We also described the main features of the lens, its color features, its manually or automatically adaptive size, the filtering and scrolling mechanisms, the visual summary, the various layout strategies of the labels, etc. We also explained the
visualization used during the test, making clear that the object of interest in this evaluation is not the visualization but
the lens.
Training. Prior to the test, we did an initial training of less
than five minutes in which users could explore the visualization and use the lens freely. We also instructed users to try
all the alternative designs available. All along this training,
users were free to ask questions and we provided help when
necessary.
Task-based evaluation. The test in itself consisted in four
tasks. Users were asked to read carefully the task list before
starting so that they could ask questions if necessary. They
were then asked to perform four tasks and to "think-aloud"
to let us understand what they are doing. We did not give any
time limit to perform the four tasks and encouraged users to
freely explore different options, in the way the lens changes
its size and in the way the labels are arranged. The four tasks
were designed to particularly test the main new features of
the extended Excentric Labeling that we propose: respectively (task 1) label reading and scrolling, (task 2) label filc 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

E. Bertini & M. Rigamonti & D. Lalanne / Extended Excentric Labeling

tering and label color feature, (task 3) label size feature, and
(task 4) summary data reading. In order to encourage users
to scroll and read labels, we asked them in the first task to inspect the applications used by department B (figure 1) and to
estimate the number of applications they know. In the second
task, we asked users to inspect a specific region and determine which applications are used by exactly 3 departments.
For this purpose, users had to use the filtering function to
prune the space or alternatively to observe the color feature
of labels. Task 3 was aiming, for a specific region, at spotting the applications used by the least number of users, thus
making use of label font size. Finally, in the fourth task, users
had to explore the visualization with the lens to spot the region that contained a majority of applications used by two
departments, thus making use of the summary.
Questionnaire. After the test we asked users to fill a short
questionnaire, which they had to comment orally afterward.
The questionnaire was meant to capture both the perceive
usability and usefulness of the extended Excentric Labeling
and of some of its major features: adaptive change of the
lens’ size (automatic or manual), labels layout technique (ordered topologically or by the color feature), the visual summary, the filtering and scrolling functions, etc.
4.1. Results
First of all, at a general level, it is important noticing that all
users completed the tasks successfully in a minimum amount
of time and with less than 5 minutes of training. The extra
functionalities and levels of details brought by the Extended
Excentric Labeling did not seem to prejudice the overall usability of the lens.
At the end of the overall test, users rated both the usefulness and usability, on a scale from 1 (bad) to 4 (good),
of each major functionality of the Extended Excentric Labeling. Perceived usability and usefulness seems to carry
complementary information; for instance users agreed that
the scrolling function is useful, but that our current implementation can be improved. On the other hand, some users
bounded the usefulness of the filtering to certain cases while
observing that the current implementation is usable. Figure
7 indicates the average rating made by the 6 users tested.

933

manual resize for two distinct purposes. While they preferred the automatic mode to move along the visualization
and overview the data, they were choosing manually the lens
size when wanting to examine details. Automatic resize was
particularly appreciated because it reduces the amount of labels without requiring additional interaction. Most users (5
out of 6) suggested that these two modes should be combined, making possible to switch quickly from one mode
to another. In our experiment, the switch between the two
modes was assigned to a radio button.
Labels layout. Users could not really tell which layout
is best; instead most of them suggested that the layout algorithm for sorting labels depends on the task. Users also
suggested to integrate other sorting algorithms, for instance
to reorganize the labels alphabetically. When the amount of
data is very large, users generally ignored the links and were
not disturbed by their intersections.
Filtering. Users found this feature reasonably useful and
usable. Notably, one user found this feature only useful for
precise inspections, and otherwise redundant with the color
feature in the list and its corresponding points in the RadViz.
Summary Statistics. Again, users found this feature useful
and usable. However, most users suggested improving the
overall summary while keeping as is the current partial summaries on each side of the lens. Some users also suggested
to add interaction with the summary so that to highlight the
labels corresponding to a category.
Scrolling. The scrolling mechanism was the most discussed feature. Although its usefulness was not in doubt,
its integration and usability has been pointed out by users.
In particular, the scroll widget represented as a pie generated some questioning, and most users expected that the
area covered by the pie contain the data item corresponding
to the labels, which is not the case in our implementation.
When the area in focus is too crowded (in task 1, about 1400
items were in focus), some users found scrolling painful and
wished to be able zoom in and out the zone in order to manipulate the number of visible labels. Instead of scrolling a
large list, one user fixed the lens size at its minimum to reduce the number of labels and inspected the region by moving the lens around.
5. Lessons Learned and Further Research

Figure 7: Average rating of the perceived usefulness and
usability.
We summarize below the major findings of this test, derived from the observations made by users during the thinkaloud walk-through and their answers to the questionnaire.
Lens size. Users combined systematically automatic and
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Based on the evaluation above, we can make the following recommendations for future developments and improvements of the Excentric Labeling. First of all, automatic and
manual adaptive lens size should be combined in a smooth
way so that to switch easily from one to the other, for instance using a right mouse click. Both have proved to be useful and usable for different purposes as described in the previous section. Second, users should be provided with various
sorting functions to lay the labels around the lens (e.g. alphabetically, feature-wise, topologically based, etc.). Third, the

934

E. Bertini & M. Rigamonti & D. Lalanne / Extended Excentric Labeling

feature used as filtering function should provide extra information that the visualization on which the Excentric Labeling will be used do not carry. Finally, rather than using a pie
widget to scroll the labels, we recommend using standard
scrolling lists on each side of the lens.

can help practitioners implement an extended version of the
Excentric Labeling and researchers be challenged with new
open issues to investigate.

The scrolling mechanism actually requires deeper research. Although we should make clear that in our experiment (task 1), users had to inspect a region containing about
1400 applications, which makes complex an exhaustive inspection of labels. However, still, we think our use case is realistic and improving scrolling is a reasonable research axis
to pursue. From our experience with users, we have spotted
four possible alternatives. First, using a zoom option within
the lens. This seems a pretty complex option, and we do not
have a proper solution to propose at the time of writing. The
second approach uses standard scrolling lists. This solution
is probably the most usable and it has the advantage to ease
the integration of standard sorting functions for ordering the
list. Sampling, as proposed in the original Excentric Labeling, remains a good solution to gain a quick overview; user
however need more control to refresh and interpret different
sample sets. Finally, label aggregation strategies can be devised to provide meaningful groups of labels. Each solution
has pros and cons. At the time of writing, we think scrolling
is the most reliable and natural one.

[AHS05] A LI K., H ARTMANN K., S TROTHOTTE T.: Label layout for interactive 3d illustrations. Journal of the WSCG 13, 1
(2005), 1–8.

6. Future Work
In the next future we plan to investigate in mode details the
label scrolling issue through the implementation of different strategies and a controlled study to test the alternatives.
We also want to implement different label sorting strategies,
notably alphabetical sorting which was requested by a good
number of users during the test. Finally, we want to investigate how to best combine automatic and manual lens resizing. Finally, we plan to run a quantitative user study, comparing the original Excentric Labeling with various other prototypes with selected extensions. On a broader perspective
we also want to investigate the added value of the Extended
Excentric Labeling when used in real world environments.
7. Conclusion
In this paper we presented an extension of Excentric Labeling a dynamic labeling technique that permits to dynamically explore the labels around the objects close to the mouse
cursor. Our extension deals with high density and uneven
distributions and provides some new additional features like:
label scrolling, ordering, and filtering. We have described
their implementation in details and the result of a usability
study. The study provided very useful hints on what works
and what does not. Furthermore it helped to suggest new
trails of research. In the paper we have discussed the implications of these results and suggest some potential solutions
for the problems found. In conclusion, we believe the paper

References

[BDY06] B EEN K., DAICHES E., YAP C.: Dynamic map labeling. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
12, 5 (2006), 773–780.
[Bre]

Color brewer - www.colorbrewer.org.

[CMS95] C HRISTENSEN J., M ARKS J., S HIEBER S.: An empirical study of algorithms for point-feature label placement. ACM
Trans. Graph. 14, 3 (1995), 203–232.
[EBD05] E LLIS G., B ERTINI E., D IX A.: The sampling lens:
making sense of saturated visualisations. In CHI ’05 extended abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2005), ACM,
pp. 1351–1354.
[FP99] F EKETE J.-D., P LAISANT C.: Excentric labeling: dynamic neighborhood labeling for data visualization. In CHI ’99:
Proc. of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (1999), ACM, pp. 512–519.
[FS95] F ISHKIN K., S TONE M. C.: Enhanced dynamic queries
via movable filters. In CHI ’95: Proc. of the SIGCHI conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (1995), pp. 415–420.
[Goo]

Google earth - http://earth.google.com/.

[HGP99] H OFFMAN P., G RINSTEIN G., P INKNEY D.: Dimensional anchors: a graphic primitive for multidimensional multivariate information visualizations. In NPIVM ’99: Proc. of the
1999 Workshop on New Paradigms in Information Visualization
and Manipulation (1999), ACM, pp. 9–16.
[JH07] JAKOBSEN M. R., H ORNBAEK K.: Transient visualizations. In OZCHI ’07: Proc. of the 2007 Australasian ComputerHuman Interaction Conference (2007), ACM, pp. 69–76.
[LSC08] L UBOSCHIK M., S CHUMANN H., C ORDS H.: Particlebased labeling: Fast point-feature labeling without obscuring
other visual features. Visualization and Computer Graphics,
IEEE Transactions on 14, 6 (Nov.-Dec. 2008), 1237–1244.
[Mot07] M OTE K.: Fast point-feature label placement for dynamic visualizations. Information Visualization 6, 4 (2007), 249–
260.
[SCS04] S ONNET H., C ARPENDALE S., S TROTHOTTE T.: Integrating expanding annotations with a 3d explosion probe. In
AVI ’04: Proc. of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual
Interfaces (2004), ACM, pp. 63–70.
[SFB94] S TONE M. C., F ISHKIN K., B IER E. A.: The movable filter as a user interface tool. In CHI ’94: Proc. of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(1994), ACM, pp. 306–312.
[Tat00] TATEMURA J.: Dynamic label sampling on fisheye maps
for information exploration. In AVI ’00: Proc. of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces (2000), ACM,
pp. 238–241.
[WLS98] W OODRUFF A., L ANDAY J., S TONEBRAKER M.:
Constant density visualizations of non-uniform distributions of
data. In UIST ’98: Proc. of the ACM symposium on User interface software and technology (1998), ACM, pp. 19–28.
[Wol] The map-labeling bibliography - http://i11www.iti.unikarlsruhe.de/ awolff/map-labeling/bibliography/. [Last access:
December 2008].

c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

