Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2009
H.-C. Hege, I. Hotz, and T. Munzner
(Guest Editors)

Volume 28 (2009), Number 3

Instant Volume Visualization using
Maximum Intensity Difference Accumulation
Stefan Bruckner and M. Eduard Gröller
Institute of Computer Graphics and Algorithms, Vienna University of Technology, Austria

Abstract
It has long been recognized that transfer function setup for Direct Volume Rendering (DVR) is crucial to its
usability. However, the task of finding an appropriate transfer function is complex and time-consuming even for
experts. Thus, in many practical applications simpler techniques which do not rely on complex transfer functions
are employed. One common example is Maximum Intensity Projection (MIP) which depicts the maximum value
along each viewing ray. In this paper, we introduce Maximum Intensity Difference Accumulation (MIDA), a new
approach which combines the advantages of DVR and MIP. Like MIP, MIDA exploits common data characteristics
and hence does not require complex transfer functions to generate good visualization results. It does, however,
feature occlusion and shape cues similar to DVR. Furthermore, we show that MIDA – in addition to being a useful
technique in its own right – can be used to smoothly transition between DVR and MIP in an intuitive manner.
MIDA can be easily implemented using volume raycasting and achieves real-time performance on current graphics
hardware.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS):
Generation—Display algorithms

1. Introduction
Direct Volume Rendering (DVR) and Maximum Intensity Projection (MIP) are two of the most common methods for the visualization of volumetric data. DVR employs a physically-motivated absorption-plus-emission optical model and frequently utilizes gradient-based shading
to emphasize surface structures. The basis of MIP, on the
other hand, is the assumption that the most relevant structures for the investigation at hand have higher intensity values. In practice, this is achieved through special scanning
protocols or the administration of contrast agents. Common examples include CT and MRI angiography as well as
Positron Emission Tomography (PET), but also different microscopic imaging modalities where structures of interest are
frequently highlighted using fluorescent marker proteins.
One of the biggest advantages of MIP over DVR is that it
does not require the specification of complex transfer functions to generate good visualization results. A major disadvantage is, however, that due to the order-independency of
the maximum operator, spatial context is lost. This paper inc 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

I.3.3 [Computer Graphics]: Picture/Image

troduces a novel method which aims to combine the advantages of DVR and MIP. Our new approach is able to generate
meaningful visualizations using a class of very simple linear transfer functions specified using standard window/level
controls.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: In
Section 2 we discuss the foundations of DVR and MIP and
identify the drawbacks of these common methods. Section 3
reviews related work. Our novel rendering technique is detailed in Section 4. In Section 5 we present an approach to
smoothly transition between DVR and MIP using our new
method as an intermediate step. Results are presented and
discussed in Section 6. The paper is concluded in Section 7.

2. Background
MIP works by traversing all viewing rays and finding
the maximum data value along each of them. This maximum is then mapped to a color value and displayed to
the user. In most cases this mapping process is simply a

776

S. Bruckner & M. E. Gröller / Instant Volume Visualization using MIDA

linear transformation of data values to pixel intensity. As
only a single value is displayed along each ray, MIP images lack depth information which can lead to visual ambiguities. Two approaches have been proposed to eliminate this drawback: Depth-Shaded Maximum Intensity Projection (DMIP) and Local Maximum Intensity Projection
(LMIP). In DMIP [HMS95], the data value is additionally
weighted by a depth-dependent term. This reduces the likelihood of high data values being projected if they are located
far away from the image plane. While this approach can
help to regain spatial context, it may also hide certain highintensity regions. For LMIP [SSN∗ 98], the first local maximum which is above a user-defined threshold is depicted. If
no value above the threshold is found along a ray, the global
maximum along the ray is used for the pixel. This approach
also adds spatial information at the cost of introducing an
additional parameter which can greatly affect the visualization.
DVR commonly employs a simplified model of light
propagation in participating media [Max95]. It only accounts for emission and absorption of light but neglects scattering effects. Emission and absorption properties are specified using a transfer function which assigns color and opacity
to each data value. The final color along each viewing ray is
then determined through accumulation of colors and opacities at constant intervals – an approximative solution of the
volume rendering integral. In order to enhance the appearance of surface structures in the volume, the vector of first
partial derivatives along the three major axes – the gradient –
can be used to evaluate a surface shading model. The color at
each sample point along a ray is additionally modulated by
the result of this evaluation. Surface-based shading generally
helps to enhance fine details in areas with high contrast, but
can lead to artifacts in nearly homogeneous areas. A major
problem of DVR is the specification of an appropriate transfer function since assigning high opacity to a certain data
range may occlude other structures of interest [PLB∗ 01].
Thus, MIP is often the method of choice as it does not require additional parameter tuning even if DVR could lead to
additional insight. In particular, shading information in DVR
can help to interpret certain structures such as blood vessels.
In this paper, we propose a new rendering technique
which aims to fuse the complementary advantages of DVR
and MIP. Specifically, we want to preserve the practically
parameterless nature of MIP and combine it with the added
spatial context of DVR provided by accumulation and shading.
3. Related Work
DVR was introduced by Drebin et al. [DCH88] and
Levoy [Lev88]. Since then, much work has focused on the
task of improving the specification of transfer functions.
Kniss et al. [KKH02] use a two-dimensional transfer function based on scalar value and gradient magnitude to effec-

tively extract specific material boundaries and convey subtle
surface properties. Correa and Ma [CM08] propose the use
of transfer functions based on the the relative size of features
to improve classification. In order to cope with the complexity of transfer function specification, several automatic and
semi-automatic approaches for their generation have been
proposed. Bergman et al. [BRT95] present an interactive approach for guiding the process of colormap selection. The
contour spectrum, introduced by Bajaj et al. [BPS97], assists iso-value selection by presenting the user with 2D plots
of several properties computed over the data range. He et
al. [HHKP96] treat the search for a good transfer function as
an optimization problem and employ stochastic techniques
for this purpose. Marks et al. [MAB∗ 97] sample the vast parameter space to find a set of input-parameter vectors that optimally disperses the output-value vectors, organizing the resulting graphics for easy and intuitive browsing by the user.
Kindlmann and Durkin [KD98] employ histogram volumes
of the data value and its first and second directional derivatives along the gradient direction to find a transfer function
which makes boundaries more visible. Tzeng et al. [TLM05]
propose the use of machine learning to find an optimal classification for user-specified regions of interest defined using
a painting metaphor. The drawback of automatic approaches
is that they require substantial pre-processing which limits
their use in interactive settings where a quick exploration of
the data is required.
Other approaches rely on properties of the data acquisition process to quickly generate meaningful visualizations.
MIP, first introduced by Wallis et al. [WMAK89] as Maximum Activity Projection for Positron Emission Tomography (PET) data, emphasizes high-intensity data values. In
addition to several optimization techniques [MKG00] it has
been attempted to re-introduce missing spatial context information to MIP. Heidrich et al. [HMS95] proposed to use a
depth-based weighting of the data values along a ray. Sato
et al. [SSN∗ 98] project the first local maximum instead of
the global maximum. Hauser et al. [HMBG01] fuse DVR
and MIP rendering for a single data set. Based on a preclassification different compositing strategies are used for
structures in a data set. Similarily, Straka et al. [SCC∗ 04]
employ a combination of rendering techniques for the visualization of vascular structures. Mora and Ebert [ME04]
experiment with different order-independent operators such
as maximum-projection and summation for the generation
of overview images.
The area of illustrative visualization has investigated techniques to enhance visual comprehension based on concepts common in traditional illustration. Rheingans and
Ebert [RE01] present several illustrative techniques which
enhance features and add depth and orientation cues.
They also propose to locally apply these methods for regional enhancement. Csébfalvi et al. [CMH∗ 01] present a
non-photorealistic technique to quickly generate contourbased overview images. Viola et al. [VKG05] introduce
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

S. Bruckner & M. E. Gröller / Instant Volume Visualization using MIDA

(a) DVR

(b) MIDA

777

(c) MIP

Figure 1: Full body CT angiography rendered using (a) DVR, (b) MIDA, and (c) MIP. Data set courtesy of the OsiriX Foundation (http://www.osirix-viewer.com).

importance-driven volume rendering which generates cutaway views based on the importance of pre-classified objects. Bruckner et al. [BGKG06] present an illustrative volume rendering technique inspired by ghosted views. RezkSalama and Kolb [RSK06] introduce opacity peeling for the
extraction of feature layers to enable the visualization of
structures which are difficult to classify using transfer functions. Malik et al. [MMG07] extend this work with a more
detailed analysis of ray profiles. Locally adaptive volume
rendering, presented by Marchesin et al. [MDM07], attempts
to reduce occlusion by dynamically adapting the opacity of
sample contributions.

4. Maximum Intensity Difference Accumulation
The basic idea behind our approach is to alter the accumulation behavior of DVR to exhibit characteristics similar to
MIP. Conventionally in DVR, when tracing viewing rays
starting from the eye, the accumulated opacity is a monotonically growing function. This means that structures located
behind thick non-transparent regions tend to have less influence on the final image. Because of this, a simple transfer
function, such as a linear ramp, frequently causes structures
of interest to be immersed in "fog", i.e., they are occluded
by irrelevant material. While more complex transfer functions can be employed to remedy this problem, their specc 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

ification is significantly more time-consuming. MIP, on the
other hand, completely disregards such occlusion relationships. We want to adapt the behavior of DVR to prevent local maxima from becoming completely occluded while still
preserving opacity-based accumulation.
We assume a continuous scalar-valued volumetric function f (P) of normalized data values in the range [0, 1]. At
the i-th sample location Pi along a viewing ray, fPi denotes
the data value at location Pi and fmaxi is the current maximum value along the ray. Front-to-back traversal is used.
We use c( f Pi ) and α( f Pi ) to denote the color and opacity,
respectively, of the sample value as classified by a transfer
function. The accumulated color and opacity at the i-th sample position along the ray are denoted by ci and αi , c0 and
α0 are initialized to zero.
We are interested in regions where the maximum along
the ray changes. Specifically, when the maximum changes
from a low to a high value, the corresponding sample should
have more influence on the final image compared to the case
where the difference is only small. We use δi to classify this
change at every sample location:

δi =

fPi − f maxi
0

if fPi > fmaxi
otherwise

(1)

S. Bruckner & M. E. Gröller / Instant Volume Visualization using MIDA

778

Direct Volume Rendering (DVR)
1

(a)

0.75

data value
0.5

intensity
opacity

0.25

0

distance

Maximum Intensity Difference Accumulation (MIDA)
1

(b)

0.75

data value
0.5

intensity
opacity

0.25

0

distance

Maximum Intensity Projection (MIP)
1

(c)

0.75

data value

0.5

intensity

0.25

0

distance

Figure 2: Typical ray profiles for (a) DVR, (b) MIDA, and (c) MIP.

Whenever a new maximum is encountered while traversing the ray, δi is nonzero. These are the cases where we
want to override occlusion relationships. For this purpose,
the previously accumulated color ci−1 and opacity αi−1
are weighted by a factor βi = 1 − δi . For our new model,
which we term Maximum Intensity Difference Accumulation (MIDA), the accumulated color ci and opacity αi for
the i-th sample are then:

ci = βi ci−1 + (1 − βi αi−1 )α( f Pi )c( fPi )
αi = βi αi−1 + (1 − βi αi−1 )α( f Pi )

(2)

Equation 2 only differs from standard DVR compositing
by the additional weighting of ci−1 and αi−1 with βi . One
way to interpret the modulation of previously accumulated
color and opacity performed in MIDA is a particular importance function which assigns highest prominence to local
maxima. In particular, maxima which occur in a rather discontinuous manner cause more modulation than smoothly
increasing ray profiles.

Figure 1 shows images generated using (a) DVR, (b)
MIDA, and (c) MIP. Figure 2 depicts a typical ray profile for
each of these techniques. A linear mapping of data values to
grayscale intensities and (for DVR and MIDA) opacities is
used. In the case of DVR, opacity is accumulated quickly resulting in a low overall intensity which manifests itself in the
corresponding rendition as dark fog. For MIP, the intensity
value along the ray is always equal to the current maximum.
Using MIDA, due to the modulation of already accumulated
intensities and opacities when a new maximum value is encountered, the intensity profile closely mimics the behavior
of MIP. As visible by comparing Figure 1 (a) and (b), MIDA
is able to immediately depict high-intensity features not visible in DVR without further transfer function modification. In
contrast to the MIP result depicted in Figure 1 (c), however,
MIDA features additional spatial cues due to accumulation
which help to interpret feature locations.
4.1. Shading
In addition to accumulation, surface-based shading in DVR
can provide important visual cues. It allows better judgement
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

S. Bruckner & M. E. Gröller / Instant Volume Visualization using MIDA

(a)

(b)

779
(c)

Figure 3: Cranial MRI angiography rendered using (a) MIP without shading, (b) MIP with gradient-based shading, and (c)
MIDA with gradient-based shading.

of shapes and fine details. MIP images, however, are usually devoid of this information. One reason for this is that in
many cases the maximum along a ray may be located in a homogeneous area where surface shading produces bad results.
Moreover, as the spatial location of the maximum between
neighboring rays can vary considerably, lacking coherence
between pixels can lead to disturbing artifacts. One major
advantage of MIDA compared to common MIP is that the
binary decision of which value to depict for each ray is replaced by accumulation. As the maximum normally does not
change abruptly due to partial volume effects, samples in the
boundary regions of high-intensity structures contribute to
the ray color. This leads to improved coherency and allows
us to perform surface-based shading as it is common in DVR
without introducing the artifacts that would occur if it was
applied to MIP. Figure 3 shows a comparison between (a)
MIP, (b) MIP with shading applied, and (c) shaded MIDA.
While shaded MIP fails to capture surface characteristics
and introduces distracting artifacts, MIDA gives a good indication of the vascular shape. The magnified area shows
how shading information can be helpful – a small aneurysm
which is almost invisible in the MIP image is clearly recognizable using MIDA.
The gradient is a bad predictor for the surface normal orientation in nearly homogeneous regions due to the increased
influence of noise. One approach to remedy this problem is
to use the magnitude of the gradient vector to determine the
degree of shading that is applied. In cases of low gradient
magnitude the unshaded color is used, while higher gradient magnitudes result in an increased degree of shading. To
achieve this, we linearly interpolate between the unshaded
and the shaded color with an interpolation weight of smoothstep(|∇ f Pi | , gl , gh ) where |∇ fPi | is the gradient magnitude
and gl , gh are lower and upper thresholds. The smoothstep
function smoothly transitions from zero to one as the first
argument varies between gl and gh and is commonly implemented as a cubic polynomial. For the thresholds we use
the empirically determined values gl = 0.125 and gh = 0.25
which have delivered universally good results in all our exc 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

periments and do not require user adjustment. This modulation is used in all images which feature shading throughout
this paper.
4.2. Classification
A major advantage of MIDA, in contrast to DVR, is that it
does not require complex transfer functions as the opacity
profile is modified based on the difference between sample value and the current maximum. The result is an image which depicts the same essential features as a MIP rendering. We can therefore limit transfer function modification to brightness and contrast adjustment using common
window/level controls which are almost universally incorporated in applications for the visualization of volume data.
The user alters two parameters: the window w and the level
l. The interval [l − 0.5w, l + 0.5w] is then linearly mapped to
the full range of grayscale intensities from black to white and
opacities from zero to one. Alternatively, the user can choose
other color maps based on domain conventions, but the opacity function does not require modification. Window/level adjustment is a routine task for domain experts. Additionally,
methods for automatically finding good window/level settings are frequently employed at the time of acquisition and
parameter values are commonly stored together with the data
(e.g., in the DICOM format). However, MIDA already provides acceptable results for an even more restricted case: if
the opacity is one and the color is white for all data values,
MIDA – due to shading – depicts the essential features of the
data set. Both, DVR and MIP would simply show a white
image.
5. Combining DVR, MIP, and MIDA
Instead of advocating the complete replacement of DVR and
MIP by our new method, we recognize that MIDA represents a good middle ground between these standard techniques. Some data sets can be visualized better with DVR,
for others MIP is more suitable. In practice, some characteristics of both are desirable in many cases [FNH∗ 06]. There-

S. Bruckner & M. E. Gröller / Instant Volume Visualization using MIDA

780

fore one valuable approach is to use MIDA as a basis for
a smooth transition between these different algorithms. We
present a method where the user can smoothly make a visualization more DVR-like or MIP-like. As demonstrated,
MIDA represents a hybrid between both methods and is
therefore an ideal starting point. We introduce a new parameter γ ∈ [−1, 1] defined as follows: For γ = −1, the rendering
result is unmodified DVR, if γ = 0 only MIDA is used, and
for γ = 1 the resulting image will be a MIP rendering. Values of γ ∈ (−1, 0) will result in a smooth transition between
DVR and MIDA, while values of γ ∈ (0, 1) cause a transition
from MIDA to MIP.
MIDA to DVR. As discussed in Section 4, MIDA introduces an additional modulation of the previously accumulated color and opacity along a viewing ray. If the modulation factor βi = 1 for all samples along the ray, the result
is DVR. For a smooth transition between MIDA and DVR,
we simply modify βi so that it approaches one for all samples when γ changes from MIDA to DVR in the following
manner:

βi =

1 − δi (1 + γ) if γ < 0
1 − δi
otherwise

(3)

Visually, this results in high intensity values smoothly fading out as γ is reduced. As the user moves γ towards DVR,
more and more occlusion occurs.
MIDA to MIP. We could use a similar approach for the
transition from MIDA to MIP, having βi approach one only
for samples where the maximum changes and letting it approach zero for all other cases. Essentially, regions where
accumulation is performed would be "thinned" to the point
where only one value along the ray is accumulated. However, shading would lead to problems in this case – the same
artifacts as in Figure 3 (b) would arise as γ gets closer to
one. Thus, we choose a different approach where the transition between MIDA and MIP is performed in image space.
If γ > 0, we linearly interpolate between the accumulated
MIDA color and opacity and the color and opacity of the
maximum value after the ray has been traversed using γ as
the interpolation weight. Interpolation is performed using
opacity-weighted colors. Since MIDA and MIP images share
the same basic characteristics, the major visual impacts of
this transition are the gradual reduction of shading and the
darkening of areas where much accumulation is performed.
6. Results and Discussion
The user can employ γ as a simple means for making a
visualization result more DVR-like or more MIP-like. Instead of discretely switching between rendering methods,
this allows a continuous manipulation of image characteristics on a clearly defined scale. The effects of modifying
γ are easy to interpret: moving from MIDA (γ = 0) towards

DVR (γ = −1) increases occlusion – higher data values shine
through less and less. Going from MIDA (γ = 0) to MIP
(γ = 1), accumulation and shading are reduced.
In our experiments, we compared DVR, MIDA, and MIP
applied to a number of different data sets. Figure 4 depicts
an MRI angiography data set rendered using DVR, MIDA,
and MIP. MIDA, like MIP, is able to depict the high-intensity
vascular structures without further transfer function adjustment. However, MIDA provides additional spatial context as
well as shape cues due to shading. In biomedical research,
structures under investigation are commonly highlighted using fluorescent markers. MIP is therefore frequently employed for 3D visualization. DVR transfer functions are particularly difficult to find for these data sets, as there is no
well-defined scale for the measured quantity. We experimented with several data sets from this field and MIDA helps
to improve spatial comprehension compared to MIP. An example is shown in Figure 5, where a mouse embryo imaged
using ultramicroscopy [DLS∗ 07] is depicted. Due to shading, MIDA depicts vascular structures more clearly. Furthermore, as MIDA can generate meaningful images without requiring much transfer function tuning, it is well-suited for
visualization tasks with strict time constraints. One example
is the screening of luggage based on tomographic modalities such as CT. While conventional X-Ray is still the default modality for examining items in security-critical environments, it is often difficult to recognize potential threats
due to its two-dimensional nature. Thus, in recent years CTbased screening has found increasing adoption in this area
and is currently employed at many institutions such as airports and government buildings [YNG∗ 07]. Figure 6 shows
a CT scan of a backpack filled with various items – MIDA
instantly allows the operator to inspect the contents and provides more information about the 3D structure of the individual items than MIP.
An existing DVR implementation can be extended to
MIDA in a straight-forward manner by modifying compositing as described in Section 4. In terms of performance, the
additional instructions required by MIDA typically can be
neglected. However, as the opacity along a ray is no longer
monotonically increasing, early ray termination is not possible. Also, in contrast to MIP, ray traversal can not be terminated when the current maximum is the highest intensity
value in the data set. Despite the lack of these optimizations,
current graphics hardware is still easily capable of rendering
typical data sets at interactive frame rates. The average frame
rates of our implementation measured on an NVidia GeForce
8800 GTX GPU for the standard UNC head data set (256 ×
256 × 224) with a viewport size of 512 × 512 and an object
sample distance of 1 were 9.9 (DVR), 9.1 (MIDA), and 18.2
(MIP). As MIDA performs only slightly worse than DVR,
we have not further investigated potential acceleration techniques.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

S. Bruckner & M. E. Gröller / Instant Volume Visualization using MIDA

(a) DVR

γ = −1

(b) MIDA

γ=0

γ = −0.5

781
(c) MIP

γ = 0.5

γ=1

Figure 4: MRI scan rendered using (a) DVR, (b) MIDA, and (c) MIP. Data set courtesy of the OsiriX Foundation
(http://www.osirix-viewer.com).

(a) DVR

γ = −1

(b) MIDA

γ = −0.5

γ=0

(c) MIP

γ = 0.5

γ=1

Figure 5: Ultramicroscopy of a mouse embryo rendered using (a) DVR, (b) MIDA, and (c) MIP. Data set courtesy of Dodt et
al. [DLS∗ 07].

7. Conclusions

References

In this paper, we introduced MIDA, a simple unifying extension of DVR and MIP which incorporates characteristics of
both techniques. In contrast to DVR, MIDA does not rely on
complex transfer functions but still features important spatial cues due to accumulation and shading. Furthermore, we
presented an approach for smoothly interpolating between
DVR, MIDA, and MIP. This allows users to enhance visualizations generated using DVR to include characteristics of
MIP and vice versa. MIDA can be incorporated into existing volume rendering systems in a straight-forward manner. In experiments, our new technique has shown to achieve
promising results for a wide range of different types of volume data.

[BGKG06] B RUCKNER S., G RIMM S., K ANITSAR A.,
G RÖLLER M. E.:
Illustrative context-preserving exploration of volume data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 12, 6 (2006), 1559–1569.

Acknowledgements
We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.
The work presented in this publication was carried out as part of the
exvisation project supported by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF)
grant no. P18322.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

[BPS97] BAJAJ C. L., PASCUCCI V., S CHIKORE D. R.: The
contour spectrum. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 1997
(1997), pp. 167–173.
[BRT95] B ERGMAN L. D., ROGOWITZ B. E., T REINISH L. A.:
A rule-based tool for assisting colormap selection. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 1995 (1995), pp. 118–125.
[CM08] C ORREA C., M A K.-L.: Size-based transfer functions:
A new volume exploration technique. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14, 6 (2008), 1380–1387.
[CMH∗ 01] C SÉBFALVI B., M ROZ L., H AUSER H., K ÖNIG A.,
G RÖLLER M. E.: Fast visualization of object contours by nonphotorealistic volume rendering. Computer Graphics Forum 20,
3 (2001), 452–460.
[DCH88] D REBIN R. A., C ARPENTER L., H ANRAHAN P.: Volume rendering. In Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH 1988 (1988),
pp. 65–74.
[DLS∗ 07] D ODT H.-U., L EISCHNER U., S CHIERLOH A.,
JÄHRLING N., M AUCH C. P., D EININGER K., D EUSSING

S. Bruckner & M. E. Gröller / Instant Volume Visualization using MIDA

782
(a) DVR

γ = −1

(b) MIDA

γ = −0.5

γ=0

(c) MIP

γ = 0.5

γ=1

Figure 6: CT scan of a backpack filled with various items rendered using (a) DVR, (b) MIDA, and (c) MIP. Data set courtesy of
Kevin Kreeger, Viatronix Inc. (http://www.volvis.org).

J. M., E DER M., Z IEGLGÄNSBERGER W., B ECKER K.: Ultramicroscopy: Three-dimensional visualization of neuronal networks in the whole mouse brain. Nature Methods 4 (2007), 331–
336.
[FNH∗ 06] F ISHMAN E. K., N EY D. R., H EATH D. G., C ORL
F. M., H ORTON K. M., J OHNSON P. T.: Volume rendering
versus maximum intensity projection in CT angiography: What
works best, when, and why. Radiographics 26, 3 (2006), 905–
922.
[HHKP96] H E T., H ONG L., K AUFMAN A., P FISTER H.: Generation of transfer functions with stochastic search techniques. In
Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 1996 (1996), pp. 227–234.
[HMBG01] H AUSER H., M ROZ L., B ISCHI G.-I., G RÖLLER
M. E.: Two-level volume rendering. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 7, 3 (2001), 242–252.

[ME04] M ORA B., E BERT D. S.: Instant volumetric understanding with order-independent volume rendering. Computer Graphics Forum 23, 9 (2004), 489–497.
[MKG00] M ROZ L., K ÖNIG A., G RÖLLER M. E.: Maximum
intensity projection at warp speed. Computers & Graphics 24, 3
(2000), 343–352.
[MMG07] M ALIK M. M., M ÖLLER T., G RÖLLER M. E.: Feature peeling. In Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2007 (2007),
pp. 273–280.
[PLB∗ 01] P FISTER H., L ORENSEN B., BAJAJ C., K INDLMANN
G., S CHROEDER W., AVILA L. S., R AGHU K. M., M ACHI RAJU R., L EE J.: The transfer function bake-off. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications 21, 3 (2001), 16–22.
[RE01] R HEINGANS P., E BERT D. S.: Volume illustration: Nonphotorealistic rendering of volume models. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 7, 3 (2001), 253–264.

[HMS95] H EIDRICH W., M C C OOL M., S TEVENS J.: Interactive
maximum projection volume rendering. In Proceedings of IEEE
Visualization 1995 (1995), pp. 11–18.

[RSK06] R EZK -S ALAMA C., K OLB A.: Opacity peeling for direct volume rendering. Computer Graphics Forum 25, 3 (2006),
597–606.

[KD98] K INDLMANN G., D URKIN J. W.: Semi-automatic generation of transfer functions for direct volume rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Volume Visualization 1998
(1998), pp. 79–86.

[SCC∗ 04] S TRAKA M., C ERVENANSKY M., C RUZ A. L.,
K ÖCHL A., Š RÁMEK M., G RÖLLER M. E., F LEISCHMANN
D.: The VesselGlyph: Focus & context visualization in CTangiography. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 2004 (2004),
pp. 385–392.

[KKH02] K NISS J., K INDLMANN G., H ANSEN C.: Multidimensional transfer functions for interactive volume rendering.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 8,
3 (2002), 270–285.
[Lev88] L EVOY M.: Display of surfaces from volume data. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications 8, 3 (1988), 29–37.
[MAB∗ 97]

M ARKS J., A NDALMAN B., B EARDSLEY P. A.,
F REEMAN W., G IBSON S., H ODGINS J., K ANG T., M IRTICH
B., P FISTER H., RUML W., RYALL K., S EIMS J., S HIEBER
S.: Design galleries: a general approach to setting parameters
for computer graphics and animation. In Proceedings of ACM
SIGGRAPH 1997 (1997), pp. 389–400.

[SSN∗ 98] S ATO Y., S HIRAGA N., N AKAJIMA S., TAMURA S.,
K IKINIS R.: Local maximum intensity projection (LMIP): A
new rendering method for vascular visualization. Journal of
Computer Assisted Tomography 22, 6 (1998), 912–917.
[TLM05] T ZENG F.-Y., L UM E. B., M A K.-L.: An intelligent
system approach to higher-dimensional classification of volume
data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 11, 3 (2005), 273–284.
[VKG05] V IOLA I., K ANITSAR A., G RÖLLER M. E.:
Importance-driven feature enhancement in volume visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 11, 4 (2005), 408–418.

[Max95] M AX N.: Optical models for direct volume rendering.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 1, 2
(1995), 99–108.

[WMAK89] WALLIS J. W., M ILLER T. R., A.L ERNER C.,
K LEERUP E. C.: Three-dimensional display in nuclear medicine.
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 8, 4 (1989), 297–303.

[MDM07] M ARCHESIN S., D ISCHLER J.-M., M ONGENET C.:
Feature enhancement using locally adaptive volume rendering. In
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Volume Graphics
2007 (2007), pp. 41–48.

[YNG∗ 07] Y ING Z., N AIDU R., G UILBERT K., S CHAFER D.,
C RAWFORD C. R.: Dual energy volumetric x-ray tomographic
sensor for luggage screening. In Proceedings of the IEEE Sensors
Applications Symposium 2007 (2007), pp. 1–6.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

