Artist As Researcher, Understanding The Tools
Theresa Gartland-Jones
Kingston University
theresa@atgj.org
Abstract
The paper begins with a response to the nature of
contemporary artists relationships to how computers
have permeated the fine art domain and how they affect
the creative process. How should artists utilize this tool in
order to fully understand and explore its potential? Using
the example of a recent project I have undertaken called
'nGen', I shall discuss some aspects of how the computer
tool has influenced the process and creative ambitions.
The conclusion will briefly summarise my future research
and what is a relatively new and potentially rich avenue
for artists.

Creative research
Creativity in the visual arts is at a fascinating stage of
development, because as an artist I have access to
technology and innovative methods of modeling creative
processes. I regard computers as both tools that enable the
use of sophisticated software metaphors for visual
language exploration, and as tools that offer the potential
for artists to enter into a world of research in which they
can influence the metaphors. Computational processes
and technology have generated new forms of visual
aesthetic and interaction, within both a modernist and
deconstruction art practice as discussed by Stephen
Wilson who asks the question:
Can the Arts Offer Alternatives in Setting Research
Agendas, Interpreting Results, and Communicating
Findings? [1]
The answer is yes, and Wilson highlights the
independent nature of the artist as researcher, valuable
commentator and originator of ideas. In order for the
artist to reach this stage, they have to be open to science,
technology and the arts in order to be transformational in
their creative practice. It seems a natural progression for
artists such as Paul Brown or Manfred Mohr to explore
the multiple permeations possible with the systemization
achievable through computer methodology. However,
much computer art is not defined by the artist, it is
mediated through the scientist or the artist has a playful,
passive collaborative, relationship with technology. It is
important that if artists are going to engage with new

technology and the impact on their aesthetic, or formal
codifying of their creative process, then it is necessary to
take on the work that is required to make the relationship
a symbiotic one.

nGen: Collaborative (music and fine art)
Installation
My art practice and interest in the science of
autonomous systems and evolving dynamic forms has
become a visual theme in my work and the focus of my
research. I have a personal creative, modernist history, of
exploring the human form and this ontology now
incorporates visual ideas for representing current research
into modes of information processing in the human brain,
how these are modeled, and how they are applied in a
creative context. Although I do not fully understand these
mechanisms, it is the isotropic nature of this connectivity
that holds a fascination for me, both in terms of how to
represent, visually, the potential of these ideas whilst also
considering them in relation to human memory,
communication and creativity. Trying to understand the
key to creativity and information processing feeds into
my work through both the philosophy and scientific
research into processes utilized to model them.
The project nGen, explored visually how to represent a
continuum of matter and time conveyed through timebased interactive processes. Traditional drawings were
made and then manipulated and computer animated using
morphing software, Photoshop and Flash. These were
brought into Director and presented as a projector (see
fig.1). The work had no set linear timeline, because it is
the potential for interaction and non-linear narrative that
initially engaged me in using the computer as a tool in my
art practice. The interaction is designed as a multi-user
environment, creating a two-way dependency on the
relationship between the audience and the visual and
musical narratives that are generated.
The real-time correspondence between the audience,
visuals and music, was dependent on the nature of the
audience interaction. The visuals and music were mapped
to sixteen virtual zones that were resolved by 8 sensors
that detected the movement of the audience. Each zone
contained a family of images and musical phrases, so that

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

the virtual zones equated to a synchronized transition
from disorder to harmony. Essentially, I was controlling
the individual and group narrative, by being aware of how
the elements came together and at what point. However,
for the audience, the synchronicity and dynamic feel of a
work evolving over time and their influence on it were
important elements that I hoped they would experience.

therefore explores the creative interplay between humans
and machines, with the final realized composition seen as
collaboration between Andrew, the computer program,
the visual narrative and the way the audience react within
the virtual space.
As part of the installation, we included live music
performance. The role of the musicians was twofold.
They improvised in response to the audience who
stimulated music generated through their interaction with
the sensors, and, they also read computer-generated
phrases that were scored by Andrew. The performance
element had an unforeseen, but welcome effect on the
nature of the audience interactivity, because they became
much more confident in their exploration of the work and
perceiving the subtleties within.

Current and Future Work
For me, current and future work has moved on to
researching intelligent systems that, in the words of Ernst
Edmonds:
Figure 1. This is a still from nGen showing the performers
and projected animation. Audio and visuals can be viewed
at: www.atgj.org.

The interactivity was programmed using Lingo in
Macromedia Director, a time-based software. Director has
the versatility of Xtras that allow for hardware device
interfaces. We used the I-Cube system for translating the
sensor output into midi data, which is then read into
director via a midi Xtra. For audio, Director is limited in
its facility to have multiple synchronized channels
operating, so software had to be written in order to handle
the music generation.
The project collaboration was with composer Andrew
Gartland-Jones who employs processes he terms as
‘Organic Music’. He uses computer technology to ‘grow’
musical phrases through the use of what computer
scientists call Genetic Algorithms. The phrases are then
played on real instruments and recorded. The music

extend the method to unify interactive work and, with the
help of meta-rules, interactive work that performs
differently over time according to experience. As the
artwork learns, it changes the way that it develops rather
than simply the way that it employs stimulus-response
rules. [2]

References
[1] S. Wilson, Information Arts, The MIT Press, Massachu-setts,
2002, pp. 35.
[2] E.A. Edmonds, “ Logics For Constructing Generative Art
Systems”, Digital Creativity, 14 (1), 2003, pp. 23-28.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

