Semantically Modified Diffusion Limited Aggregation for
Visualizing Large-Scale Networks
Chaomei Chen and Natasha Lobo
College of Information Science and Technology, Drexel University
3141 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia PA 19104-2875
chaomei.chen@cis.drexel.edu, nrl23@drexel.edu
Abstract
Diffusion-Limited Aggregation (DLA) is a model of
fractal growth. Computer models can simulate the fast
aggregation of millions of particles. In this paper, we
propose a modified version of DLA, called semantically
modified DLA (SM-DLA), for visualizing large-scale
networks. SM-DLA introduces similarity measures between
particles so that instead of attaching to the nearest particle
in the aggregation, a new particle is stochastically directed
to attach to particles that are similar to it. The results of
our initial experiment with a co-citation network using SMDLA are encouraging, suggesting that the algorithm has
the potential as an alternative paradigm for visualizing
large-scale networks. Further studies in this direction are
recommended.

1. Introduction
Network visualization is a major line of research in
information visualization. Just as the Hubble Space
Telescope helps astrophysicists to study galaxies in deep
space, network visualization techniques enable analysts
explore the topology of a network. The most traditional
way of visualizing a network is to use node-and-link
graphical representations. Graph drawing is an established
field that is concerned with how to draw a network
algorithmically in compliance with a set of aesthetic criteria
[3]. In the field of graph drawing, much of the attention has
been given to the efficiency of algorithms and the clarity of
end results.
One of the most challenging issues in graph drawing is
the scalability of an algorithm in terms of how long it will
take for the system to reach equilibrium, to what extent it
can minimize the number of links crossing each other, and
whether an algorithm can maintain its performance
benchmark as the size and/or the density of a network
increases. There is still a huge gap, conceptually as well as
algorithmically, between structural and dynamic patterns

that one would like to access at various levels of
granularity.
Diffusion-Limited Aggregation (DLA) is a model of
fractal growth. There appears to be some intriguing
resemblance between the structure of DLA and the
structure of associative network generated in our earlier
studies. In this article, we propose a semantically modified
DLA (SM-DLA) as a potential alternative method for
visualizing large-scale networks. The work presented here
is part of our ongoing research in searching for scalable
algorithms that can handle large-scale networks. We intend
to follow up the present study with more in-depth and more
detailed validations and refinements.

2. Graph Drawing Techniques
The most widely known graph drawing techniques
include force-directed placement algorithms [14] and
spring-embedder algorithms [13, 17]. The primary goal of
these types of techniques is to optimize the arrangement of
nodes of a network algorithmically, such that in the
ultimate geometric model, strongly connected nodes appear
close to each other, and weakly connected nodes appear far
apart. This optimization is known as the layout process,
which is a key topic in the graph drawing community. The
strength of the connection between a pair of nodes is
typically measured by conceptual similarity, computational
relatedness, or conditional probabilities. Examples in this
category include Galaxies and SPIRE developed at Pacific
Northwest National Laboratories [30]. Multidimensional
scaling (MDS) is a closely related topic, significant
improvements have been made by latest advances in
information visualization [18].
Several public-domain software packages, such as Pajek
[1], provide implementations of force-directed graph
drawing and spring-embedder algorithms. The strengths of
force-directed algorithms include the aesthetic appearance
of layout and intuitive good fits between visualization
models and underlying network data. The scalability issue
is one of the serious drawbacks of these algorithms. Most of

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

these algorithms do not scale well as the size and density of
a network increases.
To reduce the complexity of a network visualization
task, it is common to prune the original network by link
reduction algorithms, or to divide a large network into its
smaller components. There are several ways to reduce the
number of links in a network: using minimum spanning
trees to proximate the original network (MSTs) [19, 21],
removing links if their weights are below a threshold [31],
or applying network scaling algorithms such as Pathfinder
network scaling [22]. Using MSTs can considerably reduce
the complexity of network visualization, especially for
large-scale networks. Studies using Pathfinder network
scaling in the visualization of citation networks include [5,
6, 8-11].
In general, there is a limit for what link reduction can
accomplish in resolving the scalability issue. In the divideand-conquer category, clustering and classification
algorithms are the major approaches. Although clustering
algorithms can often identify component sub-graphs in a
network, there is little that clustering algorithms can do if
the network contains giant components and the giant
components themselves must be divided. Traditional graphtheoretical algorithms based on connectivity also belong to
this category.
Few studies have specifically addressed the challenge of
large-scale network visualization. NicheWorks [28] is a
notable exception. NicheWorks was designed to visualize
networks of tens or hundreds of thousand of nodes. It was
tested for analyzing Web sites and detecting international
telephone fraud. The strategy taken by NicheWorks is to
relax optimization criteria often applied to layout
algorithms for smaller networks with the number of nodes
ranging from 100 to 1,000.

3. Scientific Networks
Scientific networks are one of the most representative
types of complex networks, including scientific
collaboration networks, citation networks, research fronts,
and knowledge diffusion networks. These networks have
been the central subject of several fields of study, notably
complex network theory in theoretical physics, scholarly
communication and knowledge domain visualization in
information science and information visualization.
Scientific networks are large, constantly changing, and
practically significant: the citation databases compiled by
the Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) alone receive 1
million new publications and 20 million new citations each
year; scientific networks evolve in terms of emerging hubs
and authorities, competing paradigms, diffusion, and phase
transition; and scientific networks have profound
connections to a broad spectrum of scientific, technological,
social, and economic activities.

Studies of citation networks can be divided into three
categories: 1) pioneering studies of citation networks before
the 1980s, 2) emergent knowledge domain visualization
studies since the late 1990s, and 3) statistical mechanics
studies over the last two years. Although there appear to be
an increasing number of studies integrating the first two
categories, few studies have addressed fundamental issues
concerning a potential cross-fertilization between the last
two categories.
Derek Price [20] found that the more recent papers tend
to be cited about six times more often than earlier papers.
The citation rate of a paper then declines. He suggested that
scientific literature contains two distinct parts: a classic part
and a transient part, and that the two parts have different
half-lives. The make-up of these two parts varies from field
to field; mathematics, for example, is strongly
predominated by the classic part, whereas the transient
literature rules in physics. Furthermore, he introduced the
notion of research fronts – the collection of highly cited
papers that represent the frontiers of science at a particular
point of time. Based on an examination of citation patterns
of scientific papers, he conjectured that it is possible to
identify objectively defined subjects in citation networks.
He particularly emphasized the significance of
understanding the nature of such moving frontiers in the
development of a quantitative method for delineating the
topography of current scientific literature.
In the 1970s, Small and Griffith examined issues
concerned with identifying specialties by mapping the
structure of scientific literatures, especially through
analyses of co-citation networks [24]. Small subsequently
found rapid changes of focus in collagen research [23].
Documents clustered by their co-citation links can represent
leading specialties. The abrupt disappearance and
emergence of such document clusters indicate rapid shifts
in research focus. By tracing key events through a citation
network, Hummon and Doreian [16] successfully reconstructed the most significant citation chain in the
development of DNA theory. Their study has great impact
on subsequent studies of citation networks in the graph
drawing community [2, 4].
The number of studies in knowledge domain
visualization is increasing [8-10, 12, 26, 27]. The basic
assumption is that the intellectual structure of a scientific
community or a subject domain is identifiable through the
dynamics of corresponding citation networks. By modeling
and visualizing how citation structures change over time,
one can explore and better understand how a knowledge
domain evolves.

4. Diffusion-Limited Aggregation (DLA)
DLA is a fractal generation model [15, 25]. Diffusion
refers to the random motion of a particle in the process of
approaching to a cluster of aggregated particles. Individual
particles are released one by one to start their diffusion

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

processes. A particle may miss the aggregated cluster and
disappear in the void. It may also walk into the cluster. If
this happens, the walking particle will be attached to the
cluster and the next particle will be launched to repeat a
new diffusion process.
Such clusters of particles are called aggregates. Some
variations of DLA introduce forces between particles as if
they may carry electrical charge. Usually such aggregates
are well ordered and similar to the structure of crystals.
DLA has a number of practical implications, for instance, in
a catalytic process.
According to [29], the shape of a DLA aggregation is in
a way controlled by the possibility of particles to reach it.
As long there are particles moving around, an aggregate is
likely to grow. A diffusing particle is more likely to attach
to the outskirt of the aggregation than penetrate deeply to
the areas near to the center of the aggregation.
An interesting example of DLA is developed by ChiHang Lam1. The development of our modified DLA closely
references to this particular implementation.

5. DLA for Network Visualization
We are first intrigued by the striking resemblance
between the structure of an author co-citation network we
generated earlier using Pathfinder network scaling in [7]
and the structure of a DLA aggregate.

Figure 1. The structure of an author co-citation
network [7]. © 1999 IEEE.

Figure 2. A DLA aggregate of more than 10,000
particles.
Figure 1 shows the Pathfinder representation of the
author co-citation network. The most predominant
researchers are located in the center of this network, which
is a much simplified version of the original network.
Figure 2 is a standard DLA aggregation of more than
10,000 particles. Although we arrived at the two structures
from entirely different generating mechanism, the striking
resemblance evidently stands out. Both have a sense of a
center and a number of branches stretch outwards from the
center. An ambitious question is: Is it possible to devise a
new type of layout algorithms based on DLA? If we can
successfully introduce semantic proximities into the process
of DLA, then the aggregation process should still converge
and its several appealing features should be inherited by the
new approach.
The essence of a DLA algorithm can be summed up by
the following pseudo code:
launch a new particle p0;
p0 walks randomly until
either
p0 is close enough to particle p in
the aggregate:
attach p0 to p;
or
p0 is drifted helplessly far away from
the aggregation:
re-launch p0;
repeat the procedure;

Algorithm 1. A typical DLA algorithm.
1

http://apricot.polyu.edu.hk/~lam/dla/dla.html

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

It is clear from the above pseudo code that the
attachment is made deterministically in that it is purely
based on the distance between the two particles in question.
The key idea of our SM-DLA is to introduce some
randomness in the attachment so that statistically the new
attachment mechanism should be in favor of placing similar
particles near to each other.
We refer the modified DLA algorithm as SM-DLA,
standing for semantically modified DLA. The new
algorithm should meet the following criteria:
1. It should be able to generate an aggregation of a very
large network.
2. The probability that two similar particles are placed
near to each other should be high.
We undertake two steps in our modification of DLA.
First, we impose additional constraint for the random
walking particle p0 to attach to the nearest particle p in the
aggregate by introducing randomly generated numbers to
simulate the similarity between p0 and p. The deterministic
attachment in the original DLA is now replaced by a
probability that is proportional to the semantic similarity.
The modified algorithm must still converge and generate an
aggregate that is somewhat comparable to the pure DLA.
This is a necessary condition for a successful SM-DLA.
Second, we make the connection between the randomness
in the attachment process and the strength of the similarity
between a pair of particles. More detailed descriptions of
SM-DLA are given in the following sections.

DLA is equivalent to imposing a threshold of 0, or more
precisely any number less than 0. A higher threshold is
likely to make the random walking particle keep on walking
longer until it hits the right spot. In our experiment, this
does not significantly delay the aggregation, which is a
good sign for its potential scalability. Figure 3 shows an
aggregate produced by the first-step modification of DLA.
The attachment threshold is 0.5. This aggregate contains
more than 10,000 particles. If it were the size of a network,
it would be regarded very large. The color of a particle
indicates the time elapsed since the particle arrived in the
aggregate. The earlier arrivals are in red, whereas the later
ones are in blue. This example shows that the attachments
have been made uniformly in all directions.

5.1. Modified DLA – Step One
The first step in modifying the DLA algorithm is
outlined in the following pseudo code. The only difference
between this version and the original DLA is in the way
that an attachment occurs, which is underlined in the
pseudo code.
launch a new particle p0;
p0 walks randomly until
either
p0 is close enough to particle p in the
aggregate:
generate a random number r;
if ( r > thresholdattach )
attach p0 to p;
or
p0 is drifted helplessly far away from
the aggregation.
re-launch p0;
repeat the procedure;

Algorithm 2. Introducing randomness into the
attachment mechanism.
The introduction of the random number in effect raises
the threshold for an attachment to take place. The original

Figure 3. Stochastically modified DLA, containing
more than 10,000 particles. The similarity between
particles is randomly generated.

5.2. Modified DLA – Step Two
The second step in modifying the DLA algorithm
establishes the connection between the attachment
probability and the similarity between the random walking
particle p0 and a nearby particle p in the aggregate. The key
to the second step is to retrieve the attachment probability
directly from the underlying network data.
To ensure that the most similar particles have the best
chance to be gathered together, the adjacency list of the
network is first sorted in descending order. New particles
are launched from the top of the sorted list.
sort network edges in descending order of
similarity;

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

launch a new particle p0 from the beginning
of the sorted list;
p0 walks randomly until
either
p0 is close enough to particle p in
the aggregate:
if ( sim(p0, p) > thresholdsim )
attach p0 to p;
remove p0 from the sorted list;
if ( sim(p0, p) <= thresholdsim )
generate a random number r
if ( r > thresholdattach )
attach p0 to p;
remove p0 from the sorted list;
or
p0 is drifted helplessly far away from
the aggregation.
re-launch p0;
repeat the procedure;

Algorithm 3. Semantically modified DLA (SMDLA).
Figure 4 and Figure 5 show the result of SM-DLA on a
real co-citation network of 1,250 articles on botolium toxin
research. Each particle represents one article. The similarity
between two particles pi and pj is defined based on the cocitation strength between articles ai and ai as follows:
sim(pi, pj) = cc(ai, aj) / sqrt ( c(ai)*c(aj );
where cc(a, b) is the co-citation frequency function of
articles a and b, and c( a ) is the citation function of article
a.
The inspection of the result of SM-DLA is encouraging,
considering the simple steps in the modification. The shape
of the SM-DLA aggregate is essentially similar to but
distinct from a typical DLA. The color distribution is an
indicator of some features of the SM-DLA aggregate. For
example, the color distribution of the aggregate is
essentially smooth and continuous. Discontinuous colors
indicate the placement of nodes far apart in the sorted pairwise similarity list. More specifically, a blue particle next to
an area of red ones would indicate, probabilistically, that
the blue one is likely to a strong similarity to one of the red
particles. The conventional DLA does not overlap particles
in the aggregate because the nearest particle is all the
information the incoming particle needs. In SM-DLA,
however, the nearest particle may not be the most similar
one. SM-DLA intentionally reduces the probability of the
incoming particle landing on such particles. Instead,
overlapping particles are allowed so as to give the semantic
distance a higher priority than the geometric distance. A
possible improvement, not implemented in this version, is
to loosen up the aggregate from time to time to allow
overlapping particles “fall through the gaps” so that the end
result should be more similar to the natural DLA.

Figure 4. SM-DLA of 1250 articles in botolium
toxin research. The similarity between particles is
derived from the co-citation strength between
corresponding articles. Rows: Thresholdattach: 9, 8;
Columns: Thresholdsim: 7, 8, and 9.

Figure 5. Figure 4a in its original size.

6. Conclusion
In conclusion, we have proposed a semantically
modified DLA as a potential alternative for visualizing
large networks. In addition to the geometric distance used
in the conventional DLA, we have introduced the semantic
distance, which takes a higher priority in the aggregation
process. We have also introduced the randomness in the
attachment mechanism in order to maintain the fundamental
aggregation mechanism of the conventional DLA. The
initial results appear to suggest that this is a potentially
fruitful route to pursue. More thorough experimentations,
empirical studies as well as theoretical studies are needed to
establish and consolidate the usefulness of a method.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

References
[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]
[14]

[15]
[16]

V. Batagelj and A. Mrvar, "Pajek - Program for large
network analysis," Connections, vol. 21, pp. 47-57, 1998.
V. Batagelj and A. Mrvar, "Layouts for GD01 graphdrawing competition," 2001.
G. D. Battista, P. Eades, R. Tamassia, and I. G. Tollis,
Graph Drawing: Algorithms for the Visualization of
Graphs: Prentice Hall, 1999.
U. Brandes and T. Willhalm, "Visualization of
bibliographic networks with a reshaped landscape
metaphor," presented at Proc. 4th Joint Eurographics - IEEE
TVCG Symp. Visualization (VisSym '02), 2002.
C. Chen, "Tracking latent domain structures: An integration
of Pathfinder and Latent Semantic Analysis," AI & Society,
vol. 11, pp. 48-62, 1997.
C. Chen, Mapping Scientific Frontiers: The Quest for
Knowledge Visualization. London: Springer-Verlag, 2002.
C. Chen and L. Carr, "Visualizing the evolution of a subject
domain: A case study," presented at IEEE Visualization
1999, San Francisco, CA, 1999.
C. Chen, T. Cribbin, R. Macredie, and S. Morar,
"Visualizing and tracking the growth of competing
paradigms: Two case studies," Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, vol. 53,
pp. 678-689, 2002.
C. Chen and J. Kuljis, "The rising landscape: A visual
exploration of superstring revolutions in physics," Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, vol. 54, pp. 435-446, 2003.
C. Chen, J. Kuljis, and R. J. Paul, "Visualizing latent
domain knowledge," IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics, vol. 31, pp. 518 - 529, 2001.
C. Chen and R. J. Paul, "Visualizing a knowledge domain's
intellectual structure," Computer, vol. 34, pp. 65-71, 2001.
G. S. Davidson, B. HENDRICKSON, D. K.JOHNSON, C.
E. MEYERS, and B. N. WYLIE, "Knowledge mining with
VxInsight: Discovery through interaction," Journal of
Intelligent Information Systems, vol. 11, pp. 259-285, 1998.
P. Eades, "A heuristic for graph drawing," Congressus
Numerantium, vol. 42, pp. 149-160, 1984.
T. M. J. Fruchterman and E. M. Reingold, "Graph drawing
by force-directed placement," Software- Practice and
Experience, vol. 21, pp. 1129-1164, 1991.
T. C. Halsey, "Diffusion-limited aggregation: A model for
pattern formation," Physics Today, vol. 53, pp. 36, 2001.
N. P. Hummon and P. Doreian, "Connectivity in a citation
network: The development of DNA theory," Social
Networks, vol. 11, pp. 39–63, 1989.

[17] T. Kamada and S. Kawai, "An algorithm for drawing
general undirected graphs," Information Processing Letters,
vol. 31, pp. 7-15, 1989.
[18] A. Morrison, G. Ross, and M. Chalmers, "A hybrid layout
algorithm for sub-quadratic multidimensional scaling,"
presented at IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, Boston, Massachusetts, 2002.
[19] T. Munzner, "H3: Laying out large directed graphs in 3D
hyperbolic space," presented at the 1997 IEEE Symposium
on Information Visualization, Phoenix, AZ, 1997.
[20] D. D. Price, "Networks of scientific papers," Science, vol.
149, pp. 510-515, 1965.
[21] G. G. Robertson, J. D. Mackinlay, and S. K. Card, "Cone
trees: Animated 3D visualizations of hierarchical
information," presented at CHI '91, New Orleans, LA, 1991.
[22] R. W. Schvaneveldt, "Pathfinder Associative Networks:
Studies in Knowledge Organization," in Ablex Series in
Computational Sciences, D. Partridge, Ed. Norwood, New
Jersey: Ablex Publishing Corporations, 1990.
[23] H. G. Small, "A co-citation model of a scientific specialty:
A longitudinal study of collagen research," Scoial Studies of
Science, vol. 7, pp. 139-166, 1977.
[24] H. G. Small and B. C. Griffith, "The structure of scientific
literatures I: Identifying and graphing specialties," Science
Studies, vol. 4, pp. 17-40, 1974.
[25] T. Viczek, Fractal Growth Phenomena. Singapore: World
Scientific Publishing Co., 1989.
[26] H. D. White and K. W. McCain, "Visualization of
literatures," Annual Review of Information Science and
Technology, vol. 32, pp. 99-168, 1997.
[27] H. D. White and K. W. McCain, "Visualizing a discipline:
An author co-citation analysis of information science, 19721995," Journal of the American Society for Information
Science, vol. 49, pp. 327-356, 1998.
[28] G. J. Wills, "NicheWorks: Interactive visualization of very
large graphs," Journal of Computational and Graphical
Statistics, vol. 8, pp. 190-212, 1999.
[29] F.-J. Wirtz, "Diffusion-limited aggregation and its
simulation," vol. 2003: Franz-Josef Wirtz, 2003.
[30] J. A. Wise, J. J. Thomas, K. Pennock, D. Lantrip, M.
Pottier, A. Schur, and V. Crow, "Visualizing the non-visual:
Spatial analysis and interaction with information from text
documents," presented at IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization '95, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 1995.
[31] M. Zizi and M. Beaudouin-Lafon, "Accessing
hyperdocuments through interactive dynamic maps,"
presented at ECHT '94, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1994.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

