Determining Candidate Binding Site Locations Using Conserved Features

Gareth Hannaford*† and Carsten Maple†
Departments of Biology(*) and Computing and Information Systems(†),
University of Luton, Luton, Bedfordshire, LU1 3JU, UK.
gareth.hannaford@luton.ac.uk , carsten.maple@luton.ac.uk
Abstract
In this paper we present a method for representing
important conserved features of a protein directly
involved in binding. The conserved features are observed
by noticing common atoms in proteins that bind a ligand.
A method for constructing a fingerprint based upon the
geometric configuration of the atoms in the binding
region of the protein is presented. The fingerprint can be
applied to other protein structural PDB (Protein Data
Bank) files to facilitate identification of the specific
binding site the fingerprint represents.
The algorithm presented complements software
developed at the University of Luton, TMSite, and can be
used with the ClustalW alignment tool. By matching one
amino acid of the fingerprint onto a new protein, then
using it as an anchor and searching for the other
corresponding amino acids around it gives a simple
method to find possible binding sites. The more points of
the fingerprint matched the less likely the match is to be
coincidental. Thresholds, both geometrical and
biochemical, can be altered to adjust sensitivity of the
search.
This method will be implemented in TMBoundary, a
current software project, as an alternative or
complementary search method for binding sites in
proteins of known structure.

1. Introduction
The number of known protein structures is now in
excess of 18,000 (see [2]) the vast majority of which are
soluble proteins. Some of these proteins of known
structure bind compounds (also known as analogues or
ligands) but data on where they bind is far from
complete. It is also common for such proteins to have

more than one functional binding site. Traditional ‘wet
lab’ methods for determining binding sites from protein
complexes are successful but often slow and laborious.
Computational methods may find binding sites in less
time in addition to determining sites that would otherwise
be impossible or very difficult to find.
The focus of study in the authors’ research group is
on the prediction of structure/function relationships of
membrane proteins from known interactions of soluble
proteins. This research includes developing methods for
determining the location of binding sites in proteins of
known structure, many protein structures are already
being solved prior to any knowledge of function [3].
Knowledge of the existence of a binding site in a protein
can lead to knowledge of function, knowledge of multiple
sites can be important for drug uptake information.
The standard protein structure file format is known
as a PDB file. This is a standardised file created by the
Brookhaven Protein Database [2], that contains 3D
atomic co-ordinates (x, y, z) of the atoms that comprise
the protein, connection data between the atoms and
source information (how the data was determined –
namely experimentally or computationally). The 3D
atomic co-ordinates that are given represent the centres of
the atoms. There exist a number of programs available to
view and manipulate the data contained within these PDB
files. Some of the principal protein viewers are RasMol
[11], a simple PDB file viewer with a number of display
options, useful when studying PDBs and the relevance of
specific amino acids, Swiss PDB viewer [4], Weblab
Viewer [10] a PDB file viewer allowing the editing of
features.

1.1 Related Software
TMSite is a software tool that was originally
developed to solve a specific problem, see [5] for details,
but has now been modified to be of more general use.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

TMSite processes PDBs of soluble proteins with a
common binding characteristic and identifies conserved
binding site features within a selectable range, the default
set at 5Å (Angstroms), of the bound analogue. The
default distance is chosen since at this distance direct
binding interactions can occur. The output form TMSite
is in the form of a truncated PDB file. Conserved
features are then identified between the functionally
homologous structures that have been loaded. The
program then peruses the sequence of a membrane
protein (Swiss-Prot file) of undetermined structure for
amino acids compatible with those predicted to be
involved in binding function.
TMBoundary [6] allows identification and
representation of indentations and holes in protein
structures and suggest their feasibility as potential
binding sites. Features from the POCKET algorithm [7]
will be applied to TMBoundary to identify cavities, also
taken into account will be the presence of chemical
features identified as conserved for binding by TMSite.
Once a potential binding site in the protein has been
identified, a boundary representation technique is used to
represent it and an analogue that binds to the protein.
The representation procedures that are then carried out on
a pocket rely upon modifications to the Boundary Cubes
algorithm [9], which can be used to give a piecewise
planar representation of a three-dimensional object. As
well as 3D shape, biochemical properties such as
electrostatic charges on the molecules will also be taken
into account along with accessibility of a proposed pocket
if it is to be considered a valid binding site. The
methodology presented herein is to be implemented as an
augmentation to TMBoundary as a binding site searching
option.
‘Pocket’ [7], identifies possible binding sites by
searching for cavities in protein structure files. The
method involves attempting to place sphere of known
radius, at a point in the cavity without touching the
protein. If such a point can be found it is said to be
contained in a pocket. The POCKET program is limited
in that it only finds cavities that are of sufficient volume
to bind a ligand but ignores issues such as accessibility,
actual fit, and charge, which must all be considered for an
accurate consideration of binding.
Other relevant programs include ClustalW [12], a
web-based program that uses the progressive alignment
method to compare multiple amino acid sequences and
look for direct matches (conserved features) and
similarities in amino acid sequence. The amino acid
sequences are obtained from the SWISS PROT sequence
database [1] and stored as text files. The data from this
program can be used as a check against the output of
TMSite and the inputs for TMBoundary.

2. Creating Fingerprints

The binding site fingerprint is a two or three
dimensional structure made up of two or more points that
represent the relative positions of conserved amino acids
with the same spatial relationships within the binding site
of a protein where the structural information includes a
bound analogue, which demonstrates a binding site (see
Fig.1 and 2).

Bound compound molecule
Protein amino acid
Conserved amino acid forming fingerprint

Fig.1, 2D representation of protein/compound
complex with a 3 amino acid fingerprint.

Fig.2, 3D representation of of protein/ compound
complex with a 3 amino acid fingerprint. Colour key
as with Fig.1.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

A minimum of two but preferably three or more
conserved amino acids are needed to construct a
fingerprint. A single conserved feature would have no
point of reference to another amino acid and although it
would produce matches when applied to other proteins
these matches would not prove useful, as they would be
abundant.
Conserved amino acids are those found to be
identical in type, (of which there are 20) and position in
proteins that bind the same compound.
We define the binding zone of a protein to be the
region which is within a maximum distance of 5
Angstroms from the outermost atom of the bound
molecule. The choice of 5 Angstroms is based on the
largest distance at which binding interactions could take
place.
Using TMSite and several PDBs of the bound
complex (protein and bound compound) it is possible to
automatically extract the binding zones of the protein and
then the conserved amino acids over the set of proteins.
Alternatively, ClustalW could be used for searching for
conserved features however this has the hindrance that it
would determine conserved features for the entire protein
not restricted to the binding site.

Start point of search

2.1 Algorithm for Fingerprint Construction

Possible match

Input:

Fig.3. 2D representation of search step 2.
Dashed rings represent the zone searched
without any additional thresholds.

Three proteins that bind the same ligand. The
information is given in three PDB files each of
which contain information regarding the position
of the ligand and the appropriate protein.
Output:
A fingerprint that is composed of a number of
coordinates of conserved atoms
1.

2.

3.
4.

For i := 1 to 3 do
x Determine all atoms in proteini that lie within 5
Angstroms of an atom in the ligand
x Store the atom types and their coordinates in a
list binding_regioni
Identify any atoms that appear in all binding_regioni,
in such a way that the geometric relationship
between the atoms is equivalent in each of the three
proteins
Store the conserved atom types and their coordinates
in a list conserved_atoms
Return conserved_atoms

3. Applying a Fingerprint to a Protein
Once the fingerprint has been constructed for a
specific binding zone, that fingerprint can then be

searched for in a protein where a binding site or sites are
known to exist, but the location is unknown. It can also
be applied to other proteins to search for matches and
therefore provide a method to determine whether they can
bind the compound complementry to the binding site.
These proteins must be of known structure and
have an available PDB file. The method can be used to
search for the primary binding zone or if this is known
from this search method or others, other binding zones
can be searched for.
An exact match for the first amino acid of the
fingerprint is searched for in the protein. This will create
a large number of matches. Next an exact match is
searched for corresponding the second amino acid in the
fingerprint, within a 3D zone dependent on the distance
between points 1 and 2 in the fingerprint (representing
the first and second amino acids), (see Fig.3). This will
dramatically reduce the number of matches.
After amino acid 2 has been located a line is
used to join the first and second amino acids forming an

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Amino acid
2

Amino acid 1

Zone within range of
Amino acid 1 with
thresholds

Zone within
range of both

Fig. 4, 2D representation of the zones used to find amino acid 3 in the protein. Each
amino acid, 1 and 2, creates a zone (made of upper and lower thresholds) which overlap
creating the torus shaped zone that is used for the search.
axis around which 4 spheres are created as thresholds for
searching for a corresponding amino acid in the protein to
where amino acid 3 is in the fingerprint. The intersection
of these four threshold spheres create a torus shaped zone
in which the search is focused (see Fig.4).
If the above steps do not yield positive results
then there are some modifications that can be made to
this methodology. A threshold can be applied to the
range and zones used as a site may be viable with minor
changes in amino acid positions. Furthermore as some
amino acids share common biochemical properties, the
presence of a different amino acid in the same position
may carry out the same role so matches can be attempted.
For example an Alanine in the fingerprint would ideally
want to be matched with a Alanine in the protein being
tested but a Cyseine may be acceptable as it has similar
properties and may behave the same in terms of binding
interactions.
Even if a strong match is made the search should
be continued as the identified site may be a coincidental
match (this becomes less likely as the number of points in
the fingerprint increases) or not a viable site and lastly as
proteins can have multiple binding sites further
processing is justified. Examples of non-viable sites
would be where the suggested site is buried in the protein
structure and inaccessible to the analogue, the entrance of
the site is too small to allow access for the analogue to
bind, or the biochemical properties of the surrounding
inner surface contributed to by the local amino acids
makes binding impossible (for example by high
repulsion).

If there are enough conserved features to obtain
a four point fingerprint then when it comes to searching
for the relevant amino acid the search area will be a
threshold around a single point as the second and third
matched points anchor the fingerprint. Matching a fourth
point exactly may be difficult but if achieved would be a
definitive result.

3.1
The algorithm for finding candidate
binding sites based on conserved features
Input:
A set of amino acids {a1, a2, …, an} together with
their three-dimensional coordinates.
A protein, P, that will be examined for possible
binding sites.
A tolerance, tol, that is used to determine the error
in the position of amino acids in the protein.
Output:
A value of True or False corresponding to whether
or not there exists a possible binding site in the
protein, P.
1.
2.
3.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Determine R1
Search P for an amino acid of the same type as a2
that lies in R1. If such an acid exists, label it by p2.
If p2 is not defined from the line above, search P for
an amino acid of a similar type to a2 that lies in R1.
If such an acid exists, label it by p2. If no such acid

exists then it is unlikely that P will bind the ligand,
return False.
4. If n = 2 the fingerprint only has two amino acids and
both (or sufficiently similar) are present in the
protein under consideration, with the same geometric
configuration as in binding zones of known binding
proteins. It is therefore likely that P will bind the
ligand, return True.
5. Define R2
6. Search P for an amino acid of the same type as a3
that lies in the intersection of R1 and R2. If such an
acid exists, label it by p3.
7. If p3 is not defined from 2, search P for an amino
acid of a similar type to a3 that lies in the intersection
of R1 and R2. If such an acid exists, label it by p3. If
no such acid exists then it is unlikely that P will bind
the ligand, return False.
8. If n = 3 the fingerprint only has three amino acids
and all (or sufficiently similar) are present in the
protein under consideration, with the same geometric
configuration as in binding zones of known binding
proteins. It is therefore likely that P will bind the
ligand, return True.
9. For i := 4 to n do
x Define Ri-1
x Search for an amino acid of the same type
as ai that lies in Ri-1, Ri-2 and Ri-3. If such an
amino acid exists, label by pi.
x If pi is not defined from the above search,
search P for an amino acid of a similar type
to aI that lies in Ri-1, Ri-2 and Ri-3. If such an
acid exists, label it by pi. If no such acid
exists then it is unlikely that P will bind the
ligand, return False.
10. n = i and all atoms in the fingerprint (or sufficiently
similar) are present in the protein under
consideration, with the same geometric configuration
as in binding zones of known binding proteins. It is
therefore likely that P will bind the ligand, return
True.
The determination of region Ri is given by considering ai
and ai+1. Ri is defined to be region between the sphere
centred at pi and of radius |ai - ai+1| - tol and the sphere
centred at pi of radius | ai - ai+1| + tol.

is probable to bind L. The general method that will be
applied is given as follows:
1.

2.

3.

Use a tool, such as POCKET or equivalent, to
identify pockets or cavities in the protein P that are
of sufficient volume to be considered a binding site.
Using techniques outlined in section 3, search for the
fingerprint characteristics, F, in the pockets (rather
than searching the whole protein) of P, that suggest
the ability to bind L
Verify that binding is indeed possible by ensuring
that constraints such as geometric, polarity and
hydrophobicity are satisfied. This can be performed
using the ideas presented in [6], based upon
modification to the marching cubes algorithm of
Lorensen and Cline [8].

With positive results, sucessfully fitting the
fingerprint onto a new protein, the match can be
visualised by creating a new PDB file of the fingerprint
(using TMBoundary) and loading it alongside the PDB of
the new protein in a PDB viewing package allowing
multiple PDB visualisation and separate manipulation,
for example Swiss PDB Viewer. The fingerprint can then
be aligned on top of the proteins binding site to show the
match found by the fingerprint methods.

5. Summary
We have proposed a number of algorithms that
can be used together to form a useful basis for the
determination of candidate binding sites. The fingerprint
technique uses a simple way of recognising particular
conserved features in binding sites of proteins that bind
ligands. Using TMSite on sets of PDBs of proteins,
which bind a common compound, and showing the
binding site (by having a bound complex) a fingerprint
shape is constructed from the conserved amino acids and
locations. It is then attempted to match the fingerprint
onto a new protein that is known to bind the same
specific compound that binds to the site represented by
the fingerprint. Using geometrical fit thresholds and
looking for non-identical but biochemically similar amino
acids can be carried out to reduce sensitivity. The final
algorithm is to be converted into a piece of software
written in Delphi and added to TMBoundary.

4. Scope of the work
6. References
The algorithms presented in the last section can
be used to augment software tools such as TMBoundary
and ClustalW to provide a useful tool in the prediction of
binding sites. Given that we have a fingerprint, F, for a
protein to bind a ligand, L, we predict whether protein, P,

[1] Bairoch, A., and Apweiler, R., 2000, “The SWISS-PROT
protein sequence database and its supplement TrEMBL in
2000”,
Nucleic
Acids
Res.
28:
45-48.
http://www.expasy.ch/sprot

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

[2] Berman, H., M., Westbrook, J., Feng Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat,
T., N., Weissig, H., Shindyalov, I., N., and Bourne, P.E., 2000,
Protein Data Bank Nucleic Acids Research, 28 235-242.
http://www.rcsb.org/pdb
[3]Brakoulias A. & Jackson R. M. (2002) A new method for
comparing ligand binding sites in biomolecules. Preprint
[4]Guex, N., Peitsch, M., C., 1997, SWISS-MODEL and the
Swiss-PdbViewer: An environment for comparative protein
modeling. Electrophoresis 18, 2714-2723.
[5] Hannaford, G., J., H., Maple, C., R., Sarakinou, K., S.,
Mullins, J., G., L., 2001 Rapid homology modelling of
membrane transport proteins and receptors. Biochem. Soc.
Trans. 29 (5), A124, 58
[6] Hannaford, G., J., H., Maple, C., R., Mullins, J., G., L., 2001
"Finding and Characterising Candidate Binding Sites"
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Information
Visualization (IV2001), London, UK, pp 157-161, July 2001.
[7] Levitt, D.G., Banaszak, L.J., 1992 “Pocket - A ComputerGraphics method for Identifying And Displaying Protein
Cavities and their Surrounding Amino-acids”, Journal of
Molecular Graphics, 10, 4, 229-234.

[8] Lorensen,W.E., Cline, H.E., 1987 “Marching Cubes: A
High Resolution 3D surface Construction Algorithm”,
Computer Graphics, 21, 4, 163-169.
[9] Maple, C., 2001 " A Boundary Representation Technique
for Three-Dimensional Objects " Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Information Visualization
(IV2001), London, UK, pp 397-402, July 2001.
[10]Molecular Simulations Inc. 1998 Weblab Viewerlite
http://molsim.vei.co.uk/weblab
[11]Sayle R.A., Milner-White E. J., 1995, “RasMol:
Biomolecular graphics for all” Trends in Biochemical Sciences
20 (Sept):374-376
[12]Thompson, J., D., Higgins, D., G., Gibson, T., J., 1994,
"CLUSTAL W: improving the sensitivity of progressive
multiple sequence alignment through sequence weighting,
position-specific gap penalties and weight matrix choice."
Nucleic Acids Res. 22:4673-4680

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

