The Stardinates - Visualizing Highly Structured Data
Monika Lanzenberger and Silvia Miksch
Vienna University of Technology
Institute of Software Technology and
Interactive Systems
Favoritenstr. 9-11/188
1040 Vienna, Austria
{monika, silvia}@asgaard.tuwien.ac.at
Abstract
The Stardinates are a novel interactive Information Visualization (InfoVis) technique which aims at visualizing
highly structured data. They represent some Gestalt principles very well, especially the principles of Closure and
’Pr¨agnanz’. As a consequence, Stardinates form very distinct and memorable patterns which make abstraction and
aggregation much easier. We give a formal description of
the Stardinates as a basis for implementation. Furthermore,
we show an application by visualizing psychotherapeutic
data derived from a clinical study on anorectic girls.

1 Introduction
Various studies or simulations provide a huge amount
of complex data, which need to be analyzed according to
various dimensions. Such data contain different types of
information in different dimensions and also include timeoriented dimensions and features. Therefore, such kind
of data ask for particular interactive visualization methods,
which capture all data properties.
We introduce a novel interactive Information Visualization (InfoVis) technique called the Stardinates which aims
at visualizing highly structured data, e.g., psychotherapeutic data. The name results from a compound of ’Star’ and
’Coordinates’ because axes are arranged in a circle. Thus,
the visualization looks like a star (compare Figure 1). Each
axis represents one attribute of the data so that every data
record is visualized by a line (record line) along the corresponding data points. So that a polygon is formed by the
lines connecting the data points of one data record. The
Stardinates are a hybrid visualization technique combining
geometric and glyph-based visualizations. In the following
we give a short overview about related InfoVis techniques,

Margit Pohl
Vienna University of Technology
Institute for Design and
Assessment of Technology
Favoritenstr. 9-11/187
1040 Vienna, Austria
margit@igw.tuwien.ac.at

explain our background ideas and clarify the concept of the
Stardinates based on mathematical deﬁnitions in order to
outline a foundation for implementation. Thereafter, we
sketch interaction techniques, show an application by visualizing psychotherapeutic data derived from a clinical study,
and recapitulate the beneﬁts and shortcomings of the Stardinates. Finally, we conclude with an outlook to future work.

2 Related Work
The goal of InfoVis is to promote a more intuitive and
deeper level of understanding of the investigational data and
to foster new insights into the underlying process [10]. InfoVis is the use of computer-supported, interactive, visual
representations of abstract data in order to facilitate cognition. It applies visual processing methods to abstract data
and information and is a kind of external cognition — using resources in the world outside the mind in order to expand what the mind can do. An enormous amount of work
has been done in the ﬁeld of InfoVis in the last years. The
most prominent ones related to our approach are geometric
techniques (e.g., parallel coordinates [7]), Glyphs [6] and
similarly icon-based techniques (e.g., Chernoff faces [5]).
The challenges in designing visualization methods for
time-oriented psychotherapeutic data is quite speciﬁc. The
visualization should display the derived qualitative temporal patterns and important quantitative time-oriented values
in a task-speciﬁc way and provide more information on a
user’s request. One way to deal with high-dimensional,
time-oriented data are multi-views which offer different visualizations of the same data. We developed a multi-view
tool, called LinkVis [8] which uses parallel coordinates,
Chernoff faces, and scatterplots to provide the user with different views. This multi-views enable the user to prove her
or his interpretations by looking for equal patterns in the
other visualizations.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Although this multi-view approach is very promising we
began to investigate a new visualization technique, since
our highly structured data — psychotherapeutic data based
on questionnaires — had some speciﬁc features the three
existing methods used in LinkVis could not handle optimally. Our novel interactive visualization technique called
the Stardinates combines features of parallel coordinates
and Glyphs and seems more appropriate for this kind of
data. We use linking and brushing [1] to enable the user
to explore the data efﬁciently. In contrast to already existing methods, like Star Glyphs [9] applied in the XmdvTool
[11], Star Plots [4] and wheel charts, several data records
are depicted as lines within one Stardinate and several Stardinates are placed next to each other like Glyphs. In the
following we describe this visualization technique in more
detail.

3 The Stardinates
3.1 Data Characteristics
Generally, InfoVis deals with the visualization of different types of data from different sources with no inherent
spatial meaning. Every visualization is optimized for some
types of data. Therefore, we want to give a short description of the data the Stardinates can handle. The Stardinates
are suitable for ordinal and nominal values. On the one
hand the complexity of the data structure could be very high
since every axis of one Stardinate can depict another dimension. On the other hand the amount of data (frequency) and
the parameter space is restricted because of the glyph-size
of the Stardinates. If the number of lines or values is too
high, the shapes of the Stardinates lack of expressiveness so
that they are hardly distinguished. We tested the Stardinates
with up to 20 axes considered as the maximum of axes of
one Stardinate. Therefore, this method is not suitable for
high frequency data. This data classiﬁcation corresponds
to the characteristics of the data we derived from a clinical
study based on questionnaires, in particular, psychotherapeutic data. The values which represents the answers in
the questionnaires usually range from ’0’ to ’6’, ’14’ is the
maximum.

3.2 The Method
We use axes (x1 to xn ) to represent the various dimensions of our data. The axes are arranged in a circle. Each
Stardinate consists of a number of axes with scales and labels. The data values are displayed as points on the scales.
In order to emphasize the data points, two data points on
adjacent axes are connected by a line. So one data record
is displayed by a line with its vertices on the axes, we call
this record line. This results in the typical star-shape which

is perceived efﬁciently. In contrast to the parallel coordinates we use closed star-shapes. The last axis xn is placed
next to the ﬁrst axis x1 and its values are related. The same
property holds for the other adjacent axes. According to
the Gestalt laws [2] such shapes are perceived intuitively.
Like Glpyhs a number of Stardinates are displayed next to
each other in order to extract one dimension. Typically meta
dimensions like time or other dimensions of special interest are extracted this way to make the visualization more
understandable as we will show in the application beneath
(compare Figure 1). Generally, the search for multivariate
relations in n-dimensional data is transformed into a 2-D
pattern recognition problem. Large shapes indicate high
values, small shapes imply low values.
The record line is characterized by color, saturation,
brightness, sharpness, thickness and mode (dotted, etc.) of
line. This is the basis for selecting and ﬁltering data by
the user. To provide the user with detailed information every record line offers context information on demand if the
user focuses on it. In contrast to the parallel coordinates
equal values cannot be recognized by straight lines. In order to ease the recognition we use a reference line which
connects equal values on the axes on demand. The user can
display, move, or hide the reference line according to her or
his needs.
In order to enable the user to explore the data interactively, the visualization tool needs to offer direct interaction
techniques based on the users’ tasks and combined with immediate respond times.
In the following we specify the Stardinates in detail by
mathematical deﬁnitions for the axes, the data lines (record
lines) and its vertices (data points).

4 Formal Description of the Stardinates
The number of the axes of one Stardinate is derived from
the number of dimensions of the visualized data. So we
deﬁne the axes by:
x1 , . . . , xn

with n ∈ N and 3 ≤ n ≤ nmax

(1)

nmax : As mentioned above an upper limit for the number of dimensions to nmax ≤ 20 seems useful.
The similarity the Stardinates and the polar coordinates
is obvious. From a geometrical point of view the axes of the
Stardinates are placed on the coordinate lines which emanate from the pole of the polar coordinates radially. We
start with x1 at twelve o’clock position and then place the
rest of the axes clockwise. So we describe the angle for
each axis by:
ϕxk =

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

2π
π
− (k − 1) ·
2
n

∀ k ∈ N, 1 ≤ k ≤ nmax (2)

The axes have a speciﬁc length according to the size of
the window dedicated to one Stardinate. Based on the size
of the window windowx (width),windowy (height) we deﬁne the length of the axis by:
3
(3)
l = · min(windowx , windowy )
7
The coefﬁcient 37 results from the ideal case n =
4, 6, 8, . . . when the center (pole) of the Stardinate is placed
windowy
x
in the center of the window. If
at window
;
2
2
n = 3, 5, 7, . . . the lower space is used inefﬁciently because
the lower axes are inclined and therefore, do not need the
same vertical space like straight axes. But this is nearly irrelevant when n ≥ 7 because then it converges rapidly to
the ideal case. In the center of the window 17 of size of the
window is reserved for labels etc. That means we shift each
axis out for 16 of the axis length. Together with the 66 of the
axis we get the total size of 14
6 . The reciprocal value gives
us the length of the axis in relation to the size of the window.
Finally, we derive the deﬁnition of the axes by:
l
7l
≤ xk ≤
and ϕxk from (2)
(4)
6
6
Next we deﬁne the data points and the lines connecting
the points on adjacent axes. Therefore, we specify minimum and maximum scale values for each axis: xi min =
minimum scale value on axis xi and xi max analog.
To display the value of a speciﬁc data record (data record
a) we need to calculate the position in polar coordinates.
So our input da,i is a value of the dimension i of the data
and results in the point Da,i which is displayed on the axis
xi . In our deﬁnition we distinguish the negative and the
positive sections of the scale in order to enable the user to
select different scales or different min/max values for every
axis.
xk :

We derive the position of the point at the coordinates:
Da,i (

a,i ; ϕxi )

=

Da,i rf ix +

(da,i − xi min ) · l
; ϕxi
xi max − xi min

with rf ix =

analog to (4)

l
6

(5)

The data points of one record on adjacent axes xi and
xj are connected by a line. For the values of Da,i on axis
xi and Da,j on axis xj we deﬁne the line la,i,j connecting
these two points:
Da,i , Da,j

with

1≤i≤n

and

j=

i+1
1

(6)
if i ≤ n − 1
if i = n

(7)

la,i,j given by
a,i,j

a,i,j

within the range of ϕa,i,j :

=

· a,j · sin(ϕxj − ϕxi )
a,i · sin(ϕa,i,j − ϕxi ) − a,j · sin(ϕa,i,j − ϕxj )
a,i

ϕa,i,j =

ϕxi ≥ ϕa,i,j ≥ ϕxj
ϕxi ≥ ϕa,i,j ≥

− 3π
2

if i < j
if i > j

(8)

(9)

In only one case the value of i is higher than the value of
j. That happens when comparing the axis xn with x1 .
Equation (8) describing the data line is undeﬁned if the
denominator is ’0’. By an indirect proof we can show that
this never happens if we stick to the formulas above (hint:
n ≥ 3 and rf ix > 0). Thus, the deﬁnition of the line connecting two data points of the Stardinates is proved to be
valid.
This mathematical deﬁnition describes how Stardinates
are constructed and provides us with a good starting point
for the implementation of a Stardinates tool.

5 Interacting with the Stardinates
From a technical point of view we classify users’ interaction with the visual representation by the object of interaction. We think this is a good basis for both, the implementation and the concept of the user interface. The user
could (a) manipulate the axes, (b) the record line, (c) one
Stardinate or (d) all Stardinate at once. Manipulation of
one object could cause manipulations of the dependent objects. Examples for (a) manipulating an axis are: Adding or
excluding dimensions respectively the corresponding axes;
Arranging axes; Changing the orientation of an axis; Deﬁning the scales and minimum and maximum values; Using
sliders attached to the axes in order to ﬁlter interesting data;
(b) Manipulating a record line means: Highlighting or fading out one or more record lines by ﬁltering; Linking and
brushing (selecting record lines in one Stardinate causes the
highlighting of the corresponding record lines in the other
Stardinates automatically); Comparing with the reference
line. Every manipulation of an axis results in mutations
of record lines. (c) Examples for handling one Stardinate:
Magnifying and Zooming out. Finally, (d) the conﬁguration of the Stardinates includes the space per Stardinate (see
(3)); The color, thickness, and mode of the record lines (described in (8)) and axes; Saving of interesting bundles of
dimensions; Comparing or saving of visualizations.

6 Application
We use the Stardinates to visualize psychotherapeutic
data derived from a clinical study on anorectic girls. In

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

Figure 1. Mock-up of the Stardinates tool.
close cooperation with two psychologists we are developing a visualization tool which aims to support the evaluation and analysis of the therapeutic progress with focus on
the differences of group and individual therapy. Above we
show a mock-up of this tool. The clinical study works with
questionnaires—about 150 per patient. Each questionnaire
consists of about 40 questions. Since some questionnaires
are used several times, we reduce the number of dimensions respectively. This results in about 1000 dimensions
per patient and is described as highly structured data. The
questions have unique abbreviations which can be used as
labels of the axes. The huge amount of questions makes
up a number of dimensions to be visualized. We have deﬁned meaningful bundles of questions which show the state
of the patients according to signiﬁcant characteristics of the
ailment and the therapeutic progress, e.g. depression, loss
of weight, self-conﬁdence, social context, eating disorder,
etc. So far 7 patients have started with individual therapy.
The data derived from these questionnaires mainly
ranges from the value ’0’ to ’6’ which is a scale from ’No’
to ’Yes’ and is classiﬁed as ordinal data. The granularity of
the data varies. Some of the questions have negative polarity, therefore, their axes are ﬂipped in order to ﬁt in one Stardinate together with questions with positive polarity. Analysis and exploration of these data needs targeted interaction
which implies knowledge on the underlying questionnaires
and their meanings. The Stardinates support the user by intuitive distinguishable shapes, however, in order to really

understand the data users need experience in psychology.
During the next two years the therapies of 60 patients
will be evaluated. For quantitative analysis applicable techniques based on statistic methods already exist. Since the
psychologists plan to pay detailed attention to qualitative
exploration and analysis they need new techniques. Visualization offers excellent opportunities for efﬁcient perception
and recognition of relevant information because it makes
use of our special visual abilities, e.g. pre-attentiveness. In
this case visualization has crucial advantages over text or
tables.
In the following we show a mock-up (Figure 1) which
consists of two Stardinates. Each visualizes the state of
seven patients according to ﬁve dimensions / questions. The
right Stardinate deals with self-gratiﬁcation abilities of the
patients. The other one depicts data of weight / eating
disorders. Both show data from Jan. 20th. One record
line—patient id. 7 is marked in both Stardinates. This is
well-known as linking and brushing. Surely, the Stardinates
are not intended as static images. Interacting with them is
absolutely necessary in order to build hypotheses and get
more insight into the data under investigation. However,
this mock-up gives an impression of our technique. Each
axis has its own scale and minimum and maximum values
drawn from the questionnaires. To normalize the parameter
space the user can change this scales adequately.
The Stardinate on ’Self-Gratiﬁcation’ is based on the following questions:

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

FAMOS14: ’To relax is’: (1) totally unimportant (2) unimportant, (3) does not matter (4) rather important to (5) extremely important to me.
FAMOS23: ’To do something just for me is’: analog.
FAMOS37: ’To treat oneself to something is’: analog.
MRFSF1: ’I treat myself to tranquillity and recreation’: (1)
no, (2) rather no, (3) rather yes, (4) yes.
MRFSF2: ’I pay close attention to my body’: analog.
The axes starting in twelve o’ clock represents these questions.
The Stardinate on ’Weight / Eating Disorder’ is based on
the following questions:
BDIR: ’loss in appetite’: (0) no, (1) rather no, (3) rather yes,
(4) yes.
BDIS: ’loss in weight’: analog.
EAT13: ’I feel sick after eating’: (0) never, (1) seldom, (2)
sometimes, (3) often, (4) very often, (5) always.
EAT5: ’I avoid to eat when i am hungry’: analog.
EAT9: ’I look out for the calories of my food’: analog.
The data result in easily perceivable shapes which needs
to be interpreted. Since we use ﬁve axes here, the data
record of each patient is depicted as a pentagon. The Stardinate on self-gratiﬁcation shows that patient id. 7 has
high values, compared to other patients the highest values
at FAMOS23, MRFSF1, and MRFSF2. The values of the
other axes are also in the upper area. This means that this
patients has – especially compared to other patients of this
study – in principle the attempt and possibly the ability of
self gratiﬁcation because she rates them with high priority.
However, the interpretation of the Stardinate about weight
and eating disorders is more complicated. The patients rates
BDIS and EAT5 very high, the other axes show the lowest value of ’0’. In contrast to other patients, patient id. 7
has low values at EAT9 and BDIR. That means that calories are not important to her and she did not feel the loss
of appetite but lost weight. This corresponds with her answer about avoiding food although she feels hungry. These
conclusions are a ﬁrst step into the analysis of the state of
this patient. So far we do not have more data, but it would
be very interesting to show the changes over time by other
Stardinates positioned beneath. Moreover, other meaningful bundles of dimensions offer additional opportunities for
informed interpretations.

7 Shortcomings and Beneﬁts
Some problems and shortcomings of the Stardinates are
not solved so far. Similarly to the parallel coordinates
record lines with equal values cover each other. So the user
can not see, if a line represents one ore more data records.
Another problem occurs if the data are incomplete. This
could happen easily with data derived from questionnaires.
A possible approach is to add an extra point on the scale for

missing values. However, this does not seem to be the best
solution.
To mention two other restrictions: The parameter space
and the number of axes is limited. The number of Stardinates itself is also limited, because it is not possible to
compare hundreds of Stardinates efﬁciently.
However, the Stardinates offer also many beneﬁts. Visualizations have several advantages [3] from a cognitive point
of view. Stardinates seem to support some of these cognitive mechanisms in a fairly efﬁcient manner. They represent
some Gestalt principles very well, especially the principles
of Closure and ’Pr¨agnanz’. As a consequence, Stardinates
form very distinct and memorable patterns which make abstraction and aggregation much easier. They also support
perceptual inferences because the meaning of the elements
of Stardinates are intuitively fairly clear. In contrast to that,
Glyphs, for example, require much more effort to learn the
meaning of the elements of visualization. The possibility to
manipulate the data and interact with the form of representation forms another considerable advantage of Stardinates.
Manipulating representations enables users to produce visualizations which are speciﬁcally tailored to their needs.
In many cases, such representations are more meaningful
for the users and better adapted to help users to solve their
problems. The interactivity of Stardinates also helps users
to formulate and test hypotheses, thus gaining deeper insights into the subject at hand. Stardinates share some of
these advantages with other methods of visualization. What
is perhaps unique about Stardinates is the combination of
these advantages.

8 Conclusion and Future Work
Collecting data is a time consuming task and asks for
sophisticated exploration techniques to gain more information and knowledge. In particular time-oriented and highly
structured data, which contain of a complex data structure,
but only a few instances, need speciﬁc exploration techniques. We have presented an interactive InfoVis method,
called Stardinates, which addresses the particular features
of such highly structured data.
The usefulness of the Stardinates is illustrated with psychotherapeutic data collected in a clinical study on anorectic girls. That study provides complex and time-dependent
data, which are difﬁcult to explore by descriptive and classical statistical methods.
As demonstrated in Figure 1, the study of Stardinates
showed promising results and the cooperating psychologists see various application areas for this InfoVis technique
within their clinical study of anorectic girls. Therefore, in
the next step we plan detailed user testing. We will do a
study with 60 subjects to compare the effectiveness of the
Stardinates with other visualization techniques. Addition-

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

ally, we will perform ethnographic studies to collect more
information about the real users’ needs. The ﬁndings will
inﬂuence and will be assembled in the development phase
of the Stardinates tool. Within cyclical evaluation and implementation phases we will develop a visualization tool,
which will support the whole psychotherapeutic processes
as well as facilitate to analyze the effectiveness, beneﬁts,
and limitations of various treatment options and to compare
the treatment courses.
From the technical point of view, we will investigate in
more advanced techniques to capture the temporal properties. One possible extension is to integrate animated Stardinates. Such an animated view will show the changes of
the record line over time for one patient. According to the
Gestalt laws the movements of record line can be perceived
intuitively.
Finally, we are planning to evaluate the Stardinates with
traditional InfoVis methods, which address similar features.
These methods will be parallel coordinates, Chernoff faces
and their derivatives thereof. We are hopeful that we can
examine and show, that the interactive Stardinates are more
intuitive, easier to understand, and support faster capturing
of coherences.

9 Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the psychologists Susanne Ohmann and Christian Popow. Furthermore many
thanks to Markus Rester for interesting discussions about
our visualization technique and valuable LATEX support.

References
[1] M. Q. W. Baldonado, A. Woodruff, and A. Kuchinsky.
Guidelines for using multiple views in information visualization. In Advanced Visual Interfaces (AVI2000), pages
110–119. ACM Press, 2000.
[2] J. G. Benjaﬁeld. Cognition. Prentice-Hall International Editions, 1992.
[3] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, editors.
Readings in Information Visualization, chapter 1, pages 1–
34. Morgan Kaufman, 1999.
[4] J. Chambers, Cleveland, K. W., and P. B., Tukey. Graphical
methods for data analysis. Wadworth.
[5] H. Chernoff. The use of faces to represent points in kdimensional space graphically. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 68:361–368, 1973.
[6] M. C. Chuah and S. G. Eick. Glyphs for software visualization. In 5th International Workshop on Program Comprehension (IWPC ’97) Proceedings, pages 183–191. IEEE
Computer Society Press, Dearborn, Michigan, May 1997.
[7] A. Inselberg. The plane with parallel coordinates. Special
Issue on Computational Geometry, 1:69–97, 1997.
[8] M. Lanzenberger, S. Miksch, S. Ohmann, and C. Popow.
Applying information visualization techniques to capture
and explore the course of cognitive behavioral therapy. In
Proc. of the ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, SAC
2003, pages 268–274, 2003.
[9] J. Siegel, E. Farrell, R. Goldwyn, and H. Friedman. The
surgical implication of physiologic patterns in myocaridal
infarction shock. Surgery, 72:126–141, 1972.
[10] E. R. Tufte. Visual Explanations. Graphics Press, Cheshire,
CT, 1997.
[11] M. O. Ward. Xmdvtool: Integrating multiple methods for visualizing multivariate data. In Proceedings of Visualization
1994, pages 326–333, 1994.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

