Macaroni Synthesis:
A Creative Multimedia Collaboration
Ernest Edmonds1, Linda Candy2, Mark Fell3, Roger Knott3, Alastair Weakley1
ernest@ernestedmonds.com linda@lindacandy.com mark@markfell.com r.p.knott@lboro.ac.uk
alastair@weakley.org.uk
1Creativity and Cognition

2Key Centre of Design

3Creativity and Cognition

Studios,
University of Technology,
Sydney,
PO Box 123 Broadway
NSW 2007 Australia

Computing and Cognition
School of Architecture,
Design Sciences and
Planning
University of Sydney
NSW 2006 Australia

Research Studios
Department of Computer
Science
Loughborough University,
LE11 3TU UK

Abstract
The paper describes a collaborative project between an
HCI team and an internationally known Japanese artist,
based in New York, who was artist-in-residence with the
group in the UK. The collaboration resulted in a new
performance art work and a new interactive instrument.
The research included a full study of the process of
collaboration and innovation. The paper describes the work
that was created, the interactive instrument developed and
illustrates its use in a performance.

1. Introduction
The Creativity and Cognition Research Studios (C&CRS)
[6] were established for the purposes of developing new art
and technology projects and to conduct research into the
creative process. It is the result of a collaborative venture
between the Department of Computer Science and the
School of Art and Design at Loughborough University. In
the COSTART Project 1998-2003 [5] an innovative
approach to the study of technology-based art founded on
practice-led research methods has been developed. The
approach is based upon artist-in-residency studies,
gathering and analysing qualitative data and disseminating
new knowledge on the basis of the evidence [2,3,4,11].
Research issues that are under investigation at C&CRS
include: the impact of the technology on creative practice,
the implications of such practice for technological
requirements and the environments in which new
developments can take place. The work centers on the
practice of art making.
The involvement of the artists in the electronic media is as
much concerned with developing and defining those media

as with employing them in art making. Whilst art and
design oriented application programs are often used, the art
practice is normally dependant upon writing computer
programs, often interfaces between the various devices
needed to facilitate interaction. The artists at the leading
edge of technology-based work are rarely confined to using
single software applications that can be bought on the high
street. Instead, they are most often seen to be extending the
media and exploring the means of developing new
technological capabilities. As is often the case in
innovative art making, artists are deeply involved in
inventing and defining the media that they use. If this
requires new knowledge and skills, they acquire it either by
learning it for themselves or through their collaborators.
For this reason, collaborations with technical experts who
can construct and extend the technology are becoming a
vital element of the work. In this respect, a significant
development is the invention of computational
representations of the conceptual and behavioral concepts
that underpin much of the art being developed.
In this paper, we report on the particular innovations
associated with one of the residencies; that of Yasunao
Tone, an artist who was awarded the 2002 Ars Electronica
Golden Nica prize for Digital Music [10] The residency
involved three significant interacting roles: the artist, the
technologist and the researcher. This three-pronged
approach is fundamental to the research and has been
significant in enabling and fulfilling the kind of innovation
described here.

2. Background
The COSTART Project developed a new approach to the
study of technology-based art founded on practice-led

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

research methods. The artist-in-residency is at the heart of
the process but it is a residency that differs in a number of
important respects from the conventional type. First, it is a
fundamental part of the approach that a residency support
team with specialist knowledge about both technology and
art practice is established. The COSTART team has
expertise in many forms of computer systems,
programming languages and devices but equally important
is their personal involvement in music and visual arts
practice both as researchers and practitioners. In addition,
the environment into which the artist-in-residence comes is
designated primarily for their use rather than on a guest
access basis.
Artists are invited to submit a proposal for a new project
and to specify both artistic and technical needs. The
research team carries out feasibility studies into each
proposal as to whether the requirements can be met and
whether it has sufficient challenge technically. The
research exercises involve collecting data about the
collaborative creative process that takes place in the core
event, a five-day residency. This period is followed up with
further development work in preparation for the exhibition
of works that arise. The study data is analysed ready for
publication in reports and papers. It is central to the
approach that the research process and the creative practice
take place in tandem and that the experience for the artist
represents a realistic situation.
The background to the practice-based research approach
that was first developed in the COSTART-1 project is
described in Chapters 3 and 4 of Explorations in Art and
Technology [3].

3. A Residency Study
Yasunao Tone is often associated with the Fluxus group
that began in the 1960s [8]. Throughout the 1960s and
1970s Fluxus evolved into an international art movement,
notorious for its refusal to accept traditional ideas about art,
culture and authorship. Through a series of events,
happenings, performances and installations Fluxus became
one of the most radical movements in contemporary art of
its day.
As the artist put it: “I have pursued totally new relationship
between text and sound aside from traditional lyric-melody
etc. and more trendy Textual music as well. Molecular
Music is (1982-5) is an earliest experiment as such. The
piece is based on the poems written in Chinese characters
including three poems from the Tong Dynasty as well as
the 8th Century Japanese poem. The Chinese characters of
the poetic text are grammatologically studied first and then,
appropriate images are chosen from found photos. Then,
they were filmed as if an animation movie was taken.

Rhythmic structure of the spoken text is transferred to the
structure of the film. The piece employs the soundgenerating system includes light sensors attached on the
film screen and oscillators connected to light sensors, so
that the film projected on the screen creates varying sounds
in accordance with the specific arrangement of the sensors
and the changing brightness of the projected images.
Another case in point is Trio for a Flute player (1985),
which consists of three components. These components are
based on a single source, poems from the 8th century
Japanese anthology, the Man'yo-shu. The curvy line of
calligraphy of the poem, overlaid by musical staff, does not
correspond with pitches or any tonalities but with the
player's finger placements. (Note that a flute player uses
nine fingers, coinciding with the number of lines and
spaces of the staff — five lines and four spaces). Fingering,
with its movement and pressure, triggers on electronic
sound, varying in pitch and intensity, which is generated by
an oscillator with a capacitor. The poems are read through
the flute mouthpiece.
Yasunao Tone’s process for working with the conversion
of calligraphic drawings into sound is very time-consuming
involving as it does changing first Chinese characters into
images and then the images into sound. Such time scales
restrict the use of real-time interaction with his work. The
aim for the COSTART residency project was to explore the
possibilities of sound representation in real-time. The
intention was for the development of a program for
performance that could focus on the interaction between
image and sound. The Soft-Board made it possible to do
live performance in which, instead of having to transform
the text into images with pictogram-like Chinese
characters, the artist draws calligraphy on the board and
transform any text into sound.
The concern throughout the residency was how working
with an artist of this nature influenced the process of
making the work, and how a rejection of prescribed
methods, tools and structures changed the way in which
software systems were developed. This activity was further
complicated because the apparent divide between the work
and the means of making the work. So there was no point
at which we were making simple tools or technical
solutions that would later be used by the artist to produce
the work itself. The work was both the system and process
as much the outcome of these activities in a performance.
In the pre-residency discussions for Yasunao Tone’s
residency, it had seemed that it would be interesting to
make data about his drawing gestures available
computationally. The idea was that he would draw on the
Soft-board [12] in our studios. This device looks like an
ordinary whiteboard but has the additional capability to
detect the position of a pen on its surface. This information
is output via a serial cable and can be used to keep a
dynamic record of developments in a meeting, for example.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

This was an ideal way to explore Yasunao’s use of
calligraphy and how it can be transformed into sound.

uses grasps some sense of what they are doing, but are
unable to understand fully.

When it was suggested to Yasunao that a variation on
granular synthesis to generate sounds could be used, he
said that his idea was more like ‘macaroni synthesis,
because it already had a form’. Tone explained to the
COSTART observers in the final interview of the residency
what he meant by that:YT Oh!… I have a piece called “Molecular Music”
which… the title itself is “My Dissatisfaction with
Computer Music”. Computer Music is a kind of…
started from atom. Yes…… so I start from molecules
not from atom. And this time I told Mark “This is a
macaroni”.…its developed
through the granular
synthesis. Granular synthesis is …he obtains certain
small tiny bits of a wave form and in the building, so
doing you have to make a pitch how you make yours,
you have to do the same thing as I know, take academic
computer music So I don’t like that. So instead of
grain I use macaroni.
LC

Well there’s some cooking required after that.

YT

Yes cooking

LC Is it cooked macaroni first or…the basic ingredients.
YT

Yes basic ingredients

LC

the performance is the cooking?

YT

Right

When the team try to imagine a system that transforms the
movement of a pen into a sound they almost inevitably
started to think in a certain way – to define a complex
system of conditions, choices, relationships, behaviors,
where a given input is mapped to a particular parameter
and a certain kind of intervention has a certain kind or
result. This kind of method seems true of most explorations
of correspondence between image and sound through
interaction.
According to this approach a perfect system might be one
that is flexible enough to generate an almost endless series
of tonal variations, yet be controllable enough so that each
one makes musical sense. In making such a system we
primarily concern ourselves with two types of question,
firstly about how data is mapped to sound, and secondly
how we might operate the system, how we know what it
will do under certain conditions and how we become
skilled in its use. The ultimate assumption is that the
system is a tool or instrument of expression, and that this
knowledge will enable the artist to control the system, so
the he or she can articulate and communicate something
about their feelings or beliefs. There are works that employ
the opposite approach, ones that make the relationship
between input and output problematic by creating systems
that range from seemingly random, to ones whereby the

Figure 1: Yasunao Tone using the Soft-board
It was known in advance that Yasunao’s work embodied
the polar opposite of these issues. Accepted knowledge
gained in addressing such issues would be called into
question (or even, totally ignored). Such work not only
challenge ideas about art, technology and creativity, but in
doing so presents new perspectives on sound and image
correspondence, generative systems and human computer
interaction in a widest sense. However, these kinds of
issues are not of central concern here, notwithstanding
there interest.

4. A New Instrument for Interaction
The interaction device made during the residency uses the
Soft-board upon which the artist draws a series of strokes.
The Soft-board sends information about pen color, and pen
position to software that is used to synthesize sound.
Projected onto the soft board is a sequence of video images
selected by the artist. As the artist draws, the video image
advances frame by frame. Data is taken from the x-y coordinates, the speed of movements and mapped to synthesis
parameters. For the duration of the residency the sound was
relayed using a pair of Tannoy active reveal monitors
playing at high volume.

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

The system was developed and implemented in Max/MSP,
which is a graphical programming environment made by
Cycling 74. At the time of making the work the third
author was an Alpha Tester for the Jitter objects for Max.
These enable the integration of real time video and 3d
graphics into the Max environment. The Jitter objects were
developed by Joshua Kit Clayton at Cycling 74 [11]. Some
third party objects were also used in the system, these
included objects from the PeRColate collection (Dan
Trueman and R. Luke DuBois Computer Music Center,
Columbia University), and Lobjects (Peter Elsea,
University of California, Santa CRUZ)
It was decided to make an effective interpreter within
Max/MSP. This object receives the stream of data from the
Soft-board and outputs information about the color of pen
being used, together with its position on the surface of the
board and information about when the current drawing
stroke began.

4.1 Sound Synthesis
The fundamental frequency of each sound generated is
determined by the brightness of the pixel. Each pixel has
brightness that generates frequencies in the range 0hz to
10khz. The brightness value is also used to multiply the
amplitude of the sound, which results in distortion
When the pen is placed on the surface, the volume is
switched on and when the pen is lifted off the volume is
silenced. Thus, sound is only heard when the pen is on the
surface. When the pen is placed at the outer extremes of the
board along the x axis (to the far left and far right) only the
fundamental frequency is present. As the pen moves closer
to the center the harmonic content is changed, the first
harmonic is introduced, then the second and so forth. The
speed of movement in the x axis (horizontal) is used to
determine the volume of sound. Slow movements in this
direction create quite sounds, and fast movements create
harsher sound. At the very center of the soft board drawing
area, a small square is defined. When this area is drawn in
it produces white noise.

5. Three Viewpoints on the Collaboration
In this section, three viewpoints on the collaboration are
presented: the technologist, the observer and the artist each
gives a first hand account of how they saw the situation.
Figure 2: Flowchart of the transformation process
The Soft-board is connected to the computer using a serial
port. It sends a collection of items of raw data as described
here:
x Information about pen color, black, blue, red, green or
eraser.
x The x-y coordinates of the pen position when it is
placed on the drawing surface.
x After an initial pen down, the delta position is sent at a
regular interval until the pen is lifted off the drawing
surface.
x The time that the pen comes into contact with the
drawing surface.
From this raw input we were able to calculate the absolute
position of the pen while it is in contact with the surface,
and also the speed or velocity of movement.
A video file was also loaded into the system. Jitter was
used to integrate video playback. At each pen down event,
the video was advanced by one frame. The position of the
pen is used to select a specific pixel of the frame. The
brightness of the pixel is read and used in the synthesis
algorithm.

The role of the technologist, in this case, was both as a
technical assistant and as the (appropriately deferential)
creative partner in the technological development. Two
people were involved and one was a sympathetic artist
himself as well as the technology expert. It is that
technologist who reports first below.
The role of the observer is an important one in the
COSTART methodology and has been described elsewhere
[2,3].
The artist’s perspective gives a true end-user evaluation as
well as the kind of perspective “from the horse’s mouth”
that can rarely be inferred from a research analysis.

5.1 The Technologist
“Reflecting on the project, it seemed that somewhere in the
contradictory traditions within which this work is often
placed, there is an attempt to confront the notion of things
having a purpose. The Fluxus artists found this idea to be
quite unimaginative. It takes us to a place where we can
only ever talk about the relationship between the
mechanistic and the metaphysical, about ideas and ways of
embodying them, about the meaning of things being
separable in some way from the things themselves. This

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

‘containment metaphor’ is mirrored throughout western
thought and is evident for example in the belief that the
artwork is a container of meaning, or that the body is the
container of the soul. Accordingly, the mechanistic is
simply a means to a higher purpose or metaphysical goal.
But here there is a questioning of this belief, where things
are given the space to reveal themselves, not simply their
‘cargo’. John Cage explains his music ‘not as a
communication from the artist to an audience, but rather as
an activity of sounds in which the artist found a way to let
sounds be themselves’[9].
Here art objects and technological tools are not considered
to be different types of artifacts that sit at opposite ends of
a process. They are not isolated sets of thing that we can
categorize or sort according to their status or function.
They present use with a system not a collection, the
principles of which are not implicit in things themselves,
but are articulated in the ways of using those things. Hence,
when an artist of this kind makes a work, the making of the
work (and the work itself) does not simply undermine the
conventional purpose of an isolated object, but in doing so
attempts to free a process (the way of doing, the way of
making) of its purpose. It asserts a kind of reverse
teleology, and undoing of what has been done, or a
rejection of that which is thought of as inherited. Changtzu, one of the founders of philosophical Taoism suggests
that ‘language must by necessity be employed as a tool, but
in such a way that it will create the conditions in which it is
no longer useful’7. Much later (and in an entirely different
context) this sentiment is echoed by Baudrillard who
argues that ‘One must free language of its purpose’ and
that ‘the deprogramming of language will be the work of
language itself. The deregulation of the system will be the
work of the system itself.’[1]
There may be many works that display this approach. By
placing an emphasis on the process (the making or the
system), they eradicate the notion of an identifiably fixed
outcome and undermine the myth of an indefinitely
adaptable means (one that necessitates the control of an
artist). In disrupting this equilibrium a question is posed
that challenges many of our beliefs about art, technology
and authorship.
Yet, in making this work (within the residency) we were
confronted with an entirely different problem. How is this
approach compatible with the use of complex tools and
systems and how can such entities, processes and
environments be given the space to ‘reveal themselves’?
Imagine a line. Imagine that this is a sort of means<>end
continuum. At one end of this line is a set of specifications
(and a designer) and at the other end a product (and its
user). The development process is the movement of things
forwards and backwards along this line. But ignore the
traffic. Instead imagine the user turning round and looking
back along the continuum - he sees it disappearing into the

distance. Now image him moving gradually towards the
opposite end of the continuum, he keeps moving until he
reaches the very end where the line stops. What does he see
now? …. That is what I saw when I met Yasunao Tone.
Part of our work in the Creativity and Cognition Research
Studios is to ask how software is made, to look at software
the way one might look at any other text, to unpick the
development cycle, to questions the design process, to
move things from the margin to the center and vice-versa.
In posing these questions we aim not to find a way of
making things better or closer to perfection, but instead just
to ask how in another context things might be different.”

5.2 The Observer
It was not possible, nor indeed desirable, for the observer
to constantly be with the Artist and Technologist;
occasional visits are sufficient to monitor progress and to
evaluate the interactions taking place.
In almost every case when the artist and technologist were
observed the situation was the same. The technologist
appeared to be working at the computer and the artist was
sitting nearby, and at times separate from the technologist.
Thus, on one occasion the technologist was programming
and the artist was reading his e-mail. Close observation
however revealed this superficial view to be deceptive. It
was quite clear that the artist was always in total artistic
control of the developmental process. He might not have
fully understood the details of the technological solution
proposed but he was clearly aware of the artistic
implications of the system being developed.
Hewett in his comments on being an observer for the
COSTART 1 project [3, chapter 13] expresses the view
that “Artists need collaborators who understand or are
empathic to their goals and their need to exercise control
for themselves”. The collaboration between technologist
and artist was an example of this model in practice. It was
clear from the start of the week that the technologist was
aware of artist’s aims and endeavored to support them to
the best of his ability. The artist was content to leave much
of the innovation and development of the system to the
technologist, whilst retaining overall control of the artistic
process. Whenever the work appeared to move away from
his chosen objectives, he firmly took control and redirected
the effort. The technologist complied with this subtle yet
stern redirection, conscious of his overriding desire to
support the artist to the best of his ability. Indeed, there
were a number of cases where the technologist felt that the
change appeared retrograde. For example, on the fourth
day, the artist insisted that stereo separation was important
and that each stereo channel produced a different sound.
The technologist’s view was that the monophonic sound
was better however he made no attempt to control the

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

outcome, deferring, almost without comment, to the artist’s
decision. It often felt like observing a craft-master working
with an experienced journeyman.”

5.3 The Artist’s Perspective
“At Loughborough University, I was lucky enough to have
been assisted by Mark Fell who had known my previous
work and understanding my ideas suggested me to use
Soft-board for the visual to sound conversion. The system
of SoftBoad has detect movements of hand drawing with
the markers on the board with the accuracy of pixel by
pixel, then the drawn lines are converted to binary data and
stored in a computer for processing.

6. Conclusions
In the Yasunao Tone residency, a highly challenging view
of human-computer interaction was taken. It lead to the
development of a quite novel interaction device that
formed the core base of a new creative performance
artwork by Tone.
The nature of the study undertaken, in which the roles of
artist, technologist and researcher were allocated equal
place, was highly effective in stimulating innovation. As
well as enabling valuable research into the creative use of
technology, the approach can be used to stimulate the
creative development of technology.

7. Acknowledgements
The authors are extremely grateful to Yasunao Tone for the
productive time that he spent with them. The work was
supported by the EPSRC research grant GR/N26272/01,
held at Loughborough University, where all of the authors
were employed at the time of Yasunao’s residency.

8. References
1. Baudrillard J, Fragments Cool Memories III, 1991-95.
Verso, London and New York. 1997.
2. Candy, L. and Edmonds, E..A. Modeling Co-Creativity
in Art and Technology, Proceedings of Creativity and
Cognition, ACM Press. New York, 2002.
Figure 3: A still from the video illustration of Tone
performing with the Soft-board
The program that using Max/MSP enables to make
parametric variants through scanning lines of video image
from the harmonics we create beforehand. Also, it makes
possible tracing positions of moving hand with a marker to
coincide the sound distribution of pitches and timbers. So a
stroke of calligraphy or tracing outline of an image invokes
great variety of sounds. Soft-board has advantages over
other device I have used, which are:
First, it makes possible to do in live performance situation,
by combining with Max/MSP. Second, when I have created
pieces I mentioned I had to transform the text into images,
which is only possible with pictogram like Chinese
characters. With Soft-board I don't need to transform
Chinese characters into images but simply draw calligraphy
on the board. Also, it enables any text into sound. In only
five days it was quite an achievement”.

3. Candy, L. and Edmonds, E. A. Explorations in Art and
Technology. Springer Verlag, 2002.
4. Candy, L. and Edmonds, E.A. Interaction in Art and
Technology. Crossings: Electronic Journal of Art and
Technology - http://crossings.tcd.ie/ Volume 2.1 2002.
5. COSTART, project: creative.lboro.ac.uk/costart
6. Creativity and Cognition Research Studios (C&CRS):
www.creativityandcognition.com
7. Edmonds E. A. & Candy L., Creativity, Art Practice
and Knowledge. CACM 45 (10) 2002.
8. Friedman, K. The Fluxus Reader, Academy Editions.
John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 1998.
9. Kostelanetz. R. The Theatre of Mixed Means. The Dial
Press, New York, 1968.
10. Licht, A. Random Tone Bursts. The Wire, issue 223,
September 2002. pp 30-33.
11. Max/MSP: http://www.cycling74.com

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

12. Soft-board, now marketed as an LT Series Interactive
Whiteboard. http://www.polyvision.com/

Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization (IV’03)
1093-9547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE

