VAST 2006 Contest – A Tale of Alderwood
Georges Grinstein1
University of
Massachusetts Lowell

Theresa O’Connell
Sharon Laskowski

Catherine Plaisant
University of Maryland

National Institute of
Standards and
Technology

1
ABSTRACT
Visual analytics experts realize that one effective way to push
the field forward and to develop metrics for measuring the
performance of various visual analytics components is to hold
an annual competition. The first Visual Analytics Science and
Technology (VAST) contest was held in conjunction with the
2006 IEEE VAST Symposium. The competition entailed the
identification of possible political shenanigans in the fictitious
town of Alderwood. A synthetic data set was made available as
well as tasks. We summarize how we prepared and advertised
the contest, developed some initial metrics for evaluation, and
selected the winners. The winners were invited to participate at
an additional live competition at the symposium to provide them
with feedback from senior analysts.

Jean Scholtz
Mark Whiting
Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory

and Data Mining Cup [3], the Critical Assessment of Microarray
Data Analysis [4], or the IEEE InfoVis contest [5]).
The VAST 2006 contest [6] was held in conjunction with the
Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST) 2006
International Symposium, October 31-November 2. One of the
objectives of the contest was to make the research community
aware of realistic tasks and data used in analytic work.
Applying research tools to tasks and data could enhance the
research team’s understanding of the impact their tool could
have on the analysis process. The contest was open to all,
except for the contest organizers and judges. Both academic and
commercial competitors could participate. Contestants could use
any existing commercial product or research prototype, and of
course could combine tools. Forming teams was strongly
encouraged.

Keywords: visual analytics, human information interaction,
sense making, evaluation, metrics, contest.
Index Terms: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces & Presentations]:
User Interfaces – Graphical User Interfaces (GUI)
1. BACKGROUND
There are currently no standard metrics for measuring the
performance of visualizations and other visual analytic
components. Our community is interested in the development of
high level metrics to measure the impact of such tools (Fig. 1).
In order to attribute improvements to visualizations, lower
level metrics need to be developed to allow comparison across a
number of different types of visualizations. An effective way to
investigate many different types of visualization is by running a
contest in conjunction with a conference [1]. Asking contest
participants to use visualizations to explore a specified data set
and perform specified tasks provides samples of visualizations
and gives researchers a chance to show their work and get
feedback.
As both the visualizations and the analytic product are
evaluated for the contest, this also provides feedback for
developing and refining the metrics. Some other conferencerelated competitions or evaluations have been very successful
(e.g. the Text REtrieval Conference [2], Knowledge Discovery
1

grinstein@cs.uml.edu; theresa.oconnell@nist.gov;
sharon.laskowski@nist.gov; plaisant@cs.umd.edu;
jean.scholtz@pnl.com; mark.a.whiting@pnl.gov

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2006
October 31 - November 2, Baltimore, MD, USA
1-4244-0592-0/06/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE

Figure 1: The three levels of evaluation and example metrics
(Figure 6.1 in [7])
2. CONTEST MATERIALS
The data set was developed by staff at the Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory. It consisted of about 1200 news stories
from the Alderwood Daily News (a fictitious town and paper)
plus other items collected by the previous fictitious investigators
including some photos, maps of Alderwood and vicinity (in
bitmap form), some files with other mixed materials
(spreadsheet with voter registry information, phone call log) and
a few pages of background information. For more information
see: http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/VASTcontest06/. The goal for
the contestants was to determine if inappropriate activities were
taking place and report on hypotheses and conclusions,
including identification of people, places, and events. For each
question answered, the relevant documents and other materials
from the dataset used to obtain the answers had to be identified
and the process used to answer these questions described. An
answer template was provided. The data set and tasks were
released in February 2006 with a submission deadline of July

215

15th, so participants had several months to prepare their
submissions.
3. ADVERTISING AND DISSEMINATION
The announcement was posted on numerous IEEE and ACM
sites as well as KDD and European visualization or graphics
groups. Personal emails were sent out as well to individuals that
managed distribution lists or had an interest in visualization.
Last year’s IEEE Visualization participant list also received the
announcement. Web search engines were provided with key
words for quick search returns.
4. SUBMISSIONS AND JUDGING
We received six submissions. All contestants worked hard
preparing their entries and all teams will be given certificates of
participation. Submissions which included a video describing
the tools used and the process of discovery were reviewed by
external judges with content and visual analytics expertise.
Since we had a synthetic dataset “ground truth” was known
which allowed us to compare it with the teams’ answers, and to
experiment with some quantitative metrics. Scoring was based
on the correctness of answers to the questions and the evidence
provided, the subjective assessment of the quality of the
displays, interactions and support for the analytical process, the
clarity of the explanations provided, and the quality of the
submitted video.
Two full day judging sessions took place in separate
locations. A total of 10 judges reviewed the materials submitted
by six teams. Experts in visual analytics, human-computer
interaction and visualization participated, as well as professional
analysts. The judges reviewed the correctness of the answers,
the evidence provided, the quality of the explanations of the
process used, and the description of how the tool facilitated the
analysis. Videos proved very useful in clarifying the verbal
descriptions of the processes used. Each team of judges wrote a
summary of their conclusions and suggested awards. Finally,
the contest chairs discussed the results and made the final award
decisions.
5. WINNERS AND THE LIVE CONTEST
There were 3 winners.
•
First place, Corporate Category:
Proulx, P., et al., Oculus Info Inc.
•
First Place, Student Category:
Adams, S. and Singhal, K., Georgia Inst. of Tech.
•
Second Place, Corporate Category:
Lankenau, R. et al., SSS Research, Inc.
The three teams have been invited to participate in a special
interactive contest before the symposium during which
professional analysts will interact with the systems and provide
feedback. For this live contest (3 hours), a similar but smaller set
of materials will be used. Each team will consist of two
participants, one of which will be an assigned senior analyst,
who will be trained on the team’s tool usage. The team will then
analyze the new contest data. The correctness of their answers
and the number of subplots they are able to locate will be a
factor in the overall scoring. The participating analyst and
contest judges will assess the process of arriving at the answers
during the live contest and use a rating scale for the subjective
assessment. The research teams will be allowed to drive the

216

application to eliminate the analysts’ having to learn all the
details of how to operate the software.
These three winners deserve special recognition for the effort
they undertook to participate in this contest and will receive a
awards. They were also invited to present their work during the
poster session. Their materials will be posted on the contest
website and linked to the Information Visualization Benchmark
Repository [8].
6. CONCLUSIONS
We need to develop an approach to facilitate partnering. We
thought that this would happen with groups having
complementary expertise (e.g. groups with text analysis or
reasoning tools might want to seek partners with user interface
expertise) but it did not. We had few entries but enough to
make the evaluation exercise a valuable experience.
The data sets and results are archived. Our hope is that in the
future the visual analytics community can organize a TREC-like
series of yearly evaluations or competitions. We believe it is
valuable to have both classic contest submissions as well as a
live one. The data set complexity could be increased over the
years by a combination of adding more data types, providing
larger volumes of data, adding uncertainty, increasing deception,
and increasing the complexity of scenarios.
We use Thomas and Cook’s levels as a guideline for
evaluation [6]. The metrics need to be refined and validated. A
meta analysis could then be performed to determine any
correlations between qualitative and quantitative measures. We
hope that future contests will appeal to larger and more diverse
audiences than just the visual analytics community and that the
competition will encourage partnerships and collaborations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the Disruptive Technology
Office and by the National Visualization and Analytics CenterTM
(NVACTM) located at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
in Richland, WA. The Pacific Northwest National Laboratory is
managed for the U.S. Department of Energy by Battelle
Memorial Institute under Contract DE-AC05-76RL01830.
REFERENCES
[1] Plaisant, C., Fekete, J., Grinstein, G., Promoting Insight
Based Evaluation of Visualizations: From Contest to
Benchmark Repository. HCIL Technical Report # 2004-30.
www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/pubs/tech-reports.shtml
[2] TREC: http://trec.nist.gov/
[3] KDD Cup: www.acm.org/sigs/sigkdd/kddcup/index.php
[4] CAMDA: www.camda.duke.edu/camda06
[5] Infovis 2004 contest : www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/iv04contest
[6]] VAST 2006 Contest:
www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/VASTcontest06
[7] Thomas, J. and Cook, K. (Eds.) Illuminating the Path:
The Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics
IEEE CS Press (2005), http://nvac.pnl.gov/agenda.stm
[8] Information Visualization Repository:
www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/InfovisRepository/

