Case Study: Design and Assessment of an Enhanced Geographic Information System for Exploration of Multivariate Health Statistics
Robert M. Edsall
Department of Geography
Arizona State University
robedsall@asu.edu

Alan M. MacEachren
Department of Geography
The Pennsylvania State University
alan@geog.psu.edu

Abstract
An implementation of an interactive parallel coordinate
®
plot linked with the ArcView geographic information system (GIS) is presented. The integrated geographic visualization system was created for the exploratory analysis
of mortality data from specific cancers as they relate, specifically spatially, to other mortality causes and to demographic and socioeconomic risk factors. The linked and
interactive parallel coordinate plot was tested with and
compared to a similarly interactive and linked scatterplot
in usability assessments designed to assess each representation’s relative effectiveness for exploration of these data
sets. Evidence from these studies suggests that multivariate, spatial, and/or time series exploration is enhanced
through the use of the parallel coordinate plot linked to
maps.

1. Introduction
Epidemiologists are among the many types of researchers for whom the understanding of the data sets they frequently use is made challenging by the multidimensional
nature of those data. This paper will report on an effort to
design and implement a visualization environment that
links a geographic information system (GIS) to customdesigned interactive statistical representations, with the
specific conceptual goal of exploring health statistics data
of many dimensions. A two-part usability assessment,
also described here, lends support to the assertion that
multiple linked views, in particular the linked parallel coordinate plot, scatterplot, and choropleth map, facilitate
the construction of knowledge about multivariate health
statistics data.

2. HealthVisPCP
The visualization environment described in this paper is
an extension of previous work to link GIS to statistical
graphics for health statistics visualization. MacEachren,
Boscoe, et al. [1] developed the original HealthVis system

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

Linda Pickle
National Cancer Institute
picklel@mail.nih.gov

to analyze (visually) spatial, temporal, and attribute features of health statistics for the National Center for
Health Statistics (NCHS). The extensions to HealthVis
described here were implemented as part of a contract
from the National Cancer Intsiute (NCI).
Implementation of HealthVis, and of extensions specific to the NCI contract discussed in detail below, were
accomplished using ArcView®’s scripting language
“Avenue.” The HealthVis system consisted of: (1) a
choropleth map of approximately 800 “health service
areas” (HSAs), multi-county units in the U.S. used by
federal agencies for analyzing health statistics data; (2) a
scatter plot, and (3) a map legend. The developers were
able to take advantage of the existing interaction capabilities of the GUI of ArcView®, like panning, zooming,
and selecting. In addition, interactive extensions were
added to the representations above to facilitate domainspecific queries. The extensions included a focus-bypercentile tool, a brushing tool, and a specialized bivariate map. An additional useful feature of the original
HealthVis system is the dynamic classifier, which allows
users to drag lines on the plot that represent class breaks.
Such manipulations alter the classification scheme on all
the representations.
HealthVisPCP expands the HealthVis system both
conceptually and operationally. A new conceptual goal
not discussed among those for the original implementation is the facilitation of multidimensional exploration
among several variables, accomplished by developing a
dynamic parallel coordinate plot (PCP) in Avenue.
The application (Figure 1) adds a dynamic PCP (each
line on which represents a single HSA) to HealthVis.
The choropleth map is colored according to a statistic
(such as “prostate cancer mortality, white male”) and a
year. The statistic and the year can be selected by the
user in a redesigned dialog box known as the Thematic
Mapper. Also in this dialog box, a user can specify the
number of classes for a univariate choropleth map, and
can alternatively create a bivariate map.
Linked brushing was also implemented. When an object, or set of objects (HSAs in the choropleth map,
points on the scatter plot, or lines on the PCP), is selected by the user (by clicking on the object or dragging

sessment (described in the next section) was to discover
whether or not these disadvantages can be overcome by
the PCP’s use in an interactive environment.

3. Investigating linked statistical graphics:
usability assessment of HealthVisPCP

Figure 1. The HealthVisPCP environment.

a box in the display), the corresponding object(s) in the
other two representations is (are) also highlighted.
The tools for manipulating the three representations
(PCP, scatter plot, and map – all View documents) behaved similarly across the representation types (panning,
zooming, brushing, etc.). Similar to the dynamic classifier
of the original system, a axis reordering tool was implemented on the dynamic PCP, in cases where a user wishes
to compare variables represented on axes that, in the default ordering, are not adjacent. Since at any given time,
the PCP is able to show a limited number (three or four)
variables at its default zoom extent, a mechanism for panning the display left and right (to reveal other axes) was
included. Also added was a button that zooms the PCP to
a default extent that maximizes the amount of information
contained in the PCP display. These developments were
based on previous and independent work on making PCPs
dynamic in other projects [4], [Dykes], [Wegman].
HealthVisPCP was developed not only to assist health
researchers gain a new perspective on their data, but also
to serve as a vehicle for the testing of the usability of PCPs
and their relative utility for display and analysis of multidimensional information. The assertion that the PCP is an
effective tool for prompting multivariate thinking seems
reasonable, but has never been tested, although most authors who have written about or implemented PCPs assert
their effectiveness for that (or a similar) purpose [2, 3, 4].
Though the PCP is a clever data representation technique, it has several disadvantages over the scatterplot and
other statistical graphics that may limit its effectiveness for
visualization of data relationships. In particular, the use of
lines as opposed to points (on a scatter plot) to represent
individual observations requires the use of a great deal
more “display real estate” (or ink on a piece of paper), so
that the result may quickly (with increasing number of
observations) become a confusing tangle of colors and
pixels that has little explanatory power. A goal in the as-

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

The specific goals of the assessment were to compare
the relative effectiveness of each representation form
(the scatter plot and the PCP) for a series of narrowly
defined tasks (in phase one), and to test the effectiveness
of the environment as a whole for unrestricted exploration of multivariate spatiotemporal data (in phase two).
In June of 2000, thirty-one subjects at Penn State and
six subjects at the National Cancer Institute participated
in the assessment sessions. After an initial training tutorial, the assessment consisted of two phases during
which data was recorded.

3.1. Assessment: Phase One
The first phase in testing the usability environment
compared the use of the PCP and the scatterplot in isolation from each other. The strategy for comparing these
representations consisted of examining the performance
of users in accomplishing a set of narrowly defined tasks
considered typical for use of the system to explore health
statistics.
In phase one, the participants were presented with sixteen tasks in the form of multiple-choice questions.
These questions dealt with data pre-loaded into HealthVisPCP concerning prostate and lung cancer over time
(part of a sample set of health data supplied by the NCI).
Each question was carefully created to represent one of
the tasks in a typology that focused on three characteristics of the task: the dimensionality of the task (the number of variables involved), the spatial extent of the task
(the number of spatial units – HSAs – involved), and
task complexity (the difficultly of the task). This task
space is diagrammed in Figure 2.1 For example, a multiple unit, multiple-variable, value comparison task (a particularly difficult task type) was “which of the following
HSAs is most like Charlotte, NC, in trend and value of
lung cancer from 1979-81 to 1991-93?”
Given the geometry and purpose of the PCP relative
to the scatterplot and other statistical graphics of lower
dimensionality, one reasonable assertion is that the PCP
would outperform the scatter plot in questions regarding
multivariate tasks. The reverse may be true for those
queries requiring bivariate interpretations. Because of
this possibility (and others like it), it is reasonable to
expect that users need to be given, and prefer working
1

These task characteristics represent only three of a larger
superset of possible “dimensions” of a task typology.

with, multiple representations forms in order to explore
complex geospatial data fully and comprehensively.
There were two questions of each of the eight types
tested (a subset of the possible types in the typology described above). In this phase, participants were shown
only one of the two statistical graphic representations at a
time,
the
scatter plot or
the PCP (seeing each representation
for
eight
questions, in
random order).
Both
the participants’
anFigure 2. The task typology used in creating
swers to the
questions for the assessment.
questions and
the interactions the participants made with the environment to reach
an answer were recorded for analysis.

3.2. Assessment: Phase Two
In phase two, participants were presented with an openended task. They were given a new set of data – heart
disease and lung cancer mortality rates over time – and
asked to play the role of an epidemiologist, looking for
patterns and structure in these health statistics. The subjects were able to use any of the HealthVisPCP representations (scatterplot, PCP, map, Thematic Mapper, etc.) to
look for interesting spatial, temporal, spatiotemporal, or
attribute trends in the data. Their interactions were logged
as in phase one. Participants were asked to provide written
commentaries of their observations (in a text-entry dialog
box).

3.3. Results: The Accuracy Analysis
The interaction logs recorded in phase one were carefully designed to facilitate querying using relational database software. In order to analyze the accuracy of responses, a series of cross-tabulations were designed, yielding multivariate contingency tables. The “response” variable in the tables is the number (and percent) of correct
responses, given a representation form (PCP or scatter
plot) and given a question type. Since the focus of this
particular assessment is the effect of the representation
type on question-answering accuracy, given specific types
of questions, multi-way tables were also created to list the
counts of correct and incorrect answers according to representation type, then by question type.
Some of these multi-way tables seemed to show a potentially significant difference in performance between the

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

representation
% correct
% correct
types, given a
dimensionality using PCP using SP
state of variable
single-var
74.14%
79.66%
dimensionality
dual-var
72.09%
78.16%
in the question
multi-var
76.83%
67.82%
(Table 1).
A
logistic regresTable 1. Sample contingency table,
sion
model,
suggesting that the scatterplot was
appropriate for
used more successfully to solve dualbinary categorivariable tasks, but that the PCP was
used more successfully to solve multical
response
ple-variable tasks.
variables
(in
this case, “correct” or “incorrect” answers) was fit to the observed values. Despite the apparent interactions in the contingency
tables, the model specified in the analysis (via a backwards-elimination process in SAS) did not retain interactions that would have resulted if the representation type,
given a specific question type, had a significant influence
on the odds of a correct or incorrect answer. Although
the raw data seem to indicate such interactions, the statistical evidence for such a relationship was not present.
However, the intercept term in the model was very significant, indicating that the odds of a correct answer are
much greater (regardless of representation type or any of
the other explanatory variables) than those of an incorrect answer. This latter result provides relatively strong
support for the overall contention that visualization environments that incorporate multiple linked representations
forms are usable and useful.

3.4. Results: The Interaction Log Visualizations
Analysis of the interaction logs involved the investigation of the actual interaction that led to the responses
analyzed above. Is it possible to observe a “sophisticated” interaction strategy that would lead to a correct
answer?
Interaction logs may be analyzed in a variety of
ways. To discover whether there was a discernable difference between interaction strategies leading to either
successful or unsuccessful task accomplishment, eight of
the 34 interaction logs were selected for visual analysis.
The eight consisted of two groups: the four who scored
the highest on the 16-question phase-two questionnaire
and the four who scored the lowest.
We produced graphs that serve as timelines of interactions (Figure 3). For this analysis, interactions were
grouped on the y-axis according to the window that was
manipulated. The example in the figure (with system,
map, and PCP interactions grouped together) is the ordering we chose to emphasize, since we were primarily
interested in the representations being manipulated.
Comparing the black (incorrect) and white (correct)
traces, much can be discerned. Among other observa-

comprehensive commentaries – those that discuss spatial, temporal, spatiotemporal, and attribute trends, patterns, and hypotheses – are those that made extensive
use of the interactive capabilities of the statistical representations.

4. Conclusions

Figure 3. Example interaction log for 5 participants while using
PCP. Traces of correct answers are solid, incorrect are dashed.
Traces of adept users are white, less adept users are black.

tions, successful subjects were found to exhibit more interaction with the system before deciding on each response.
Visualizing these interaction logs also reveals evidence of
specific sequences and strategies that are more likely to
lead to a correct answer.

3.5. Results: The Exploration Logs
The interaction logs described above also serve as useful tools to understand how subjects used the tools and the
environment for more free-form exploration of data about
which they knew little or nothing (and for which they were
not prompted by a request to perform specific tasks).
What useful information can be gleaned from these interaction logs and their corresponding commentary statements?
Indeed, the sophistication and type of strategy employed in interacting with the system to explore data seem
to have an effect on the type and quality of the observations in the commentary. For example, all of the
recorded commentaries are similar in that each includes
some recognition of spatial patterns. These observations
are possible only through the use of the choropleth map
(either alone or in tandem with other representations).
This use is reflected in the frequent use of the Thematic
Mapper tool, which changes all representations to varying
degrees, but has an obvious and direct effect on the map.
Temporal trends, in contrast, were observed only by those
subjects who interacted with the PCP, perhaps reflecting
the ability of the PCP to be transformed into a time sequence by the proper ordering of axes.
Through these assessments, it can be said that the parallel coordinate plot and the scatter plot play important
roles in successful exploration: the most complex and

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

In this paper, a system for exploring health statistics
is presented. The multidimensional nature of health
statistics and their analysis calls for creative and useful
techniques for their visual representation. A highly interactive system like the one presented here allows multiple perspectives on complex information, which can
lead to deeper and more comprehensive knowledge construction about the data represented. This assertion is
examined in a usability assessment focused on the efficacy of the parallel coordinate plot and scatterplot when
linked to a geographic representation (like a choropleth
map). The findings of the assessment include the lack of
support for the superiority of the PCP or scatterplot to
accomplish narrowly defined tasks of any specific type
(at least according to the task typology developed for the
evaluation). Nevertheless, interaction logs and written
commentary of participants in the study indicate that a
visualization environment is most effective for data exploration when a variety of tools are presented to and
used by the researcher. The linked PCP is one of a suite
of tools and representations which, in tandem, serve to
create an important visual link between the human analyst and the represented multidimensional data.
We are pleased to acknowledge support for portions of this
work provided by a contract from the NIH-National Cancer
Institute and a grant from the U.S. National Science Foundation (#EIA9983451).
[1] MacEachren, A.M., F. Boscoe, D. Haug, and L. Pickle.
“Geographic Visualization: Designing Manipulable Maps for
Exploring Temporally Varying Georeferenced Statistics.” Proceedings of Information Visualization '98. IEEE Computer
Society, Raleigh-Durham, NC, Oct. 19-20, 1998, pp. 87-94.
[2] Inselberg, A. “The Plane with Parallel Coordinates.” The
Visual Computer 1: 69-97. 1985.
[3] Wegman, J. J. “Hyperdimensional Data Analysis Using
Parallel Coordinates.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 85(411): 664-675. 1990.
[4] Edsall, R. “Development of Interactive Tools for the Exploration of Large Geographic Databases.” 19th International
Cartographic Conference, Ottawa, University of Victoria. 34B.
1999.
[5] Dykes, J.A. “Cartographic Visualization: Exploratory Spatial Data Analysis with Local Indicators of Spatial Association
using Tcl/Tk and cdv,” The Statistician, 47(3), 485-497. 1998.

