Battlespace Visualization: A Grand Challenge
Moderator:
Jeffrey L. Posdamer, Ph.D., Sarnoff Corporation
Panelists:
Jack Dantone, Rear Admiral (Ret.), National Imagery and Mapping Agency
Nahum Gershon, Ph.D., MITRE Corporation
Jon Dale, National Imagery and Mapping Agency
Trish Hamburger, Naval Surface Warfare Center
Ward Page, DARPA

Over the last several years, the size and significance of
problems to which visualization has been applied has increased significantly. A few problems can be thought of
as Grand Challenge domains; problems of such consequence, size and complexity that their solution represents
a significant validation of our technology’s value. Battlespace Visualization, BV, ingests complex, real-time,
multi-source, multi-type data; must create tailorable, multipurpose presentations; and, must present a robust, intuitive, easily learned, interactive interface to life-and-death
decision makers. It represents a union of technical challenges that, regardless of problem domain, makes BV a
Visualization Grand Challenge.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

Battlespace Visualization represents a challenge
of many different dimensions:
1.

Data comes from many heterogeneous sources. Terrain, map and imagery inputs are high-resolution and,
as a consequence, very large data sets. Operational,
intelligence and logistics data come from independent, legacy, real-time sources and represent tens of
thousands of dynamic elements (compared to a total
of less than 10,000 stocks on the combined NYSE,
ASE and NASDAQ).

2.

While the real-time and contextual data represent a
‘fire hose’ of data, the BV system and users need
only a small, but flexibly selected, subset of that data

to be presented at any one time. Since mission, task,
echelon, and user vary from moment to moment, the
BV system must operate an extremely agile mechanism for tailoring the content of the presentation.
3.

The HCI for operating the system, its data feeds and
tailoring the sources, selection and appearance of the
presentation must be operated by a staff under high
stress and with minimal computer science training.

4.

The essence of the BV problem is to create a visualization that conveys the important information in a
manner which allows rapid, confident, (often distributed) effective decision making. Designing the visual presentation to meet the needs of a wide variety
of users, situations, geographic and temporal extents
and data sources is, and remains, a challenge to all of
the elements of visualization technology.

The extremely large amount and variability of
data, response, and reliability requirements and consequences of failure make this among the most challenging
of visualization undertakings.
The goals of the session are to convey the technical challenge of working in BV to a broader part of the
Visualization community and to engage in technical interchange about innovative solutions to the Challenge problems. The session will begin with a short video montage
of material from several BV systems and a statement from
each panel member.
The panel will consist of experts from Battlespace Visualization implementation, evaluation, and the
user communities.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2001 (INFOVIS’01)
1522-4048/01 $17.00 © 2001 IEEE

Biographies
Jeffrey L. Posdamer has spent the last ten years working
in a variety of BV areas including design, implementation, field testing, and evaluation. Dr. Posdamer was on
the original Visualization Conference organizing committee.
Jack Dantone was the founding Director of the National
Imagery and Mapping Agency and currently serves as
liaison between DARPA and the Joint Forces Command,
Joint Experimentation Command.
Nahum Gershon has led efforts in BV for government
agencies including futures studies in technologies and
applications. Dr. Gershon is currently active in the Visualization conference.
Jon Dale is leading efforts within the Intelligence Community to support basic and applied research on Visualization technology.
Trish Hamburger has led several efforts to evaluate the
effectiveness of concepts including the efficacy of various
forms of BV to naval command and control.
Ward Page has been involved in developing visualization
technologies for training, intelligence analysis, and situation awareness. Currently, he is leading an effort developing visualization technologies for the unique area of
command.

