Genetic Algorithms in Design: Theory and Application
George Katodrytis
School of Architecture and Design, American University of Sharjah, U.A.E.
{gkatodrytis@aus.ac.ae}
Abstract
This paper examines the complex encounters between
digital media and the current discourse in architectural
theory and practice. Although virtuality has been seen as
an agent of alienation from the material reality of
architecture, it has so far proven to have the reverse
effect: reconditioning the nature of built form and
reasserting the way we design it. The paper considers the
points of overlap in the autopoiesis of architecture,
Adorno’s “mimetic impulse”, and Benjiamin’s concept
of fetishism, to explore confusions of identity between
the mental or virtual and the physical, the organic and the
inorganic. New norms of spatial identification are
established - that of surface and genetic algorithmic
structure as a three-dimensional space.
1.
2.
3.
4.

Digital Uncanny
Mimetic Impulse
Genetic Algorithmic and the Autopoiesis of
Architecture
Surface Spatiality / Structural Morphology
Keywords--- Algorithms, Morphogenetic,
Architecture

1. Digital Uncanny
I would argue that from its inception, digital media were
considered as a discipline external to architecture. By
definition the digital in architecture does not exist.
Despite this, architecture would seem to be the medium
that truly lends itself to digital exploration, both in
physical and psychical structures. It creates a topology of
symbolic forms as digital constructs. More importantly,
it manifests itself in the most ambiguous element – space
– within which any projection moves freely and without
fixed boundaries. What the new technology of the digital
media has managed to achieve is to unraveled the
repressed condition and abandoned projects of 20th c
architecture (Futurists and Surrealists) and, in a strange
way, challenge the only ideology that created it:
modernism and its associated technology. One may talk
about the digital uncanny and introjections.

In architectural terms, the search for modernism’s
repressed condition was concentrated in the domain that
the modernists had clearly and polemically identified as
the basis of their attack on tradition: the irrational, the
decorative and the uncanny. A good example is Tzara’s
indictment of modern architecture as a “complete
negation of the image of the dwelling”. “Modern
architecture,” Tzara argued, “as hygienic and stripped of
ornaments as it wants to appear, has no chance of
living…because it is the complete negation of the image
of the dwelling.”
In the modernists’ tradition, the line between nature and
machine, between the organic and the inorganic seemed
clear; organicism was a metaphor, not reality. But for the
current digital media, the boundaries between organic
and inorganic are blurred; the body itself, invaded and
reshaped by technology, in turn invades, permeates the
space outside, even as this space takes on dimensions
that themselves confuse the inner an the outer, visually
and physically. As Walter Benjiamin presciently
observed, “The work of Le Corbusier seems to arise
when the “house” as mythological configuration
approaches its end.” Digital technology attempts to
reincarnate this “mythological configurations”, repressed
by modernism, with the monstrous and anamorphic
merging of animal and house as an oneiric machine, a
machine for dreaming. After all, there is no architecture
without dream, myth and fantasy.

Figure 1 Project by author

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

The blurring of lines between the mental and physical,
the organic and inorganic was, transformed by the
surrealists and, especially by Dali, into a formulation that
stressed the intersection of the biological and the
constructional, building and psyche, architecture and
hysteria, in order to produce the ultimate object of desire,
or, at least, its reification. Characterized by its mimesis
of the digestible, it was an architecture that, in Dali’s
words “verified that urgent “function,” so necessary for
the amorous imagination: to be able in the most literal
way possible to eat the object of desire.” Walter
Benjiamin stated that the intersection of technology and
nature was represented by the displacement of symbols
from Romanticism to Modernism. Here we may begin to
trace the affiliations of Surrealism and modernism on the
level of technique - affiliates that were stated by
Benjamin in the aphorism: “The reactionary attempt that
seeks to detach the forms imposed by technique from
their functional context and to make natural constants out
of them – that is to say, to stylize them…” In
Benjiamin’s terms, the structure that unified the two was
fetishism. For fetishism, in its multiple displacements,
“suppresses the barriers which separate the organic from
the inorganic world.” It is as “at home in a world of the
inert as in the world of the modern mechanization of the
dwelling in its mission of repression against the bric-abrac of the nineteen century.”

2. Mimetic Impulse

Figure 2 The act of mimesis
What happens, then, when the fusion between the
organic and the inorganic takes form? Mimesis? A
mimesis that has a multiple interpretation. Digital
technology mimicking architectural space, so much that
it becomes believable and “real”, so that organic and
inorganic matter, animate and inanimate forms becoming
indistinguishable. Form becomes malleable and
changeable and interactive, as though it imitates its
occupants. The body fuses with its surroundings.
According to Walter Benjamin and Theodor Adorno's
biologically determined model, mimesis is posited as an
adaptive behavior that allows humans to make

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

themselves similar to their surrounding environments
through assimilation. Through physical and bodily acts
of mimesis (i.e. the chameleon blending in with its
environment), the distinction between the self and other
becomes porous and flexible. Rather than dominating
nature, mimesis as mimicry opens up a tactile experience
of the world in which the Cartesian coordinates of
subject and object are not firm, but rather malleable.
Adorno's discussion of mimesis originates in a biological
context in which mimicry (a mediator between life and
death) is a zoological predecessor to mimesis. Animals
are seen as genealogically perfecting mimicry
(adaptation to their surroundings with the intent to
deceive or delude their pursuer) as a means of survival.
Survival, the attempt to guarantee life, is thus dependant
upon the identification with something external. The
manner in which mimesis is viewed, as a correlative
behavior in which a subject actively engages in "making
oneself similar to an Other", dissociates it from its
definition as merely imitation.
According to Adorno, “by means of the mimetic
impulse, the living being equates himself with objects in
his surroundings.” This surely holds the key to exploring
the question of how human beings situate themselves
within their environment, and points to an area in which
the domain of psychoanalysis may offer crucial insights
into the mechanism by which humans relate to their
habitat. It begins to suggest, for example, that the way in
which humans progressively feel 'at home' in a particular
building, is through a process of symbolic identification
with that building. They may come to identify with
technological objects. This symbolic attachment is
something that does not come into operation
automatically; it occurs gradually. Mimesis in Adorno,
and in Walter Benjamin, is a psychoanalytic term - taken
from Freud - that refers to a creative engagement with an
object. Mimesis is a term, as Freud himself predicted, of
great potential significance for aesthetics.
To understand the meaning of mimesis in Adorno we
must recognise its origin in the process of modelling, of
'making a copy of'. In essence it refers to an
interpretative process that relates not just to the creation
of a model, but also to the engagement with that model.
In mimesis imagination is at work, and serves to
reconcile the subject with the object. This imagination
operates at the level of fantasy, which mediates between
the unconscious and the conscious, dream and reality.
It is important to recognize here the question of
temporality. Symbolic significance may shift - often
dramatically - over a period of time. What was once
shockingly alien may eventually appear reassuringly
familiar. The way in which we engage with architecture
must therefore be seen not as a static condition, but as a
dynamic process.
Mimesis for Benjamin offers a way of finding meaning

in the world, through the discovery of similarities. These
similarities become absorbed and then rearticulated in
language, no less than in dance or other art forms.

the act of mimesis happens.

3. Genetic Algorithmic and the Autopoiesis
of Architeture

Architecture along with the other visual arts can
therefore be viewed as a potential reservoir for the
operation of mimesis. In the very design of buildings the
architect may articulate the relational correspondence
with the world that is embodied in the concept of
mimesis. These forms may be interpreted in a similar
fashion by those who experience the building, in that the
mechanism by which human beings begin to feel at home
in the built environment can also be seen as a mimetic
one.

Figure 5 Project by author

Figure 3 Project by author

Figure 6 This image was created by placing the
algorithm onto a unit sized NURBS plane

Figure 4 Project by author
Mimesis, then, may help explain how we identify
progressively with our surroundings. In effect, we read
ourselves in our surroundings, without being fully
conscious of it. “By means of the mimetic impulse,” as
Adorno comments, 'the living being equates himself with
objects in his surroundings”. The aim throughout is to
forge a creative relationship with our environment. When
we see our values 'reflected' in our surroundings, this
feeds our narcissistic urge, and breaks down the
subject/object divide. It is as though - to use Walter
Benjamin's use of the term mimesis - in the flash of the
mimetic moment, the fragmentary is recognized as part
of the whole, and the individual is inserted within an
harmonic totality. It is within the new digital spaces that

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

The new digital approach to architectural design is based
on computational concepts such as topological space,
isomorphic surfaces, parametric design, and genetic
algorithms. Architecture is recasting itself, becoming - in
part - an experimental investigation of topological
geometries. Digital media is employed not as a
representational tool for visualization, but as a generative
tool for the derivation of form and its transformation –
the digital morphogenesis. It explores the possibilities of
the “finding form”, that the emergence of various
digitally based generative techniques seem to bring
about. Topological space opens up a universe where
essentially curvilinear forms are not stable but may
undergo variations, giving rise to new possibilities, i.e.,
the emergent form.
The computer simulation of evolutionary processes is
already a well-established technique for the study of
biological dynamics. This is based on mimesis and on
evolutionary simulations to breed new forms rather than
specifically design them. This algorithm searches needs
to be sufficiently rich for the evolutionary results to be
truly surprising and for exploration of space rich enough

so that all the possibilities cannot be considered in
advance. This unpredictability of the new, like an
outcome of a design process, makes genetic algorithms
useful visualization tools.
In the task of designing rich search spaces, certain
philosophical ideas, which may be traced to the work of
Gilles Deleuze, play a very important role. Though not
invented by Deleuze, he was the one who brought them
together for the first time, making the basis for a brand
new conception of the genesis of form. As Manuel De
Landa says in his essay: “Deleuze and the Use of the
Genetic Algorithm in Architecture” mentions, that the
productive use of generic algorithmic implies the
deployment of three forms of philosophical thinking:
1. Populational thinking: The sequence of operations
points at spontaneous and multiple mutations.
2. Intensive thinking: Without the structural engineering
and distributions of stress, a virtual building will not
evolve as a building.
3. Topological thinking: The obtained with the genetic
algorithm must demonstrate an incredible combinatorial
productivity like in natural forms, with thousands
possibilities.
The employment of Generic Design Strategies develop
autonomous architectural concepts, which replace the
traditional hierarchical processes of production known as
“cause and effect,” with generative systems of reciprocal
and interdependent relationships: new organizational
patterns and weavings and performative morphologies
that can modulate and differentiate the environment. In
doing so, we have suggested alternative forms of
habitation: interlacing and networking lines into complex
configurations. This morphogenetic process includes
pattern, repetition and permutations.
The tendency towards architectural autonomy might
be understood as a moment of an overall societal process
of differentiation. Traditionally, architecture and good
design were inseparably connected with a society and
with harmony. The new algorithmic evolutionary
conditions give architecture an autopoiesis. The
autopoietic system as a complex, historically evolving
system always uses time and involves series of events in
its "responses", so that simple, predictable one-to-one
correlations between environmental impacts and system
responses are out of the question. Recent developments
in digital technology expose a degree of autonomy that
architectural discourse has established by differentiating
itself from the immediacy of everyday talk about
buildings, and thus the complexity of the discursive
detour, which mediates a particular impact/response,
should grow with the overall complexity of society.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 7 Project by author
Current experimental work focuses on issues of
organizational complexity (layering, interpenetration of
domains), the production of diversity (iteration vs.
repetition), the spatial recognition of fuzzy social logics
(smooth vs. striated space), ways of coping with
uncertainty (virtuality vs. actuality), and engagement
with new production technologies.
What is important about the morphogenetic model is the
degree to which it allows for a coexistence of various
forces, engendering an autogenetic, autopoietic and
mimetic system. Autopoietic systems produce theories of
complex self-organization that nevertheless can become
problematic. Self-organization or autopoiesis is thus
impossible without the necessary random inﬂux of
external forces. This is precisely Felix Guattari’s point
when he talks about the machine and its arrangement that
a machinic arrangement of heterogeneous forces and
heterogeneous autopoietic processes are much more
interesting than simple models of poiesis.

4. Surface Spatiality /
Structural Morphology

Figure 10 Example of a script to pipe curves
Figure 8 Project by author
It is time to move from theorizing forms to structuring
them. The new apace is the outcome of the synthesis
between space-oriented and structure-oriented models,
developing
self-regulatory
patterns
in
which
potentialities are regulated by the developing structure
itself. These techniques result in the simulation of
evolutionary and environment based three-dimensional
structures and surfaces. This results in high-speed
generation of formal systems. The new research in
architecture involves structural morphology, generative
modeling of architectural form. The design process now
has turned from mimetic into one of growth, based on
given data (directions or restrictions). Algorithmic
structure represents abstract patterns that are not
necessarily associated with experience or perception.
Algorithmic processes result from events that are often
neither observable nor predictable and seem to be highly
intuitive. In this sense, algorithmic processes become a
vehicle for exploration that extends beyond the limits of
perception.

Figure 9 Project by author

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

One example of fusing surface and structure is the
production of weaves, a tool that generates woven
meshes. This script uses a grammar capable of describing
and generating woven strands to a user-defined surface.
It allows the user to explore patterns that can be either
used to generate the building morphology or be applied
to a shape established by other parameters.
The architectural process is now evolutionary and
intuitive. As if re-enacting Surrealism in a new form, the
modernist repressed condition may have been liberated,
replaced by the uncanny and the myth and the new
autopoiesis of architecture.

References
Anthony Vidler. Fantasy, the Uncanny and Surrealist Theories
of Architecture, essay, 2003
Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari. A Thousand Plateaus.
(University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1987)
Gilles Deleuze. Difference and Repetition. (Columbia
UniversityPress, New York, 1994)
Manuel De Landa. Deleuze and the Use of the Generic
Algorithmic in Architecture, essay, 2001

