2

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION, VOL. PC-26, NO. I, MARCH 1983

Preface

L

IKE the man in the cartoon, I've been collecting little
notes about items for this preface . But first, a quick look
at the issue.
THIS ISSUE

The first four papers concern the writing process. Yvonne
Day demonstrates what to cut out of your writing; Muriel
Zimmerman advocates what to build into it; H. F. Lippincott offers a seven-point guide for revising it; and Jim
Corey prioritizes characteristics when not all can be accommodated.
Next, how should you make decisions about documents?

Joel Haness tells how to constructively review someone
else 's letter or report, and Richard Conway looks at company-oriented factors that can separate publishable documents from nonpublishable ones.

Presentations are the subject of the next three authors . John
Donee comments on the problems of a speech writer; Joan
Dornbusch gives advice to a speech reader; and Eric
Skopec analyzes the whole presentation process as a systematic problem-solving activity .

In the final pair of papers, Thomas Ealey outlines the
considerations that go into seminar development, and William Houze advises technical writers and editors to retool
their work from wordsmithing to information processing.
MORE USER FRIENDLY?
If you're a regular reader of this TRANSACTIONS, you've
probably noticed already that we've modified our typography. The changes are intended to make the text easier to
read-easier for the eye to locate the headings ("road
signs"), to take a break between paragraphs (segments of
information), and to track from line to line . The modest
increase in white space also lightens the appearance of the
mostly text-full pages .
Readers with a good memory may recall that these elements
were advocated by James Hartley in our issue on Making
Information Usable, March 1981 (PC-24/l, pp . 17-27) .
BOOK REVIEW EDITOR
I am pleased to introduce Lynn Denton
as Book Review Editor of the TRANSACTIONS . Lynn is an information developer
in IBM's Austin, Texas laboratory where
he is a lead technical editor for product
publications . He has taught technical and
business writing at the university level
for 15 years and most recently was associate professor of English and director of the technical writing division at Auburn University in Auburn, Alabama.

"Let me just make a little note of that. I never seem to get anything
done around here unless I make little notes."

Drawing by Henry Martin; copyright 1975 by The New
Yorker Magazine, Inc. Reprinted with permisison .
Lynn is also a prolific writer and has extensive reviewing
experience with several publishers . Although we may not
have eight book reviews in every issue , as we do in this one,
Lynn will ensure that TRANSACTIONS readers are exposed to
the latest in technical communication literature.
BERT PEARLMAN
Former PCS president Bert Pearlman died last October just
three days before he was to receive the society's Alfred N.
Goldsmith Award for his contributions to professional communication . Bert's biography and the citation for his posthumous award are on page 47. The IEEE has lost an outstanding member.
BEST PAPER AWARD
Professor Alphonse Chapanis, Ms. Janan AI-Awar , and Dr.
W . Randolph Ford of the Johns Hopkins University have
received the PCS Best Paper Award for 1981 for "Tutorials
for the First-Time Computer User," which appeared in the
March 1981 issue of the TRANSACTIONS (a special issue on
Making Information Usable). The award was presented by
Dr. Daniel Rosich, president, and Lois Thuss, vice-president,
at a luncheon at the univerity's Applied Physics Laboratory
in Baltimore on October 4. 1982.
The paper describes a method and principles especially designed to create tutorials that make computers seem friendly
and that motivate casual users to learn more . The developing
tutorial is tested and retested with a continual stream of users

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION, VOL. PC-26 , NO. I , MARCH 1983

3

CALLS FOR PAPERS

The Many Facets of Computer Communications
The 1983 PCS Conference is scheduled for October 19-21 in
Atlanta, Georgia. It will highlight computer technology in
communication. Abstracts are due by May 1; see the announcement on page 49 .

Technical Documentation Programs

Left to right: Lois Thuss, Janan AI-Awar, Alphonse Chapanis , Daniel Rosich.

There is still time to subm it papers for the December topical
issue on activities in technical organizations that encourage
internal and external documentation . The call for papers is on
page 48; the deadline is May 16.

Education-PC Joint Issue
until eventually they go through the program with essentially
no problem at all. A key philosophy is that the user is always
right. If users do not respond the way the programmer expected, the program is changed to lead them into making the
correct response .

The third-quarter 1984 issues of the ThANSACfIONSON EDUCATION and the TRANSACTIONS ON PROFESSIONAL CoMMUNICATION
will have a jointly prepared set of papers on education for
communication. Contributions may be sent to either editor
and must be received by October 31, 1983.

Dr. Chapanis is a professor of psychology at the Johns Hopkins University and director of its Communications Research
Laboratory . He is a consultant to government and industry
and has published more than 120 articles and books. His
publications deal with experimental psychology, human engineering, vision, and statistics and experiment design .

The general theme is how students are taught to communicate. Topics of interest are successful curricula; teaching in
English, communication, and engineering departments; and
industry's view of graduates' communication abilities. A
detailed call for papers will appear in the next issue .

Ms. Janan AI-Awar is a doctoral student in psychology at the
university where she is developing an instrument for measuring, scoring, and evaluating the feasibility and applicability
of voice input and output in computerized tasks. She has a
B.S. degree from the American University of Beirut and an
M .A . degree from the Johns Hopkins University .
Dr. W . Randolph Ford received B.A ., M .A . , and Ph.D .
degrees in psychology from the Johns Hopkins University
where, from 1975 to 1982, he worked with Prof. Chapanis as
both a research assistant and an associate research scientist.

TOPICAL ISSUES AVAILABLE
Copies of four topical issues are available from the editor for
$5 each: Interpreting Technology for the Nonspecialist,
PC-25/4, December 1982; Making Information More Usable Through Graphics , PC-25/2, June 1982; Making Information Usable, PC-24/l, March 1981; and Public
Speaking for Engineers and Scientists, PC-23/l , March
1980. Please make checks payable to the IEEE Professional
Communication Society.
R. J . JOENK, Editor
IBM Corporation
Boulder, CO 80302

