Research of Project Organization Variation Dynamics
based on the Theory of Organizational Behavior
Lin Jichu;lecturer

Chen Jie;associate professor

School of Civil Engineering;
Zhenzhou University
Zhengzhou ;Henan Province;China
lin_like@zzu.edu.cn

Department of Engineering Management
Henan University of Economics&Law
Zhengzhou ;Henan Province;China
ggcj@zzu.edu.cn

Abstract: A success project need a success project organization
certainly, so the research on organization variation mechanism
of Construction Project is important. The production shows the
form mechanism and the motivity during the Life-Cycle
variation in construction project organization and provides gists
and references for construction project organization scheme and
organization pattern choice.
However, because of the
dynamicity and complexity of construction project organization
and the adult business organization theory should not be simply
adopted , so the systemic production has not been put forward
so far. According to the character of construction project
organization, the interior dynamics research of construction
project organization variation has been divided into two levels
which are individual dynamics research and participators
organization dynamics research, and then the ERG theory and
Expectancy theory have been adopted to analyze the project jobundertaker in the organization how to impact the project
organization variation through organization behaviour from
micro and medium view. Further, the dynamics system chart of
individual and participators organization has been put forward.
Keywords: Organizational Behavior; organization variation;
dynamic mechanism; ERG theory; Expectancy theory;

I.

INTRODUCTION

The research results of biological evolution and social
development in the history have shown that the existence of a
force behind biological evolution and social development,
promote its progress, we can call this power dynamic, and that
anything hadn’t developed without this power push .Seeing the
dynamic nature is essential to the law of development research
[1] [2] [3]. The project organization is a new type of
organization, its own theoretical system and there is still much
room for improvement. The project organization's own
dynamics and complexity caused certain difficulties to the
dynamic mechanism of the changes in its research work. At
the same time, the project's characteristics are different from
the general business organization, and therefore we can not
simply apply the now more mature organization theory, it has
yet to emerge system of the dynamic mechanism of changes in
project organization research. Project organization bears the
project construction tasks, a successful project definitely need
a successful project organization, no doubt, studying project
changes in dynamic mechanism of the organization is very
important. The results will allow people to understand the
formation mechanism of the project organization and project

organizations in the process of dynamic change during the
entire lifetime, and provide a basis and reference. For the
planning of project organization and choice of organizational
model
II.

ORGANIZATION OF THE CHANGES OUTLINED IN THE
PROJECT

A. The difference between Project Organization and general
Business organizations
1)
In the project, the task decided to organize.
The implementation of the project has its unique laws and
procedures, which is determined by the characteristics of the
project. People in the Project construction process, we must
follow these rules. The formation of the project organization is
affected by many factors, such as project characteristics,
project size and difficulty, management model, contract model
and so on. However, the formation of the macro-level of its
analysis (the target system →object system →behavior
system→ organizational systems) we can see, the project
organization system is decided by project behavior system that
the mission decided to organize; general business
organizations have been in the identification of market
opportunities to find new tasks, while general business
organizations must obtain legal personality prior to engaging
in economic activity
2)
The project organization has a clear end time.
One of the features the project is "binding conditions", the
time limit is one of the conditions of its constraints, but also
need to focus on constraints to consider. A one-time projects
and time constraints determine the organization is a one-time
projects, and project organization has a clear start and end
time, which is formed from the beginning to the expected
dissolution, and the project is on schedule to pursue the
dissolution of the organization, because it means that the task
of the project completed on schedule, and this is the obvious
different from the general business organization. While the
general business organizations will experience life-cycle,
through the process from creation to extinction (from this point
of view analysis, general business organizations are also onetime), but the general business organizations are in the pursuit
of long-term nature, that there is more time long as possible.
Existence of time is a key factor that measures the success of
business organizations, as the end of business organization,

978-1-4244-6255-1/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE

that is the dissolution of business organizations, often means
that business organizations to fail.
3)
In the project, it is necessary to comply with all the
organization's systems and uniform set of rules, which is
almost non-existent, and general business organizations have
strict rules and regulations
Project organization is a "Super Enterprise", binded up by a
number of different enterprises involved in the project, whose
link is a contract. The contract can only bound parties involved
and outside the contract can not be bound by the formation of
the participating organizations. General business organization
is an independent legal person; its link is the social contract.
Project organization is dynamic, changing in the project during
the whole life of constant, the participating organizations are
independent of interest, before going into the pre-project, have
their own work habits, organizational practices and
organizational culture. Therefore, time-bound project, the
participating organizations is difficult to form a consistent
system and culture, but business organizations can gradually
form the system and enterprise culture for all employees to
acknowledge and abide by in production management practice.
B. Organization of the changes outlined in the project
Project Life Cycle organizational change will be the impact
of the external environment bringing the project type of
material, energy and information into the project, which will
inevitably lead to a change in organizational change. And
therefore from the point of view of organizational design, the
project organization's change process that is, the project
organization to adapt to the environment process. In addition,
since between the project organization and business
organizations there is a complex relationship, the enterprise
organizational change would also project a view to organizing
changes the whole life of an impact. The complex interface

exists in the project organization and environment and
business organizations, which determines the life of the project
organization-wide changes in complexity. At the same time,
"one-off" and "ultra-entrepreneurial" characters of the project
decide the project life-cycle changes to be unique. By this
analysis, we can see changes in the project is different from the
general business organizations, organizational change, or
evolution, and therefore we can not simply apply the corporate
organizational change research, so we must base on project
organization , from its root studying projects change
mechanism for project organization.
The various organizational change research results,
combined with organizational change characteristics of the
project, giving a somewhat more standard definition, the
authors believe that changes in the project organization is the
process. Of the project organization, development, change and
dissolution. As a result, the project organization change from
the time point of view is a process of change, from the point in
time is the state transition to another state of an organization.
Change in terms of its content, the project organization change
is mainly reflected in the organization's goals, the
organization's internal structure and operating mechanism, as
well as the organization's activities with regard to methods and
characteristics of the changes resulting from migration, and its
form of organization change is change an expression, but also
the most obvious phenomenon of a change. By their very
nature, the project organization changes refer to the
organizational structure of the organization varying nonequilibrium state to equilibrium process of change. From the
above analysis we can see, the project organizational change is
a multidimensional system. A complete and comprehensive
organizational change projects should include at least the
following three aspects: the time change, the task changes and
the participants’ change, the process of its system structure
shown in Figure 1:

III.

BASED ON ORGANIZATIONAL BEHAVIOR

ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE PROJECTS WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK
OF DYNAMIC ANALYSIS

As noted above, the project organization and general
business organizations are different, one of which is the
"Project organizations have a clear start and end time, is
formed from the beginning of time known to the expected
dissolution of the" This is the decision of the project
characteristics. However, the project plans are based on the
current situation in the various organizational capacities
developed under the optimal plan, if conditions change or the
organizational capacity to change, they affect the accuracy of
the project implementation of the scheme, thus affecting start
and end time for influence of the project organization's history.
As a single project and the project organization is very difficult

to affect or influence of environmental factors, the only control
is the power within the organization. The smallest unit of
organization consisting of a single "person", it is all individual
"person" bears all the necessary items to complete the task,
also it is these individual "person" work and effort into the
overall objective . From the above analysis we can see that
individual project holders are the smallest factor in engineering
project organization within the dynamic analysis of changes.
By the same token we can see very project participants affect
organizational change, will also is another factor in the internal
dynamic mechanism analysis. This is from micro-and mesoperspective, from the perspective of organizational behavior to
analyze the project within the organization mandate holders to
change how they affect the project organization and its system
framework shown in Figure 2:

Environmental
Systems

The upper system
problems
Upper System Strategy
Environmental
constraints

Target
system

Behavior
System

Object
System

Organizational
system

Optimization based on the
current status of plans

Theoretical project
organizational changes

Changes
in the
external
environme
nt

Differences in project
organizational changes
Target
system

Object
System

Behavior
System

Organizational
system

Actual project organizational
changes

Active
Control

Passive
acceptance

The actual internal
environment
organization system

Figure 2 Project organization changes in the system framework for dynamic analysis of micro -

IV.

ANALYSIS OF INDIVIDUAL DYNAMICS SYSTEM

In the ERG theory, Clayton Alderfer believes that there are
three central demands: demands of existence , the relationship
and development[4] [5]. When an individual with demands for
access to business organizations, and then join the construction
project organization, the individual will undertake the
activities in a particular way. This intensity of activities
depends on the results of their own expectations, and how such
an outcome appeals to them. From the perspective of
individual dynamics, individual work, the ultimate goal is to
achieve individual goals. Whether or not the ultimate goal is
accord with business goals, and the construction project

organization goals, then depending on the specific
circumstances. Simply put, the individual power dynamics is
based on individual efforts as a starting point to end the
individual target. When an individual with the above three
kinds of demand-driven, to a certain intensity of working
methods and ways to try to achieve individual goals in the
process will be subject to various internal and external
conditions. According to expectancy theory, between the
individual effort and individual objectives, but also there is
performance and rewards, can be regarded as individual
performance and organizational rewards. Shown in Figure 4:

The figure describes the basic framework of individual
dynamics system. According to expectancy theory, individuals
level of performance depends not only on the individual level
of effort, but also depends on the capability when the
individual completes the work(internal factors) and
organizations whether or not have a fair and an objective
performance appraisal system in measuring employee's
performance(external factors). Thus, between individual
efforts and individual performance, a personal capacity and
objective performance appraisal system plays an important
role.

Because of the input of the personal ability and objective
performance appraisal system, the relationship between the
individual efforts and individual performance has been
strengthened; you need to provide incentives through the
organization to enhance individual performance. Of course,
when individual effort is not enough, so that not meet business
or organizational requirements, we also need to punish in order
to enhance individual performance. In this process, an
objective performance evaluation criterion is also needed. At
the same time, the organization's incentive also should be fair.
Organizational rewards whether or not accord with personal

goals depend on the needs-led. These are the specific analysis
of individual dynamics system. According to goal-setting
theory, personal goals should be considered as the guiding role
of conduct, but also need to consider personal goals through
"objective guide behavior" link on the impact of individual
efforts. Personal goals through the organization of integrated

V.

PARTICIPANTS IN THE ORGANIZATION DYNAMICS
SYSTEM ANALYSIS

(1) The input of participants in the Organization's efforts
should be a specific task. Individuals with a variety of
demands access to groups (participators organization), but
when the participants bodies are established, participants in the
value of the organization (or motivation) is to accomplish
specific tasks. Because the task once completed, participators
organization is dissolved. Professional tasks of the project
holders, the participants in the organization generally refers to
items sent by the Department of enterprise, they assume
specific tasks, including business contracts and business tasks
under the Department's specific instructions to the project
tasks. Different enterprises, the purpose of participation in
public works projects will be different, the involvement of
(3) Each participant organization's organizational goals
output create the project organization's overall goals by
competition and collaboration. This theoretical project
objectives will get some different with overall goal of the
organization, which affected the project changes in the
organization, the organization through the regulation of the
project, making the project will help achieve the overall goal

collections into organizational goals, personal goals,
organizational goals with the project more consistent, better
integrated, then the completion of the project organization
goals as possible, thus contributing to the smooth changes in
project organization. A complete individual dynamics system
is
as
shown
in
Figure
5:

different purposes, which lead to different objectives. Different
objectives, leading to a specific business-to-project department
assignment are different, thus forming a wide variety of
projects organizational behavior.
(2) According to the participants in the dual task
undertaken by the organization, we can conclude that in
construction project organization, each participant within the
organization is the existence of a dual mechanism, which is
different from the individual dynamics systems. Individual
rewards or punishment is carried by the business or
organization. The participants in the organization of rewards or
punishment, there will be a dual mechanism, the reward or
punishment may be accompanied by construction project
organizations and business organizations.

of the positive factors continue to play a role, At the same time
to eliminate the unfavorable overall objective of the project to
achieve a negative factor. The more positive factors, the
project organization changes more smoothly, and vice versa.
By this analysis, participants in the organization can draw
power system diagram, as shown in Figure 6:

feedback

control

Accountability

By the analysis of individual dynamics systems and
construction project participators organization dynamics
systems, we can see in the Project construction process, the
project organization has a feedback effect to the project target
system. A smooth variation of construction project

organization is a prerequisite for the successful target system,
therefore, carrying out goal-setting prior to taking fully into
account the participants and staff of the organization's basic
needs, following the laws of the market and the construction of
the law, giving full play to the work of staff initiative and the
integration of the guiding role of the organization, making
changes in the project organization can be smoothly achieved.

[1]
[2]

[6]

VI.

[3]
[4]
[5]

CONCLUSIONS

Li Zhao-xia. Research of Enterprise Evolution Mechanism [M]. Beijing
Library Press, 2001
Cai Xiao-ming, Ecosystem ecology [M]. Beijing. Science Press, 2000
Zhang Jin-tun. Applied ecology [M]. Beijing. Science Press, 2002
(U.S.) Robbins, Sun Jian-min, Li-Yuan. Organizational Behavior [M].
People's University Press, 2005

[7]
[8]

(U.S.) Robbins (Robbins, S.P.). Organizational Behavior (11th edition)
[M]. Tsinghua University Press, 2005.8
(Australia), Steven • L • McShan, etc. Organizational Behavior [M].
Mechanical Industry Press, 2003.5
Cheng-hu. Project Management [M]. Beijing: Higher Education Press,
2004

