Seeing is Believing So Beware
Ken Brodlie
University of Leeds

When we present data in the form of a visualization, we are conveying a message – and we have a responsibility to
make sure the message is as accurate as possible. Yet rarely do we include uncertainty information in a visualization
to document the errors that may be present.
In this talk we shall study a number of areas in visualization where we make approximations in generating the final
image – from simple graphs, through contour maps, to volume visualization and flow fields. We shall try to explain
the approximations which are made and reflect on ways of presenting the associated uncertainty.
Professor Ken Brodlie was promoted to a Chair in Visualization in the School of Computing in January 2001. He
has authored over 80 papers in numerical computation, computer graphics, visualization and virtual reality. He is
director of the IRIS Explorer Centre of Excellence – with funding of over £200k from NAG Ltd, this allows the
visualization research at Leeds to be made available as components of a commercially available visualization
system. A particular interest is collaborative visualization, allowing a geographically separated research team to
work together on the analysis of data. This work is now being extended to Grid-based computing, to allow
collaborative visualization and computational steering over the Grid. This work began with an EPSRC/DTI eScience demonstrator project, and continues with an e-Science Core Programme project, gViz, in collaboration with
the Universities of Oxford and Oxford Brookes, CLRC Rutherford Appleton Laboratory and three industrial
partners, NAG, IBM and Streamline Computing. He sits on the Executive of the White Rose Grid, a new UK eScience Centre of Excellence. He was elected a Fellow of the Eurographics Association in 1999. He sits on the
NAG Technical Policy Committee, and was co-opted to NAG Council in 2003.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization (CGIV’04)
0-7695-2178-9/04 $20.00 © 2004 IEEE

