Graph Visualization Techniques for Conceptual Web Site Traffic Analysis
Walter Didimo

Giuseppe Liotta

∗

Salvatore Agostino Romeo

Universit`a degli Studi di Perugia,
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettronica e dell’Informazione.
E-mail:{didimo,liotta,romeo}@diei.unipg.it

A BSTRACT
Systems that support Web site traffic analysis are core business intelligence applications for many companies. Recent papers remark
that these systems are especially useful if they measure the users’
interest into the relevant concepts described in a Web site rather
than counting users’ accesses to the distinct pages forming the Web
site. This paper extends existing measures of conceptual Web site
traffic analysis and describes a system, called COWA, that supports
this analysis by means of network models and graph visualization
technologies. The graph drawing algorithmic core of the user interface of COWA is a force directed heuristic that computes a simultaneous embedding of two non-planar graphs. This heuristic optimizes the visualizations in terms of crossing resolution and user’s
geodesic tendency. Experimental results and case studies show the
effectiveness of the proposed approach in practice.
Keywords: Graph Drawing, Visual Analytics, Web Data Mining,
Web traffic analysis.
Index Terms:
G.2.2 [Mathematics of Computing]: Discrete Mathematics—Graph Theory; H.2.8 [Information Systems]:
Database Management—Database Applications H.5.2 [Information Systems]: Information Interfaces and Presentation—User Interfaces; H.3.3 [Information Systems]: Information Storage and
Retrieval—Information Search and Retrieval I.3.6 [Computing
Methodologies]: Computer Graphics—Methodology and Techniques;
1

I NTRODUCTION

Web sites are a key communication channel in private organizations
and public institutions. Web site traffic analysis systems are typically used to understand how different pages forming Web sites are
accessed by their target audience over time. These systems explore
data stored in Web server’s log files (and/or other kinds of data on
users’ accesses) and output different statistic reports, such as the
number of accessed pages, the rank of the most accessed pages,
the number of visitors in a given time frame, and so on. The reports are commonly presented in some standard forms, for example
lists, tables, plots, or charts. Examples of popular systems for Web
site traffic analysis are 123L OG A NALYZER , A NALOG , AWS TATS ,
G OOGLE A NALYTICS. The data returned by these systems should
support business analysts in: (i) better understanding what items
or services are the most interesting for the users, which may lead
to new strategic decisions and market investments; (ii) discovering
unexpected behaviors in the usage of a Web site, which can give
suggestions on how to improve the company on-line communication channel. See, e.g., [2, 6, 18, 21, 22], for some references on
Web content and usage mining.
∗ The research in this paper has been partially supported by the Umbria
Region under the FESR grant “COWA: A Conceptual Web Analyzer”.

IEEE Pacific Visualisation Symposium 2010
2 - 5 March, Taipei, Taiwan
978-1-4244-6686-3/10/$26.00 ©2010 IEEE

However, there is a growing consensus that these systems and
methods are becoming not fully satisfactory for business intelligence applications. Statistical reports about users’ accesses to the
pages of a Web site are useful for Web designers who have a deep
knowledge of the physical structure of the site and of its contents.
They are less meaningful for business analysts whose strategic decisions often rely on speculations about what their customers like
or will like the best. What a business analyst needs is a measure of
users’ interests for the concepts available in a Web site. The limits
of reporting only the visitors’ interest in the URLs of a Web site are
even more evident if one considers that many pages in modern Web
sites are generated dynamically and the URLs of these pages are far
from reflecting their contents and therefore the real users’s interest
to the concepts that they contain.
As a consequence, an emerging research direction in Web site
traffic analysis aims at decoupling the physical organization of Web
sites from the concepts that they contain in a given time frame.
Norguet et al. define a concept-based audience metric [19, 20];
this metric uses standard information retrieval techniques for extracting relevant terms from the pages of a Web site and applies ontologies for recursively grouping terms into concepts [1, 13]. The
concept-based audience metric combines the volume of visitors of
the different Web pages with the presence of each concept in these
pages, so to obtain a measure of the interest of the visitors in the
different concepts. The output provided to the business analyst is a
set of classical graphical reports (e.g., plots and bar charts) showing
the values of users’ interest for the main concepts addressed in the
Web site.
In this paper we extend the concept-based audience metric model
and describe a system that supports the conceptual Web site traffic
analysis. While the model by Norguet et al. considers every concept independent of one another, our main idea is to analyze the
interplay between the different concepts and how this interplay correlates with the users’ interest. Our techniques allow a business
analyst to: (a) estimate to what extent the interest for a concept
C is affected by the users’ interest into other concepts that share
some Web pages with C; (b) discover possible relationships between concepts by revealing whether pairs of concepts are visited
by a relevant amount of users within a given time frame. The intrinsic relational nature of the concepts is explored by means of an
enhanced diagrammatic interface that shows multiple visualizations
of graphs. In more detail, our contribution is as follows.
• We refine and generalize the concept-based metric by introducing two kinds of graphs, G pag and Gusr (Section 2). These
graphs share their vertex set, each vertex representing a concept in a given Web site. In G pag two concepts C1 and C2
are connected if there are pages of the Web site in which C1
and C2 appear together. In Gusr two concepts are connected
if there are users that visited a page containing C1 and a page
containing C2 in a same time frame.
• We describe visual analysis techniques that help the analyst
to discover relevant concepts for the users and relevant correlations between these concepts (Section 3). The interaction
paradigm is based on the visual comparison of G pag and Gusr .

193

In addition, the analyst can interact with a third graph, Gvis ,
that summarizes the distribution of the users and the users’
browsing behavior on the visited pages.
• In order to make the visual analysis more effective and efficient, we study the simultaneous embedding problem for
G pag and Gusr (Section 4). We recall that recent cognitive
experiments show that users have a geodesic tendency in discovering relations between vertices and that edge crossings
do not affect the readability of a diagram if they form large
angles [14, 15, 16]. We present a force-directed heuristic
that computes a simultaneous embedding of two non-planar
graphs. An evaluation using quantitative metrics that we performed suggests an improvement in terms of angular resolution of crossings and geodesic edge tendency. We remark
that the simultaneous embeddability problem is a well known
topic in the graph drawing literature (see, e.g., [3, 12]).
• We describe a system, called COWA, that is based on the new
analysis and graph drawing techniques mentioned above (Section 5). We discuss a case study that uses COWA for the conceptual analysis of a popular Web site containing information
about Volleyball Leagues.
Finally, conclusions and open problems can be found in Section 6.
2

C ONCEPT-BASED AUDIENCE M ETRICS AND G RAPHS

Let {C1 ,C2 , . . .,Cn } be a set of concepts addressed by a Web site.
We assume that each concept Ci (i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}) is defined as a
collection of terms {si,1 , si,2 , . . . , si,ki }. We also say that si, j is a
term of Ci . Terms and concepts can be computed automatically, by
combining text analysis techniques and ontologies [20], or they can
be manually defined. When a term is a word of some dictionary,
it can be assumed in its stemmed version (which depends on the
chosen language).
In this paper, we assume that concepts are manually defined by
an analyst (like an organization manager) that has a deep knowledge
of the topics addressed by the organization Web site (but who may
ignore the structure of the Web site and the distribution of contents
in the different pages) and that wants to analyze the interest of the
target audience of the Web site for the different concepts in a certain
period of time.
2.1 Interest for Concepts
We formalize the notions of interest for a concept or for a pair of
concepts. Our definitions refine and generalize those by Norguet et
al. [20]. They will be used to discover relevant concepts and relevant correlations between concepts with a finer analysis than the
one in [20]. From now on, with the term page we refer to the content associated with a valid URL in a Web site. We denote by P the
total set of pages of a Web site and by Pd ⊆ P the subset of pages
visited during day d 1 . We define the following measures:
• Consultation of a term si, j in a page p during day d:
For each term si, j and for each page p ∈ Pd , the function
Consultation(si, j , p, d) represents the frequency of si, j in p
multiplied by the number of times page p has been displayed
on visitors’ screen during day d. To avoid big fluctuation over
time, the consultation of a term can be divided by the total
number of page accesses during day d.
1 If a Web site is strongly dynamic, many URLs can depend on the user’s
interaction, and cannot be automatically discovered in an exhaustive way.
We assume as set P of pages the one obtained by all URLs contained in the
Web server log file in a long period of time.

194

• Consultation of a concept Ci in a page p during day d:
For each concept Ci and for each page p ∈ Pd , the function
Consultation(Ci , p, d) is defined as: Consultation(Ci , p, d) =
ki
Consultation(si, j , p, d).
∑ j=1
• Presence of a term si, j in a page p during day d: For each term
si, j and for each page p ∈ P, the function Presence(si, j , p, d)
represents how many times si, j appears in page p during day
d.
• Presence of a concept Ci in a page p during day d:
For each concept Ci and for each page p ∈ P, the function Presence(Ci , p, d) is defined as: Presence(Ci , p, d) =
ki
Presence(si, j , p, d).
We also define the presence
∑ j=1
of a concept Ci during day d as Presence(Ci , d) =
∑ p∈P Presence(Ci , p, d).
If Presence(Ci , p, d) > 0 we say that Ci is present in p and that
p contains Ci , during day d. Also, if two concepts Ci and C j are
both present in the same page p during day d, we say that Ci and C j
share p.
Definition 1 The interest for a concept Ci in a subset Pd′ ⊆ Pd is the
following function:
Interest(Ci , Pd′ , d) =

∑ p∈Pd′ Consultation(Ci , p, d)
.
Presence(Ci , d)

The next definition measures the total interest for a concept Ci
during a day d and corresponds to the definition of interest given by
Norguet et. al [20].
Definition 2 The gross interest for a concept Ci during day d is the
following function:
GrossInterest(Ci , d) = Interest(Ci , Pd , d).
Additionally, for two concepts Ci and C j , we introduce a measure
of the interest for Ci “modulo” the interest for C j . Namely, let Pdi j ⊆
Pd be the subset of pages of Pd shared by Ci and C j .
Definition 3 The net interest for a concept Ci with respect to a concept C j during day d is the following function:
ij

NetInterest(Ci ,C j , d) = GrossInterest(Ci , d) − Interest(Ci , Pd , d).
Notice that, NetInterest(Ci ,C j , d) is in general different from
NetInterest(C j ,Ci , d).
2.2 Graphs of Concepts
Besides the concept-based metrics defined above, we introduce
three types of graphs. In Section 3 we will describe a graph-drawing
based interface that, by means of Definitions 1-3 and the graphs defined here, makes it possible to evaluate to what extent the interest
for a concept is affected by the interest for other concepts.
The first two graphs are called the shared-pages graph and the
shared-user graph, and are denoted as G pag and Gusr , respectively.
They are defined on the same set of nodes V , i.e., G pag = (V, E pag )
and Gusr = (V, Eusr ). Set V contains a node vi for each concept Ci
(i ∈ {1, . . . , n}). Let vi and v j be two nodes of V .
• There is a weighted edge (vi , v j ) ∈ E pag if Ci and C j share
some pages of Pd during day d; in this case, the weight of
ij
(vi , v j ) is set equal to the number |Pd | of shared pages.

• There is a weighted edge (vi , v j ) ∈ Eusr if there exists a user
that during day d visited some pages containing Ci and some
pages containing C j . As weight for an edge (vi , v j ) ∈ Eusr
we consider two possible definitions. Namely, let Udi [ j] (resp.
Udj [i]) be the set of users who visited pages of Pd containing Ci
ij
but not C j (resp. C j but not Ci ), and let Ud be the set of users
ij
who visited pages of Pd . We define the following possible
weights for (vi , v j ): The gross weight, defined as |(Udi [ j] ∩
j
ij
j
Ud [i]) ∪Ud |; the net weight, defined as |(Udi [ j] ∩Ud [i])|.

• In each drawing, a node vi is represented as a circle or as
box, whose size is proportional to the gross interest of the
corresponding concept Ci during day d, i.e., the size of vi is
proportional to GrossInterest(Ci , d).
• Edges in D pag and in Dusr are colored differently. We assume
that the edges of D pag are colored blue and that the edges of
Dusr are colored red. Each edge receives a label that shows its
weight and/or it has a thickness proportional to its weight. In
drawing Dusr , the weight initially used for an edge is its gross
weight.

The third graph is a directed graph called the visited-pages graph
and denoted as Gvis . Graph Gvis has a node ui for each page pi ∈ Pd ,
and it has a directed edge (ui , u j ) if there is a user that visited p j
immediately after pi during day d.
3 V ISUAL A NALYSIS T ECHNIQUES
Given a Web site and a set of concepts {C1 ,C2 , . . . ,Cn } for this site,
our main goal is to support the analyst in mining reliable information on the interest of the audience target for the different concepts
in a desired period of time. Our approach is based on graph visualization, by comparing and interacting with graphs G pag , Gusr , and
Gvis . We have in mind two main tasks of analysis:
• Task 1 - Discovering relevant concepts. The goal of this task
is to understand if the gross interest for a concept is reliable or
if can be positively affected by the interest for other concepts.
If in G pag there are two nodes vi and v j that are not adjacent, we can exclude that the gross interest for Ci is affected
by the interest for C j and vice-versa. More in general, one
may expect that the gross interests for two adjacent concepts
Ci and C j in G pag can affect one another proportionally to
the weight of their connection; however this is not always the
case. Therefore, this analysis should be enhanced by looking
at more data, such as: (a) The net interests for each concept
with respect to the other; (b) the presence of the two concepts
in each shared page; (c) the distribution of the users on the
pages containing Ci and/or C j .
• Task 2 - Discovering relevant correlations between concepts.
If in Gusr there is an edge (vi , v j ) with a high gross weight,
we can expect that many users that look for concept Ci are
interested in concept C j , too. This data may indicate a strong
correlation between the two concepts from the user’s interest
point of view. However, if Ci and C j share some pages, this
conclusion may be not reliable. To strengthen the analysis in
this case, one should look at some extra data, such as: (a) The
net weight of edge (vi , v j ) in Gusr ; (b) the presence of the two
concepts in each shared page; (c) the distribution of the users
on the pages containing Ci and/or C j .

(a)

(b)
Figure 1: (a) Schematic illustration of the visual paradigm for G pag and Gusr .
(b) Schematic illustration of the visual paradigm for Gvis [Ci ,C j ].

The analyst can interact with the visualization by means of three
main primitives:

3.1 Visualization and Interaction Paradigms
For a given day d, we display graphs G pag and Gusr using the following visual paradigm (see Figure 1(a)):

• Edge Hiding: This primitive allows the analyst to temporarily
hide an edge in Dusr or in D pag (or to restore a previously
hidden edge). Hiding an edge from Dusr has no other effect
in the visualization; this primitive can be useful to simplify
the amount of data currently displayed, by hiding for example
those edges with a low weight. Hiding an edge (vi , v j ) from
D pag can be used to get data according to point (a) of Tasks 1
and 2, as it has two effects in the visualization: (i) The size of
vertex vi becomes proportional to the net interest of Ci with
respect to C j , and the size of vertex v j becomes proportional
to the net interest of C j with respect to Ci ; (ii) the edge (vi , v j )
in Dusr (if such an edge existed) is updated with its net weight.

• We compute two different drawings D pag and Dusr for G pag
and for Gusr , respectively. To help in the visual comparison of
these drawings, corresponding nodes receive the same coordinates in D pag and in Dusr , up to a translation of one of the two
drawings. Also, each node vi receives a label that describes
the concept Ci .

• Redraw: With this primitive the analyst can ask for an update of the current visualization for G pag and Gusr , after some
edges have been hidden (or restored) from the last computation. Drawings Dusr and D pag are recomputed with two main
targets: (i) improving the readability of the current visualization; (ii) preserving the user’s mental map.

In the next subsection, we define visualization and interaction
paradigms for graphs G pag , Gusr , and Gvis in order to support the
analyst in Task 1 and Task 2. In particular, comparing and interacting with suitable visualizations of G pag and Gusr will provide data
for point (a) of each task, while a suitable visualization of Gvis will
be adopted to provide data for points (b) and (c) of each task.

195

• Edge Exploration: This primitive makes it possible to ask data
according to points (b) and (c) of Tasks 1 and 2, with respect to
a selected edge (vi , v j ) (either in G pag or in Gusr ). These data
are displayed using a suitable visualization for Gvis . Namely,
denote by Gvis [Ci ,C j ] the subgraph of Gvis induced by the
nodes uk such that page pk contains Ci and/or C j . We display
Gvis [Ci ,C j ] with the following paradigm (see Figure 1(b)): (i)
Each node uk is represented as a box filled with two colors,
one for Ci and the other for C j , such that the amount of each
color reflects the relative presence of the corresponding concept in page pk . (ii) Each node uk is associated with an integer
label, showing the number of users who visited page pk .
4

T HE S YSTEM COWA: CO NCEPTUAL W EB SITE T RAFFIC
A NALYZER
We implemented a prototypical software system, called COWA, for
the visual analysis of concept-based web-traffic data. The implementation is entirely done in the Java programming language. Subsection 4.1 describes the main functionalities of COWA; Subsection 4.2 describes its graph drawing algorithms.
4.1 Functionalities and Interaction Methods
COWA allows the analyst to define a set of concepts she is interested on, and an interval time T in which visitors’ requests must
be analyzed. Each concept Ci is manually defined by the analysts
by inserting a profile, i.e., a brief textual description for Ci and a
collection of terms characterizing Ci . After this phase, the system
analyzes the Web server log file, and computes and stores the presence, consultation, and gross interest for each concept as defined in
Subsection 2.1, for each day of T . It also computes graphs G pag and
Gusr for each day of T . Graph Gvis is computed on-line according
to the analyst’s requests.
Once all data needed for the analysis have been processed, the
system shows a graphical interface, in which it is possible to focus on any of days d of interval T . For a selected day d, the system visualizes two drawings D pag and Dusr , according to the visual
paradigm described in Section 3. In our implementation edges are
represented with a discrete number of thickness values based on
their weights.
COWA implements all the interaction primitives described in
Subsection 3.1, and some additional functionalities, described hereunder:
Node info: Passing the mouse over a node vi of D pag or of Dusr ,
the system displays a tooltip that summarizes several data, like the
currently shown interest for Ci (i.e., its gross interest without the
contribution of shared pages represented by some incident edges
that have been hidden, if any), the total number of users who visited
pages containing Ci , and the total number of pages containing Ci ,
during day d.
Edge info: Passing the mouse over an edge (vi , v j ) of Dusr , the system displays a tooltip that informs about its current weight (gross
or net).
Drawing translation: The analyst can translate each drawing independently, so to decide the preferred relative positions of drawings
for an effective visual comparison.
4.2 Graph Drawing Algorithms
Our drawing algorithms have to respect the visual paradigms described in Section 3. For a pair of selected concepts Ci ,C j , graph
Gvis [Ci ,C j ] is represented as a layered drawing by applying a variant of the well-known Sugiyama approach, described by Buchheim,
J¨unger and Leipert [4]; this variant uses only two bends per edge,
which improves the readability of the drawing in most cases.
The most challenging task is computing a drawing of G pag =
(V, E pag ) and Gusr = (V, Eusr ) in such a way that shared substructures can be easily identified by a visual inspection. Once the two

196

drawings are computed, one of them can be translated according to
a split view visualization scheme (see, e.g., [12]).
A simultaneous embedding of {G pag , Gusr } is a drawing D pag
of G pag and a drawing Dusr of Gusr where each vertex v ∈ V is
drawn at the same location in D pag and in Dusr . The simultaneous
embedding problem of a pair (or sequence) of graphs has a rich tradition in the graph drawing literature, especially when the graphs
to be drawn are planar (see, e.g., [3, 8, 10, 11, 12]). For non-planar
graphs, force-directed techniques are used by Erten et al. to define
visualization schemes and design drawing heuristics where vertices
shared by many graphs of the sequence are located in the center of
the layout and edges shared by many graphs are not too long [12].
Kobourov and Pitta describe an interactive multi-user environment
for simultaneous embedding where the number of edge crossings
is kept under control by means of heuristic primitives [17]. Chimani et al. further investigate the problem of minimizing the number of crossings in a simultaneous embedding; they both show the
NP-Hardness of the question and experimentally compare heuristics and exact drawing algorithms [5].
Similar to previous approaches, we use force-directed techniques
to compute a simultaneous embedding of G pag and Gusr . However,
since G pag and Gusr share the whole vertex set, the centrality of
the shared vertices is not a meaningful aesthetic requirement in our
case. Also, motivated by recent cognitive experiments, we do not
insist on minimizing the number of edge crossings but rather we try
to control the visual quality of the edge crossings. More precisely,
human-computer interaction experiments have shown that orthogonal crossings do not inhibit human task performance when reading
a drawing and that users have a geodesic tendency when discovering relations between pairs of vertices [14, 15, 16]. We therefore
compute a simultaneous embedding of {G pag , Gusr } by taking into
account the following aesthetic requirements:
(1) The crossing resolution of any two edges of Eusr (E pag ) should
be maximized. The crossing resolution is the minimum angle at
which any two edges cross. Note that, to achieve a good crossing
resolution some of the edges may be required to bend [9].
(2) The geodesic edge tendency should be guaranteed. This is done
by minimizing the maximum distance between every edge with
bends and a straight-line segment connecting its end vertices.
The drawing technique that we are going to describe further
helps the user in the visual analysis of D pag and Dusr by guaranteeing that edges of Eusr ∩ E pag have the same representation in
both drawings and by making the distance of adjacent vertices inversely proportional to the weights of their connecting edge, i.e., to
the strength of their relationship.
Force-Directed Drawing Algorithm
We consider the graph G = G pag ∪ Gusr , compute a drawing D of
G, and construct the wanted simultaneous embedding by extracting
D pag and Dusr from D. The edges of G are assigned one or two
colors in the set {red, blue}. An edge e of G is colored blue if
e ∈ E pag − Eusr and red if e ∈ Eusr − E pag . Edges that belong to
both G pag and Gusr are blue and red at the same time. Our drawing
algorithm works in three steps.
Step 1: An initial drawing of G is computed by applying a classical spring-embedding algorithm, where vertices are modeled as
charged particles and edges are modeled as springs [7]. In our case,
the charge of each vertex is proportional to the weight of the vertex,
and the zero-energy length of each spring is inversely proportional
to the weight of the corresponding edge. The weight of an edge e
of G depends on its color: If e is blue its weight is the one that it
has in G pag ; if it is red its weight is the one that it has in Gusr ; if e is
both red and blue, its weight is the maximum of its corresponding
weights in G pag and Gusr .
Step 2: Let D1 be the drawing of G at the end of Step 1. Notice that, D1 is such that vertices connected by edges with larger

weights tend, if possible, to be closer with each other than vertices
connected by edges with smaller weights. The graph is augmented
by splitting some of its edges and by adding some new edges. Let
e1 = (u1 , v1 ) and e2 = (u2 , v2 ) be a pair edges of D1 such that e1 and
e2 are both in G pag or both in Gusr and such that e1 and e2 cross at a
point c. Define a disk δ centered at c such that δ does not intersect
in D1 any edge other than e1 and e2 having their same color. Refer to Figure 2. Let pi , qi be the intersection points between δ and
ei (i ∈ {1, 2}). Edge ei is split into the path (ui , pi ), (pi , qi ), (qi , vi ).
All edges of this path are given the same color of e1 and of e2 . Also,
the straight-line edges (p1 , p2 ), (p2 , q1 ), (q1 , q2 ), (q2 , p1 ) are added
to the drawing; they are also given the same color as e1 . The fourcycle formed by these dummy edges is called the cage of crossing c.
This procedure is iteratively applied to all crossings of the drawing.

Figure 2: Illustration of Step 2 of the drawing algorithm.

Step 3: Let D2 be the augmented drawing at the end of Step 2 and
let G2 be the corresponding augmented graph. The force-directed
algorithm is executed again on G2 . The initial position of the vertices is the same as in D2 . The zero-energy length of the edges
of all cages is fixed and made much smaller than the zero-energy
length of the shortest edge of D1 . Intuitively, this choice guarantees that the edge with bends will not be much longer than the
straight-line segment connecting its endpoints and therefore ensures
a good geodesic edge tendency. The spring stiffness of the edges
of the cages is much larger than the stiffness of all other edges.
This choice enforces the cages to be drawn as close as possible to
squares, which guarantees that their diagonals make a crossing approximating right angles (i.e., the portions of the edges of G inside
the cage intersect each other orthogonally). At the end of this step
the dummy edges are removed, the dummy vertices are replaced
with bends, and finally the edges are smoothed and drawn as B´ezier
curves (bends are used to define the control points).
We implemented our modified force-directed algorithm and run
an experimental analysis on a set of 300 randomly generated graphs
to evaluate its effectiveness. We measured the drawing readability
in terms of crossing resolution and geodesic edge tendency. The
experimental results showed a dramatic improvement with respect
to a standard force-directed algorithm. With the new technique, the
improvement of the crossing resolution is between 50% and 100%.
About the geodesic edge tendency of the drawings, almost all edges
are monotone and each edge approximates well the straight line between its end-vertices. Of course, the theoretical time complexity
of the new technique increases with respect to a standard forcedirected algorithm, due to the number of dummy vertices introduced in Step 2. However, we observed in practice that a small
number of iterations in Step 3 is typically sufficient to get highly
readable drawings, and then the running time of the whole algorithm remains feasible. For reasons of space, details and charts on
the experimental results are not reported in this abstract and will
appear in a forthcoming full version of the paper.
In the next section we briefly discuss an example of application
of our technology to the analysis of web-traffic data on a real-world
Web site.

5

C ASE S TUDY

We applied COWA to the analysis of visitor’s requests for a popular Web site containing information about volleyball championships
and teams 2 . By means of analysis like the one described in the following, volleyball managers can define better focused communication strategies and/or a differentiation of investments to improve the
popularity of the sport.
The Web server log file of the analyzed site contains about
4,000,000 of entries each day, which correspond to several thousands of visitors (a single user’s access typically causes several
HTTP requests automatically performed by the user’s browser to
load the different parts of the final content displayed to the user).
We focused on the interval time T = [1 April 2009 - 13 April
2009], and analyzed the following ten concepts: Series A, Series
B, National Cups, International Cups, Senior Male National Team,
Senior Female National Team, Junior Male National Team, Junior
Female National Team, Beach Volley, Schools. After a preliminary
analysis of the page contents, we decided to describe each concept
by using a profile consisting of two or three terms.
Table 1 reports the gross interest of each concept in each day of
the period. In general, we can observe that for most of the concepts
there is a homogeneous trend, and that concept International Cups
is the one with the largest gross interest. However, there are days
in which the gross interest increases significantly for some specific
concepts. For example on April 12, we have a relevant increase of
gross interest for the concepts Series A with respect to its average
interest in T . Checking the volleyball events on a calendar, we
justified this data with the fact that on April 11 played the second
division of Series A and probably many users accessed the site the
day after to check the results and the new ranking of the teams.
We asked the system to visualize graphs G pag and Gusr in a specific day, namely April 1. The drawings D pag and Dusr of these
two graphs computed by using our drawing algorithm are shown in
Figure 3(a). The sizes of the nodes visually convey the information on the gross interest of each concept much more rapidly and
intuitively than looking at a table. Also, we can visually compare
the two drawings and interact with them in order to mine additional
information that cannot be easily extracted with the concept-based
audience metric model by Norguet et al. [19, 20].
Concerning Task 1 of Section 3 (discovering relevant concepts)
and looking at D pag , one can study in which measure the interest
of a certain concept is affected by some other (i.e., how much the
gross interest of a certain concept is close to its net interest with
respect to some other concepts). For example, hiding edge (Series
A, International Cup), we obtain two drawings showing the relative net interests of the two concepts, and the net interest of edge
(Series A, International Cup) in Dusr (see Figure 3(b)). We can see
that concept International Cup is affected by concept Series A in
a remarkable way; indeed, most of the users that visited these two
concepts on April 1 always visited at least one page in which the
two concepts appear simultaneously. This implies that if we want
to know what is the real interest of the visitors for the International
Cups independent of their interest for the series A, we have to look
to the size of this concept in Figure 3(b) more than in Figure 3(a).
More details on the distribution of the visitors on the two concepts can also be obtained by looking at the drawing of Gvis [Series
A, International Cup] (see Figure 4(a)). Recall that each node in
Gvis represents a page containing one or both the two concepts. A
label is shown for each node, indicating the number of distinct accesses. The dark color in each page indicates the relative relevance
of concept Series A, the light color indicates the relative relevance
of concept International Cup. From the picture, we can observe
that there are few pages that share the two concepts, but most of
2 We do not report the URL and the name of this Web site for reasons of
privacy.

197

Concept / Day
Series A
Series B
National Cups
International Cups
Senior Male National Team
Senior Female National Team
Beach Volley
Junior Male National Team
Junior Female National Team
Schools

1
4
1.8
3.6
68.3
10.5
35.3
7.9
9.5
8.9
29.6

2
4.3
2
4.2
70.4
9.6
35.4
7.3
8.6
8.8
27.5

3
3.3
1.9
2.8
67.9
8.1
33.8
6
7.2
7.3
23.7

4
2.9
4.6
2.4
72.5
6.2
33.6
2.6
5.2
5.4
13.9

5
5.3
6.6
3.8
78.8
6.2
32.6
1.6
5.3
5.4
11.4

6
4.9
4.1
3.6
87.5
7.9
39.9
3.3
7
7.3
22.2

7
3.5
2.2
4.5
86.4
10
44.7
4.9
8.9
9.2
28

8
3.5
2
6.7
82.6
9.7
42.5
4.8
9.2
9
25.7

9
4.8
2.4
11
75.7
11.7
38.6
7.2
11.2
10.3
26.6

10
6.5
2
7.1
80.5
14.4
40.2
6.4
13
12.3
25.9

11
8
2.6
11.4
79.7
9.7
37.4
6.4
9.2
9
19.6

12
11.3
2.9
12.3
84.2
12.3
35.4
5
11.9
10
17.4

13
8.5
2.9
8.4
77.7
12
35.6
7.4
11
11
25

Table 1: Gross interests of the volleyball Web site concepts in the interval time [1 April 2009 - 12 April 2009].

the users visited them during their browsing. This data strengthens
the fact that the interests for the two concepts cannot be considered
independently of one another.
Concerning Task 2 of Section 3 (discovering relevant correlations between concepts), we observe that there are several edges
in Dusr that connect concepts not adjacent in D pag , and some of
these edges have a high weight. For example, many users that visited concept Senior Female National Team were also interested in
concepts Series B and Series A in the same day. This indicates a
reliable connection between such pairs of concepts in the considered day; volleyball managers can therefore deduce that during this
day the visitors were mainly interested in the series A and B of the
senior female teams. We can also observe that in the same day there
were several users interested in both Series A and School, which are
however adjacent concepts in D pag . Hiding edge (Series A, School)
in D pag we can get the net interests for the edge and the relative
net interests for the two concepts (see Figure 4(b)). In this case it
is worth observing that they are heavily affecting each other and
just 9 users actually visited only pages in which the two concepts
do not appear simultaneously. Hence, we cannot trust the logical
correlation between these two concepts.
6

C ONCLUSIONS AND O PEN P ROBLEMS

The contribution of this paper is twofold. From the point of view
of data and knowledge engineering, it introduces new notions and
models to measure the users’ interest into the concepts of a Web
site. From the point of view of information visualization, it presents
new visual analytics techniques and an adaptation of force-directed
heuristics to compute drawings of graphs where the angles formed
by crossing edges are large and each curved edge is a monotone
curve relatively close to the geodesic path between its end-vertices.
These concepts were implemented and experimented within a system called COWA. The interaction with COWA makes it possible
to measure the interest in a pair of concepts; it would be interesting
to extend this facility and measure the interest for groups or clusters of concepts. The graph drawing heuristic draws edges having a
bend for every crossing; it would be interesting to reduce the curve
complexity of the edges by integrating our heuristic with crossing
reduction techniques (see, e.g., [5]).
R EFERENCES
[1] R. A. Baeza-Yates and B. A. Ribeiro-Neto. Modern Information Retrieval. ACM Press / Addison-Wesley, 1999.
[2] P. Berkhin, J. D. Becher, and D. J. Randall. Interactive path analysis
of web site traffic. In ACM SIGKDD, pages 414–419, 2001.
[3] P. Braß, E. Cenek, C. A. Duncan, A. Efrat, C. Erten, D. Ismailescu,
S. G. Kobourov, A. Lubiw, and J. S. B. Mitchell. On simultaneous planar graph embeddings. Comput. Geom.: Theory and Appl.,
36(2):117–130, 2007.

198

[4] C. Buchheim, M. J¨unger, and S. Leipert. A fast layout algorithm for
k-level graphs. In GD 2000, volume 1984 of LNCS, pages 229–240,
2000.
[5] M. Chimani, M. J¨unger, and M. Schulz. Crossing minimization meets
simultaneous drawing. In IEEE PacificVis 2008, pages 33–40, 2008.
[6] R. Cooley. The use of web structure and content to identify subjectively interesting web usage patterns. ACM Trans. Internet Techn.,
3(2):93–116, 2003.
[7] G. Di Battista, P. Eades, R. Tamassia, and I. G. Tollis. Graph Drawing.
Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1999.
[8] E. Di Giacomo and G. Liotta. Simultaneous embedding of outerplanar
graphs, paths, and cycles. Intern. Journ. of Comput. Geom. and Appl.,
17(2):139–160, 2007.
[9] W. Didimo, P. Eades, and G. Liotta. Drawing graphs with right angle
crossings. In Algorithms and Data Structures Symposium, volume
5664 of LNCS, pages 206–217, 2009.
[10] C. Erten, P. J. Harding, S. G. Kobourov, K. Wampler, and G. V. Yee.
Graphael: Graph animations with evolving layouts. In GD 2003, volume 2912 of LNCS, pages 98–110, 2003.
[11] C. Erten and S. G. Kobourov. Simultaneous embedding of a planar
graph and its dual on the grid. Theory Comput. Syst., 38(3):313–327,
2005.
[12] C. Erten, S. G. Kobourov, V. Le, and A. Navabi. Simultaneous graph
drawing: Layout algorithms and visualization schemes. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 9(1):165–182, 2005.
[13] D. Fensel. A Silver Bullet for Knowledge Management and Electronic
Commerce. Springer Verlag, 2000.
[14] W. Huang. Using eye tracking to investigate graph layout effects. In
Asia-Pacific Symposium on Visualization, pages 97–100, 2007.
[15] W. Huang, P. Eades, and S.-H. Hong. Graph reading behavior:
Geodesic-path tendency. In IEEE PacificVis 2009, pages 137–144,
2009.
[16] W. Huang, S.-H. Hong, and P. Eades. Effects of crossing angles. In
IEEE PacificVis 2008, pages 41–46, 2008.
[17] S. G. Kobourov and C. Pitta. An interactive multi-user system for
simultaneous graph drawing. In GD 2004, volume 3383 of LNCS,
pages 492–501, 2004.
[18] P. Kolari and A. Joshi. Web mining: Research and practice. Computing in Science and Engg., 6(4):49–53, 2004.
[19] J.-P. Norguet, B. Tshibasu-Kabeya, G. Bontempi, and E. Zimanyi. A
page-classification approach to web usage semantic analysis. Engineering Letters, 14(1), 2007.
[20] J.-P. Norguet, E. Zim´anyi, and R. Steinberger. Improving web sites
with web usage mining, web content mining, and semantic analysis.
In SOFSEM 2006, volume 3831 of LNCS, pages 430–439, 2006.
[21] Z. Pabarskaite and A. Raudys. A process of knowledge discovery from
web log data: Systematization and critical review. J. Intell. Inf. Syst.,
28(1):79–104, 2007.
[22] J. Srivastava, R. Cooley, M. Deshpande, and P.-N. Tan. Web usage
mining: Discovery and applications of usage patterns from web data.
ACM SIGKDD Explorations, 1(2):12–23, 2000.

(a)

(b)
Figure 3: (a) Drawings D pag (to the left) and Dusr (to the right) on April 1. (b) The effect of hiding edge (Series A, International Cups).

199

(a)

(b)

200

Figure 4: (a) Exploring graph Gvis [(Series A, International Cups)]. It is possible to see that the few pages in which the two concepts appear simultaneously are highly
accessed. The dark color represents concept Series A, while the light color represents concept International Cup. (b) The effect of hiding edge (Series A, School).
The logical connection between the two concepts Series A and School is not reliable.

