Keynote Address
Image-Based Biomedical Computing and Visualization
Chris Johnson
Director, Scientific Computing and Imaging Institute, University of Utah

Abstract

Bio

Increasingly, biomedical computing and visualization applications require building functional models from images
(MRI, CT, EM, etc.). The “pipeline” for building such
models includes image analysis (segmentation, registration,
filtering), geometric modeling (surface and volume mesh
generation), simulation (FE, FD, BE, linear and non-linear
solves, etc.), visualization (scalars, vectors, tensors, etc) and
evaluation (uncertainty, error, etc.).
In this talk, I will present research challenges of imagebased biomedical computing and visualization and discuss
their application for solving important problems in neuroscience, cardiology, and genetics.

Chris Johnson directs the Scientific Computing and
Imaging (SCI) Institute at the University of Utah where he
is a Distinguished Professor of Computer Science and holds
faculty appointments in the Departments of Physics and
Bioengineering. His research interests are in the areas of scientific computing and scientific visualization. Dr. Johnson
founded the SCI research group in 1992, which has since
grown to become the SCI Institute employing over 165
faculty, staff and students. Professor Johnson serves on
several international journal editorial boards, as well as
on advisory boards to several national and international
research centers. Professor Johnson has received several
awards, including the NSF Presidential Faculty Fellow (PFF)
award from President Clinton in 1995 and the Governor’s
Medal for Science and Technology from Governor Michael
Leavitt in 1999. He is a Fellow of the American Institute for
Medical and Biological Engineering (AIMBE), a Fellow of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS) and a Fellow of the Society of Industrial and
Applied Mathematics (SIAM). For more information, please
visit http://www.cs.utah.edu/~crj/ .

x

