Color Edge Enhancement based Fuzzy Segmentation of License Plates
Yusuf A Syed, Sarfraz M
Department of Information and Computer Science, KFUPM, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia,
{sadnan, sarfraz}@ccse.kfupm.edu.sa}

analysis [11], aspect ratio of characters [12], the
distribution [13] and alignment of characters [14]. In
reality a universal, small and easy to detect features
would suffice.
The License Plate candidate(s) determined in the
locating stage are examined for the presence of the plate
characters or character signature. Character separation in
the past is being performed by techniques such as
projection profiles [15] [16], morphology [17],
connected components [18] and blob coloring.
An image with low background light and a white
number plate can be extracted by using a regular or
K-means region-growing algorithm [19]. This technique
generates poor results for cars with white number plates
and lighter backgrounds. A morphology based technique
is suggested for such conditions [21]. Again, the
technique fails for overly illuminated images and a need
arise to use image enhancement techniques for the
recovery of distorted characters or interconnected
characters [22]. In Gray-Scale images, edges are
typically modeled as brightness discontinuities. These
discontinuities are employed by most edge detectors
using some form of difference operator on neighboring
pixels [23]. Though 90% [24] of the edges are the same
in color and gray scale edge maps, the 10% may be
important for a consecutive processing step as for
example the segmentation of images based on edges. The
point we have forward is that no edges are detected in
gray scale images if the neighboring objects have
different hues but similar intensities. This fact promoted
the use of color segmentation in our application.

Abstract
The area of Automatic License Plate Recognition
(ALPR) offers a big scope in numerous applications and
a lot of techniques have been proposed. Most of the
techniques work under restricted and supervised
conditions. The proposed ALPR technique consists of
two main modules: Plate Locating Module and Plate
Segmentation Module. In the initial stage, search is
being made for a prospective license plate on the basis of
some of the local features contained in its fuzzy geometry.
The second module utilizes a fuzzy C means based
clustering over the finalized plate-patch to cluster the
eight-connected components in it into desired and
undesired regions. Segmentation proceeds only over the
cluster containing the desired plate regions.
In the experiment on locating license plates, 852
images were taken at various backgrounds and
conditions. Of these, 10 images failed to locate the
license plates; the rate of success was 98.82%.
Experiments for character segmentation were carried
out on the remaining 842 plates. Of which, 39 plates
were not properly segmented; the success rate was
95.36%. The combined rate for the two phases of our
License Plate Identification Algorithm is 94.24%.
Keywords: Fuzzy Logic, Fuzzy Segmentation, License
Plate Recognition.

1

Introduction

Automatic license plate recognition has an important
role in numerous applications such as unattended parking
lots [1] [2], security control of restricted areas [3], traffic
law enforcement [4] [5], congestion pricing [6], and
automatic toll collection [7].
A typical LPR process consists of two main phases:
Phase 1 locating the license plates and 2 identifying the
plate’s license number. Phase 1 is supplemented by a
number of preprocessing stages that enhance an image to
remove noise induced due to lowlight, glare and
confusing objects and also providing local searching
features based on image orientation. These sub stages in
effect provide the plate area extracting algorithms a
simpler to image to process with less details and
therefore lower computational cost.
In the first stage, the orientation of the license plate
is determined by the local features of the license plates
such as size and aspect ratio comparison [8] [9],
bounding box matching, fuzzy segmentation and vertical
edge matching [10]. Character features include blob

2

License Plate Identification Process

This section briefly describes the control flow of the
license plate locating and segmenting system. The plate
consists of a total of six characters with a standard
format of digits on the right and characters on the left.
The syntax ‘al-saudia’ is written on the top part of the
license plate as shown in fig 1(a).

Figure 1(a): A standard license plate with digits
on the left and characters on the right. (b) Saudi
Arabian License Plate Template ( I T )

The license plate locating system basically comprise
1

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

application. Image processing that involves edge
detection based on RGB colors space has an added
advantage over HSI space of being less computationally
expensive.

of two main modules. The modules are
•
Plate area extraction, and
•
Character segmentation.
It is assumed that the system is incorporated in an
event detection system, e.g., software or a hardware
trigger. Once the presence of the car is detected, the
camera is activated that sends the image to the system’s
license plate locating module. The module searches for
the license plate in a specific area of the image on the
basis of the local features. If the plate is found, the
system returns the candidates to the template matching
module that extracts the actual license plate for character
segmentation. If no plate is found, the system rejects the
image frame. In case if a number of candidates are found,
they are forwarded to a template matching sub-module to
finalize the candidate that is to be forwarded to the
segmentation sub module. The group of characters is
deemed to form a valid license number if they agree with
the license plate dimensional definition given previously.
The segmentation module returns the ‘6’ characters that
are used in the later stages for the recognition. This step
is performed using a hybrid approach combining fuzzy C
means clustering algorithm with the standard projection
profiling method.
The system was fed with a true color 24-bit image
from a high resolution digital camera at a resolution
of 900× 600 .
In section 3 and 4 we look at detail of the proposed
strategy for locating and segmenting license plate
modules. Section 5 presents the set of results obtained
with a range of test cases during the testing phase of the
system.

3

3.1 Search space optimization for image processing
algorithms using local car based features

Consider the enhanced true color map as the search
map, the core objective is to locate or isolate an area with
highest probability of the presence of the plates and
characters. The presence of a car in an image is always
marked by some local features that are normally not
present in the entire image. The objective in this section
is only to reduce the search space and chances of
mistakenly processing a structure similar to a license
plate in the background.
In the proposed approach an image is first searched
for the following feature.
•
Presence of car break lights
Car break lights offer a number of unique features
that are rarely common in all the other areas present in an
image containing the back of a car. The break lights are
prominent because, normally, the only rich color present
at the back of the car is of break lights. The important
characteristics of RED color are:
•
Its invariance to HUE in the Hue, Saturation,
Intensity (HSI) domain.
•
Dissimilarity of break lights in shape to any
other objects in the image.
These characteristics contain some important local
features in an image like color, shape, symmetry and
distance.
Table 1: Algorithm for extracting local features
based on car break lights

License Plate Locating Module

Input
Output

For color images, a number of edge detection
approaches have been proposed from processing
individual planes [25] to true vector based approaches
[26]. The Vector Angle (VA) and Euclidean Distance
(ED) metrics were compared based on a modified
Roberts’s operator in [27]. ED works best for edge
detection under LUV space but in general is sensitive to
intensity variations. [28] ED, however, is not sensitive to
variations in hue and saturation; therefore, it can be used
in similar image processing and computer vision
applications that contain little or no intensity variation.
Opposed to ED, VA qualifies well in hue and
saturation differences. Since the basic license plate
standards used in Saudi Arabian license plates consists of
specially designated locations (boxes with depressions),
a major hue or saturation difference arise in situations
ranging from shadow effects based saturation differences
to sudden hue based difference due to license plate
outlines. This effect in turn results in a higher number of
small-sized segments in an image which reduces the
number of original candidates that could qualify for a
standard license plate.
The above facts support the usage of the VA based
technique in the image segmentation phase of our

A True Color (24 bit) Image Matrix
Feature vector for height, width and
area of the regional components

Begin
Scaled down the image ‘ I ’to 320x240
using a bi-cubic filter.
Convert I to HSV domain as ‘ HSV ’
Set a threshold to extract the upper
most color domain
Apply a ‘7x7’ median filter to remove
salt & pepper noise
Label ‘ HSV ’in a 4-connected regional
neighborhood search as ‘ labeled ’
Divide the matrix ‘ labeled ’into two
halves
Store the following values for all
connected regions in the two halves
- Regional Height
- Vertical Width
- Area
Based on the features given in Table 1, all the
2

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

regions in the left half are compared with those on the
right. The objects, thus compared, are not crisply defined;
and thus need to be compared under fuzzy domain for an
accurate comparison. To realize fuzziness in these
comparisons, a fuzzy set termed as “similar to each
other” is used.
Consider the universal set of areas of all regions in
the image.
Suppose the object of comparison on the left has an
area Al and that on the right has an area Ar . The
measure of similarity between the two can be calculated
as follows:
( weight ) k ,l = min( Al , Ar ) / max( Al , Ar )
(1)
membership k ,l = Al × ( weight ) k ,l

µ ( Ak ,l ) = (membershipk ,l ) ×

1
Ar

§ § T
¨ ¨
c1 c 2
sin θ = ¨1 − ¨
¨ ¨ c .c
¨ © 1 2
©

·
¸
¸
¸
¸
¹

1

2

(6)

A simple edge operator known as Robert’s operator
was used. The operator uses a 2× 2 neighborhood of the
current pixel. The convolution masks used by Robert’s
Operator are as follows:
ªh (0,0) h1 (1,0)º
(7)
h1 = « 1
»
¬h1 (0,1) h1 (1,1) ¼

(2)

(3)

ª1 0 º
h1 = «
»
¬0 - 1¼
This
operator
can
be
generalized
multidimensional pixel values for VA as follows:

(8)
to

2

§ c T (x, y )c(x + 1, y + 1) ·
¨
,¸
¨ c T ( x, y ) . c(x + 1, y + 1) ¸
2
¸
RVA
= 1 − max¨
(9)
¨ c T (x, y + 1)c( x + 1, y ) ¸
¨
¸
¨ c T ( x, y + 1) . c(x, y + 1) ¸
©
¹
Here c( x, y ) is the vector containing the multiple
values of the pixel at coordinate ( x, y ) , and •

is the

L 2 vector norm.
The implementation of the above edge detectors was
enhanced introducing a membership function indicating
the degree of edginess in each neighborhood [28]. The
membership function is measured as follows:
(10)
1
µedge ( g ( x, y )) = 1 −

§
1+ ¨
¨
©

¦

N

g ( x, y ) − g ( i , j )

·
¸
∆ ¸
¹

Where g ( x, y ) is the pixel whose edginess is to be
determined and N is a predefined neighborhood
( 3 × 3 in our case) along which the edginess of the pixel
is to be calculated. ' ∆' is the total number of pixel
present in the neighborhood N (8 in our case). The
membership function enhances the edginess of a pixel in
a way that if there are a lot of edges present in a
neighborhood, the membership value of the pixel
g ( x, y ) increases to ‘1’. The same value asymptotically
reaches ‘0’ if there are almost no pixels present in the
neighborhood.
The input image edge map based on VA and edge
enhancement is shown in Fig 2 (c) and (b) respectively.

3.2 VA based edge detection
The approach [26] is to use Vector angle
measure, V A between adjacent color pixels to calculate
an edge map,
T

c1 c 2

2

3.3 Rule based implementation using modified
Robert’s operator and fuzzy edge enhancement

Here ' k ' is a region in the right half of the image
The
and ' l ' is a region in the left half of the image.
two operators of Fuzzy Height and Vertical Width are
calculated on the basis similar to that of Fuzzy Area
given in Equations 1, 2 and 3.
This results in a k × l membership matrix in which
each region in the left half is similar to a region in the
right half. The similarity of the image is by some degree
set by the fuzzy membership functions defined in
Equation 3. These membership functions result in three
separate membership values ranging from 0 to 1 based
on the closeness of the region with the one compared on
the basis of the three maps discussed. The overall
aggregate fuzzification is achieved by multiplying the
membership values to achieve an ultimate membership
as follows:
µ ( AHVk ,l ) = µ ( Ak ,l ) * µ ( H k ,l ) * µ (Vk ,l )
(4)
The final map, thus obtained, has the final break
light candidates selected on the basis of
maximum-area-similarity pair. In case of no recovery, the
system initiates a recovery mechanism that searches for
license plate candidates in the remaining sections of the
image.

cos θ =

·
¸
¸
¸
¹

(5)

c1 . c 2
Here c1 and c 2 are the RGB color vectors of the
adjacent pixels. The statistical analysis of values in
angular coordinates is problematic [26]. For these
reasons and since we are interested in Hue differences
however small, the sin θ was proposed in [27] and is
defined as follows:

3.4 Candidate Selection based on fuzzy regional
compactness
The edge map thus obtained is labeled on the basis
of 8-connected regions as shown in Fig 3. A number of
candidate license plate areas are selected from the
3

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

connected edge map on the basis of a fuzzy geometrical
feature. The feature used is the regional compactness of
each connected area found. The reference value of fuzzy
compactness is found from the training plates we
obtained manually and is designated c in Equation (12).
Based on area and perimeter, the compactness of a fuzzy
set can be determined as follows:
a(µ ) =
µ

¦

p(µ ) =

M

N

¦¦ µ
m =1 n =1

N

m, n

− µ m, n +1 +

M

¦¦ µ

m, n

− µ m +1,n

n =1 m =1

compactness (µ ) = a(µ )

(11)
P 2 (µ )
The value of compactness is invariant to distance
and skew in the image and serves well in fuzzy domain
even if an extent of noise distortion is present.
This resulted in a compactness map µ cˆ (c ) for all
the candidate regions present.
Cˆ Map: Suppose that the object of interest has
compactness ' c i ' . Given an entry in map Cˆ , say ' c' , the
membership degree, µ cˆ of the entry belonging to fuzzy
set ‘Like a Plate’ can be written
µ cˆ (c ) = exp(− a c − c i )
(12)

According to the definition of a fuzzy map, a large
entry indicates a high degree of possibility that the region
is a license plate. The candidate license plate(s) are
extracted on the basis of threshold criteria finding out the
minimum and the maximum entry present in the Cˆ Map.
~
Let M be any fuzzy map,
(a~ + a~min )
threshold = max
(13)
2
Where a max and a min are the maximum and
~
minimum values in M . All the entries that are greater
than the threshold are taken as potential candidates of
being a license plate.
The process of final candidate selection usually ends
with more than 1 candidate. The candidates are sorted on
the basis of their closeness of compactness (membership
degree) to the threshold set and are fed to the license
plate segmentation module. If the segmentation test on
the first test doesn’t prove successful, the second closest
match is fed and the process is repeated until either a
license plate is retrieved or all the candidates are
processed.

Figure 2: (a) Original Image, (b) Edge map based
on VA based edge detection. (c) Edge enhanced
version of VA based edge detector.

Let I T be the template image and I C be the
candidate image to be compared. The candidate image is
first normalized to the template image size [65 145] using
Nearest-neighbor interpolation. The difference between
the two matrices using Hamming Distance (XOR) is
measured and the candidate with lowest mismatch value
is selected as shown in Table 2.

3.5 Template matching for final candidate
selection
The process of filtering unwanted regions normally
ends up with more than one license plate candidates.
This situation is handled by matching all such regions
with a standard template as shown in fig 1 (b).

Figure 3: An 8 connected label map of image
shown in Fig. 2(c).

4
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Table 2: The white area in the XOR matrix
displays the mismatch between the actual and
the template image.
Candidate

XOR Matrix:

Image: ‘I C ’

IT ⊕ IC

Figure 6: The final ‘6’ characters of the license
plate.

Mismatch

If the number of segmented characters found in the
selected cluster is larger than the prescribed number (six),
components are deleted one at a time starting with the
smallest one until the above condition is satisfied.

3839

4745

5

4

Results

The system was tested on a database of 852 images
at various distances and angles as shown in Fig. 7. The
images were taken at varying lighting conditions
including low light, direct sunlight and uneven intensities.
The test set included plates with dirt, rust, skew, break
and other noise distortions. Table 3 shows separate
results of extraction and segmentation. The major
success obtained was in the successful extraction of
license plates where plates taken at a tilt of 45 degrees
were also extracted accurately. The system failed for 10
out of 852 images in extraction phase. A further 39 plates
were lost in the segmentation test subject to the character
interconnections due to highly skewed or dirty images.
The proposed edge enhancement scheme based on
VA based edge detector turned out to be a very robust
way of extracting the license plates under extreme
weather conditions with uncertain lightning conditions.
In almost all cases the technique created 8 connected
entries including one of a license plate as shown in Fig 3.
The overall success rate for the segmentation came out to
be 94.24%.

License Plate Segmentation Module

4.1 Character segmentation using Fuzzy c means

The features local to a license plate can be utilized to
classify valid characters and drop unwanted regions
before commencing an image histogram projection. This
eliminates areas affecting the selection of an optimal
threshold for a plate’s segmentation using horizontal and
vertical projections.
The basis of our assumption is the fact that nearly all
the characters in a license plate have some features
specific to only their structure. The regional features we
used were
•
Centroid
•
Vertical Width
•
Horizontal Width
Before commencing with the feature extraction
process, the candidate image was converted into an
8-connected labeled image and the feature vector is
passed to a bi-cluster fuzzy c-means algorithm. The
process is shown in Fig. 4.

Figure 4: Plate segmentation based on fuzzy c
means clustering. The lighter circles are the
candidates of cluster 2 selected on the basis of
average centroid height.

Figure 7: Samples taken at 2 meter (a) and 4
meter (b) at three different angles.

Figure 5: Horizontal (a) and Vertical projection (b)
profile based on selected cluster (Cluster 2)
from the image shown in Fig. 4.

5
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Technology, vol. 3, 1994, pp. 2147–2152.
[15] H. A. Hegt, R. J. De la Haye, and N. A. Khan, “A high
performance license plate recognition system,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. System, Man, and Cybernetics, vol. 5, 1998, pp.
4357–4362.
[16] L. Salgado, J. M. Menendez, E. Rendon, and N. Garcia,
Automatic car plate detection and recognition through
intelligent vision engineering, Proceedings of IEEE 33rd
Annual International Carnahan Conference on Security
Technology, pp. 71-76, 1999.
[17] D. S. Kim and S. I. Chien, “Automatic car license plate
extraction using modified generalized symmetry transform and
image warping,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Industrial
Electronics, vol. 3, 2001, pp. 2022–2027.
[18] J. A. G. Nijhuis, M. H. T. Brugge, K. A. Helmholt, J. P.
W. Pluim, L. Spaanenburg, R. S. Venema, and M. A.
Westenberg, “Car license plate recognition with neural
networks and fuzzy logic,” in Proc. IEEE Int.Conf. Neural
Networks, vol. 5, 1995, pp. 2232–2236.
[19] Pappas, T., N., “An Adaptive Clustering Algorithm for
Image Segmentation”, IEEE Trans, Signal Processing, Vol. 40,
Issue: 4, April 1992, pp 901 – 914.
[20] Hsieh, J., W., Yu, H., S., Chen, Y., S., “Morphology
Based License Plate Detection from Complex Scenes”, Pattern
Recognition 2002 Proceedings, Vol. 3, 11-15 Aug. 2002, pp
176-179.
[21] Cristian, M., Rosa, A., “Gray-Scale Image Enhancement
as an Automatic Process Driven by Evolution”, IEEE Trans,
Systems, Man and Cybernetics-Part B: Cybernetics, Vol. 34,
No. 2, April 2004.
[22] Gonzalez, R., C., Wood, R., E., “Digital Image
Processing", Addison Wesley, 1993.
[23] C. L. Novak, S. A. Shafer, “Color Edge Detection”,
Proceedings DARPA image understanding workshop, Vol 1, pp
35-37, Los Angeles, CA, US, 1987.
[24] Carron, T., Lambert, P, “Color Edge Detection using
jointly Hue, Saturation and Intensity”, IEEE Int. Conf. on
Image Processing, Vol. 3, 13-16 Nov, 1994, pp 977 – 981.
[25] Dony, R., D., Wesolkowski, S., “Edge Detection on
Color Images using RGB Vector Angles”, Proceedings of,
IEEE Canadian Conf on Electrical & Computer Engineering,
Vol. 2, 9-12 May, 1999, pp 687-692.
[26] Wesolkowski, S., Jernigan, E., “Color Edge Detection
using jointly Euclidean and Vector Angle”, Vision Interface, 99,
19-21 May, 1999
[27] Carron, T., Lambert, P, “Color Edge Detection using
jointly Hue, Saturation and Intensity”, IEEE Int. Conf. on
Image Processing, Vol. 3, 13-16 Nov, 1994, pp 977 – 981.
[28] Tizhoosh,H.,R.,
http://pami.uwaterloo.ca/tizhoosh/edge.htm

Table 3: Results of license plate extraction
and segmentation

Success
Percent
Recognition

Extraction
842/852
98.86%

Segmentation
803/842
95.36%

Overall
803/852
94.24%

References
[1] T. Sirithinaphong and K. Chamnongthai, “The
recognition of car license plate for automatic parking system,”
in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Signal Processing and its Applications,
1998, pp. 455–457.
[2] N. H. C. Yung, K. H. Au, and A. H. S. Lai, “Recognition
of vehicle registration mark on moving vehicles in an outdoor
environment,” IEEE International conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 1999, pp. 418–422.
[3] S. Draghici, “A neural network based artificial vision
system for license plate recognition system ”, International
Journal for Neural Systems, Vol. 8, pages 112-113, February
1997.
[4] P. Davies, N. Emmott, and N. Ayland, “License plate
recognition technology for toll violation enforcement,” Inst.
Elect. Eng. Colloquium Image Analysis for Transport
Applications, pp. 7/1–7/5, 1990.
[5] K. Yamaguchi, Y. Nagaya, K. Ueda, H. Nemoto, and M.
Nakagawa,“A method for iidentifying specific vehicles using
template matching,”, IEEE Int. Conf. Intelligent Transportation
Systems, 1999, pp., 8-13
[6] J. R. Cowell, “Syntactic pattern recognizer for vehicle
identification numbers”, Image and Vision Comput., vol. 13, no.
1, pp. 13–19, 1995.
[7] R. A. Lotufo, A. D. Morgan, and A. S. Johnson,
“Automatic number plate recognition,” Inst. Elect. Eng.
Colloquium on Image Analysis for Transport Applications, pp.
6/1–6/6, 1990.
[8] T. Naito, T. Tsukada, K. Yamada, K. Kozuka, and S.
Yamamoto, Robust license-plate recognition method for
passing vehicles under outside environment. IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, Volume: 49 Issue: 6, pp: 2309-2319,
2000.
[9] J. A. G. Nijhuis, M. H. T. Brugge, K. A. Helmholt, J. P.
W. Pluim, L. Spaanenburg, R. S. Venema, and M. A.
Westenberg, “Car license plate recognition with neural
networks and fuzzy logic,” in Proc. IEEE Int.Conf. Neural
Networks, vol. 5, 1995, pp. 2232–2236.
[10] M. Yu and Y. D. Kim, “An approach to Korean license
plate recognition based on vertical edge matching,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 2000, pp.
2975–2980.
[11] H. Hontani and T. Koga, “Character extraction method
without prior knowledge on size and position information,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Vehicle Electronics, 2001, pp. 67–72.
[12] T. Naito, T. Tsukada, K. Yamada, K. Kozuka, and S.
Yamamoto, Robust license-plate recognition method for
passing vehicles under outside environment. IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, Volume: 49 Issue: 6, pp: 2309-2319,
2000.
[13] J. C. H. Poon, M. Ghadiali, G. M. T. Mao, and L. M.
Sheung, “A robust vision system for vehicle license plate
recognition using grey-scale morphology,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Symp. Industrial Electronics, vol. 1, 1995, pp. 394–399.
[14] Y. S. Soh, B. T. Chun, and H. S. Yoon, “Design of real
time vehicle identification system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
System, Man, and Cybernetics: Humans, Information, and

6
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

