Diagramming Design: Visualizing User Interactions with Colour Palettes
Catherine Stones
University of Leeds
{c.m.stones@leeds.ac.uk}
Abstract
This is a partly practical, partly theoretical paper
regarding the uses and potential uses of capturing and
visualising digital design moves. The paper-based
sketch consists of ambiguous marks that evidence shifts
in creative thinking over time. When the artist or
designer uses digital technologies to design, only final
polished digital marks remain at the end of a session.
The processes by which the final design occurred are
invisible.
This paper presents visualizations of task-based
and highly constrained design activities such as colour
selection to indicate what can be learned by visualizing
mechanical design processes. By visualizing how
student designers move across two different designs of
colour palette both artistically and empirically
interesting results are found. Visualizing design moves
enables the design researcher to discover patterns
within design behaviour, enables the usability
researcher to test interface usage, and enables the
designer to create images with aesthetic potential
through process alone.

1. Introduction
The paper-based sketch consists of ambiguous marks
that evidence shifts in creative thinking over time.
When the artist or designer uses digital technologies to
draw or design, only final polished digital marks
remain at the end of a session. The processes by which
the final design occurred are invisible.
This paper presents visualizations of task-based
and highly constrained design activities such as colour
selection to indicate what can be learned by visualizing
mechanical design processes.
By visualizing how student designers move across
two different designs of colour palette both artistically
and empirically interesting results are found.
Visualizing design moves enables the design
researcher to discover patterns within design
behaviour, enables the usability researcher to test

interface usage, and enables the designer to create
images with aesthetic potential through process alone.

2. Design Move Capture in Context:
Existing Work
Pamela Schenk [1] in her detailed study regarding
the use of the sketch in the graphic design process
states that many design tasks originally performed on
paper during the prototyping stage were migrating to
the computer. The challenge this poses for the
researcher wishing to gain insight into such processes
are clearly expressed by Schenk when she states ‘The
drawn record provided a detailed witness of the
progress of design solutions, now no such records
exist. Evidently, equivalent decision making processes
are now supported by drawing on computer as were
previous supported by drawing in more traditional
ways, and in order to move on it will be necessary to
explore ways to log these processes’ [2].
Similarly Black [3] raises the issue of logging
digital design moves stating that the activity of erasing
marks and revising individual drafts indefinitely means
that no concrete record is made of the progress of an
idea. Logging design decisions is seen to be a valuable
activity within the design community. Mamykina,
Candy and Edmonds [4], amongst others, state that in
creative work it is important to be able to track the
progress of an idea or revisit design decisions. Peter
Van Sommers [5] also states that all documentation of
graphic and other productions should include
information on process if this can be achieved nonintrusively.
There are many instances of analogue recording of
the analogue design process, most commonly through
the use of protocol analysis (facilitated through video
and audio recordings, and subsequent manually
encodings) [6] and the examination of sketches. There
is not the space in this paper to address how these
methods are used. Studies regarding sketching and its
usage have been predominantly based around design
disciplines such as architecture, interior design and

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

engineering. Little work, apart from Schenk [1] so far
has been carried out about sketching in the graphic
design process, where the goals are driven first and
foremost by a communication need. Graphic design is
also different due to its predominantly twodimensional quality. We can still however, apply some
discoveries about the design process from other
disciplines to our understanding of graphic design
decisions.
Perhaps the most exhaustive analogue recording
and visualisation of the graphic design process, is
featured in Peter Van Sommers ‘Drawing and
Cognition’ [5] in which mechanical drawing methods
are recorded and then visualised through charts and
diagrams to explore emergent patterns in the drawing
process. Such work is useful since the diagrams reveal
clear trends and combine several session outcomes in
one diagram. However diagrams are manually created
from data extracted from observations and video
recordings and they are therefore time consuming to
generate.
Instances of recording the digital design process via
digital means are more difficult to find but do occur in
a range of design fields. The IBM History Flow Project
[7] involves logging the collaborative editing process
of a Wiki (a website which anyone can alter), and
represents the user adjustments through a visualisation
system. Maps produced are complicated but reveal the
dominance of a particular user over other users and
map the evolution of a web document over time. Thus,
a visual design of sorts is being tracked electronically.
Makkuni’s work [8] resides in the field of
architecture but is very relevant in this context. His
approach involves recording design decisions that a
designer took when designing a chinese temple –
decisions about various architectural elements, their
properties and position. A series of lines connect visual
representations of these decisions to form what he
called an ‘historical sketch’. Makkuni’s approach is
useful since he makes effort to track where design
changes occur and uses novel graphical representations
to describe the relationship between two changed
elements.
Of general interest are also broader creative
projects which combine the social movement of people
with visualization, and the interplay between the
analogue and digital. Half Angel’s ‘The Knitting
Project’ [9] based in the Irish city of Cork involves
capturing weather information and weather/traffic
movement across the city and visualizing this data
within a continuous stream of knitting patterns which
are then ‘executed’ by a group of knitters. The end
result is a collaboratively-made visualization in a
traditional craft material and one which plays

effectively on the boundaries between the analogue,
the digital and quite explicitly, life and art.
The work presented here has an exclusively digital
focus – digital design decisions are rendered digitally.
What is of particular interest is the transformation of
one art form (a design artifact) into another related one
(a visible design process). For each decision there is a
trail of indecisions which potentially has its own
aesthetic, as well as levels of meaning and interest.
Such visualizations have the potential to span both
artistic and empirical endeavours.

3. Visualizing Principles
One of the fundamental difficulties of representing
the design process through a symbol system is the illdefined, multi-faceted and ambiguous nature of the
process itself. As Nelson Goodman stated, drawing
could not be adequately represented through a symbol
system – “the sketch, unlike the score, is not in a
language or notation at all, but in a system without
either syntactic or semantic differentiation” [10].
However certain digital design moves are constrained
enough to be summarised by a diagram, in the same
way as dance, through the Labanotation system, can be
represented mostly accurately (though clearly not every
conceivable dance move nor mood can be adequately
described by a finite number of graphical systems).
Given the constrained design environment of palettebased interfaces in certain tools (such as in
Macromedia Flash and Freehand) for colour design,
and the list driven selection of font styles and settings,
certain digital design processes could be represented
via a symbol system.
Clearly not every design move can be coded –
such as a computer-based mark made by using a
freehand drawing tool. This mark could potentially be
unique and therefore outside the remit of a symbol
system. The digital design environment is very
spatially oriented. Selection from menus is a vital
activity for the designer, be it typographic choice or
colour choice from a palette (particularly for web
design). Many interface elements have a spatial
dimension with access to some options ‘buried’ deep
within menu systems, Other digital design activities
require simply more interactions in the workspace
(careful illustration creation through more bezier curve
additions or boolean operations), or long sequences of
option selections (such as selecting, cropping and, say
colour correction). In order to investigate specific
instances of spatial significance within the digital
design environment an evaluative study was carried
out.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

4. Evaluative Study

4.2 Visualization Results: Interface as a basis
for visualization.

4.1 Methodology
A bespoke design system was created which
allowed users, in this case, students to easily select and
add colours to a basic graphic design document
[11,12]. A group of 32 students at the University of
Leeds were requested to use the system. They were
asked to produce colour schemes for a supplied
document consisting of a background colour, a simple
shape and three text elements. As students selected
colours from a colour palette their selections were
stored in a database. In total 61 student sessions were
captured. This data was later visualized dynamically
using Macromedia Flash and the actionscript coding
language.
One of the objectives of the evaluative study was to
attempt to visualize user movement within the digital
design workspace including movement between
objects in the document and movements between
colours on the colour palette. This paper focuses on the
latter. The study was not designed in the first instance
to be empirical but to be exploratory, to uncover
usually hidden behaviour.
Approximately half the subjects were given a
colour palette of 216 colours arranged hexidecimally
(as tends to be the default convention in many software
packages) and half in hue order (one which may be
classed as more intuitive). This manipulation to the
study was carried out to allow for the capturing of
usage data in spatially-diverse design environments,
testing out the significance of spatial arrangement in
interface elements. Whilst not crucial to this paper,
below is a summary of the data captured showing that,
statistically there was no great difference between the
number of design moves (where a design move is
classed as a colour change to an element in the
document) nor time taken by students (measured by an
arbitrary timer) using either palette arrangement.
Table 1. Overview Data of Study
Hex Arrangement
Hue Arrangement
874 Design Moves
860 Design Moves
32 subject sessions
29 subject sessions
Mean of 29.65 moves per Mean of 27.31 moves per
session
session
Total time=4151: mean
Total time = 4141:
129.7 units
mean:142.79 units
A range of visualizations were carried out to
explore whether design move data could offer us
further information about the design process and
interactions between the designer and a colour palette
interface.

Figure 1. Hexadecimal ordered palette
showing relative popularity of colours
selected during 29 colour scheme sessions

Figure 2. Hue ordered palette showing relative
popularity of colours selected during 32
colour scheme sessions
Figures 1 and 2 are visualizations of total colour
popularity for each colour palette arrangement,
presented within the visual frame of each palette
interface. Especially noticeable in Figure 1 is the
dominant use of ‘pure’ colours in the left most column.
Interestingly the same colours were popular in Figure 2
(though placed amongst other colours) perhaps hinting
that such isolation in palette design in Figure 1 is
useful in terms of efficiency. Whilst not showing any
identifiable differences in results between the palette
arrangements such visualizations could be used to
identify colours which are not being used and to
encourage the adoption of a wider range of colours by
student designers. This is made more feasible when we
visualize a sample of sessions separately as below.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 3. Visualisations of movement within
25 individual sessions using the hexadecimal
palette.
Using interface elements themselves as
visualizations again, we are able to present individual
session information in physically relevant form – white
space represents ignored colours (those colours which
were not even requested to preview) and reveals
distances traversed between colours. These palettes
above help make visible ‘colour formations’, in which
a particular colour was sort, and ‘location-bias’
formations, in which colours were used simply because
of their location on the palette.
Grey lines have been used, in a basic manner, to
suggest order by which colours were selected, though
direction of movement and exact sequences can not be
determined using the system. Tracking movement
within interface elements therefore can reveal
particular preferences of usage and can be used as an
instrument in interface evaluation and in design
process studies. Of more interest to the author in this
case is the ability to diagram design as a process –
creating a diagram that retains designer decisions, and
which itself holds an aesthetic value.
In terms of accumulation, visualizations can also
be made which combine many session movements in
one diagram.

4.3 Visualization Results: Tracking Overall
User Movement

Figure 4. Visualizations combining all
captured movements across the hexademical
palette.

Figure 5. Visualizations combining all
captured movements across the hue-ordered
palette.
Figures 4 and 5 represent movements across the
two colour palettes for 29 and 32 sessions respectively.
Each session is represented by a coloured strip of
points. Distance travelled around the palette (as the
subject moved from one colour to another) is
represented through a left to right, bottom to top series
of nodal positions. Downwards and left oriented
movement across the palette was measured and
visually coded by inversion. This coding system was
used to try to establish a means for comparing total
distance travelled by students when using the
hexidecimal ordered palette versus the hue-ordered
palette. As can be seen, both figures reveal overall
similar shapes, though at first glance Figure 5 could be
interpreted as more densely packed, and with fewer
visible vertical movements. Though the diagrams
illustrated here are static the actual maps can be
separated and inspected individually. Such maps have
a molecular styling, suggestive of the organic and fluid
process of design. Crampton-Smith relates the act of
graphic design to a ‘subconscious ballet’ [13] in which
graphical elements are unconsciously and naturally
adjusted. Quite literally visualizations of this process

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

can capture elements of this seemingly uninterrupted
‘dance’.
Given the hint of density of Figure 5, further, more
constrained visualizations were carried out.
Purely horizontal and vertical movements were
plotted to see whether the palette arrangement had an
effect on the basic direction of movement across it.

Figure 6. Visualizations combining the
horizontal and vertical movements of 29
sessions using the hexadecimal palette.

Figure 7. Visualizations combining the
horizontal and vertical movements of 32
sessions using the hue-ordered palette.
Figures 6 and 7 show accumulative horizontal and
vertical movements around a central axis. Semitransparent overlays represent individual sessions and
so when combined, dark areas show the most popular
orientation of movement. What is clearly evident,
looking at the dark areas is the symmetry of figure 6
versus the asymmetry of figure 7. Through
visualization it is evident that those using the hueordered palette used fewer vertical moves and a greater
number of horizontal moves in the right hand direction
than those using the hexadecimal arrangement. The left
to right order of the hue-palette arrangement seemed to
be echoed in the way it was used, perhaps making, at
least for Western designers, the act of designing with
colour more closely related (and therefore more
intuitive) to the natural order of writing and reading.

5. Further Work and Conclusions
User movement within the digital design
environment affords itself to be captured, especially
where constrained and closed options and movements
pervade. As the designer ‘dances’ across the canvas
and interface a map of their journey reveals decisions
and indecisions. Other qualities which can be classed
as being part of a symbol system include typographic
choice, certain manipulations such as scaling, rotation
and skewing, and positioning, and thus other design
activities other than colour choice can be visualized.
The author is currently developing a system for
visualizing how novice designers work with digital
typography in order to establish relationships between
creation and manipulation of type on computer.
By visualizing how student designers move across
two different designs of colour palette both artistically
and empirically interesting results are found.
Visualizing design moves enables the design
researcher to discover patterns within design
behaviour, such as the right-hand horizontal usage of
the hue ordered palette. The system could also
potentially enable the usability researcher to test
interface usage – to spot unexpected and inefficient
usage.
The system also enables the designer to create
images with aesthetic potential through process alone.
The fascination for marks made in sketches and
notebooks by artists and designers working in
conventional media could extend to interest in digital
processes beyond information stored by File-Save
alone. More sophisticated storage and visualization
methods could meet such a need – the biggest
challenge is to devise increasingly rich (both in
aesthetic and informational terms) methods for
representing increasingly ambiguous and complex
digital designing activities, beyond the basic properties
visualized here.

6. References
[1] P Schenk, The Nature of the Graphic Design Process,
within the Commercial Environment, with Particular Regard
to Drawing, PhD Thesis, Manchester Polytechnic, Institute of
Advanced Studies, 1989.
[2] P Schenk, The Role of Drawing in the Graphic Design
Process, Design Studies, Vol 12 No 3 pp.168-88, 1991.
[3] A Black, Visible Planning on paper and on screen: The
impact of working medium on decision-making by novice
graphic designers, Behaviour and Information Technology,
Vol 9, No 4, pp.283-296, 1990

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[4] L Mamykina, L Candy & E Edmonds, Collaborative
Creativity, Communications of the ACM, 2002, Vol 45, No
10, p.91
[5] P Van Sommers, Drawing and Cognition: Descriptive
and Experimental Studies of Graphic Production Processes,
Cambridge University Press, 1984
[6] N Cross, H Christiaans & H Dorst (eds), Analysing
Design Activity, Chichester: New York, Wiley, 1996
[7] M Wattenberg & FB Viégas, History flow: visualizing
dynamic, evolving documents and the interactions of multiple
collaborating
authors:
a
preliminary
report,
http://researchweb.watson.ibm.com/
history/index.htm, Collaborative User Experience research
group, 2003
[8] R Makkuni, A gestural representation of the process of
composing chinese temples, IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, Dec 1987, pp45-61
[9] Half Angel, The Knitting Map: http://www.halfangel.ie/
knitting-ie/index3.html
[10] N Goodman , Languages of Art: An Approach to the
Theory of Symbols, Oxford University Press,1969
[11] C Stones, Capturing & Visualising Colour Choice
History in Document Design, Digital Creativity, Vol. 14 No.
4, 2003, pp. 195-202, 2003
[12] C Stones, Extending the Sketch: Assessing Colour
Design Processes in Graphic Design Production,
Proceedings of 2nd International CLTAD Conference,
Barcelona, Publication Forthcoming
[13] G Crampton Smith, Computer Graphics and Graphic
Design: Too Costly, Too Complex, Too Cryptic, in J
Lansdown & R Earnshaw, Computers in Art, Design and
Animation, Springer Verlag, New York, 1989

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

