Sitecam: A Multimedia Tool for the Exploration of Construction Environments

Rob Manton, Carsten Maple, Andrew Callard, Martyn Baker
Department of Computing and Information Systems
University of Luton, UK.
rob.manton@luton.ac.uk, carsten.maple@luton.ac.uk, andrew.callard@luton.ac.uk,
martyn.baker@luton.ac.uk,
Abstract
There is increasing interest in the use of multimedia
and web based materials for teaching and learning;
areas of particular significance for the use of enhanced
learning materials are those that may be inaccessible to
certain student populations. Environments such as
building sites present unique safety and access difficulties
for visits and are particularly suitable for virtual
exploration using interactive software. In this paper we
present a tool that provides multiple cross linked digital
media of a construction site, address some of the issues in
the choice of delivery format and present an initial
assessment of the efficacy of the software for teaching
and learning..

1. Introduction
As computational power continues to increase
exponentially with time, the use of technology in all areas
of life is widening in scope. Computer systems are
ubiquitous in today’s society; an area in which the use of
technology has been revolutionary is education. There is
an increasing requirement for education delivery to be
flexible and provide learning through multiple channels,
presenting information through various media: audio,
visual and textual.
The use of multimedia in education should be undertaken
with care. Bishop and Cates [3] investigated the use of
sound in multimedia education; their analysis involved
combining both information processing theory and
communication theory. Mayer is conducting research at
the forefront of educational technology and applies
cognitive principles to the application of multimedia in
teaching and learning, see for example Mayer [9], [10]
and Moreno & Mayer [11].

An area in which the use of multimedia is of particular
importance is that construction.
When teaching
construction engineering to students, a visit to a
construction site is critical for an effective learning
experience. However, arranging a suitable number of
visits can pose problems. As such, the use of multimedia
in this area is becoming widespread. This paper presents
Sitecam, a project funded by a grant from the Higher
Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE) Fund
for the Development of Teaching and Learning.(FDTL)
The project concerned the development of a multimedia
tool to be used in the teaching of construction to students
in higher education. The software was developed
between 2002 and 2004 by a team of academics,
construction professionals and learning technologists at
the
University
of
Luton.
(http://www.luton.ac.uk/sitecam/). The project was
established to enhance the learning experience and
employability of Built Environment students by bringing
the reality of construction processes and procedures
closer to the lecture room.
The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we
describe the use of multimedia in education, with
particular reference to the work of Mayer. In Section 3
we discuss the application of multimedia and time lapse
materials in a construction built environment educational
context. The Sitecam software tool is presented in
Section 4, before results and conclusions are presented in
Sections 5 and 6, respectively.

2. The Use of Multimedia in Education
There has been a great deal of work in recent years that
attempts to measure the efficacy of multimedia in
teaching and learning. Much of the body of research
refers to the fundamental work of Mayer, that

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 1. Depiction of a cognitive theory of multimedia learning, taken from [11].
incorporates ideas from cognitive load theory, see
Sweller, [17] for example, the widely cited dual-coding
theory of Paivio [14], and Baddeley’s working memory
model, see [2] for example; an illustration of the
integration of these theories is given in Figure 1.
The key principles to be observed when constructing
multimedia tools for educational purposes may be
considered as:
Multimedia
Principle

SplitAttention
Principle

Modality
Principle

Spatial
Contiguity
Principle

Students learn better from words and
pictures than from words alone.
Examples of effective techniques include
on-screen animation and slide shows.
Such animation and slide shows should
written text or narration. Blocks of text
and strictly audio links are less effective
unless coupled with visual images
Students learn better when the
instructional material does not require
them to split their attention between
multiple sources of mutually referring
information.
Multimedia presentations should ensure
that multiple sources of information are
complimentary rather than simultaneously
demanding the attention of the learner.
Students learn better from animation
accompanied by narration rather than
from animation accompanied by onscreen text.
Multimedia presentations should be
created utilising audio techniques rather
than being supplemented with written
text.
Students learn better when corresponding
words and pictures are presented near to
rather than far from each other on the

Temporal
Contiguity
Principle

Coherence
Principle

Redundancy
Principle

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

screen.
When presenting coupled text and images,
the text should be close to, or even better
embedded within, the images. While the
use of text below or beside visual
information, such as a caption is useful, it
is more effective to embed the text within
the visual object.
Students learn better when corresponding
words and pictures are presented
simultaneously rather than successively.
When presenting coupled text and images,
both text and visual images should be
presented simultaneously. In cases where
animation and narration are both used, it
should be ensured that the animation and
narration coincide.
Students learn better when extraneous
words, pictures, and sounds are excluded
rather than included.
It is important that multimedia
presentations focus on which information
is necessary to ensure that the learning
outcomes are met. Any extra information
that is not entirely necessary should be
removed to ensure the presentation is
clear and concise
Students learn better from a combination
of animation and narration than from
animation, narration, and on-screen text.
Multimedia presentations should ensure
that the learner does not suffer from
sensory overload. Presentations should
involve
either
visual
information
combined with text or visual information
combined with audio, but not a
combination of all three.

3. Visualisation in construction
3.1. The use of time lapse photography in the
construction industry
Time lapse photography has been used to record the
progress of construction projects since the 1960s.[8] This
is a well explored field. As early as 1978, Paulson [13]
described the use of the technique as a first step toward
an automated data collection process. Everett et al [6]
provide a useful summary of previous work and describe
the use of time lapse material ‘in historical
documentation of project progress and dispute
resolution’. Abeid and Arditi [1] describe another system
used for recording project progress and in dispute
resolution. There is little literature describing the use of
time lapse recordings in a construction education context.

Quicktime™ VR technology (eg The Buildscape project
at University of Reading – see [7]). A Quicktime VR
panorama is only ‘partially immersive’ since the user is
constrained to a finite number of pre created vantage
points. While a Quicktime VR panorama allows the user
to explore an environment spatially (in a limited way) a
time lapse video sequence presented in a non-linear

3.2. The use of multimedia and virtual
exploration in built environment education
The effectiveness of multimedia as an aid to teaching and
learning in tertiary education is now widely accepted, see
for example Yaverbaum & Nadarajan [19]. Turk[18]
advocates the use of multimedia to create an artificial
‘being in the world’ experience. In the education of built
environment students, Riley & Hodgkinson [15] explore
the use of multimedia materials both in large class
teaching and in self study.
A number of researchers address the particular issues of
providing experience of construction sites in lieu of real
site visits. Bouchlaghem et al [5] describe a multimedia
based database system containing imagery related to
construction sites and conclude that ‘Students found that,
in the absence of regular site visits, the images were a key
factor in relation to their understanding of the aspects of
building construction’ and further that ‘ Animations were
found to be the most popular feature of the system as they
offered the students a degree of interaction stimulating
their assimilation.’

Figure 2. The main Sitecam interface with
the live action video selected. The tabbed
menu selects the media type.

Figure 3. The computer animation sequence
selected.

The use of ‘partially immersive virtual reality’ to help
illustrate practical situations is well established: eg
Schafe and Clarke [16] describe an application whereby
an interactive digital VR panorama of a computer room is
used to give students context to their theoretical studies.
Health and safety and logistical issues make it
particularly difficult to take built environment students on
site visits to real construction projects. To alleviate this
difficulty a number of efforts have been made at creating
interactive digital panoramas of construction sites using
Figure 4. The time lapse video section selected.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

multimedia format offers the ability to explore the
construction project temporally.

4. The software
The software consists of a user interface that allows the
user to navigate between a number of different media
showing the construction of a main case study (the
Salvation Army building at Luton, Bedfordshire) and
related material taken from other projects.
The included media are a time lapse video sequence, a
computer generated (CGI) animation, live action showing
an edited sequence of real time footage and finally a set
of related video material taken from other building
projects. Supporting documents like a video interview
with the project’s site manager, design drawings and a
GANTT chart are also included.
The time lapse sequence was created by editing together
a series of still images taken by a webcam (details can be
found at http://www.luton.ac.uk/sitecam/ppoint.shtml)
which was fixed in position for the duration of the
building project and set to capture images automatically
every hour on weekdays between 9am and 6pm. The
webcam was operated for the six month duration of the
building activity. This gave a total of over 1500 images.
The images were edited together in Adobe Premiere
video editing software and exported as an AVI digital
video.
The live action sequence was shot on hand-held
camcorder at periodic intervals throughout the
construction process. It was edited together into a single
30minute sequence and processed as an AVI digital video
file.
The computer animation was produced using 3dMax and
rendered as an AVI. It shows an animated build up of the
building structure in the order of the actual build process.
The related video material was also shot with hand held
camcorder at a number of other construction sites and
edited to provide stage-specific material, for example all
the footage showing foundations from the different sites
was edited together into a single ‘foundations’ sequence.
The Sitecam software presents a unified interface to four
different media. A tabbed menu system across the top of
the screen allows the user to cross link from one medium
to another. (see Figure 2) For example if the user is
viewing the part of the live action sequence that relates to
the roof construction and presses the 3d animation tab,
playback of that sequence starts on the roof part. A
further menu (at the side of the screen) allows the user to

jump to another stage of the construction process. It is
also possible to fast forward/rewind the video sequence
by dragging the slider at the bottom of the screen.
The interface was created using Macromedia Director ™
software. The interactivity was programmed using the
Lingo programming language. The whole thing is
presented as a stand-alone projector (exe) file and
requires no additional software to be installed.
To achieve the interactive control that makes digital
multimedia more engaging than traditional linear media
like video, the user must be able not only to search
through the video material using fast forward and rewind
but also be able to jump instantly either forwards or
backwards to another section. This non linear support is
afforded by digital video stored in the AVI or Quicktime
formats but not by the MPEG format or by the various
streaming video formats that would be viable for delivery
on a VLE or via the web.
Although the user can do this arbitrarily when playing a
stand-alone digital video file with a video player (such as
Quicktime ™ player or Windows™ Media player ) by
dragging a time slider, the feature is most useful when
coupled with a menu system offering the user the ability
to instantly select material relating to a topic of interest.

4.1 The different variants produced.
The video files take up many Gigabytes of space so the
material does not fit on a single CD-ROM. Three
alternative versions have been produced. These are:
•
CD-ROM lecturer version, designed to work on
relatively old equipment without the installation of any
extra video software such as Quicktime™. It was
identified that any requirement to install additional
software could make the software unusable where the
lecturer was unable to do so either because of their lack
of computer expertise or because of the controls placed
by systems administrators. This version is intended for
projection in a group teaching situation under lecturer
control. A pause facility driven by keyboard or on-screen
button is provided to facilitate this control. Because of the
large quantity of video material spanning five CDs there
are installation and disk switching issues with this version
that do not arise with the two versions described below.
•
DVD lecturer version, designed to work on
relatively old equipment but with DVD drive. The video
is compressed to a relatively low data rate, which gives
relatively poor image quality but is sure to work on older
equipment. By compiling all of the video material onto a
single disk the package becomes easier to use and avoids
complicated installation and disk swapping issues.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

•
DVD student version, designed to work on
relatively new equipment with DVD drive. The video is
of a higher quality using the Quicktime format and
encoded at a higher data rate. This version also takes
advantage of the text track feature of Quicktime to
provide on-screen subtitles that explain the events shown
in the video. (see Figure 5)
•
In addition, an experimental online version for
delivery via a virtual learning environment (VLE) was
created. This uses streaming video technology. Due to the
limitations of the online delivery medium, the interactive
cross linking between the different media is not supported
in this version.

materials and 40% said it was the same. 32%
said it was better than a real site visit and 22%
said it was the same.

5. Conclusions and Further Work
A tool is described that provides a useful addition to the
growing pool of resources available for use in the
education of built environment students. It can be used
either in large group teaching or in self study using the
captioned student version. It provides an engaging and
informative medium for demonstrating the construction
process particularly for students with no first hand
experience of building sites.

6. References
[1] Abeid, J and Arditi, D (2003) Photo-net: An
Integrated System for Controlling Construction Progress,
Engineering,
Construction
and
Architectural
Management, 10(3), 162-171.
[2] Baddeley, A.D. (1999). Human Memory. Boston:
Allyn and Bacon.

Figure 5. The student self study version
showing the explanatory captions.

5. Results
74 students on HE construction courses were shown the
software and asked a number of questions. The majority
(97%) were introduced to the software by a lecturer.

[3] Bishop, M.J., & Cates, W.M., (2001). Theoretical
foundations for sound’s use in multimedia instruction to
enhance learning. Educational Technology Research and
Development, 49(3), 5-22.
[4] Bouchlaghem, N., Beacham N., & Sher, W. (2000)
Computer Visualisation in Civil Engineering Education,
Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 14(2), 134140.

•

51% said if they were given the material on
CD/DVD they would definitely use it; another
43% said they probably would.

[5] Bouchlaghem, N, Wilson A, Beacham, N, & Sher, W
(2002) Computer Imagery and Visualization in Built
Environment Education: The CAL-Visual Approach,
Innovations in Education and Teaching International,
39(3), 225 – 236.

•

Interestingly the results were slightly lower
(42% definitely and 43% probably) when asked
whether they would use the software if it were
available on intranet or VLE.

[6] Everett, J. G., Halkali, H., & Schlaff, T. G. (1998)
‘Time-lapse video applications for construction project
management, Journal of. Construction Engineering
Management., 124(3) 204–209.

•

88% said the material would be useful in self
guided study and 95% said that it increased
student understanding of the construction
workplace practices and processes.

•

When asked about the Sitecam product
compared to other teaching materials, 47% said
it was better than other CD-ROM based

[7] Finch, E, Creating Navigable Movies As A Teaching
Aid,
from
http://www.cebe.heacademy.ac.uk/learning/habitat/HABI
TAT3/fhab.html
[8] Fondahl, J. W. (1960). Photographic analysis for
construction operations.’J. Constr. Div., ASCE, 86(2), 9–
25.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[9] Mayer, R. E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we
asking the right questions? Educational Psychologist, 32,
1-19.
[10] Mayer, R. E. (1999). Multimedia aids to problemsolving transfer. International Journal of Educational
Research,
31, 1-19.
[11] Moreno , R, & Mayer, R (1999). Cognitive
principles of multimedia learning: the role of modality
and contiguity. Journal of Educational Psychology , 91 ,
358 – 368
[12] Moreno , R, & Mayer, R (2000). A LearnerCentered Approach to Multimedia Explanations:
Deriving Instructional Design Principles from Cognitive
Theory, Interactive Multimedia Electronic Journal of
Computer-Enhanced Learning, 2(2).
[13] Paulson, B. C. (1978). Interactive graphics for
simulating construction operations. J. Constr. Div.,
ASCE, 104(1), 69–76.
[14] Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual
coding approach. Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
[15] Riley, M & Hodgkinson , R, Integration of
Multimedia in Construction Technology Education
Programmes,
available
from
http://www.cebe.heacademy.ac.uk/learning/habitat/HABI
TAT3/ljm2.html
[16] Schafe, L. M., & Clarke, R. J. (1997). Tertiary
Educational Uses of Partially Immersive Virtual Reality.
Proceedings of Australian Society for Computers in
Learning in Tertiary Education, Ascilite'97, 538-543.
[17] Sweller, J. (1999). Instruction Design in Technical
Areas. Camberwell, Australia: ACER.
[18] Turk, Z., (2001) Multimedia: Providing Students
With Real World Experiences, Automation in
Construction, 10(2), 247-255.
[19] Yaverbaum, G.J. & Nadarajan, U. (1996) Learning
Basic Concepts of Telecommunications: An Experiment
in Multimedia and Learning, Computers and Education
26(4), 215-224.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

