Visualising Knowledge Maps for Encyclopedia Articles
Wolfgang Kienreich and Michael Granitzer
Know-Center, Competence Center for Knowledge-Based Applications and Systems
{wkien@know-center.at, mgrani@know-center.at}
Abstract
This publication presents a prototype visualisation
system for navigation of encyclopaedia articles based on
knowledge maps connecting articles to each other. A
turning table is used as a metaphor to depict a result set
as a whole, while three-dimensional objects of various
shapes placed on top of the table represent individual
encyclopaedia articles. The system employs a number of
depth cues to enhance spatial perception and uses depthdependent semi-transparency of labels to avoid display
cluttering. A concrete implementation for the German
language
“Brockhaus
Multimedial”
electronic
encyclopaedia is presented and discussed.
Keywords:
Visualisation,
Metaphors,
Interfaces, Interaction, Encyclopaedia, Java.

is usually reviewed and, in part, written by experts
familiar with relevant knowledge areas. Digital
Encyclopedias typically feature sophisticated search and
navigation facilities to ease the task of locating and
displaying specific articles.
The work presented in this publication is based on
the Brockhaus Multimedial Encyclopedia [1], a product
which enjoys a dominant market and image position in
the German-speaking European countries (the famous
German Duden is published by the same company). With
around 240.000 articles and 350.000 mentioned
keywords, Brockhaus is among the world’s largest
Encyclopedias.

User

1. Introduction
An encyclopedia is a written compendium of
knowledge which contains articles from many different
fields. Most general encyclopedias are structured in an
alphabetical manner and rely, in digital form, on
keyword queries for locating specific articles and on
link-based navigation for browsing articles. Knowledge
maps connect articles with other articles of similar
content, imposing a topical structure on the encyclopedia
knowledge space without relying on a complete ontology
of the knowledge space as a whole (which is often not
available). This publication introduces a threedimensional, interactive visualisation method for such
knowledge
maps
and
describes
a
concrete
implementation for the Brockhaus Encyclopedia.

2.1. Articles
Encyclopedia Articles always relate to a given
keyword or concept: For example, and article could talk
about “India”, the “Roman Empire” or “Nuclear Power”.
Articles vary widely in size and detail, ranging from very
short text segments which define a term only rarely used
to reports of several thousand characters supplemented
with images, audio and video for major topics. While an
increasing amount of information in large Encyclopedias
is of multimedia nature, the core information entity is
still the textual article, which has often been revised and
updated for a hundred years or more if a topic has a long
history or relevance.

2.2. Metadata and Structure
A typical Encyclopedia article features at least some
metadata which describes its content. Article metadata
splits in three major categories:
•

2. Encyclopedia
An Encyclopedia provides a rich repository of
highly structured, annotated and revised information in
the form of articles covering specific topics. Today’s
digital multimedia encyclopedias typically contain
hundreds of thousands of articles which consist of textual
content as well as images, sound and video. Information

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

•

•

Technical metadata describes article properties
like character count, number of revision or date
of addition to Encyclopedia
Content metadata provides hints on the articles
content and context. For example, a topic can be
assigned to each article, or a summary can be
provided for larger articles
Relational metadata describes relations to other
articles, for example ontological links

With the presence of metadata, structuring of articles
according to one or more attributes becomes possible.
However, Encyclopedias are general-purpose knowledge
repositories which can hardly be structured in a single,
consistent way. Even if such a structuring could be
devised, it would be highly susceptible to the personal
preferences of editors. As a consequence, only
superficial structuring is present in most Encyclopedias.
The Brockhaus Multimedial Encylopedia provides
two metadata attributes particularly relevant for the work
presented: Each article in the Encyclopedia is assigned a
topic out of a collection of ten possible entries, including
for example politics, history, science and art.

Encyclopedias by definition cover the total of human
knowledge, any matching ontology would have to be
very comprehensive. While several attempts are
currently in progress to devise such global ontologies [2],
none of the available results is sufficiently powerful to
structure an Encyclopedia as a whole.
Still, the Brockhaus Encyclopedia has taken a first
step towards employing ontological structuring in the
organisation of its articles: A Knowledge Map is present
for most articles, which relates an article to a score of
similar articles and provides a quantification of the
degree of relatedness. While not an ontology in a
classical sense, the Knowledge Map of an article allows

Figure 1 The Gyro knowledge map visualisation about “India”
Furthermore, articles are characterized as being of
biographical, geographical or general nature. Both
structurings have been taken into account when
designing the visualisation described in this publication.

2.3. Knowledge Maps
The advent of ontologies has provided Encyclopedia
producers with a promising way of introducing structure
without having to resort to subjective subdivision of
articles into topical hierarchies. However, as global

quick identification of related content, and navigation
can be used instead of search query refinement to browse
a domain of knowledge.
A Knowledge Map of a typical Encyclopedia Article
contains around 25 related articles. The Knowledge
Maps present in Brockhaus Multimedial are semiautomatically extracted in an offline process and
manually edited, thus providing a very high degree of
quality, as compared to links and categorizations derived
fully automatically in an online process.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

3. Visualisation
In cooperation with Brockhaus, we have devised a
visualisation which specifically targets the Knowledge
Maps present in the Brockhaus Multimedial
Encyclopedia. The focus of our activities has been on
replacing the currently rather formal, two-dimensional
representation of the Knowledge Maps with a threedimensional, metaphorical display more accessible and
appealing to users. The use of 3D techniques has been a
mandatory requirement. A visualisation system has been
designed and implemented. Project results will be
included in future versions of Brockhaus Multimedial.
Several visualisation techniques have been
considered when planning for a visualisation of the
Brockhaus knowledge map. Hyperbolic trees [3] are a
widely accepted visualization technique for large link
structures, of which a three-dimensional derivate has
been described [4]. Unfortunately, hyperbolic trees focus
on the visualisation of many links and objects at a time,
while for the task at hand, a high-quality visualisation of
comparably few objects was desired. Cone trees [5]
display hierarchical structures as stacked cones arranged
in three dimensions. However, the knowledge maps
present in Brockhaus do not constitute a hierarchy and
thus cannot easily be displayed in a cone tree. In
addition, cone trees are prone to overlapping of object
labels, which in the case of an encyclopedia visualisation
would be particularly disturbing.

triangles (any other visual accentuation could be used,
however, the “crown” has been approved by users).

3.2. Object Rendering
Objects are rendered as solid geometry, with each
object type having a distinct shape according to its
corresponding entry type: Biographical entries are drawn
as stylized characters, geographical entries are drawn as
towers and general articles as cylinders. Object size in
the visualisation reflects article size in the Encyclopedia.
Object appearance is enhanced by applying gouraud
shading and supplying a projection shadow on the
underlying turning table according to a light source
placed in the top-left corner of the display, in accordance
with the metaphor used in many graphical user
interfaces. These measures also enhance depth
perception, especially when the scene is animated. In
fact, object hover slightly above the turning table,
allowing the projection shadow to provide contrast of
object edges against the similar-coloured table sector
underground.

Still cone trees were considered as an alternative
form of display for the ontological data attached to some
of the encyclopedia articles as described in section 3.5.
Further cues, including interaction metaphors and
rendering hints, have been devised from visualizations
such as Lighthouse [6] and Harmony [7].

3.1. Metaphor
Objects placed on a turning, multi-segment table
have been chosen as a metaphor to represent the
knowledge map. The table is divided into several sectors
which represent topics. For each of the ten topic
categories which articles in Brockhaus Multimedial are
assigned to, a distinct sector colour has been chosen.
Articles are represented as geometric objects, and placed
on the turning table, in the sector corresponding to the
topic they are assigned to; the central article the
knowledge map corresponds to is placed at the table’s
center.
For further clarification, each object representing an
article is coloured according to article topic. Another
metadata channel, the type of the article, is encoded in
the geometric form chosen for representation. Finally,
so-called premium articles featuring voluminous content
supplemented with multimedia data, are marked by a
rotating “crown” constructed of semi-transparent

Figure 2 Article close-up, pop-up menu
Location of an object on the turning table is not
related to inter-article similarity. The distance of an
object from the centre denotes its relevance to the central
article, and the placement of an object in a distinct sector
relates the object to that sectors topic. However, two
objects which are close to each other do not necessarily
feature a close relation in content.

3.3. Label Rendering
Objects on the table have to be rendered with their
respective article title. Title length can range from two
characters to a hundred characters, an amount clearly not
displayable with up to twenty objects on screen at a time.
Consequentially, labels are cut off at a certain character
count, and full label text is only displayed when a user
points the mouse at a label. However, this measure is not
sufficient to avoid the problem of overlapping labels
which three-dimensional visualisations are prone to.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

We address label overlap by applying a depth
sorting to labels based on label anchor (object centre) z
location in eye space. Consequentially, labels of objects
in the foreground are drawn atop those of objects in the
background. In order to retain at least partial readability
for background labels, transparency is applied to label
areas as a function of z: The further away a label is from
the eye, the more transparency it gets assigned, with hard
limits for very near and very far labels. Selected labels
(labels the mouse is currently hovering over) always get
zero transparency assigned, and are moved to the top of
the z-Order. As a consequence, labels in the background
of the scene do not clutter the display and obstruct visual
objects, labels do not become immediately unreadable
when even partially obstructed by another label, and
selected labels are always perfectly readable.
A number of dynamic label layout algorithms are
available, which could assign positions to labels
completely avoiding overlaps. However, use of such
algorithms would result in constantly changing label
locations whenever animation is done or users change
the point of view manually. User tests conducted in the
context of the InfoSky project have shown us that users
easily get confused by labels which change location even
slightly [8]. Thus, labels have been positioned at fixed
(three-dimensional) locations and are solely subjected to
view and perspective transforms before displaying.

that though sector labels are ignored once users get
familiar with the visualisation, they play an important
role during familiarization with the various components.
If the point of view is placed low on the vertical
axis, close to the turntable, a steep angle for the labelled
sector edges would grant the best readability. However,
if the point of view is placed (almost) top-down, flat
sector edges would grant best readability. Experiments
have been made with automatically adjusting the angle
of sector edges according to current height of the point of
view above the turntable. However, user feedback
suggested that such dynamic modifications leads to a
greatly reduced depth perception because unfortunately,
they counter the perspective transform applied to the
turntable. Consequentially, the appropriate feature has
been dropped, and the sector edges are now fixed at an
arbitrary angle.

3.4. Interactivity
Interactivity is provided through areas sensitive to
mouse operations. Each object on the turning table
displays a context menu: When the user places the mouse
on the object’s label for a short time (less than one
second, configurable), a menu appears atop the item
offering options to centre the item in the view, to open
the item’s referring article in the encyclopedia and to
open the item’s ontology view. Each topical segment
displays a 3D interaction area next to its label: Clicking
this area expands or collapses the segment, displaying or
hiding all object contained in the segment. Clicking on
the surface of a segment (on a location where no object is
placed) brings the segment to the foreground.
Interactivity not directly related to objects within the
visualisation is implemented via popup menus: A
number of menu headers are displayed on the screen
edges, whenever the mouse enters such a header, the full
menu pops up, overlaying the visualisation displayed.
After selecting an item in the menu or leaving the menu
area, the popup menu disappears again. The concrete
layout (shape, colouring, texts, icons etc.) of the menus is
subject to change, design is still in progress.

3.5. Animation
Figure 3 Sector selection pop-up
Labels for sectors on the turning table are handled
differently from object labels. Sector labels are applied in
a circular fashion to the outer edges of sectors by means
of an appropriate texture mapping transform. Outer
sector edges are flattened so that most of them remain
visible at oblique angles of observation. Consequentially,
even sector labels of sectors on the far side, as seen from
the current eye location, are visible, even though they
appear bottom-up. However, even an inverted view of a
well-known text segment like a brief sector name
provides enough visual recall clue to enable users to
remember sector names quickly. User feedback indicated

Transitions between discrete points of view within
the visualisation are shown as animation sequences. This
measure helps keeping the visual metaphor consistent
and in providing users with a continuous world in which
they can orient themselves. A typical animation sequence
lasts about one second, with the exact duration
depending on the total rotation and translation, in three
dimensions, necessary to reach the desired destination
point of view. Focusing on a sector, focusing on an
article and displaying the ontology for an article
(compare section 3.7) all trigger an animation sequence.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

3.6. Environment Rendering
The environment of the turning table, is rendered
using a cylindrical geometry onto which images
matching the topics of segments are projected. For
example, the segment “Kunst” (art), when viewed from
the table side opposite to it, displays in its background an
image showing various statues, famous paintings,
musicians and so on. Thematic background images are
generally kept in the colour of the segment they back.
Background images are blended against each other at
their (overlapping) left and right edges, and are blended
against the background colour on the top and bottom
edges of the cylinder geometry forming the environment.
We have experimented with using fog attenuation for
background images and turning table. However, due to
the highly varying angle of view, a fog configuration
which enhances depth perception without hiding objects
or looking unnaturally is very hard to find.

3.7. Displaying Ontologies
For a growing subset of encyclopedia articles, a
backing ontology is available, connecting articles to
related articles via directed, annotated edges.

Figure 5 Ontology navigation pop-up

4. Implementation
The system has been implemented using Java [9]
version 1.5 as a development environment and the JOGL
Java OpenGL bindings [10] as a graphical interface. All
major brands of graphic accelerators are supported for
OpenGL[11] rendering. Performance tests have shown
that the system is fill-rate limited: When a graphics
adapter capable of hardware rasterisation is present,
realtime frame rates are achieved and processor load is
just a few percent on standard office machines even
when animation sequences are displayed. Due to the use
of Java and OpenGL, the system is highly platformindependent: Distributions for Microsoft Windows XP,
Linux and Mac OSX (there, using Java version 1.4) have
been generated, which differ only by native library files
required to bind to the platform’s OpenGL services. No
advanced rendering features of OpenGL, like p-buffers
or ARB extensions, have been used to further increase
independence of platform and graphics hardware.

Figure 4 Experimental ontology display

5. Evaluation
While not the primary target of the visualisation
discussed, such ontological relationships have to be
represented to users in a convenient way.
An innovative visualisation metaphor has been
considered in early prototypes, displaying related articles
in the form of a tree below the plane of the disc (compare
figure 4). However, due to problematic visibility of
objects on the disc and significant extensions to already
complex user interactions, this form of ontology display
has been discarded and replaced by a conventional,
textual tree view as shown in figure 5: For each article, a
list of relations and related objects is displayed in a
window hovering atop the object representing the article.
Users can click on an entry to cause the visualisation to
navigate to that entry.

Formative user testing has accompanied the
development process of the system presented. For
example, quality and visual appearance of object labels
has been evaluated in a prototype before being integrated
into the system presented here, and visual design (layout,
colouring etc.) is currently being adjusted to user
feedback. Results of various other evaluations have
already been integrated into the system. However,
summative and comparative user testing remains to be
done: An extensive user test comparing the flat
knowledge map visualisation with the one presented in
this publication is planned for 2005. Testing will
includes multiple task assignments like locating specific
articles or gaining an overview on topical distribution of
a knowledge map. User behaviour will be recorded and

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

noted by observers. Statistical data gained from records
will be supplemented by interviews designed to gather
qualitative assessments. We hope to be able to judge the
improvements achieved with the new interface, and to
get new research directions, from this user test.

6. Future Work
Future work will focus on evaluation: Extensive user
testing and comparative system evaluation will be done
in the near future to optimize all aspects of the
visualisation presented. Advanced forms of displaying
ontologies will be evaluated, to integrate ontology data
more tightly with the current knowledge map. Finally,
label rendering will be further optimized, with a label
layout algorithm based on keyframe animation being
envisioned as a promising approach.

Conclusion
This publication presented a three-dimensional
visualisation system for knowledge maps consisting of
encylopedia articles. A turntable metaphor employs
visual attributes like object size, colour and shape to
encode object metadata. Depth-dependent label
transparency has been used instead of dynamic label
layout to create a consistent display of textual object
information. Extensive user tests will validate the
concept in comparison with existing, flat systems in the
near future.

Acknowledgements
The Know-Center is a Competence Center funded
within the Austrian Competence Centers Programme K
plus under the auspices of the Austrian Ministry of
Transport, Innovation and Technology (www.kplus.at).

References
[1] Bibliographisches Institut & F. A. Brockhaus AG,
Germany, 2005.
http://www.brockhaus.de
[2] C. Fellbaum (Ed.). WordNet: An electronic lexical
database. MIT Press, USA, 1998.
[3] J.Lamping and R.Rao. Laying Out and Visualizing Large
Trees Using a Hyperbolic Space. In Proceedings of the
ACM
Symposium on User Interface Software and
Technology 1994, California, USA, 1994.
[4] T.Munzner. H3: Laying Out Large Directed Graphs in 3D
Hyperbolic Space. In Proceedings of the 1997 IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization, Arizona, USA,
1997.
[5] M.A. Hearst, C. Karadi. Cat-a-Cone: An Interactive
Interface for Specifying Searches and Viewing Retrieval
Results using a Large Category Hierarchy. In Proceedings
of 20th Annual International ACM/SIGIR Conference,
Philadelphia, USA, 1997.
[6] K.Andrews.
Visualising
cyberspace:
Information
visualisation in the Harmony Internet browser. In
Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization, Georgia, USA, 1995.
[7] A. Leuski and J. Allan. Lighthouse: Showing the way to
relevant information. In Proceedings of the 2002 IEEE
Symposium on Information Vizualization, Massachussets,
USA, 2002.
[8] M. Granitzer, W. Kienreich, V. Sabol, K. Andrews, W.
Klieber: Evaluating a System for Interactive Exploration
of
Large,
Hierarchically
Structured
Document
Repositories. In Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Symposium
on Information Vizualization, Texas, USA, 2004.
[9] The Java Programming Language, Sun Microsystems,
2005. http://java.sun.com
[10] JOGL – The Java OpenGL API, Sun Microsystems, 2005.
https://jogl.dev.java.net
[11] The OpenGL high performance graphics standard,
OpenGL Consortium, 2005.
http://www.opengl.org

We would like to thank Arndt Frederichs and Bernd
Kreissig, both of Bibliographisches Institut & F. A.
Brockhaus AG, for their feedback and efforts.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

