Seeing Sound : Real-time Sound Visualisation in Visual Feedback Loops used
for Training Musicians
Sam Ferguson*, Andrew Vande Moere°and Densil Cabrera*
*School of Architecture, Design Science and Planning, The University of Sydney
°Key Centre of Design Computing and Cognition, The University of Sydney
samferguson@ihug.com.au, andrew@arch.usyd.edu.au, densil@arch.usyd.edu.au
Abstract
Musicians in training need to understand the sound they
are producing in order to improve its deﬁcient aspects.
Verbal feedback from musical masters is the usual method
used for attaining this understanding. However, using realtime sound visualisation as a complementary form of feedback allows the large amounts of data typical of real-time
acoustic analysis to be employed within training. This improves the efﬁciency of the feedback loop normally present
within musical training and pedagogy. The implementation
and effect of such a system is discussed.

Musician
watches
visualisation and
creates sound

Musician’s sound is
acoustically analyzed
in real-time.

Keywords—Sound visualization, real-time visualization.

Visualisation
displays useful
acoustic information
for musician
(also realtime)

Visual Feedback

1

Introduction

Musicians in training have a difﬁcult problem. They
must extend their skills as musicians, often without being
able to rely on their personal aural appraisal of sound quality, tuning and loudness. This means it is difﬁcult for them
to distinguish between effective and ineffective training.
Most musicians therefore seek verbal advice from a master of their particular instrument, who has more experience
with appraising musical sound, locating improvement and
specifying effective types of training for these students.
Verbal feedback is the primary tool used in instrumental and vocal pedagogy. It is the basis of many years of
music tuition and is a very ﬂexible pedagogic method in
the hands of talented pedagogues. However, the number of
data-points practically transferable using verbal feedback
is limited compared to that of information visualisation. If
we wish to communicate several speciﬁc pieces of information about the sound being produced by the musician, all
of which change several times per second, then clearly verbal feedback is ill-suited to this information transfer task.
By contrast, real-time acoustic analysis can achieve this
rate of information supply, and an effective real-time visualisation can both communicate it and elucidate the patterns within it to the musician (Figure 1).

Figure 1: Visualisation helps musicians understand acoustic parameters of their sound. The
display assists comprehension of multiple parameters, allowing instant changes to sound production methods to be made when deﬁciencies
are interpreted.
Visualisation has been applied to sound previously for
various purposes, but usually without utilising the principles of information visualisation. Visual integration of the
various sound characteristics is essential for a useful display, so that the musician can build a complete conceptual
understanding of their sound from the data. The authors
are unaware of any other tool that attempts this aim.
This research documents the design and implementation
of such a tool for instrumental musicians in training. A preliminary evaluation of its effectiveness is also provided.

2

Background

Information visualisation is concerned with navigating
and ﬁnding patterns within large, often static, datasets.
Dealing with real-time data visualisation is a different type
of problem. If this visualisation’s purpose were solely
recognising patterns within a musician’s sound, the dataset

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

could be recorded and any one of many statistical visualisations could be applied in post-processing. However, for
a musician this information would not be useful, as the various mouth, throat and other muscle positions affecting the
sound would be forgotten by the time they were able to see
the patterns.
A real-time visualisation’s instantaneous feedback allows students to employ the information perceived about
their sound in correcting or reinforcing their sound production methods. The visualisation must clearly show variables that change in time, and also allow understanding of
the rate and trend of this change. It also needs to describe
the relationships between each variable visually, allowing
them to be understood in context.

2.1

Previous work

Interest in visualising sound is not new, and has existed
at least since Lissajous and Helmholtz in the 19th century
[1]. These pioneers developed systems to analyse and represent sound visually that were either optical or mechanical, proving quite difﬁcult to devise. Modern computing
power has increased the ease of both graphical representation and acoustic analysis. It has also allowed the two to be
developed separately and connected arbitrarily, rather than
requiring the engineering of an integrated machine.
Visualisations for singers are already available as commercial products, and have been researched for some time.
One of the earliest attempts at visualisation for training
singers was the ‘SINGAD’ system implemented by Welch
[14]. This system was able to facilitate noticeable efﬁciency improvements in teaching children the ability to
sing with control over their pitch [13].
Sing and See [4] is a more recent program that uses realtime spectral displays, metering and traditional notation to
provide visual feedback for singing pedagogy. Enthusiastic
responses to the software were received when a qualitative
investigation was conducted in pedagogical situations [3].
Within speech pathology visualisation of acoustic measurements has been used widely. This is often useful for
young patients, as treating speech deﬁciencies can be approached in the form of interactive computer animations
using patient speech as a control mechanism (for instance
Speechviewer III [9]).
Finally, sound visualisation has also been employed in
providing aural awareness for hearing-impaired persons
[6]. A visualisation was implemented that appeared in
the corner of the computer display used in an ofﬁce environment. After two weeks using this system a respondent could detect and distinguish speech, mobile phone
calls, chair movement, typing, mouse movement, page
turning, papers rustling, footsteps of people entering the
ofﬁce and even a truck that visited the workplace carpark
once weekly.

789()28

4IVJSVQERGI

8SXEP/6

/6



/6! +EMRIHJVSQ
8VEMRMRK

-RXIVTVIXEXMSR
SJ1EWXIV´W
*IIHFEGO

4IVJSVQERGI

-RXIVTVIXEXMSR
SJ1EWXIV´W
*IIHFEGO

*IIHFEGO

-RXIVTVIXEXMSR
SJ7XYHIRX´W
4IVJSVQERGI

*IIHFEGO

4IVJSVQERGI

IXG

1%78)6
-RXIVTVIXEXMSR
SJ7XYHIRX´W
4IVJSVQERGI
1MWMRXIVTVIXEXMSR
-REGGYVEG]
-RGSRWMWXIRG]

1MWMRXIVTVIXEXMSR
-REGGYVEG]
-RGSRWMWXIRG]





1MWMRXIVTVIXEXMSR
-REGGYVEG]
-RGSRWMWXIRG]



1MWMRXIVTVIXEXMSR
-REGGYVEG]
-RGSRWMWXIRG]

8SXEP

! -RIJJMGMIRG]
SJ8VEMRMRK

Figure 2: The process of private music lessons
and personal musical practice can be described
as a feedback loop.

2.2

Feedback loops and musicians

Music education is normally carried out using a masterstudent framework in single-student or small class lessons.
In these lessons an iterative feedback loop is used for the
tuition in which; a) the student performs b) the master
interprets the performance c) the master provides verbal
feedback d) the student interprets the verbal feedback and
gains Knowledge of Results (KR) e) this process is repeated (Figure 2) [11]. This loop is also present in the
student’s personal practice, except that the student mentally interprets their own performance rather than having
the beneﬁt of the master’s appraisal.
Two processes of interpretation are relied on in this
feedback loop, both of which can be inconsistent depending on the skills of master and student. Furthermore, feedback is usually provided after the student performs, meaning that it can be difﬁcult for the student to relate muscle
movements and sound production methods to their musical
results, based only on their memory of the performance.
Unfortunately these problems undermine the efﬁciency of
pedagogy with verbal feedback.
Using real-time visualisation circumvents many of these
problems. The repeatability of acoustic analysis strongly
decreases the reliance on subjective interpretation skills for
primary aspects of sound production (e.g. tuning, loudness, sound quality). The real-time nature of the visualisation also means that it is possible to receive instant feedback, allowing the student to relate production method to
musical result with increased certainty. This instant feedback also allows the feedback loop to iterate at a much
higher rate, greatly increasing the speed at which the student receives KR.

3

Implementation

Implementation of our visualisation involved i) acquiring and ﬁltering the data to provide only the relevant data
attributes, ii) considering the requirements and visual as-

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

sociations of training musicians, and iii) employing appropriate visual metaphors for the visualisation.

3.1

Data

This visualisation problem consists of integrating
salient attributes of the data into a cohesive visual representation. Visualising only the data that beneﬁts the musician when supplied in real-time or very recent time assists
in simplifying the representation.
The primary data source consists of a digitised audio
stream, which is then analysed using Fourier transform
based methods to extract parameters that describe speciﬁc
aspects of that stream. These parameters include :
Harmonic Content: The harmonic content of a note is
what determines, to a great extent, its ‘sound character’.
We used Puckette et al’s analysis system ‘ﬁddle∼’ [10] to
obtain the magnitude and frequency of the ﬁrst four harmonics within the sound.
Noisiness: The comparison between periodic and random elements within the data stream can be described as
a ratio and also assists in describing the ‘sound character’.
This algorithm was ﬁrst described by Johnston [8], and this
instance was implemented by Jehan [7].
Loudness: The strength of the instrument’s sound pressure level as perceived by the listener is an essential parameter for providing the musician with information regarding
their production of contrasts between loud and soft. By
using psycho-acoustical loudness ratings, a better approximation of the perceptual effect is made. The algorithm
used for this is described by Jehan [7].
Fine Pitch: The pitch of the note can be extracted relatively precisely. By comparing this pitch to the western
musical scale we can measure any discrepancy. This data
is again based on the pitch-picking abilities of ‘ﬁddle∼’.
These four data streams can often be related to each
other as a by-product of the acoustic properties of the instrument or production mechanism. For example, an increase in loudness can also be accompanied by a change
the harmonic content of the sound. They can also sometimes be totally separate. Therefore, simultaneous perception of all parameters is necessary.

3.2

Design rationale

Designing a sound visualisation for facilitating musical
training has included considering the integration of prioritised information, using time-variance wisely and understanding the way in which a musician would mentally visualise sound.
In a real-time display of information that is constantly
changing, it is impossible to visually scan the smaller aspects of the visualisation to reveal hidden detail. If the visualisation features many objects that need to be perceived
separately, then only one of these objects can be understood at once, and other objects must be ignored. Therefore

it is preferable that a visualisation feature a single object
that has several perceivable attributes, rather than several
different objects.
The real-time nature also affects the use of time as an
axis. It is possible to provide a scrolling display of data
over a recent time-span. This has the advantage of allowing comparison over time without relying on the viewer’s
memory. However, this element also has the capacity to
distract the attention from the instantaneous information.
By placing the display of this information on the periphery, attention remains on the instantaneous information.
Relating the information display to the way that musicians are likely to mentally visualise sound is advantageous. This establishes a connection with the musician on
a more associative conceptual level, and decreases the necessity to consciously interpret the display. Musical sound
visualisation of a mental nature is heavily subjective, and
relies implicitly upon the speciﬁc style of music concerned.
However, certain associations can be relied on for some
generality across across cultural groupings and musical
style boundaries. Walker [12] has shown that when presented with simple tone groups, and given visual analogies
on cards, the choices made followed previously understood
patterns. Size was associated with amplitude, frequency
with vertical position, duration with horizontal length, and
waveform with pattern. It is not immediately apparent why
these analogies may be anything but associative, but for
some attributes of sound visualisation physical perceptual
elements may have a role in sustaining these associations
(see for instance [2]).

3.3

Technical implementation

Figure 3 shows the stages by which the program processes the primary data source, and the data mapping rules.
(EXE
*MPXIVMRK8VERWJSVQ

1MGVSTLSRI
'SRZIVXWWSYRH
MRXSZSPXEKI
JPYGXYEXMSRW
8MQI7IVMIW(EXE

:MWYEPM^EXMSR
1ETTMRK

4MXGL(MWGVITERG]

7PERXSJ
7TLIVI+VSYT

8SXEP7SYRH
0SYHRIWW

,IMKLX
SJ7TLIVI+VSYT

,EVQSRMG **8FEWIH
'SRXIRX 8VERWJSVQEXMSR

7M^ISJIEGL
7TLIVI

2SMWMRIWW

(MVIGXMSRSJ
4EVXMGPI*PS[

**8FEWIH
8VERWJSVQEXMSR

Figure 3: A schematic diagram of primary data
source ﬁltering and data mapping rules.
Implementation was completed in the Max/MSP environment using Jitter to program the graphical output [5].
Max/MSP and Jitter are oriented towards processes rather
than data, and thus deal with real-time visualisation well.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

D	 /VERALL ,OUDNESS 
(EIGHT OF 3PHERE 'ROUP
E	 ,OUDNESS OVER TIME  
2ED 4RAILS 
A	 (ARMONIC #ONTENT 
3IZE OF 3PHERES

B	 .OISINESS 
7IDTH OF 0ARTICLE 3TREAM

C	 4UNING $ISCREPANCY 
3LANT OF 3PHERE 'ROUP

Figure 4: The visualisation display prototype.
Sophisticated signal processing extensions to the
Max/MSP environment implemented by Puckette et al [10]
and Jehan [7] are the basis of the audio analysis stage.
The power of modern computer systems allows this program to be run from a single laptop computer. This allows
a realistic use of this system within teaching or practice
situations without modiﬁcation or specialised hardware.

4

Results
The prototype visualisation is shown in Figure 4.

Harmonic Content is mapped to each sphere’s radius, with the fundamental frequency being the lowest
sphere, and the harmonics displayed equally spaced above.
Sounds with harmonic content containing a strong fundamental frequency will display as a large sphere with
smaller spheres above it (Figure 4(a)).
Noisiness is represented by a ‘fountain’ of particles,
which are placed directly behind the spheres. These particles originate from the same point as the sphere that represents the fundamental frequency. The average direction
of the particles is always directly vertical, however there is
also a random horizontal force that determines the width of
the particle stream. This width is mapped to the noisiness
values, and thus the distribution of the particles in the horizontal direction is very narrow when the noisiness value is
low, and very wide when it is high (Figure 4(b)).
Fine Pitch is represented using a balance metaphor; the
spheres are balanced vertically if the pitch of the sound
agrees with the model pitch. This forms a line of spheres
that moves in a manner reminiscent of the needle display
in common electronic chromatic tuners (Figure 4(c)).

Loudness is represented by the overall height to which
the group stretches (its size). This follows the size analogy
validated by Walker (Figure 4(d)). It is also shown over the
recent timespan by the red trails that are located either side
of the central group of spheres (Figure 4(e)). Smooth or
sudden changes in dynamics are common and planned in
musical performance, and the visualisation helps describe
the rate of change and its linearity. Display over the recent
timespan for the other parameters mentioned above is not
usually as important, as their planned change over time is
much less common.

4.1

Information revealed

When two tones are played consecutively with
markedly different harmonic content the sphere’s sizes
change accordingly (Figures 5(a) and 5(b)). This can seem
quite dramatic, with spheres suddenly disappearing or appearing when certain notes are played. Generally speaking, large changes in sound quality between notes near to
each other are not desired by musicians, and this visualisation helps locate these problem notes. Notes or groups
of notes that would be referred to by musicians as having
a ‘mufﬂed’, ‘honky’ or ‘tinny’ sound character are clearly
distinguished by this visualisation behaviour.
Although the difference between vibrato (cyclical frequency modulation) and tremolo (cyclical amplitude modulation) is not always obvious to the ear, the visualisation
manages to distinguish these. It sways from left to right if
vibrato is used, or stretches and shrinks upwards and downwards in a spring-like manner if tremolo is used . The trails
of the visualisation also display the smoothness and speed
of the tremelo (Figure 5(g)). Tremelo or vibrato quality can

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

(a) An ‘oo’ sound has
harmonic content in the
fundamental and 1st
harmonic, hence lower
spheres are largest.

(e) The red trails on
either side of the sphere
group show a large
loudness
contrast
occurring.

(b) An ‘or’ sound has
harmonic content in the
2nd and 3rd harmonic,
hence upper spheres
are largest.

(f) They can also show
a slow increase in loudness occurring.

(c) Noisy sound causes
the particle ‘fountain’ to
be indiscriminate about
which direction particles
are ﬁred towards.

(g) Tremelo (cyclical
amplitude modulation)
speed and smoothness
can be visualised.

(d) In contrast to Figure
5(c), if sound contains
little noise particles ﬁre
straight upwards.

(h) The rightwards slant
of the sphere group indicates ﬁne pitch is slightly
sharp. Vertical alignment
represents correct tuning.

Figure 5: Revealed Information.
be very important aspects of the musician’s sound quality.

5

The display of overall loudness can provide an indication of the performer’s dynamic range. This can be very
important for ensuring adequate ability for dynamic contrast is achieved. The time varying ‘tail’ of the visualisation allows the user to see these dynamic contrasts over the
recent time-span (Figure 5(e) and 5(f)), and understanding the smoothness and consistency of their musical use of
loudness is important for musicians.

It can be seen from the results that this visualisation allows musicians to understand the outputs of many types of
acoustic analysis and immediately relate this information
to their musical sound production. This should increase
the efﬁciency of musical training and prove a complementary tool for musical pedagogy.

This display of ﬁne pitch (Figure 5(h)) functions in a
similar way to an everyday electronic chromatic tuner, but
it is essential to understand tuning within the context of
the manipulation of these other parameters. The interconnected display helps bring out interconnected patterns of
performance. Musicians often develop habits of sacriﬁcing
one musical attribute (often tuning) to achieve another, not
necessarily realising they’ve adopted this behaviour. By
using a display that shows tuning as well as other parameters behaviour of this nature may be more easily recognised.

5.1

Discussion

Possible effect of interpretation

This system is interactive in a different way to most information visualisation. Users interact with the visualisation by creating new data in a different way, rather than
by adjusting their view of a static set of data. The visualisation may play roles apart from the pure communication
of information, and this raises the question of interpretation. Speciﬁcally, information may be communicated with
a visual context that is not impartial, and rather suggests
its modiﬁcation. This is trivial in static visualisations, as
this possibility usually does not exist. However, considering that the process of musical training is undertaken over
hundreds of hours, the musician may spend a great deal

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

of time staring at this visualisation. Therefore, it may be
possible to utilise the impulse to ‘tidy’ a visual scene for
the purpose of recommending the shift of parameters towards optimums, or conversely a badly designed visualisation may accidentally recommend arbitrary changes.

5.2

Other Applications

This visualisation allows the study of sound quality
from a musician’s point of view. In acoustics research subjective sound quality is often investigated by asking human
subjects to rate a set of sounds, and then attempting to correlate these sounds against acoustic parameters extracted
from the sound. However, by providing an easily interpretable display it is possible for the musician to tell the
acoustician what they personally believe to be good sound
by deﬁning it as an object shape.
Whilst this visualisation beneﬁts musicians, the underlying principles are applicable to other areas directly.
These may include any situation where a sound source
is better monitored visually rather than aurally, or when
multiple sound sources need to be monitored concurrently.
As an example, the sound produced by each of an aeroplane’s jet engines would be too distracting to monitor aurally within a cockpit, and with multiple engines in some
aircraft the distinction between these would also be difﬁcult to make with concurrent sound signals. However
these sounds may contain sound ‘signatures’ of faults in or
inconsistencies between the functioning of these engines.
With visual display these sounds may be described in a
non-distracting but still useful manner.

6

Conclusion and Further Work

In conclusion, this paper has presented a real-time visualisation system that communicates data extracted from
real-time acoustic analysis to musicians. This system improves the efﬁciency of musical training by clarifying aspects of musical sound perception.
Much further work is likely for this system. Practical
usage of the system will be evaluated quantitatively and
qualitatively with musicians in training. The system will
also be applied in the inverse, by asking musicians to discuss what constitutes good sound based on experimenting
with the system, and correlating these subjective values
against those accepted by the literature. This may also be a
useful approach in the discussion of concert hall acoustics,
and speciﬁcally stage acoustics. Further opportunities for
research in this area include investigating a similar system
designed for multiple musicians, extending and validating
the sound quality representation with more complex data
extraction and visualisation algorithms, and designing interactive creative works based around similar ideas.

7

Acknowledgements

We gratefully acknowledge the assistance provided by
an Australian Postgraduate Award and a Department of

Architectural and Design Science Supplementary Scholarship.

References
[1] Frederick J Ampel. The history of audio and sound measurement. In Proceedings of 94th Convention of the Audio
Engineering Society, Berlin, Germany, 1993.
[2] Densil Cabrera, Sam Ferguson, Steven Tilley, and Masayuki
Morimoto. Recent studies on the effect of signal frequency
on auditory vertical localization. In Proceedings of International Conference on Auditory Display, Limerick, Ireland,
submitted 2005.
[3] Jean Callaghan, William Thorpe, and Jan van Doorn. The
science of singing and seeing. In R Parncutt, A Kessler, and
F Zimmer, editors, Proceedings of Conference of Interdisciplinary Musicology, Graz, Austria, 2004.
[4] Cantare Systems. Sing and See. www.singandsee.com,
2005.
[5] Cycling74 Inc.
2005.

Max/MSP/Jitter.

www.cycling74.com,

[6] F Wai-ling Ho-Ching, Jennifer Mankoff, and James A Landay. Can you see what I hear? The design and evaluation of
a peripheral sound display for the deaf. CHI, 5(1):161–168,
2003.
[7] Tristan Jehan. Perceptual Synthesis Engine : An AudioDriven Timbre Generator. Masters thesis, Massachusetts
Institute Of Technology, 2001.
[8] J D Johnston. Transform coding of audio signals using perceptual noise criteria. IEEE on selected areas in communications, 6:314–323, 1988.
[9] International Business Machines. Speechviewer III. International Business Machines, New York, USA, 2005.
[10] Miller Puckette, T Apel, and D Zicarelli. Real-time audio
analysis tools for PD and MSP. In Proceedings of International Computer Music Conference, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 1998.
[11] C. William Thorpe, Jean Callaghan, and Jan van Doorn. Visual feedback of acoustic voice features: New tools for the
teaching of singing. Australian Voice, 5:32–39, 1999.
[12] Robert Walker. The effects of culture, environment, age,
and musical training on choices of visual metaphors for
sound. Perception and Psychophysics, 42(5):491–502,
1987.
[13] Graham F Welch, D M Howard, and C Rush. Real-time visual feedback in the development of vocal pitch accuracy in
singing. Psychology of Music, 17:146–157, 1989.
[14] Graham F Welch, C Rush, and D M Howard. The SINGAD
(SINGing Assessment and Development) system: First applications in the classroom. Proceedings of the Institute of
Acoustics, 10(2):179–185, 1988.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

