PlanningLines: Novel Glyphs for Representing Temporal Uncertainties
and their Evaluation
Wolfgang Aigner, Silvia Miksch, Bettina Thurnher, Stefan Biffl
Institute of Software Technology & Interactive Systems, Vienna University of Technology
Favoritenstraße 9-11/188, A-1040 Vienna, Austria, Europe
{aigner, silvia, thurnher, biffl}@ifs.tuwien.ac.at
Abstract
Dealing with temporal uncertainties is a key issue
in domains like project management or medical
treatment planning. However, support for temporal
indeterminacies is not very well integrated in current
methods, techniques, and tools. In this paper we
present
a
visualization
technique
called
PlanningLines that allows for representing temporal
uncertainties and aims at supporting project
managers in their difficult planning and controlling
tasks. We conducted a controlled experiment to
gather empirical evidence on the strengths and
limitations of our approach. Main results are that
PlanningLine users make fewer mistakes and are
faster in conducting tasks than users of a traditional
visualization technique.
Keywords --- glyph, temporal data, uncertainty,
usability study, project management.

1. Introduction
Planning future activities is a task that we have to
face constantly. Since the future is always inherently
connected with possible uncertainties, delays, and the
unforeseen we have learned to deal with this
circumstances in everyday life. Application areas
such as project management or medical treatment
planning have to cope with inexact knowledge about
future activities and temporal uncertainties. When
future planning is done in a more formal way,
support for indeterminacies is not very well
integrated. Furthermore, only very few visualization
techniques provide means to represent such
uncertainties.
Particularly, project managemers face the
extremely difficult tasks of planning future activities,
dealing with uncertainties, delays, estimations,
meeting deadlines, managing people, assigning
resources, budget constraints, and many more. In

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

order to support project managers, many methods,
tools, and techniques like PERT (Program Evaluation
and Review Technique), CPM (Critical Path
Method), Gantt charts, or project management
software have been developed and applied. But
despite the long tradition of the field, managers still
have to face lots of problems – delays arise,
deadlines cannot be met, expenses explode, or
projects get cancelled. White & Fortune conducted
an empirical study [12] to investigate current
practices in project management. They list relevant
problems and critical factors, whereas the number
two entry on the list of critical factors is realistic
schedules. Another top listed entry on the list of
limitations of current methodologies is difficulty to
model ‘real world’. These results indicate the need
for support in dealing with temporal uncertainties in
order to improve project management.
In our work, we especially focus on the temporal
domain. Key tasks of project management are the
estimation of task durations as well as begin and end
times. On the one hand, this needs a lot of experience
and many unknown factors might influence
estimations. On the other hand, often different levels
of uncertainty are known but cannot be integrated or
dealt with using current methods. Gantt and PERT
charts are the most widely used visual techniques in
project management. Gantt charts, on the one hand,
do not have a notion to represent indeterminacies at
all. Because of this, the visualization gives the
impression of exact knowledge about begin, end, and
duration of tasks. This can easily lead to the situation
of uncertainties that are buried in oblivion. PERT
charts, on the other hand, allow for the integration of
uncertainties. But this can only be done textually
which makes spotting problematic areas and
comparison at a glance very hard. Furthermore,
mostly only “slack times” (time between tasks) is
considered, not variations of begin, end, or duration.
A way of improving this situation is to make
knowledge about uncertainties visible and thus
explicit. “People are visual creatures. Most people,

if not all, perform better when things are pictorially
associated. … Instead of using their cognitive powers
to figure things out, managers can perceive visually
what they need to perceive about the nature of all the
data involved.” [14] This makes it easier to deal with
temporal uncertainties and keeps them in the mind of
project managers.
In Section 2 we introduce a novel glyph called
PlanningLine that makes temporal uncertainties
visible. PlanningLines allow the representation of a
complex set of time attributes treating begin, end,
and duration as intervals rather than instants.
PlanningLines were originally designed to ease
medical treatment planning [1] and have been
modified to meet the demands of project
management. In Section 3 we empirically evaluate
PlanningLines with the well-known PERT technique
to investigate the impact of the novel representation.

2. PlanningLine Glyph
Before presenting our visual representation in
detail, we introduce the design goals that drove the
development. In principle, these design goals can be
divided into two major areas – single-glyph-related
and multiple-glyph-related goals. Particularly, goals
related to a single glyph are to provide a visual
representation of temporal indeterminacies of a
single activity, facilitate the identification of
(un)defined attributes, support in maintaining logical
constraints, and to give a visual impression of how
distinctive the individual and overall uncertainties
are. Goals related to multiple glyphs (parts of a
project plan or complete plans) are foremost to
support the identification of critical areas, facilitate
the understanding of activity interrelationships and
hierarchy as well as the comparison of activities.
Overall design goals are to provide an intuitive visual
representation with low learning effort that can easily
be integrated into current techniques.

2.1. Design Concept
For our glyph, the concept of LifeLines [10] has
been extended to enable the display of hierarchical
decomposition as well as a set of complex time
annotations to reflect temporal indeterminacies.
These new visual elements are called PlanningLines
and allow for the interactive representation of
temporal intervals with hierarchical decomposition
and simple element characteristics. The glyph
consists of two encapsulated bars, representing
minimum and maximum duration, that are bounded
by two caps that represent start and end intervals (see
Figure 1).

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure 1: Glyph Concept

Temporal Attributes. For reflecting temporal
uncertainties, begin, end, and duration of activities
are modeled as intervals including a set of six
attributes:
• start interval
o earliest starting time [EST]
o latest starting time [LST]
• end interval
o earliest finishing time [EFT]
o latest finishing time [LFT]
• duration
o minimum duration [minDu]
o maximum duration [maxDu]
This implies that the actual start of an activity
might be any instant within the start interval and an
activity’s end any instant within the end interval
while the duration of the activity might be any span
between minimum and maximum duration.
Moreover, the start and end attributes can either be
defined absolutely on the time scale (e.g., Dec 10th)
or as shifts relative to a reference point (e.g., two
days after the end of Activity A).
Visual Representation. The glyph itself consists
of three main parts: The start cap on the left, the end
cap on the right, and the duration bars in between
(see Figure 2). The caps are drawn in black to
emphasize their fixed position. The bars in contrary
are colored whereas the color of the maximum
duration bar has equal hue and saturation but higher
brightness as the minimum duration bar.
Mental Model. In order to facilitate a straight
forward explanation of the visual representation we
use a simple mental model. The two black caps
representing begin and end interval are mounted at
the time scale. These caps are holding two
encapsulated bars that represent minimum and
maximum duration (see Figure 1). Furthermore, the
bars can be shifted within the constraints of the two
mounted caps.

Figure 2: Represented Time Attributes

2.2. Attribute Constraints
For maintaining a valid attribute set, a number of
logical constraints have to be followed:
1. The interval between the latest starting time
[LST] and the earliest finishing time [EFT]
defines the smallest possible and the interval
between the earliest starting time [EST] and the
latest finishing time [LFT] defines the largest
possible time window for the duration of an
activity.
2. For each single time point in the starting interval
[EST, LST], there must exist at least one
duration out of [minDu, maxDu], which allows
the finishing interval [EFS, LFS] to be reached.
3. Each single time point in the finishing interval
[EFT, LFT] must be reachable by at least one
duration out of [minDu, maxDu] from the
starting interval [EST, LST].
4. Each duration must connect one instant in the
starting interval with one instant in the finishing
interval.
5. EST LST, EFT LFT, EST EFT, LST
LFT, minDu maxDu
Our glyph helps to maintain these constraints
visually. First of all, the possible durations have to be
longer than the interval between latest start and
earliest finish [LST, EFT] – if this would not be the
case, the inner bars would fall out of the holding
caps. Secondly, the possible durations cannot be
longer than the interval between earliest start and
latest finish [EST, LFT] – otherwise, the inner bars
would not fit into the caps. Furthermore, the inner
bars have to be long enough to reach the end cap if

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

shifted completely to the left which satisfies
constraint number two – otherwise, the bars would
fall out of the right cap. Analogous, this is applied for
shifting the bars to the right which satisfies constraint
number three. Several other implicit constraints, as
for example that the earliest finishing time, might not
be before the earliest starting time can also easily be
maintained and spotted visually at a glance.

2.3. Special Constellations
All temporal attributes can be specified optionally
since they may not all be known. However, the
remaining ones still have to maintain the constraints
that are applicable and attributes might be calculated
(e.g., the minimum duration by the interval between
latest start and earliest end). Undefined attributes are
not drawn at all and attributes that have been
calculated are represented in lighter colors (e.g., gray
instead of black for start and end interval attributes).
If only the latest start (without earliest start) or
earliest end (without latest end) are known, they are
represented as diamonds (filled, rotated squares) that
support the duration bars.

2.4. Relative Time Attributes / Relations
Relative attribute definitions (shifts) and relations
between attributes are represented by connecting
arrows similar to Gantt charts (see Figure 3). In
principle we allow for the definition of end/begin
(Activity 2 starts after the end of Activity 1) and
start/start (Activity 2 starts after beginning of
Activity 1) relationships.

2.5. Project Plan Example
Figure 3 shows an example of a simple project
plan of construction works using PlanningLines.
When comparing the two activities “Windows /
Doors” and “Roof” one can see at a glance that the
activity “Windows / Doors” is afflicted with more
uncertainties regarding begin and end than activity
“Roof”. On the one hand, “Windows / Doors” has a
lot of slack time and large beginning and ending
intervals whereas activity “Roof” has a fixed
beginning and much less uncertainty in its finishing
time. On the other hand, activity “Roof” is more
indeterminate in terms of its duration compared to
“Windows
/
Doors”.
The
PlanningLines
representation allows for a quick recognition and
comparison of such constellations that would be hard
to see when for example using PERT charts or
completely impossible to detect with Gantt charts.

3. Empirical Evaluation
The challenge and need for evaluating information
visualization has lately been emphasized by C.
Plaisant [11]. Accordingly, we conducted a
controlled experiment comparing design elements to
evaluate the usefulness of our approach. Goal of the
study was to compare the performance of individuals
using PlanningLine or PERT representations
depicting temporal attributes and relationships of
project tasks. The reason for the decision to compare
PlanningLines with PERT is based on the capability
of PERT to represent temporal uncertainties. The

experiment design is paper-based and analogous to
related studies evaluating LifeLines [7] and Paint
Strips [4]. For brevity you find both experiment
hypotheses and results of statistical tests in Section
3.1.8.
3.1.1
Subjects
The subjects in the study were 48 undergraduate
and graduate students of informatics and business
informatics in a usability engineering workshop. The
subjects exhibit rather heterogeneous knowledge and
experience levels, and had no knowledge on the
PlanningLine method. Since the subjects in our study
have varying degrees of experience with the PERT
method, we conducted a tutorial that briefly repeated
how to use PERT and introduced the new
PlanningLine method to ensure a minimal common
level of knowledge for the experiment, namely chart
reading and basic calculation skills.
3.1.2
Experiment Objects and Procedures
In the following, we give a short overview of the
experiment objects used in the empirical study (refer
to [2] for the detailed material). All experiment
participants received the following material:
1. Background Questionnaire: At the beginning of
the study, a one-page questionnaire acquired the
experience with PERT and other representations
used in project management.
2. Answering Sheets for task solutions in three
parts.
Four different versions of these sheets were
available, for the combinations of the two

Figure 3: Example of a Simple Project Plan

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

3.

treatments (PlanningLine, PERT) and data sets
(1, 2).
Part A: This part contained a three-page
answering sheet for questions and tasks,
concerning the usage of PlanningLines or PERT.
Part B: Contained an example project plan and a
five-page answering sheet for questions on the
project plan.
Part C: A one-page answering sheet for drawing
a PlanningLine/PERT chart, based on textual
task description.
Feedback Questionnaire on the ease of use and
perceived usefulness of both approaches [6].

After the tutorial that briefly repeated how to use
PERT and introduced PlanningLines, the participants
received the experiment material. The participants
had 45 minutes to fill in the questionnaires and
answering sheets. Subjects were asked to take time
stamps at the start and end of each part of the
answering sheet. These time stamps allow to measure
the time needed to work on the tasks in a part.
3.1.3
Experiment Design
We randomly selected students for the two groups
in the study initial PlanningLine and PERT users.
By randomization we forced unknown source of
discrepancy to contribute homogeneously to the
treatments, following the suggestion presented in [3].
During the experiment each individual independently
worked on the experimental material. In addition to
the two treatments, PlanningLine and PERT, we used
two project data sets to investigate whether the
treatments performed similarly with different data
sets.
3.1.4
Threats to Validity
In every empirical study there are possible threats
to the validity of the study which need to be
acknowledged and mitigated with appropriate
countermeasures. With the experiment design we
prevented threats to internal validity: history,
maturation, selection, and process conformance [13].
Regarding external validity we took a control method
(PERT) that is widely used in practice and we
investigated mainly cognitive abilities of subjects
rather than their project management abilities. Thus
using students for the study is not a problem.
3.1.5
Experiment Variables
The goal of the empirical study is to infer
causality or to analyze relationships between
variables. The dependent variables measure the effect
of manipulating the independent variables [8]
subject performance on number of mistakes when
answering a standard questionnaire and duration for
answering these questions. Independent variables are

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

defined as factors believed to influence the results of
the experiment [8], in our case the treatments
(PlanningLine and PERT) and the project data sets.
3.1.6
Data Analysis Approach
In this paper we use the following notation to
describe a combination of treatment (PlanningLine,
PERT) and data sets (1, 2): PlanningLine1 means
using PlanningLines with data set 1.
We used statistical differences to determine
significant differences in the dependent variables’
means caused by the independent variables. In most
cases the parametric t-test or its non-parametric
counterpart, the Mann-Whitney test can be used to
compare two sample means [13]. The statistical tests
were performed with an -level of 0.05.
3.1.7
Test on Similarity of Data Sets
First we tested the similarity of performance with
the two project data sets. We have four groups of
combinations of treatments and data sets
(PlanningLine1, PlanningLine2, PERT1, and
PERT2). We evaluated the performance (relative
number of mistakes and duration) of groups that use
the same data set but different representation
techniques (PlanningLine1–PlanningLine2, PERT1–
PERT2). There is no significant difference in the
performance of the project data sets regarding
mistakes (p=0.501 for PERT and p=0.431 for
PlanningLines) and duration (p=0.601 for PERT and
p=0.401 for PlanningLines).
After establishing that the users of different data
sets perform in a similar way, we can compare the
performance of different representations regardless of
the data set used (PlanningLine1+2 – PERT1+2). The
hypotheses correspond to testing the user groups and
data set combinations regarding data from different
parts and sections of the experiment material.
3.1.8
Hypotheses and test results
As t-test and Mann-Whitney test consistently
showed similar results, we report the p values from
the t-test. The hypotheses correspond to testing the
above user groups and data set combinations
(PlanningLine1+2 vs. PERT1+2) regarding results
from the different parts and sections of the
experiment material. In the following, we state the
hypothesis and the results.
1. The PlanningLine representation is as simple
and intuitive to use as the PERT representation.
Regarding the performance of both mistakes
(p=0.468) and time (p=0.323) there is no
significant difference between PlanningLine and
PERT users.
2. The classical PERT chart is more appropriate
for answering detailed questions on single
attributes of a project plan than PlanningLines.

3.

4.

5.

6.

While PERT users make significantly fewer
mistakes than PlanningLine users (p=0.016), the
task duration of both technologies is not
significantly different (p=0.087).
The PlanningLine representation is better suited
to deal with temporal uncertainties regarding
the duration, start, or end of activities or plans.
PlanningLine users do not make significantly
fewer mistakes than PERT users (p=0.086), but
the task duration of PlanningLine users is
significantly shorter (p=0. 012).
Possible critical sections in a project plan can
be spotted easier and more correctly using
PlanningLines as with PERT charts.
PlanningLine users make significantly fewer
mistakes than PERT users (p=0.089).
The layout and meaning of individual parts of
the PlanningLine glyph are recalled easier as of
the PERT representation.
PlanningLine users make significantly more
mistakes (p=0.000) and take longer than PERT
users (p=0.000).
PlanningLines are perceived subjectively
positive.
PlanningLines users are more content using their
method than PERT users (p=0.005).

3.1.9
Discussion
Overall, the experiment results confirm our
assumptions
regarding
PlanningLines.
The
fundamental assumption that PlanningLines are
generally not harder to use for typical project
management tasks as PERT charts was supported by
the study results. Furthermore, PlanningLine users
are faster in answering questions on temporal
uncertainties which clearly reflects our intentions.
Only the fifth hypothesis on the recall of the
representation was not supported by the study results
which might be caused by the fact that most subjects
used PERT before. As predicted, PlanningLines are
harder to use for reading exact attributes but are best
for overall analysis of temporal uncertainties and can
be augmented with dynamic display of explicit detail
data as needed. Besides the quantifiable results, users
subjectively judged PlanningLines positively.

4. Related Work
LifeLines [10] utilize horizontal bars to represent
the temporal location and duration of data elements.
They were applied for representing personal histories
and patient records. For organizing the elements, socalled “facets” are introduced for grouping the data
which can be expanded and collapsed. When
collapsed, only a very small and geometrically as
well as semantically downscaled version without

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

textual labels is shown. Furthermore, information can
be encoded via the height and color of individual
bars. Additional information can be provided on
demand in a linked view as for example x-ray images
or the like. Due to their simplicity they are easy to
understand but some important features are missing,
such as the ability of depicting hierarchical data. The
visualization is mainly used retrospectively for
analytic and presentation tasks rather than for
planning. Moreover, LifeLines cannot represent
temporal indeterminacies.
With Paint Strips [4] the idea of Timelines is
enriched by a painting metaphor indicating that the
displayed bars are drawn by a paint roller. A paint
roller at an end of a bar means that this line can
expand by moving the roller until a wall is reached.
This way the maximum duration and earliest start or
latest end, depending on which end of the painting
strip the paint rollers are attached to, are defined and
indeterminacies shown. Another addition is the
possibility to combine strips. The relationship of
Paint Strips can be fixed, which means that if one
strip moves, the other one moves in the same extent
as well. This relationship is indicated graphically by
connecting the involved paint rollers and attaching
them to a weight at the end of a “rope” which is able
to move the rollers. Paint Strips were especially
developed for medical applications but can be used
elsewhere as well. Due to the simplicity of the paint
strip metaphor, some time annotation attributes such
as durations independent of the differences between
start and end points, different granularities, undefined
values, or a reference point cannot be visualized.
Temporal Objects [5] were developed for
depicting temporal data with different granularities.
Temporal data that is defined in a coarser granularity
level than the visual representation is depicted by two
encapsulated bars for minimum and maximum
duration with a cap at each end for the start and end
intervals. Although being visually similar to
PlanningLines, this technique has been developed to
serve a fundamentally different purpose (granularity
vs. indeterminacy), is of static nature, and less
flexible.
The Time Annotation Glyph [9] is based on the
same attribute set as the PlanningLine, but uses the
metaphor of bars that lie on “pillars”. Four vertical
lines on the base specify earliest and latest starting
and ending times. These pillars support a bar that
represents the maximum task duration. On top of the
maximum-duration bar, a minimum-duration bar lies
upon two diamonds for latest start and earliest end.
Furthermore, undefined parts are displayed in gray
and different temporal granularities are indicated by
using zigzag lines. Because of this metaphor, a few
simple time-attribute constraints can be understood

intuitively. For example, the minimum duration
cannot be shorter than the interval between latest
start and earliest end – if it was, the minimum
duration bar would fall down between its supports.
All attributes may be defined relative to a reference
point that is also represented graphically.
Disadvantages of Time Annotation Glyphs are their
relatively steep learning curve, difficult integration
into currently used and well-known techniques, and
less visual cues in order to help maintaining timeattribute constraints as with PlanningLines.

5. Conclusions
Temporal uncertainty is a very important issue in
different applications domains. To represent and
visualize temporal uncertainty, we have designed and
developed an innovative glyph, called PlanningLines,
concerning the starting and ending times and the
duration of actions or events. PlanningLines were
originally designed for medical treatment planning.
In this paper we illustrated how PlanningLines can be
applied to the domain of project management.
Designing novel visualization methods is a
necessary task to improve the communication of
complex interdependencies. However, to assess the
real usability of such visualization, an evaluation
must be performed [11]. We conducted an empirical
study comparing our designed PlanningLines with
PERT charts, which demonstrated the usefulness of
our approach on a cognitive level.

Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Peter
Messner, for reviewing the experiment design, to Gernot
Goluch, Christoph Gesperger, Manuel Ganglberger, and
Christoph Fleury, for their support in preparing the
experiment material, and to the experiment participants.
This project is supported by “Fonds zur Förderung der
wissenschaftlichen Forschung - FWF” (Austrian Science
Fund), grant P15467-N04.

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

Wolfgang Aigner, Interactive Visualization of TimeOriented Treatment Plans and Patient Data, Master’s
thesis, Vienna University of Technology, Institute of
Software Technology and Interactive Systems,
Vienna, Austria, 2003.
Wolfgang Aigner, Silvia Miksch, Bettina Thurnher,
Stefan Biffl. PlanningLines Usability Studie - User
Study zum Vergleich von PlanningLines und PERT
Darstellung (in German), Vienna University of
Technology, Institute of Software Technology and
Interactive Systems, Vienna, Technical Report,
Asgaard-TR-2005-3, 2005.
George E. P. Box, William G. Hunter, J. Stuart
Hunter, William Gordon Hunter. Statistics for
Experimenters, John Wiley & Sons. 1978.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[14]

Luca Chittaro and Carlo Combi. Visualizing Queries
on Databases of Temporal Histories: New Metaphors
and their Evaluation. Data and Knowledge
Engineering. 44(2): 239-264, 2003.
Carlo Combi, Luisa Portoni, and Francesco Pinciroli.
Visualizing Temporal Clinical Data on the WWW.
In Proceedings of the Joint European Conference on
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine and Medical
Decision Making (AIMDM'99). Springer, 301-311,
1999.
Fred D. Davis. Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease
of Use and User Acceptance of Information
Technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3): 319-340. 1989.
Diane Lindwarm Alonso, Anne Rose, Catherine
Plaisant, and Kent L. Norman. Viewing Personal
History Records: A Comparison of Tabular Format
and Graphical Presentation using LifeLines.
Behavior and Information Technology. 17(5): 249262, 1998.
Christopher M. Lott and H. Dieter Rombach.
Repeatable Software Engineering Experiments for
Comparing Defect-Detection Techniques. Empirical
Software Engineering 1(3), 241-277. 1996.
Silvia Miksch and Robert Kosara. Communicating
Time-Oriented, Skeletal Plans to Domain Experts
Lucidly. In Database and Expert Systems
Applications, Proceedings of the10th International
Conference of Database and Expert Systems
Applications (DEXA'99). Springer, 1041-1051, 1999.
Catherine Plaisant, Richard Mushlin, Aaron Snyder,
Jia Li, Dan Heller, and Ben Shneiderman. LifeLines:
Using Visualization to Enhance Navigation and
Analysis of Patient Records. In Proceedings of the
1998 American Medical Informatic Association
Annual Fall Symposium. 76-80, 1998
Catherine Plaisant. The Challenge of Information
Visualization Evaluation, In Proceedings of the
working conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces
(AVI 2004). ACM, 109-116, 2004.
Diana White and Joyce Fortune. Current Practice in
Project Management – An Empirical Study.
International Journal of Project Management. 20(1):
1-11, 2002.
Claes Wohlin, Per Runeson, Martin Höst, Magnus C.
Ohlsson, Björn Regnell, Anders Wesslén.
Experimentation in Software Engineering - An
Introduction. The Kluwer International Series in
Software Engineering, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
2000.
Ping Zhang and Dan Zhu. Information Visualization
in Project Management and Scheduling. In
Proceedings of the 4th Conference of the
International Society for Decision Support Systems
(ISDSS'97). 1-9, 1997.

