Polyrhythmic Organization of Coupled Nonlinear Oscillators
Gerold Baier¹, Thomas Hermann², and Markus Müller¹
¹Faculty of Sciences, Autonomous University of Morelos
Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico
{baier;muellerm}@servm.fc.uaem.mx
²Neuroinformatics Group, Bielefeld University, Bielefeld, Germany
thermann@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de
Abstract
We study the rhythmic organization of coupled
nonlinear oscillators. If oscillators with non-identical
internal frequency are coupled they generate a great
variety of periodic and chaotic rhythmic patterns.
Sonification of these patterns suggests their
characterization in terms of polyrhythms: each
oscillatory unit subdivides “measures” of equal or
varying length differently. For the case of two coupled
oscillators the organization of these polyrhythms is
exemplified as a function of the internal frequency ratio
and the coupling strength. Some sonification strategies
are presented which aid to detect complex rhythmic
relationships between oscillators. The results may be of
importance for the analysis of complex multivariate time
series like human EEG.

1. Introduction
Rhythm can be defined as a non-random temporal
sequence of discrete events. In our context, “nonrandom” means that there exists some deterministic
generating algorithm for the temporal sequence and, as a
consequence, that there are at least short-term
correlations between successive events. By polyrhythm
we refer to the coexistence of two or more rhythms that
are dependent on each other but do not share a common
denominator in their isochronous patterning (see e.g.
[1]). This means that, for instance, they divide a measure
with a noninteger ratio of their number of beats. Their
mutual dependence implies a finite coupling between the
participating rhythms (i.e. they are not free-running).
The musical concept of polyrhythm (for a definition
and examples see [2]) expresses that two rhythms that
are neither in synchrony nor simple multiples of each
other, can still be correlated. The common situation is
that i) both rhythms are periodic (each is based on an
isochronous pulse train), ii) the number of pulses per
period, p and q, have some non-integer ratio p/q (p,q∈N,
where p>q), and iii) the communication between the
rhythms is expressed in periodic coincidences of pulses.
From a theoretical point of view there is no reason to
exclude irregular rhythms from this definition, if only
they follow a fixed generating rule. The only difference

to the periodic case would be that the coincidences of
pulses occur at irregular intervals. Here we permit this
generalization and discuss the concept of polyrhythm in
the context of nonlinear dynamical systems.
We provide some background about self-organized
oscillations and then study a model of linearly and
reversibly coupled nonlinear oscillators. This model is a
prototype used for the description of rhythmic processes
in biological systems like heartbeat, neural firing, and
hormone secretion among many others (a readable
introduction can be found in [3]). The basis for our
discussion is that each oscillator has a well-defined
internal frequency (i.e., when there is no coupling
between oscillators) and thereby generates a periodic
sequence of “events”. Sonification of the rhythms
resulting from the introduction of finite coupling
demonstrates that the concept of polyrhythm can be
applied naturally when the rhythmic patterns are
complex. We argue that this might be used to
characterize complex rhythmic phenomena in biological
systems (like cardiac arrhythmias and neural firing
patterns) but also as a general tool in time series analysis.

2. The Model
We analyze the dynamics of a prototypic system of
coupled nonlinear oscillators. The system consists of two
FitzHugh-Nagumo (FHN) models and is given by the
following set of ordinary differential equations:

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

dX 1
= X 1 ( a − X 1 )( X 1 − 1) − Y1 + I + D ( X 2 − X 1 )
dt
dY1
= b ( X 1 − Y1 )
dt
(1)
dX 2
= X 2 ( a − X 2 )( X 2 − 1) − Y2 + I + D( X 1 − X 2 ) / ε
ε dt

dY2
= b( X 2 − Y2 )
εdt

where we fixed constants a=0.1, b=0.01, c=1.2, and
I=0.07. D is the coupling constant and parameter ε
controls the frequency of the second oscillator relative to
the first, i.e. the ratio of internal frequencies.
Originally, the FHN equation was introduced to
describe the firing of squid neurons but it soon became
clear that, with some modification, it may be used to
describe the dynamics of different types of neurons, of
heart cells, muscle cells, pancreas cells and others as
well. All these cells display sudden eruptions of voltage,
either spontaneously (oscillations) or in response to
external perturbations (excitability). The corresponding
models are able to reproduce these observations and they
allow to make specific prediction that can be tested
experimentally (for instance, that the transition between
excitability and oscillations is sharp and not continuous).
An important feature of these models is that they
may be applied at different levels of organization.
Coupled oscillators like those in eq. 1 not only present a
means to describe the interaction between individual
biological cells but also between groups of cells if each
group can be modeled to act synchronously. In the case
of the heart, for example, a two-oscillator model might
be adjusted to describe the electric interaction between
the ventricles (the main pump) and the atria (the
supplementary pump). As such, the investigation of
coupled oscillators has become central for the
understanding of rhythmic processes in living systems
[3].
With the selected set of parameters each of the two
units in eq. 1 exhibits periodic nonlinear oscillations
(sometimes referred to as “self-excitation”). We refer to
these oscillations as the internal rhythm of the individual
unit. For ε≠1 the units display periodic oscillations with
non-identical frequencies. For simplicity, in the present
contribution the two oscillators are chosen to be identical
otherwise. Complex rhythms are then formed by
introducing coupling of oscillators, i.e. setting D>0.

3. Sonification of Polyrhythms
The possibly complex temporal organization of the
system in eq. 1 strongly suggests the use of human
listening for the analysis of its structure. Since we are
interested in rhythms and rhythmical changes, the use of
percussive sound events to directly represent the
nonlinear oscillations is intuitive. The sonification
examples presented and discussed in the following
chapter employ percussive sounds at a clear pitch,
created by additive synthesis, using a variable number of
harmonics. Event parameters employed are spatial
panning, pitch, onset, and level. For each oscillator one
stream of events is created. Pitch and panning is used to
facilitate stream separation; level is constant for both,
while brightness (number of active harmonics) is driven
by the inter-oscillator nearest-neighbor maxima distance,
i.e. the temporal distance between a given maximum and
the subsequent maximum in the other oscillator.

This simple mapping has proven ideal to perceive in
particular polyrhythmic structures. The timbre mapping
in addition supports the detection of rhythmic outliers
(e.g. missing beats), which stand out in the display due to
their influence on inter-oscillator event distances. This
enables us to analyze the time series for rhythmical
irregularities even at time compressions that are beyond
the range where human listeners can clearly discern
rhythm.
It is certainly possible to choose more elaborate
sounds than we did, yet we believe that the rather
canonic choice presented here is sufficient to
qualitatively understand the system’s basic rhythmic
organization.

4. Results
We define the rhythm of eq. 1 as the temporal
pattern of all suprathreshold oscillations. There are two
trivial extremes: On the one end, for D=0 the units are
independent and not part of a bigger system. In this case
it is sufficient to study each unit in isolation and it is
preferable not to speak of a common rhythm. On the
other end, for strong enough coupling the two oscillators
completely synchronize and provide the same time
series. In this case the two sources are indistinguishable
and the result is a single rhythm on the level of the whole
system. If however finite reversible coupling is
introduced that does not succeed to synchronize the
oscillators, the formerly independent rhythms start to
interact and influence each other. This creates non-trivial
rhythmic patterns.
Fig. 1 schematically shows the generic organization
of the main periodic (poly-)rhythms in eq. 1 in an octave
of frequency mismatch. The parameter region 0.5<ε<1.0
does not contain integer ratios of the internal frequencies.
Nevertheless the generic integer rhythms 1:1 and 2:1
invade the region from both ends. For small values of
coupling constant D, quasiperiodic oscillations dominate
(gray areas) interrupted by the so-called Arnol’d tongues
of complex periodic modes that terminate at the rational
values of ε for D=0. The width of these tongues grows as
D increases in accordance with the Arnol’d picture but
from D≈0.0015 bifurcations create more complex
behaviors (e.g. period-doubling on the lower right edge
of the 2:1 tongue). Note that such differentiation is
omitted in the figure.
The polyrhythms (only three of which are included
in Fig. 1) start at the exact values of frequency ratio for
D=0: 3:2 at ε=0.666…, 4:3 at ε=0.75, 5:4 at ε=0.8, and
so on. For values up to D≈0.01 the respective tongue
widths grow. For higher coupling strength, the tendency
to synchronize the spiking in both units diminishes the
widths of all tongues except 1:1, which grows
considerably. In addition, there are other complex
periodic rhythms (like the period-doubled 6:4 rhythm at
ε=0.45, D=0.005, or a 8:5 rhythm at ε=0.73, D=0.0045);
quasiperiodic; and deterministic chaotic rhythms. These
are found in the gray areas and are not differentiated in
the figure.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Lyapunov characteristic exponents (LCEs) yields one
positive, one zero and two negative exponents. The
positive exponent indicates deterministic chaos. The time
series of the slower unit is characterized by “missing
beats”, i.e. subthreshold oscillations with small
amplitude caused by perturbations that prevent the rising
of the amplitude when the spike is due (according to
internal frequency). The rhythm is unable to maintain a
single repetitive pattern. However, it still shows the 4:3
pattern occasionally. Due to the vicinity of the chosen
parameters to the 4:3 region in parameter space the 4:3
sequence of spikes recurs from time to time and could be
called a characteristic “motif” of the chaotic rhythm.
This can be heard in Sonification S2.
Figure 1: Schematic drawing of main periodic
rhythms in eq. 1 in the ε/D parameter plane. For
simplicity, some details are omitted.

Figure 3: Time series of a chaotic rhythm in eq.
1 with ε=0.74, D=0.005. Shown are the Xvariables (as in Fig. 1)

Figure 2: Time series of a periodic polyrhythm
(frequency ratio 4:3) in eq. 1 with ε=0.75,
D=0.005. Shown are the X-variables of oscillator
1 (solid line) and 2 (dotted line).

Fig. 2 shows the two time series of the two Xvariables of the 4:3 rhythm as a function of time (for
ε=0.75, D=0.005). The faster firing of oscillator 1 (solid
line) produces nearly equal intervals between maxima of
the oscillations and every fourth maximum almost
coincides with a maximum of oscillator 2. For oscillator
2 a pattern of three events is repeated where two of the
distances between maxima are comparable but the third
distance is somewhat larger. Sonification 1 exemplifies
this polyrhythm in a stereo setting [4]. The frequencies
assigned to the events in each channel have a ratio of 4:3
according to the internal frequencies of the two
oscillators.
Compared to the parameters in Fig. 2 a slight
modification in frequency ratio led to the result displayed
in Fig. 3. Here, the rhythm is asymptotically aperiodic
and shows a broadening of the Fourier spectrum (as
compared to Fig. 2). Calculation of the spectrum of

For lower values of constant offset I in eq. 1 the
picture is not as simple as given in Fig. 1. In particular,
near the vicinity of the onset of self-excitation there are
complications due to dominant chaotic attractors. E.g. at
I=0.0605, ε=0.6445, D=0.005 the two units produce
bursts of spikes. Strangely, between such bursts there are
no spikes in neither unit. It appears as if the spiking in
the two units were switched on and off irregularly by
some external factor (Sonification S3).
As a simple extension of the above results we
calculated a system composed of three identical,
symmetrically coupled units. In that case we deal with
two parameters, ε 1 and ε 2 , for the control of internal
frequencies in oscillators two and three, respectively.
This way we can realize a more complex polyrhythm
like, for example, 5:4:3. A time series of the three Xvariables in that case is shown in Fig. 4. Sonification
example S4 displays how the three units divide a
“measure” (the time between two synchronizations of all
three units) into 5, 4, and 3 beats, respectively. The
three-dimensional parameter space D/ ε 1 / ε 2 has (except
for D close to zero) a highly complex organization of
periodic, complex periodic, quasi-periodic, and
deterministic chaotic rhythms. An example of a chaotic

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

rhythm between three oscillators is provided in
Sonification 5. While the fastest oscillator maintains a
constant pulse, the other two oscillators appear to impede
each other leading to unexpected rhythmic variations.
Given the completely deterministic nature of the source
of the signal, the sonification reveals a surprising
richness in their interaction pattern.
It is known that human listeners are not only
sensitive to the perception of rhythms but also to the
perception of changes in rhythm. The following
sonification examples make use of this skill. For this
purpose the system of two FHN oscillators eq. 1 is
integrated with a linearly changing frequency ratio ε.
This is equivalent to a horizontal line in Figure 1.

polyrhythms that occupy only a narrow window along
the chosen parameter line are not resolved numerically
and cannot be heard in the example.
Sonification example S7 starts from the same point
(D=0.015, ε=0.5) towards the right edge of Fig. 1 but
extends the duration to 1 minute. Listening to the sound,
not only the polyrhythmic regimes can be better
distinguished, also another feature can be perceived:
within a polyrhythmic regime the “meter” continuously
slows down. Such features remain easily unattended in
time series plots, yet they are immediately obvious in the
sonification, and demonstrate the utility of sonification in
detecting qualitative behavior in studying dynamic
systems in general.

5. Discussion

Figure 4: Time series of X-variables for a
periodic 5:4:3 polyrhythm in a system of 3
coupled FHN oscillators.
In the first example, S6, the simulation starts on the
left edge of Fig. 1 from point (D=0.015, ε=0.5) with a
sonification of the 2:1 rhythm and then changes ε from
0.5 to 1.0 while keeping D constant. Along this line it
crosses, one by one, the borders to various polyrhythms.
We perceive the constant beats of oscillator 1 whereas
the rate of oscillator 2 increases. The rhythmical changes
are immediately obvious. They are not continuous but
proceed in well-defined steps. Due to the finite speed of
parameter variation and the model’s inertia, complex

Coupled nonlinear oscillators are able to display
polyrhythmic firing patterns if their internal frequencies
are not close to an integer ratio p/q, with p>q. While such
polyrhythmic phenomena have been discussed a long
time ago as a possible explanation of the so-called
Wenckebach rhythms in cardiology [5], we are not aware
of a systematic investigation of polyrhythms in the
context of other biological systems, notably the firing
patterns of coupled neurons. In particular, auditory nerve
fibers are known to possess clearly differentiated internal
frequencies [6].
The FHN equation is a prototypic model of a type 2
excitable system (finite frequency at the onset of selfoscillation). It can be adjusted to describe a variety of
waveforms found experimentally in excitable cells and
tissues. The parameters for eq. 1 were chosen such that
each model unit displays periodic nonlinear action
potentials. All deviations from this simple periodic
behavior are a consequence of the mutual coupling of the
oscillators. As oscillator 1’s internal frequency is always
higher than that of oscillator 2 for ε<1.0, its time series is
normally continuously spiking whereas missing beats
and subthreshold oscillations are found in oscillator 2.
However, in chaotic and intermittent regimes missing
beats are also possible in the first oscillator (e.g.
Sonification S3).
The definition of rhythm presented in the
introduction is based exclusively on the temporal order
of the data and thus on measurable physical properties.
Such an approach is essential because the sonifications
are supposed to reveal the dynamic patterns of the data.
This is opposite to studies of rhythm that use a definition
based on the perceptual response of the listener [1]. The
results of these psychological studies will have to be
taken into account, however, when it comes to the
correct interpretation of the perceptions. Even though for
example clear preferences in the (temporal) grouping of
sound events can be found, the perception of rhythm
varies strongly among listeners when complex pattern
like polyrhythms are involved [7]
Previous sonifications of rhythms in (non-excitable)
ordinary differential equations have focused on the

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

aspect of limited irregularity of deterministic chaos [8].
There it was first argued that listening to these rhythms
forms an important approach for the analysis of irregular
but non-random temporal events. A similar argument can
be derived from the present numerical studies.
Comparing sonifications of the periodic and chaotic
rhythm (S1 and S2, see Figs. 2 and 3) the occurrence of a
common motif makes the relationship between the
rhythms obvious. As in the case of most published
studies that offer numerous graphical representations to
familiarize the reader with rhythmic dynamics (like e.g.
[3]), it is now recommended to perform extensive
explorations of the parameter space to obtain a
sophisticated aural representation of the rhythmic
richness and relationships. Whereas in the simplest case
of 2 coupled oscillators this amounts to basically
repeating in a second sensory mode an already
completed analysis, we conjecture that the aural
representation may be superior in the more complex
cases of three or more coupled oscillators (Sonification
S4) and as such may provide new insights that were not
yet obtained from the traditional representation.
A particularly promising strategy is to combine the
auditory display with animated visualization, for instance
of the time series or some truncated form of it. From our
preliminary experience it is likely that the visual display
can be coupled to the sonifications without conflict
between the media. If in addition the user could interact
with a graphical display (e.g. navigate a parameter vector
in a plot like Fig. 1, the two perceptual modes may even
mutually fertilize the understanding. A multimedia
approach will then accelerate and deepen insight into the
polyrhythmic quality of the dynamics.
It is in the more complex cases that the exploitation
of additional features of the time series and their
representation
in
sound
parameters
becomes
indispensable. For example, in a system of 3 coupled
FHN oscillators recently so-called hyperchaotic behavior
was observed [9]. Hyperchaos is a deterministic process
that is identified by the presence of 2 or more positive
Lyapunov exponents as compared to only 1 for simple
chaos (see [10] for technical details). A preliminary
study of such hyperchaotic systems composed of
oscillators with different internal frequencies revealed
intriguing rhythmic patterns [11] but so far a deeper
understanding is lacking. Rhythmic sonification as
demonstrated in the present contribution offers a route to
such understanding.
Immediate application of rhythmic sonification is
possible in cardiology where complex rhythmic activity
and rhythmic transitions are known to precede the lifethreatening state of fibrillation. An important advantage
of sonification in this case is that it can implement
knowledge
obtained
from
electrocardiographic
recordings, e.g. it might assign the individual
contributions of atria and ventricles into separate sound
sources.
Finally it should be mentioned that the concept does
not only apply for time series where the rhythmic
behavior is obvious. An important example is human

electroencephalogram (EEG), where signals are noiselike and hard to quantify in terms of rhythms but where
temporal correlations nevertheless are suspected to be
present, if only transiently (for a sonification of the
transition from normal to epileptic behavior see [12]).
For such cases recently a new method of analysis was
proposed that extracts information in the form of
rhythmic spike sequences [13]. The process works
similar to groups of sensory neurons that convert analog
signals into temporal sequences of action potentials. In
both cases the outputs of the analysis are rhythmic
according to our definition if they are non-random. To
apply the proposed concept of polyrhythm to EEG data
one would have to decompose the signals recorded at
different positions on the scalp and then sonify them with
the techniques given above. A first attempt was
presented in [14] for the transition from normal to
epileptic behavior but further research is necessary to
clarify the differences between complex rhythms (like
the hyperchaotic solutions mentioned) and truly random
sequences of events.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by CONACyT, Mexico
(project no. 40885-F). G.B. thanks Sven Sahle, EML
Research, Heidelberg, for discussion.

List of Sonifications
All sonifications can be found in the following webpage:
http://www.techfak.unibielefeld.de/~thermann/projects/index.html

S1: A 4:3 polyrhythm with parameters as in Fig. 2.
S2: A chaotic polyrhythm with parameters as in Fig. 3 in
two different speeds.
S3: An intermittent polyrhythm with parameters
I=0.0605, ε=0.6445, D=0.005.
S4: A periodic polyrhythm in a three oscillator system
with internal frequencies set to 5:4:3 and D=0.01 (other
parameters as in eq. 1).
S5: A chaotic polyrhythm in a three oscillator system
with internal frequencies set to 1.0:0.9:0.55 and
D=0.0032 (other parameters as in eq. 1). Duration a) 45
sec; b) 15 sec; and c) 5 sec.
S6: Sequence of rhythms in eq. 1 as parameter ε is
continuously varied from 0.5 to 0.99.
S7: Sequence of rhythms as in S6 but with total duration
1min.

References
[1] S. Handel, Listening, MIT Press, Cambridge, 1989,
chapter 11.
[2] http://www.xs4all.nl/~marcz/Polyrhythm.html

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[3] L. Glass, M. Mackay, From Clocks to Chaos, Princeton
University Press, 1988.
[4] http://www.techfak.uni-bielefeld.de/~thermann/projects
/index.html
[5] K.F. Wenckebach. Arrhythmia of the Heart: a
Physiological and Clinical Study. Green, Edinburgh,
1904.
[6] see e.g. W.L. Gulick, G.A. Geschieder, R.D. Frisina,
Hearing - Physiological Acoustics, Neural Coding, and
Psychoacoustics. Oxford University Press, New York
1989.
[7] S. Handel, Using Polyrhythm to Study Rhythm, Music
Perception 1, 465 (1984).
[8] G. Baier and S. Sahle, Listening to Chaos: the Aural
Representation of Irregular Rhythms. In: H.H. Diebner, T.
Druckery and P. Weibel (eds.), Sciences of the Interface,
Genista Verlag, Tübingen (2001), p. 255. Sonifications at:
http://basic-research.zkm.de:8080/basic_research/projekte
/?top=vertonung
[9] G. Baier and M. Müller, Excitable Chaos in Diffusively
Coupled FitzHugh-Nagumo Equations. Rev. Mex. Fís. 50,
422 (2004).
[10] G. Baier and M. Klein (Eds.), A Chaotic Hierarchy. World
Scientific, Singapore 1991.
[11] G. Baier and S. Sahle, Spatio-Temporal Patterns with
Hyperchaotic Dynamics in Diffusively Coupled
Biochemical Oscillators. Discrete Dynamics in Nature and
Society 1, 161 (1997)
[12] S. Sahle and G. Baier, track 16 of the CD accompaning G.
Baier, Rhythmus (in German), Rowohlt Verlag, Reinbeck,
2001. Also c.f. “Listening to epilepsy” on the webpage
http://www.cerebraldynamics.org
[13] G. Baier, R. Leder, P. Parmananda, Human Electroencephalogram Induces Transient Coherence in Excitable
Spatio-temporal Chaos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4501 (2000).
G. Baier and M. Müller, The Nonlinear Dynamic
Conversion of Analog Signals into Excitation Patterns,
Phys. Rev. E 70, 037201 (2004).
[14] G. Baier and T. Hermann, The Sonification of Rhythms in
Human Electroencephalogram. Proceedings of ICAD
2004, July 6-9, Sydney (2004). See also: T. Hermann, G.
Baier and M. Müller, Polyrhythm in the Human Brain.
Proceedings of ICAD 2004, July 6-9, Sydney (2004).

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

