Digital Concept Mapping in Learning Contexts: Integrating Knowledge,
Arguments and Information Resources
Sigmar-Olaf Tergan, Tanja Keller
Knowledge Media Research Center
s.tergan@iwm-kmrc.de, t.keller@iwm-kmrc.de

Abstract
Students who self-regulate their study have to cope
with an increasing amount of increasingly complex
knowledge and information. This is particularly true
for students in resource-based scenarios. Visualization
tools may assist students in the easy and effective
orientation of the status of their knowledge, as well as
the access to knowledge elements and task-relevant
knowledge resources. Most existing tools focus on the
visualization of knowledge, arguments, or information
only. It is claimed that concept mapping may function
as a bridging technology. This paper analyses the
potential of advanced digital concept mapping tools
for visualizing knowledge, arguments, and information
resources in an integrative and comprehensive
manner. Structural, representational, processing and
usability features of concept mapping are outlined. It
is suggested that digital concept mapping may be used
for effectively managing individual knowledge and
knowledge resources in resource-based learning.
Keywords: Concept mapping, knowledge
visualization, argument visualization, cognitive tool

1. Introduction
In many domains, students who self-regulate their
study have to cope with complex arrays of knowledge
and information. With the advent of massive and yet
flexible information resources like hypermedia
environments, digital libraries, and the World Wide
Web, an even stronger demand is made on the
students‘ own level of responsibility and learning
management skills. This is particularly true in
resource-based learning scenarios [21], when the
Internet is used as a tool for communication and access
to task-relevant digital information resources.
“Resource-based learning can be explained as a
learning mode in which the student learns from his or

her own interaction with a wide range of learning
resources rather than from class exposition” [21] (p.
52). These scenarios allow students a great amount of
freedom
for
planning,
self-evaluating
the
appropriateness of existing knowledge, searching for
additional information, assembling ideas, (co)constructing and representing shared knowledge,
communicating it to others, as well as for using
knowledge and information in a flexible manner for
argumentation, knowledge communication, and
problem solving. Many students, however, have not
yet acquired effective strategies for resource-based
learning. They suffer from cognitive overload, as well
as conceptual and navigational disorientation
Particularly in learning scenarios with a complex
and ill-structured subject-matter content, there is a
need for fostering learning by means of cognitive tools
to overcome limitations of the human mind in
reasoning, learning, and problem solving. Mapping
techniques for the external representation of the
structure of ideas, thoughts, arguments, and knowledge
in a visual-spatial format are suggested to help learners
coping with complex and ill-structured subject matter
and facilitating “the coherent representation of new
information in semantic memory” [12] (p. 14). They
are also advocated to foster coping with complex tasks
by capitalizing on the potential of external cognition
[10]. Existing tools mostly focus on the visualization
of knowledge, arguments, or information only.
It is claimed that concept mapping may function as
a bridging technology. This paper analyzes the
potential of advanced digital concept mapping tools for
visualizing knowledge, arguments, and information
resources in an integrative and comprehensive manner.
Structural, representational, processing and usability
features of concept mapping are outlined. It is also
suggested that digital concept mapping may be used
for effectively managing individual knowledge and
knowledge resources in resource-based learning.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

2. Need for integrative mapping tools
Until now, a variety of visualization tools are
available that may assist users in resource-based
learning. Visualizations of the structure of conceptual
domain knowledge focus on concepts í and the
semantic relations between them í for assisting
learners in knowledge construction, knowledge
assessment, and knowledge use [18]. Argument
visualizations focus on fostering the process of
structured argumentation and reasoning by providing
templates [3] or visualizing the structure of
argumentation for discovering and conveying “the
structure of wicked problems” [4] (p. 12). Information
visualization approaches focus on the visualization of
structures in large amounts of documents and abstract
data for fostering access to resources by visual search
[22].
The problem with these tools is that most of them
are very specialized tools that allow for either the
mapping of knowledge, arguments, or information
resources. For example, traditional concept mapping
falls short, because the focus is on the structure of
conceptual knowledge only, which is represented in a
visual-spatial format as a structure of propositions [2].
However, such approaches do not take into account the
content knowledge, which is composed of reflections,
explanations, elaborations, examples, episodes,
images, as well as the knowledge of where to find
information resources associated with it. Information
resources may be relevant for making sense of a
particular knowledge structure and for a complete
understanding of an argumentation.
Argument visualization approaches often focus on
structuring the process of argumentation. They might
be extended to include representations like concept
mapping, plan diagrams, and mathematical models
[24]. They might also be extended to integrate the
information resources, which are the basis for some
arguments. In this way, they may be used for
collaborative and educational sense-making [14]. An
example of an argument visualization approach is
Belvédère [20]. Belvédère supports collaborative
inquiry. The environment offers access to web-based
materials, a chat window, and a shared visual
workspace where learners construct scientific
explanations in so-called “evidence maps” [25].
Knowledge resources like arguments and
multimedia information are of paramount importance
for the construction of individual and shared
conceptual knowledge about a subject-matter domain.
Knowing where to find task-appropriate resources is of
primary importance in self-regulated learning.

Knowledge and resources serve different functions in
the learning process. Resources, on the one hand, are
the basis upon which existing knowledge has been
constructed and new knowledge could be constructed.
They may be important for elaborating, tuning, and
restructuring conceptual domain knowledge if
necessary. In order to make effective use of the
resources, students have to remember them in time or
access them in an external repository by some kind of
searching procedure. On the other hand, existing
conceptual domain knowledge may be used for
interpreting arguments, generating new arguments,
structuring arguments and making sense of single
information resources, as well as for visualizations of
the structure of abstract data.

Fig. 1: Interrelation of conceptual knowledge,
arguments and information

In resource-based learning, when the Internet is
used for communication and cooperation and as a
global repository for accessing information resources,
there is a need for an integrative representation of
conceptual knowledge, content knowledge (episodes,
examples, models), thoughts and arguments, as well as
related information resources. Supporting just-in-time
access to knowledge elements, arguments, and
information resources may help users in coping with
task situations where they need additional data and
information for cognitive processing.
Advanced concept mapping tools allow for the
comprehensive mapping of knowledge by taking into
account the content knowledge and the information
that is behind individual claims, ideas, and concepts
[26], [27]. They also provide facilities to visualize
structures of reasoning, including argumentation
visualization diagrams, and to integrate content
knowledge and information resources into a coherent
representation [11], [7].

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

3. Digital concept mapping as a bridging
technology
Advanced digital concept mapping is suggested to
be a promising bridging technology, on top of which
synergistic approaches may be developed. Typical
examples of existing digital concept mapping tools are
SMART Ideas, Knowledge Manager, and CmapTools.
CmapTools [6] is a software environment developed at
the Institute for Human and Machine Cognition that
empowers users, individually or collaboratively, to
represent their knowledge using concept maps, to link
media resources to them, to share them with peers and
colleagues, and to publish them. These approaches
may integrate concept knowledge for the
representation of semantic meaning, arguments,
explanations, and decisions, which led to the
generation of conceptual knowledge, and the
information resources to which concepts and
arguments are related. The potential of concept
mapping as a bridging technology for an integrative
mapping of knowledge, arguments, and information
resources may be revealed through an analysis of the
structural, representational, processing, and usability
features.

3.1. Structural features
A concept map is a spatial array that represents
elements of knowledge by means of nodes and
directionally labeled or named links, whereas the
nodes represent ideas, concepts, or beliefs and the links
depict relations between them [18]. “Together, nodes
and labeled or named links define propositions,
assertions about a topic, domain or thing” [1]. In
concept maps, propositions are used as the basis for the
representation of domain knowledge at an abstract
level; the concepts are abstractions of declarative and
empirical domain knowledge. Up to now, concept
maps have mostly been used to map structures of
conceptual knowledge. The structural features of
concept maps, however, may also be appropriate for
representing the structure of arguments (see [4] for a
survey of computer-supported argument visualization
tools).
Nodes with different geometric shapes like
rectangles, ovals, or circles, as well as different spatial
configurations, icons, colors, and sizes may be used for
symbolizing different semantic aspects of knowledge
elements and arguments, as well as for conveying
meaning [1]. Multiple linkages between concepts and
arguments may depict how each concept is related to
other concepts, how arguments are related to other

arguments, and which interrelation exists between the
conceptual knowledge and the arguments. Concept
maps are particularly useful for representing networks
of concepts, as well as argument structures, where
links not only connect adjacent concepts and
arguments, but are often linked to other concepts and
arguments in different sections of the concept map [4],
[11]. The structural features open up a wide spectrum
of possibilities for using the structural features of
concept maps for argument visualization that capitalize
on the structural features of concept mapping
technology.

3.2. Representational features
Due to the fact that traditional concept maps
represent concept knowledge only í that is, the
conceptual macrostructure of a knowledge domain í
idiosyncratic individual content knowledge about a
domain, as well as knowledge about relevant
information resources, are left unrepresented. Content
knowledge represents the microstructure of an
individual’s declarative domain knowledge, which is
relevant for coping with a particular task. It is strongly
related to the more abstract conceptual knowledge. It
may be externalized, for example, by means of
personal notes, sketches, personal verbal explanations
(abstracts, summaries), and examples illustrating the
meaning of a concept [8]. Content knowledge also
refers to individual images and mental models about
objects, episodes and events, actions, processes, and
procedures and may be externally represented by using
different semiotic codes and perceptual modalities [1].
Resource knowledge means knowing where to find
task-relevant information [23], what the information is
about, and how the information is related to the
abstract conceptual knowledge or arguments
represented in the map. In digital concept maps,
information is represented by means of hyperlinks
indicating the connection between a concept and a
particular information resource and vice versa. In a
strict sense, information resources are digital storage
devices containing and making accessible all kinds of
data and information represented in different formats.
The data may be stored in repositories and digital
media (e.g. PC files, hypermedia databases, digital
libraries, web sites, web logs, or virtual realities),
either online or offline, using different codes (e.g.
verbal or pictorial) and modes (e.g. visual or auditory).
Data in information resources may be accessed by
students for confirming an idea or for generating new
knowledge, thus, serving as knowledge resources.
They may also be easily accessed when looking for
appropriate background material for presenting the

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

results of a knowledge acquisition process or a
problem-solving task.
Advanced computer-based concept mapping tools
provide facilities for representing and accessing
different kinds of knowledge: conceptual knowledge,
content knowledge, as well as knowledge resources.
The representational features of most advanced digital
concept mapping tools make it possible to also
visualize the structure of arguments and how the
arguments relate to the knowledge of an individual. If
a template has been used for argument visualization,
the template may be integrated into the map directly by
using a pop-up window for displaying it in close
relation to a particular concept node to which it is
related. It may also be integrated as an external
knowledge resource by using a hyperlink (Fig. 1).
Content knowledge, single arguments and argument
visualizations, as well as information resources, may
be directly accessed from a concept by just clicking on
an icon associated with the node or on a hyperlink
connecting the abstract concept or argument with the
related resource [1], [7].

3.3. Processing features
Mapping tools like concept maps are suggested “to
take advantage of the remarkable capabilities of the
human visual perception system and the benefits of
visual information representation. These benefits
include (a) ease of recognition, (b) the possibility to
quickly scan a picture and find differences or
keywords, (c) compactness of representation, and (d)
the observation that it seems to be easier to keep an
overview” [15] (p. 423). Concept maps can enhance
our processing ability by visualizing abstract
relationships of human knowledge and may serve as a
basis for externalized cognition [9]. During the process
of learning and problem solving, a concept map may
help the learner overcome problems that are due to the
limitations of working memory in both capacity and
duration of stored information. Concept maps expand
the capability of an individual’s memory for coping
with complex cognitive task requirements [10], [16].
During learning and problem solving, they may be
used for depicting progress in argumentation, as well
as in the changing status of knowledge.
Quite a similar argument is made by van Gelder
(2002) [28] concerning computer-supported argument
mapping.
It has also been shown, however, that the
advantages of concept maps for fostering cognitive
processing may be mediated by both the user’s
cognitive prerequisites and the requirements of the
tasks [9], [10], [11]. In particular, self-constructed

concept maps pose high cognitive demands on
analyzing and externalizing knowledge and associated
knowledge resources. “Private representations tend to
be less labeled, sparser and may only be partially
externalized, whereas those intended for sharing with
others will tend to be more richly labeled, better
formed and more conventional” [9], (p. 347).

3.4. Usability features
In addition to the processing features and enhanced
representational facilities, computerized conceptmapping tools provide typical office-software usability
facilities, for example, free editing to be used for
(re)constructing, (re)organizing, and (re)representing
mapped knowledge. Storing, printing, representation in
different formats (outline, graphic), e-mailing and
web-implementation of concept maps in html format
are possible. Functions for interactive access to linked
knowledge elements on the basis of the conceptual
structure of a domain may be used for enhancing the
localization, individual conceptual elaborations, as
well as for accessing information resources. Some of
these tools also provide functions for reviewing the
creation process of a map, e.g. by means of
backtracking, and provide functions for webconferencing (e.g. SMART Ideas). Most of the tools
also support functions for a collaborative construction
of concept maps, enabling distributed teams to
collectively develop and access maps [8], [19].
Due to the processing features of concept maps, as
well as the enhanced representational and usability
functions provided by computer-based mapping tools,
digital concept maps may be particularly helpful as
cognitive tools for self-regulated students in open
resource-based
e-learning
scenarios
designed
according to a constructivist design rationale [21].
These learning scenarios call for visualization tools
suited for individual and collaborative managing of
knowledge, arguments and related information
resources [17], [27].

4. Concluding remarks
Traditional concept mapping has proven to be a
valuable technique for visualizing conceptual
knowledge, ideas, and thoughts. Advanced digital
concept mapping not only allows for the representation
of concepts and arguments, but also for the
representation of multi-media domain knowledge and
knowledge resources in an integrative manner in one
coherent visual representation. It may be suggested
that future representations of knowledge, arguments,

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

and related information with concept maps will be
further augmented by using information visualization
strategies for highlighting contexts, structures,
knowledge types, and individual perspectives. The
synergies inherent in a combination of knowledge,
argument, and information visualization techniques for
managing knowledge, arguments, and knowledge
resources must be further discovered [5], [13].

Exploring the synergies of knowledge management & casebased reasoning. Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press.
[9] Cox, R. (1999). Representation, construction,
externalised cognition and individual differences. Learning
and Instruction, 9, 343-363.

References

[10] Cox, R., & Brna, P. (1995). Supporting the use of
external representations in problem solving: The need for
flexible learning environments. Journal of Artificial
Intelligence in Education, 6(2/3), 239-302.

[1] Alpert, S.R. (in press). Comprehensive mapping of
knowledge and information resources: The case of Webster.
In S.-O. Tergan, & T. Keller (Eds.), Knowledge and
information visualization. Searching for synergies. New
York / Heidelberg: Springer LNCS Series.

[11] Dansereau, D.F. (in press). Node-link mapping
principles for visualizing knowledge and information. In S.O. Tergan, & T. Keller (Eds.), Knowledge and information
visualization. Searching for synergies. New York /
Heidelberg: Springer LNCS Series.

[2] Alpert, S.R., & Gruenenberg, K. (2000). Concept
mapping with multimedia on the web. Journal of
Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 9(4), 313-330.

[12] Holley, C.D., & Dansereau, D.F. (1984). The
development of spatial learning strategies. In C.D. Holley, &
D.F. Dansereau (Eds.), Spatial learning strategies.
Techniques, applications, and related issues (pp. 3-19). New
York: Academic Press.

[3] Bruggen, J.M., Kirschner, P.A., & Jochems, W. (2002).
External representation of argumentation in CSCL and the
management of cognitive load. Learning and Instruction
12(1), 121-138.
[4] Buckingham-Shum, S. (2003). The roots of computer
supported argument visualization. In P.A. Kirchner, S.
Buckingham Shum, & C.S. Carr (Eds.), Visualizing
argumentation: software tools for collaborative and
educational sense-making (pp. 3-24). London: SpringerVerlag.
[5] Burkhard, R.A. (in press). Towards a framework and a
model for knowledge visualization: Synergies between
Information and Knowledge Visualization. In S.-O. Tergan
& T. Keller (Eds.), Knowledge Visualization and Information
Visualization: Searching for Synergies. Heidelberg/New
York: Springer í Lecture Notes in Computer Science
[6] Cañas, A.J., Hill, G., Carff, R., Suri, N., Lott, J.,
Eskridge, T., et al. (2004). CmapTools: A knowledge
modeling and sharing environment. In A.J. Cañas, J.D.
Novak & F.M. González (Eds.), Concept maps: Theory,
methodology, technology, proceedings of the 1st
international conference on concept mapping. Pamplona,
Spain: Universidad Pública de Navarra.
[7] Cañas, A.J., Carff, R., Hill, G., Carvalho, M., Arguedas,
M., Eskridge, T.C., Lott, J., & Carvajal, R. (in press).
Concept maps: Integrating knowledge and information
visualization. In S.-O. Tergan, & T. Keller (Eds.),
Knowledge and information visualization. Searching for
synergies. New York / Heidelberg: Springer LNCS Series.
[8] Cañas, A.J., Leake, D.B., & Wilson, D.C. (1999).
Managing, mapping, and manipulating conceptual
knowledge. AAAI Workshop Technical Report WS-99-10:

[13] Keller, T. & Tergan, S.-O. (in press). Visualizing
knowledge and information: An introduction. In Tergan, S.O. & Keller, T. (Eds.), Knowledge and information
visualization. Searching for synergies. New York /
Heidelberg: Springer LNCS Series.
[14] Kirschner, P.A., Buckingham Shum, S., & Carr C.S.
(2003) (Eds.). Visualizing argumentation: software tools for
collaborative and educational sense-making. London:
Springer-Verlag.
[15] Kommers, P., & Lanzing, J. (1997). Student’s concept
mapping for hypermedia design. Navigation through the
World Wide Web (WWW) space and self-assessment.
Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 8(3/4), 421-455.
[16] Larkin, J.H. (1989). Display-based problem solving. In
D. Klahr, & K. Kotovsky (Eds.), Complex information
processing. The impact of Heribert Simon (pp. 319-342).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
[17] Neumann, A., Gräber, W., & Tergan, O.-S. (in press).
ParIS - Visualizing ideas and information in a resource-based
learning scenario. In S.-O. Tergan, & T. Keller (Eds.),
Knowledge and information visualization. Searching for
synergies. New York / Heidelberg: Springer LNCS Series.
[18] Novak, J.D., & Gowin, D.B. (1984). Learning how to
learn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[19] Novak, J. & Wurst, M. (in press). Collaborative
knowledge visualization for cross-community learning. In S.O. Tergan, & T. Keller (Eds.), Knowledge and information
visualization. Searching for synergies. New York /
Heidelberg: Springer LNCS Series.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[20] Paolucci, M., Suthers, D., & Weiner, A. (1995).
Belvédère: stimulating student’s critical discussion. CHI95
Conference Companion, Interactive Posters, 7 - 11 May,
Denver, CO (pp. 123 - 124).
[21] Rakes, G.C. (1996). Using the Internet as a tool in a
resource-based
learning
environment.
Educational
Technology, 36(5), 52-56.
[22] Shneiderman, B. (1996). The eyes have it: A task by
data type taxonomy for information visualizations,
Proceedings IEEE Visual Languages, pages 336-343,
Boulder, CO, Sept 1996. http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/shnei
derman96eyes.html Washington: IEEE.
[23] Siemens, G. (2005). Connectivism. A learning theory
for the digital age. Int. J. of Instructional Technology &
Distance Learning, 2(1). Available online January 20, 2005:
http://www.itdl.org/Journal/Jan_05/article01.htm.
[24] Suthers, D. (1998). Representations for scaffolding
collaborative inquiry on ill-structured problems. Online
available April 2005: http://lilt.ics.hawaii.edu/lilt/papers/
1998/Suthers-aera98.pdf

Proceedings of the CSCL ’97: The Second International
Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning
(pp. 272 - 279). Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
[26] Tergan, S.-O. (2003). Managing knowledge with
computer-based mapping tools. In D. Lassner, & C. Mc
Naught (Eds.), Proceedings of the ED-Media 2003 World
Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia &
Telecommunication (pp. 2514 - 2517), June 23-28, 2003.
Honolulu, Hawaii (USA). Norfolk, VA, USA: AACE.
[27] Tergan, S.-O. (in press). Digital concept maps for
managing knowledge and knowledge resources In S.-O.
Tergan, & T. Keller (Eds.), Knowledge and information
visualization. Searching for synergies. New York /
Heidelberg: Springer LNCS Series.
[28] van Gelder, T. J. (2002). Enhancing Deliberation
Through Computer-Supported Argument Visualization (pdf
file). In P. Kirschner & S. Buckingham Shum & C. Carr
(Eds.), Visualizing Argumentation: Software Tools for
Collaborative and Educational Sense-Making (pp. 97-115).
London: Springer-Verlag. Online available March 5, 2005:
http://www.philosophy.unimelb.edu.au/reason/papers/Enhan
cing_Deliberation.pdf

[25] Suthers, D.D., Toth, E.E., & Weiner, A. (1997). An
integrative approach to implementing collaborative inquiry
in classroom. In R. Hall, N. Miyake, & N. Enyedy (Eds.),

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

