Appraisal of standards for 3D City Models
Katja Ewald, Volker Coors
University of Applied Sciences, Stuttgart, Germany
{Katja.Ewald, Volker.Coors}@hft-stuttgart.de
Abstract
3D City models have a broad field of applications.
One of these is the support of an interdisciplinary,
participative planning process. Such a process is the
aim of the INTERREG IIIB Project "Virtual
Environment Planning Systems" (VEPS). To be able to
build a system that integrates different data sources
and formats it is necessary to have common interfaces
and data standards. In this article some of the
modelling, data, and distribution standards for 3D City
Models will be discussed.

1. Introduction
3D City Models can make the regional planning
process more comprehensive and more transparent for
all parties involved, as less interpretation of 2D maps is
necessary. Especially citizens without any training in
interpreting planning maps benefit from an intuitive
understanding of 3D-Models instead of 2D-Maps. Eplanning can also involve architects who can upload
their plans to an existing 3D-planning model as
alternative scenarios.
But so far the possibilities with the already
existing technology are limited [6]: Real interactivity,
interoperability and fast and secure data transmission
are mostly impossible.
Implementing a technology that enables a two-way
consultation process in e-planning is one of the goals
of the INTERREG IIIB Project "Virtual Environment
Planning Systems" (VEPS). The project aims at
improving knowledge transfer relating to spatial
planning and at contributing to modernisation of the
planning process. The focus of the project is on
planning at a local level within North West Europe
(NWE).
The project objectives are to:

1. "Develop a common architecture and
methodology for 3D-Internet-GIS drawing on transnational experience and the knowledge of planning
regulations and sustainability metrics in NWE, to
enable citizens to view and respond to planned changes
via home PCs"
2. "Refine and implement a test-bed system in a
number of demonstrations in the NWE region, thereby
increasing trans-national experience. Evaluate and
iteratively refine the methodology and the system
architecture and applicable open standards."
As part of the test-bed system, the HfT Stuttgart
will implement a demonstration application for a
planning process in the city of Stuttgart.
As citizens at their Home PCs should be able to
participate in the planning process, and to view and
interactively change the 3D model, a delivery via the
Internet will be employed. Thus, the amount of data
that needs to be sent is critical as users are usually not
willing to wait very long.
The way 3D data is modeled and visualized has an
important impact on the time aspect. Employing
different Levels of Detail is one way of handling big
data sets. Compression of data is another promising
way of reducing the time needed for downloads.
The architecture of the VEPS-system should be
interoperable - as different parties might upload their
models - and intelligent - as calculations and
interpretations should be part of the system.
As the planning process is quite complex and
involves many different sources of data it is critical to
integrate the different data sources into one system.
Due to the wide variety of data formats and the
financial situation of municipalities it cannot be
expected that the different authorities will transform
their multiple data formats into one. Thus, interfaces
must be used to bring the data into one system.
Standardised data formats are necessary to distribute
the data via Internet.
The idea of building a geoportal using the Web 3D
Service as interface seems to be most suitable. For data

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

distribution VRML 97 is the most common standard at
the time being but offers little more than visualization.
GML3 and specifically CityGML, which is being
developed by the Special Interest Group 3D of the
initiative
Geodata
Infrastructure
North-Rhine
Westphalia in Germany seem to be more promising in
terms of modeling and analysis.
These concepts will be discussed in the following
paragraphs.

Since the connection information in TINs builds
up huge amounts of data, a Grid structure is used to
store extensive DTMs for 3D-models. The height
information of the regular distributed Terrain points is
interpolated in such a way that the model of the surface
best fits the terrain [7].
DTMs can be captured by Laser scanning or
Photogrammetric methods.

2.2 3D-Building models

2. Standards in City Modeling
Any city model that is aimed at serving multiple
tasks should consist of a Digital Terrain Model (DTM),
3D-Buildings, 3D-Objects, and Textures. For each of
those elements different approaches of data collection,
data storage, and data distribution exist. In the
following sections some of the today most common
approaches will be discussed. The focus is set on
modeling of buildings rather than terrain-modeling.

2.1 DTM
The Digital Terrain Model (DTM) as border area
between the earth surface and the air usually consists
of irregular or regular distributed Terrain points,
Height points and edges. For smaller DTMs and for
fast visualization the terrain is usually stored as
Triangulated Irregular Network (TIN). With the
irregular distributed Terrain points triangular meshes
are generated [7].

Different approaches to the task of representing
the geometry and topology of 3D-objects exist.
From CAD systems it is known that 3D-models
can be distinguished in wire frame-models (a cubic
would-be build of 12 edges), boundary models (cubic
build of 6 surfaces) and volume models (cubic as body)
[1].
Geometric modeling in 3D City Models is most
commonly done with boundary representation (B-Rep),
which represents the body by faces, edges, nodes, and
the topological connectivity of those elements. For
representing an object all enclosing faces are
aggregated into a unique representation.
The boundary representation has the advantage of
not mixing topological and geometric information.
Also a quick visualization and application of texture on
any of the surfaces is possible.
But because it is difficult to model with B-Reps,
Constructive Solid Geometry is much more suitable for
CAD modeling.

Figure 1. 3D-Model of the city of Stuttgart in LoD 1, ¤ Stadtmessungsamt Stuttgart.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

The Constructive Solid Geometry (CSG), which is
often used in CAD-Systems, builds objects using
volume primitives such as cylinders, cubes, and
spheres [1]. This enables a simple way of representing
complex buildings and other man-made objects.
A problem is that the construction is not unique.
Thus, different representations can form the same
geometry. Spatial analysis is difficult to handle, too,
and textures cannot be applied easily as the single
surfaces cannot be dealt with on at a time. Due to those
reasons it is not very often used in complex 3D-City
Models.

2.3 Level of Detail
Quite often it is necessary to have not only one but
multiple representations of a model with different
accuracy. Therefore, different Levels of Details (LoD)
have been described. The following explanations are
based on the suggestions of the Städtetag North-Rhine
Westphalia [7].
LoD 0: Regional model (2.5D) contains only the
DTM with Texture or Orthophoto. The terrain is
classified according to land use and no buildings or
roofs are modeled. The accuracy is usually less then
5m in height and position.
LoD 1: A simple city model where buildings are
modeled as blocks with flat roofs. The models are

generalized and no textures are applied. The accuracy
in height and position is 5 meters or less.
Laser scanning is usually used to capture data for
the Levels 0 and 1[12]. Buildings of LoD 1 can also
quite easily be computed from the footprints of
cadastral data if some height information like number
of stories is available as well.
LoD 2: A City model with roof shapes and
textures for buildings and terrain. Also Vegetation may
be included in this LoD. The accuracy in height is 2
meters, in position 1 meter. All objects of a footprint of
at least 4 by 4 meters have to be considered. Usually
photogrammetric methods are used to derive the
models. Textures can either be photo realistic, which
means the buildings have to be photographed digitally.
Or some synthetic textures can be applied. Because of
their regularity they need less storage space and no
disturbing objects like trees or cars parking in front of
the building have to be removed.
LoD 3: This LoD includes highly differentiated,
architectural models of buildings, Vegetation, and
street furniture. The roof shapes have their real form
and the accuracy is 0.5 meters in height and position.
All objects with minimal footprints of 2 by 2 meters
have to be considered.
LoD 4: Model of the interior of buildings, which
includes constructive elements and openings such as
windows and doors. The roof shapes have their real

Figure 2. Several detail levels of Darmstadt city, taken from [11].

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

form and accuracy is 0.2 meters in height and position.
Objects in LoD 3 and 4 are usually manually
modeled in CAAD systems or captured by terrestrial
laserscan.
Using LoDs has the advantage that visualization
for the user can be much faster for example when using
a high LoD in the front and lower LoDs in the distance.
For a number of applications and analysis the highest
LoD is unnecessary and using simplified models can
decrease computing time. This is especially important
for Internet applications that need very small amounts
of data.
Two main concepts for storing LoDs exist [10]:
Using the concept of Static LoD a small number of
different LoDs for each object are explicitly stored. For
visualization, exactly one of those LoDs is used at a
time. In coarser LoDs, groups of objects can be
aggregated into one object (e.g. neighboring houses
can be modeled as a block), which reduces the
complexity. This concept is realized in a number of
software products and is widely spread in 3D-City
Modeling.
In contrast the concept of dynamic LoD stores all
generated LoDs implicitly in the data structure. This
allows a high number of LoDs and an almost infinitely
variable selection of representations. For very complex
models view-dependent dynamic LoDs can be used to
increase the visualization speed.
Dynamic LoD works well for digital terrain
models [9]. For architectural models in LoD 3 and 4,
both static and dynamic LoD are well established.
However, in an urban model of LoD 1 and 2 each
single object has a quite simple geometry. There is a
large amount of simple objects. In order to handle such
kind of models, the aggregation of objects is much
more promising than simplification of single objects
[8].

context the Web 3D Service (W3DS), a web service
for three-dimensional data, is a main breakthrough.

3.1 GML
The well known 3D-graphics standard Virtual
Reality Modeling Language (VRML) is the most used
standard for visualization of 3D-Models today. As it
has some major drawbacks it is necessary to implement
other standards for more sophisticated scenarios and
3D-GIS.
Especially for storing 3D-data the XML-based
Geography Markup Language (GML3) of the Open
Spatial Consortium (OGC) is an excellent solution [2].
GML is an encoding standard for geographic
information, which is based on an abstract model of
geography. Furthermore, GML is the native data
format of OGC’s Web Feature Service (WFS), which
enables access and manipulation of geodata within a
spatial data infrastructure through the Internet [3].
Since Version 3, GML is based on the Geometryand Topology-Modeling of ISO 19107 and can
represent geospatial phenomena like 3D geometry [4].
It is built on a class hierarchy, which allows to model
features (spatial and nonspatial objects), geometry, and
topology (Fig.2).

3. Infrastructure for access and
distribution of 3D models
3D-Models have a wide field of applications as in
telecommunication, disaster management, geology, and
city planning to name a few. To be able to use the 3dimensional data for different purposes and different
applications it is necessary to have standards for
storage and distribution of the 3D-models. Also for eplanning as it is the concept of the VEPS-project,
standards and interfaces play a major role. In this
context Geography Markup Language (GML3) is an
important standard.
Distribution via Internet is becoming more and
more important in all application fields and the idea of
Geoportals is tempting for the 3D-community. In this

Figure 3. GML Class Hierarchy © OGC 2003 [4]

3.2 CityGML
As GML is an abstract concept, application
specific implementations have to be defined. The
Special Interest Group 3D (SIG 3D) of the initiative

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Geodata Infrastructure North-Rhine Westphalia (GDI
NRW) is currently working on an implementation
schema for 3D city models called CityGML [3].
As it is based on GML3 syntactic interoperability
is achieved.
Semantic interoperability is gained through
common definitions of objects, attributes, and their
interrelationships defined in the semantic schema of
CityGML. Semantic classes include buildings and
other man-made artifacts, vegetation objects, water
bodies, and transportation facilities.
Relations link objects on the semantic level to the
geometric-topological objects on the spatial level. Both
levels can be structured into the LoD-schema explained
above.
The representation of the spatial objects is based
on the Boundary Representation (see paragraph 2.2).
The DTM may be specified as Grid, TIN, by break
lines or by mass points. All of these types are
implemented by using standard GML elements.
There are a number of other concepts in CityGML
that cope with special problems of city modeling such
as ClosureSurface (for computing volume of open
objects and model entrances of subsurface objects) or
TerrainIntersection curve (a curve representing the
position where building and terrain touch in order to
avoid gaps at different LoDs).
As CityGML is addressing the specific problems
and the complexity of modeling huge city models, it
might become an important data format in this area.

3.3 Web 3D Service (W3DS)
The Web 3D Service (W3DS) is not yet a standard
but so far an OGC discussion paper on which the
following descriptions are based [5].
W3DS is based on the Web Map Service standard
(WMS) and the Web Terrain Service (WTS). It
delivers 3D scene graphs instead of two dimensional
maps as well as service metadata. Therefore, the two
service operations GetCapabilities and GetScene are
specified.
As the scene graphs will be rendered by the client
(medium client) different types of 3D data can be
combined into one interactive scene graph. It is also
important to know that with the W3DS not the geodata
itself but visualization is provided. Thus, data from
different providers can be received and combined at
the same time via Internet.
The answer to the request GetCapabilities is an
XML document containing service metadata about the
3D-data and provided services.
The request GetScene delivers a 3D scene graph.
The standard, mandatory output format for this scene
graph is VRML 97. But other formats are strongly

advised. When requesting 3D scene information about
the Spatial Reference System, the requested area
(Bounding box), the output format, and the version of
the W3DS have to be provided. It is also possible to
make specifications about the perspective, specific
layers or environmental settings.
In the course of the Pilot 3D of the SIG 3D NRW
a number of prototypical implementations of W3DS
have been realized. Future work on the W3DS may
include a “GetFeatureInfo” operation, environmental
enhancements, additional output formats, and styled
Layer Descriptors.
As can be seen in 2D-Internet GIS the
functionality of web services is gaining importance
very quickly. As the application fields for 3D-Models
are very extensive and often many different parties
hold the data for a whole region, it is important to
provide these kinds of services for 3D-data as well.

Conclusions
Although a number of standards already exist, in
the area of 3D modeling focus was only set on
visualization rather than on interactivity or on
consistent modeling. Thus, VRML 97 is the most used
standard for 3D models today. With the use of
application schemas of GML3 the focus might be
shifted. With the increasing importance of Internet
applications it is especially important that GML3 is
applicable to Internet communication and plays a
major role in OGC’s Web Services.
Data integrity is one of the big issues, too, which
are not solved yet. Especially the integration of CAD
and GIS data remains a major problem, as no common,
standardized interfaces exist.
The recent announcement of OGC and NIBS
(National Institute of Building Sciences) of their
collaboration [13] might be a step forward here. The
initial focus of the cooperation is likely to be the
creation of an ifcXML- ifcGML model to improve the
sharing of IFC (Industry Foundation Classes) models
between geospatial and CAD communities. IFC is
developed by the International Alliance for
Interoperability (IAI) as standard for the CAD world.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the INTERREG IIIB for
co-operation and funding and the City of Stuttgart for
making available the 3D-Model of Stuttgart.

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

Martin Breunig. Räumliche Repräsentationen. In
Volker
Coors
and
Alexander
Zipf:
3DGeoinformationssysteme.
Heidelberg,
Herbert
Wichmann Verlag, Hüthig GmbH & Co. KG. 2005.
Volker
Coors
and
Alexander
Zipf.
3DGeoinformationssysteme.
Heidelberg,
Herbert
Wichmann Verlag, Hüthig GmbH & Co. KG. 2005.
Thomas H. Kolbe, Gerhard Gröger and Lutz Plümer.
CityGML – Interoperable Access to 3D City Models.
In Proc. Of the International Symposium on
Geoinformation for Disaster Management GI4DM
2005 in Delft, Netherlands. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer.
Simon Cox, Paul Daisey, Ron Lake, Clemens Portele,
Arliss Whiteside. OpenGIS® Geography Markup
Language (GML) Implementation Specification. OGC
02-023r4. 2003.
Udo Quadt and Thomas H. Kolbe. Web 3D Service
Version
0.3.0.
OGC
Draft
Implementation
Specification. OGC 04-096. 2004.
Gerhard Gröger and Thomas H. Kolbe. 3DStadtmodellierung auf der Basis internationaler GIStandards. In Volker Coors and Alexander Zipf: 3DGeoinformationssysteme.
Heidelberg,
Herbert
Wichmann Verlag, Hüthig GmbH & Co. KG. 2005.

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Information Visualisation (IV’05)
1550-6037/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

AG 3D-Stadtmodelle des AK Kommunales
Vermessungs- und Liegenschaftswesen des Städtetages
NRW. 3D-Stadtmodelle – Eine Orientierungshilfe für
die Städte in NRW.
V. Coors. Feature-preserving Simplification in Webbased 3D-GIS. In: Butz, Andreas et al. (Eds.):
International Symposium on Smart Graphics.
Proceedings 2001. New York. ACM Press, 2001, pp.
22-27
H. Hoppe. Smooth View Dependent Level-of-Detail
control and its Application in Terrain Rendering.
Proceedings of IEEE Visualization 98, pp. 35-42, 1998
Luebke et al.: Level of Detail for 3D Graphics, Morgan
Kaufmann, 2003
V.Coors, S. Flick. Integrating Levels of Detail in a
Web-based 3D-GIS. 6th ACM Symposium on
Geographic Information Systems (ACM GIS 98),
Washington D.C., USA, 1998.
N. Haala and C. Brenner. Extraction of buildings and
trees in urban environments. In ISPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing. 54(2-3), p.130137. 1999.
OGC Press release. OGC and NIBS Announce
Collaboration. http://portal.opengeospatial.org/public/
pdf/pr_pdf.php?prid=212. 31.01.2005.

