Visualizing Data with Bounded Uncertainty
Chris Olston∗
Stanford University
olston@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Visualization is a powerful way to facilitate data analysis, but it is crucial that visualization systems explicitly
convey the presence, nature, and degree of uncertainty
to users. Otherwise, there is a danger that data will
be falsely interpreted, potentially leading to inaccurate
conclusions. A common method for denoting uncertainty is to use error bars or similar techniques designed
to convey the degree of statistical uncertainty. While
uncertainty can often be modeled statistically, a second
form of uncertainty, bounded uncertainty, can also arise
that has very different properties than statistical uncertainty. Error bars should not be used for bounded uncertainty because they do not convey the correct properties,
so a different technique should be used instead. In this
paper we describe a technique for conveying bounded
uncertainty in visualizations and show how it can be
applied systematically to common displays of abstract
charts and graphs. Interestingly, it is not always possible to show the exact degree of uncertainty, and in some
cases it can only be displayed approximately.
Keywords: uncertainty visualization, bounded uncertainty

1 Introduction
In most data-intensive applications, uncertainty is a fact of life.
For example, in scientific applications, error-prone measurements
or incomplete sampling often result in uncertain data. Another example is financial analysis, where it is common for some data to
represent uncertain projections about future behavior. Even when
it is possible to gather precise data, there are many real-time applications, such as network monitoring, mobile object tracking, and
wireless ecosystem monitoring, in which uncertainty may be introduced intentionally to conserve system resources while data is
being transmitted or processed. When data is uncertain, it is critically important that analysis tools, including information visualization tools, make users aware of the presence, nature, and degree of uncertainty in the data as these factors can greatly impact
decision-making. If users are misinformed about the uncertainty
∗ Research supported by a National Science Foundation graduate research fellowship.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Jock D. Mackinlay
Palo Alto Research Center
mackinlay@parc.com

associated with their data, they may draw inaccurate conclusions,
potentially leading to costly mistakes.
A report by the US Department of Commerce National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) [TK94] identifies two
predominant forms of uncertainty, which we call statistical uncertainty and bounded uncertainty. Statistical and bounded uncertainty have dramatically different meanings. Statistical uncertainty is typically captured by a potentially infinite distribution of
possible values with a peak indicating the most likely estimate. In
contrast, with bounded uncertainty no distribution of values can
be assumed, but the exact value is known to lie inside an interval
defined by precise lower and upper bounds.
Pang et al. [PWL97] argue, as we do, that uncertainty should
be presented along with data in visualization applications. After discussing traditional techniques for showing statistical uncertainty such as error bars, they propose an extensive suite of techniques for conveying uncertainty in scientific visualization applications. Many of these techniques can be adapted to information
visualization scenarios. However, techniques for conveying statistical uncertainty tend to be misleading when used for bounded
uncertainty for two reasons. First, users have been trained to interpret them as probabilistic bounds on an unbounded distribution
of possible values. Second, since error bars are typically used
in conjunction with an estimated exact value, the existence of a
single most likely value is strongly implied.
Visualizations should clearly differentiate between the two
forms of uncertainty, making it obvious whether the uncertainty
is statistical or bounded in addition to conveying the degree of
uncertainty. Therefore, we advocate the use of two distinct techniques for the two forms of uncertainty. To convey statistical uncertainty, it is appropriate to display the most likely value along
with error bars or other glyphs as in [PWL97]. To convey bounded
uncertainty, we advocate a systematic technique based on widening the boundaries and positions of graphical elements and rendering the uncertain region in fuzzy ink. We show how to apply
this technique, which we call ambiguation, to common displays
of abstract charts and graphs. Interestingly, it is not always possible to show the exact degree of uncertainty, and in some cases it
can only be displayed approximately.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. We begin
by discussing related work in Section 2. We then formally define
the two forms of uncertainty in Section 3. Then, in Section 4
we describe our systematic approach to conveying the presence,
form, and degree of uncertainty.

2 Related Work
In certain visualization scenarios, data may be unavailable for
display or even purposefully omitted for a variety of possible
reasons, giving rise to uncertainty. The importance of visually
informing the user of the absence of data has been identified
[WO98] and techniques for doing so have been proposed in, e.g.,
Clouds [HAC+ 99] and Restorer [TCS94]. We focus on a different
type of uncertainty where all the data is present but precise values
are not known.
Numerous ways to convey the degree of uncertainty in data
using overlayed annotations and glyphs have been proposed, as
in, e.g., [PWL97]. Another approach is to make the positions of
grid lines used for positional reference ambiguous [CR00]. Uncertainty can also be indicated by adjusting the color, hue, transparency, etc. of graphical features as in, e.g., [DK97, Mac92,
vdWvdGG98]. Some techniques for conveying uncertainty by
widening the boundaries of graphical elements have also been
proposed. For example, in [WSF+ 96], the degree of uncertainty
in the angle of rotation of vectors is encoded in the width of the
vector arrows. Also, [PWL97] proposes varying the thickness of
three-dimensional surfaces to indicate the degree of uncertainty.
To our knowledge, however, none have focused on accurately
and unambiguously conveying not only the presence and degree
but also the form of uncertainty in data, as we do. We also believe that our work is the first to establish systematic methods for
conveying bounded uncertainty by widening the boundaries and
positions of graphical elements in abstract charts and graphs. The
approach in [FWR99] for displaying cluster densities gives a visual appearance similar to our ambiguated line charts (discussed
later) but serves a different purpose.

3 Forms of Uncertainty
In this paper we consider two commonplace forms of uncertainty,
as described in [TK94], [PWL97], and elsewhere. Consider a numeric data object O whose exact value V is not known with certainty. There are two predominant ways in which partial knowledge about the possible values of V can be represented: statistical uncertainty and bounded uncertainty. Under statistical uncertainty, the uncertain value of a data object can be represented
in a number of ways, depending on the statistical model. In one
common case, when errors follow a normal distribution, the uncertain value of a data object can be represented by a three-tuple
E, D, P of real numbers, where D ≥ 0 and P ∈ (0, 1]. Here,
E is an estimate that represents the most likely candidate for the
unknown value V , and P is the probability that V lies in the confidence interval [E − D, E + D]. Typically, P is fixed at, say,
P = 0.95, and D is chosen so that the value V lies inside the
confidence interval [E − D, E + D] with probability P . Under
bounded uncertainty, there is some numeric interval [L, H] that is
guaranteed to contain the exact value V , i.e., L ≤ V ≤ H. Under
bounded uncertainty, the probability that V is outside the interval
is zero, but, unlike with statistical uncertainty, no assumptions can
be made about the probability distribution of possible values inside the interval.
Both forms of uncertainty commonly occur in scientific and
other applications [TK94]. For example, bounded uncertainty
can occur when measurements are taken using a device having an unknown degree of imprecision that lies within known

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
2
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

bounds. Statistical uncertainty can occur, for example, when single or repeated measurements are taken in conditions exhibiting
experimental variability, often resulting in an unbounded probability distribution over possible values featuring a central peak.
Both bounded and statistical uncertainty can also occur in emerging data delivery paradigms that intentionally introduce uncertainty for performance reasons, e.g., [HAC+ 99, OW02]. In these
paradigms there is often the opportunity to adjust the uncertainty
levels interactively, unlike with traditional sources of uncertainty.
In the extended version of this paper [OM02], we discuss interactive data delivery techniques that exhibit these properties.

4 Representing Uncertain Data Visually
Having described the two common forms of uncertainty and some
ways they can occur, we are now ready to discuss ways to represent uncertain data visually. In most abstract charts and graphs,
data values are graphically encoded either in the positions of
graphical elements, as in a scatterplot, or in the extent (size) of
elements along one or more dimensions, as in a bar chart. When
the underlying data is uncertain, we believe it is appropriate to
clearly indicate not only the presence and degree but also the form
of uncertainty. As described in Section 3, statistical and bounded
uncertainty encode two dramatically different distributions of potential values. Due to this key difference, using the same display
technique to represent both forms of uncertainty could mislead the
user. Instead, we advocate two alternative methods for conveying
uncertainty in the positions or extents of graphical representations
of data: error bars for statistical uncertainty and ambiguation for
bounded uncertainty. We begin by describing these general techniques and then show how they can be applied to some common
types of charts and graphs.

4.1 Error Bars
Error bars and their variants have been well studied as a suitable
means to convey statistical uncertainty [Cle85, Tuf01, Tuk77].
For each uncertain data value to be represented visually, the idea
is to use the normal display technique to render the estimate E in
place of the unknown exact value V . Error bars are then added to
indicate uncertainty in the position or boundary location in proportion to the size of the confidence interval [E − D, E + D].
Some standard uses of error bars are illustrated in the upper left
quadrant of Figure 1. When uncertainty occurs in bounded rather
than statistical form, it is important to avoid the use of error bars
since the accepted interpretation implies a potentially unbounded
distribution extending beyond the error bars. Even worse, rendering an exact estimate using the normal display technique strongly
implies the existence of a most likely value E, but in bounded
uncertainty no most likely value can be assumed.

4.2 Ambiguation
To convey the presence and degree of bounded uncertainty, we
propose the use of a technique we call ambiguation. The main
idea behind ambiguation when uncertain data is encoded in the
extent of a graphical element is to widen the boundary to suggest a
range of possible boundary locations and therefore a range of possible extents. The ambiguous region between possible boundaries
can be drawn as graphical fuzz, giving an effect that resembles

error bars

absolute

bar chart

ambiguation

scatterplot

bar chart

line chart

100%

line chart

100%

100%

50%

50%

0%

0%

stacked bar chart

scatterplot

stacked bar chart

or

pie chart

pie chart

Figure 1: Error bars and ambiguation applied to some common chart types.
ink smearing. A straightforward application of this technique is
illustrated in the ambiguated bar chart in the upper right quadrant
of Figure 1. To indicate positional uncertainty, rather than drawing a crisp representation of the graphical element at a particular
position, the representation is elongated in one or more directions
and drawn using fuzz. A simple application of this technique is illustrated in the ambiguated scatterplot in the upper right quadrant
of Figure 1.
Other variations of boundary or position ambiguation may be
possible, but the necessary feature is that no particular estimate
or most likely value should be indicated. Rather, the entire range
of possible values for the boundary or position of the graphical
element should be presented with equal weight. This key characteristic is in contrast with error bars and other approaches such as
fuzzygrams and gradient range symbols [Har99] that emphasize a
known probability distribution over data values.

4.3 Discussion
The complementary use of error bars and ambiguation makes the
presence, degree, and form of uncertainty clear. First, these techniques make it easy to identify the specific data values that are
uncertain by suggesting imprecision in the graphical property (position or boundary location) in which the values are encoded. For
bounded uncertainty, the position or boundary is made ambiguous using fuzzy ink, and for statistical uncertainty, error bars are
added to visually suggest the possibility of a shift in position or
boundary location. Second, these techniques allow the degree of
uncertainty to be read in a straightforward manner using the same
scale used to interpret the data itself. Finally, the use of two visu-

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
3
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

ally distinct techniques makes it clear which of the two forms of
uncertainty is present, and each technique conveys the properties
of the form of uncertainty it represents.
Ambiguation and error bars work well when data is encoded
as the position or extent of graphical elements. Coping with displays that use other graphical attributes such as color and texture
to encode data is left as a topic for future work. In the absence of
analogous techniques for other graphical attributes, when uncertainty is present it is desirable to only use charts and graphs that
encode data using position and extent alone so the presence, degree, and form of uncertainty can be clearly and unambiguously
depicted.

4.4 Application to Common Chart Types
Figure 1 illustrates how error bars and ambiguation can be applied
to some common chart types (exhaustive illustration on all known
chart types is omitted for brevity). While these techniques are
general and can be applied to a broad range of displays that use
position and extent to encode data, we focus on abstract charts and
graphs, which can be classified into two categories: absolute displays and 100% displays. In absolute displays, each data value is
given a graphical representation whose extent or position is plotted on an absolute scale. Examples of absolute displays include
simple bar charts (which encode data in the upper boundaries of
bars), scatterplots (which encode data in the positions of points),
and line graphs (which encode data in the positions of points and
lines). It is generally straightforward to add error bars or apply
ambiguation to boundaries and positions in absolute displays such

as those displayed in the top half of Figure 1.1
In 100% displays, the scale ranges from 0% to 100%, and
n values V1 , V2 , . . . , Vn are plotted on this relative scale. Each
value Vi is plotted as a graphical element whose size is proporVi
of the total over all n values.
tional to the fraction
1≤j≤n

Vj

Examples of 100% displays include stacked bar charts and pie
charts. Indicating uncertainty in 100% displays is more challenging than doing so in absolute displays. In 100% displays,
the graphical elements usually contact each other directly, so the
boundary between two elements indicates the difference between
them in terms of relative contribution to the total. To inform the
user of statistical uncertainty in the locations of these boundaries,
error bars can be drawn adjacent to the boundaries. Alternatively,
for pie charts the wedges can be separated, leaving space for error bars extending directly from the boundaries between wedges.
The lower left quadrant of Figure 1 illustrates these techniques.
Bounded uncertainty can be indicated by inserting an ambiguous
region of fuzzy ink between each pair of elements whose shared
boundary is uncertain, as illustrated in the lower right quadrant
of Figure 1. It turns out that determining the sizes to use for the
fuzzy and solid regions in an ambiguated 100% display is not trivial because each region of fuzz shares a border with two solid data
regions. In fact, it is not always possible to show the exact degree
of uncertainty, and in some cases it can only be displayed approximately.
In the extended version of this paper [OM02], we specify an
algorithm that approximates the degree of uncertainty to make it
displayable while minimizing the overall loss in accuracy. In addition, in [OM02] we consider new data delivery paradigms that
offer mechanisms for interactive control over uncertainty levels,
but whose use may result in hidden side effects. We propose interfaces that offer control of uncertainty levels to the user in ways
that encourage careful use of these facilities.

References
[Cle85]

W. S. Cleveland. The Elements of Graphing
Data. Wadsworth, 1985.

[CR00]

A. Cedilnik and P. Rheingans. Procedural annotation of uncertain information. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Visualization Conference, pages 77–
84, Salt Lake City, Utah, October 2000.

[DK97]

[FWR99]

T. J. Davis and C. P. Keller. Modelling and visualizing multiple spatial uncertainties. Computers
and Geosciences, 23(4):397–408, 1997.

[HAC+ 99]

J. M. Hellerstein, R. Avnur, A. Chou, C. Hidber,
C. Olston, V. Raman, T. Roth, and P. Haas. Interactive data analysis with CONTROL. IEEE
Computer, August 1999.

[Har99]

R. L. Harris. Information Graphics. Oxford University Press, 1999.

[Mac92]

A. M. MacEachren. Visualizing uncertain information. Cartographic Perspective, (13):10–19,
1992.

[OM02]

C. Olston and J. Mackinlay.
Visualizing
data with bounded uncertainty. Technical report, Stanford University Computer Science
Department, 2002. http://dbpubs.stanford.edu/
pub/2002-20.

[OW02]

C. Olston and J. Widom. Approximate caching
for continuous queries over distributed data
sources.
Technical report, Stanford University Computer Science Department, 2002.
http://dbpubs.stanford.edu/pub/2002-8.

[PWL97]

A. T. Pang, C. M. Wittenbrink, and S. K. Lodha.
Approaches to uncertainty visualization. The Visual Computer, pages 370–390, November 1997.

[TCS94]

R. Twiddy, J. Cavallo, and S. M. Shiri. Restorer:
A visualization technique for handling missing
data. In Proceedings of the IEEE Visualization
Conference, pages 212–216, Washington, D.C.,
October 1994.

[TK94]

B. N. Taylor and C. E. Kuyatt. Guidelines
for evaluating and expressing the uncertainty
of nist measurement results. Technical report,
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Note 1297, Gaithersburg, Maryland, 1994.

[Tuf01]

E. R. Tufte. The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information, Second Edition. Graphics Press,
2001.

[Tuk77]

J. W. Tukey. Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison
Wesley, 1977.

[vdWvdGG98] F. J. M. van der Wel, L. C. van der Gaag, and
B. G. H. Gorte. Visual exploration of uncertainty
in remote-sensing classification. Computers and
Geosciences, 24(4):335–343, 1998.
[WO98]

A. Woodruff and C. Olston.
Iconification
and omission in information exploration.
In SIGCHI ’98 Workshop on Innovation
and Evaluation in Information Exploration
Interfaces, Los Angeles, CA, April 1998.
http://www.fxpal.com/ConferencesWorkshops/
CHI98IE/submissions/woodruff.htm.

[WSF+ 96]

C. M. Wittenbrink, E. Saxon, J. J. Furman,
A. T. Pang, and S. K. Lodha. Glyphs for
visualizing uncertainty in environmental vector
fields. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, pages 266–279, September
1996.

Y. Fua, M. O. Ward, and E. A. Rundensteiner. Navigating hierarchies with structurebased brushes. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, pages 58–
64, San Francisco, California, October 1999.

1 Displays

such as stacked bar charts that are not normalized to sum
to 100% are problematic when used in conjunction with these uncertainty
indicators because the interpretation can be ambiguous. For example, in
an absolute stacked bar chart, an error bar or a fuzzy region appearing at
the top of the stack can be interpreted either as uncertainty in the topmost
element or as uncertainty in the overall height of the stack (the sum over
all elements).

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
4
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

