Process Visualization with Levels of Detail
Kreˇsimir Matkovi´c, Helwig Hauser,
VRVis Research Center
in Vienna, Austria,
http://www.VRVis.at/
Matkovic, Hauser @ VRVis.at

Reinhard Sainitzer,
Imagination
Computer Services
Vienna, Austria
sainitzer@imagination.at

Abstract
In this paper we demonstrate how we apply information visualization techniques to process monitoring. Virtual instruments are enhanced using history encoding – instruments are capable of displaying the current value and the
value from the near past. Multi-instruments are capable
of displaying several data sources simultaneously. Levels of detail for virtual instruments are introduced where
the screen area is inversely proportional to the information
amount displayed. Furthermore the monitoring system is
enhanced by using: 3D anchoring – attachment of instruments to positions on a 3D model –, collision avoidance –
a physically based spring model prevents instruments from
overlapping –, and focus+context rendering – giving the
user a possibility to examine particular instruments in detail without loosing the context information.
Keywords: process visualization, information visualization, levels of detail, focus+context visualization,

1. Introduction
Information visualization (InfoViz) has emerged as an important field of research in the past few years. Process visualization as one of its sub-fields is directly related, but
nevertheless much older. Processes have been visualized
and monitored using traditional, analog instruments since
the early days of industrialization. Analog instruments were
followed by the use of digital instruments, and finally, computers are increasingly used to visualize and monitor processes.
There are a lot of software tools available, offering a
comfortable and intuitive way for process visualization.
Most of these tools try to mimic conventional instruments,
without taking advantage of well-known InfoViz methodology.
In this paper, we describe how process visualization can
benefit from information visualization. We have improved

and M. Eduard Gr¨oller
Institute of Computer
Graphics and Algorithms
TU Vienna, Austria
groeller@cg.tuwien.ac.at

features of individual instruments, as well as global monitoring features, and finally we developed two applications
which illustrate the methods described in this paper.
Features added to virtual instruments are: history encoding, multi-instruments, and levels of detail (LOD).
Besides augmenting the instruments themselves, the
global monitoring system was improved by adding focus+context (F+C) rendering [3] and collision avoidance.
The above described features will be explained in more
detail using gauge, bar, LED, and numeric instruments. The
bar instrument is an instrument where the length of a solid
bar corresponds to the measured value. It’s analog counterpart is a mercury thermometer. The LED instrument mimics
a single LED and can represent two states in our case. The
numeric instrument displays measured data on a numeric
display as a decimal, hexadecimal, or binary number.

2. New Features for Virtual Instruments
The idea of using virtual instead of classical instruments is
not new. However, most of the virtual instruments try to
mimic real ones, and offer a faster, more comfortable and
more flexible way of arranging a new set of measuring instruments. We improve virtual instruments themselves. We
make them capable of displaying the history of data (history
encoding). Our virtual instruments are also able to simultaneously display several data values within one instrument,
so that divergencies in redundant information are easily recognizable (multi-instruments). Finally, a LOD representation for virtual instruments is introduced.

2.1. History Encoding in Virtual Instruments
It is often important not only to read the current value of
a sensor, but also to get a clue what was the value in the
near past. Of course it is possible to use some kind of oscilloscope instrument or time chart, but their size is often
a limiting factor. We add history encoding to the bar and
gauge instrument. Such an augmented instrument takes no
more place than a common bar/gauge instrument, but gives

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

far more information to the user in a convinient and intuitive style. In the case of the bar instrument, history is encoded through horizontal lines on the left of the numerical
scale. Length and saturation of a line encode the ”recentness” of a value. Figure 1(a) illustrates a bar instrument
without history encoding depicting just the current value.
In figures 1(b)–1(d) data history is depicted.
The same idea has been applied to the gauge instrument.
The history needles in the gauge instrument are reduced to
the needle tips to avoid visual cluttering (Figure 2).

2.2. Multi-Instruments
Common practice in fault tolerant systems, e.g., planes, locomotives, modern cars, etc., is to install several sensors
for the same data. Important system decisions must not be
based on a single measurement alone. If a separate instrument is used for each sensor, it is very hard to see if there
are any deviations in the measurements, unless one value is
significantly different from the others.
In order to make it easier to visualize such cases, we introduce multi-instruments (Figure 2). The multi-bar and
the multi-gauge instrument, display several distinct data
sources simultaneously, but using the same scale. The
multi-bar instrument uses more bars beside each other, and
the multi-gauge instrument uses more needles. The needles have different length, and shorter needles are placed
on top of longer needles, so that the user immediately sees
all the values. If there is a deviation in the values, one (or
more) not matching needle(s) will be easily spotted. Multiinstruments can also be used whenever it is necessary to
visualize related data which does not have to be identical.
In order to make it easier to read the instruments, two
more features are added. First a bullet on the scale indicates the current value. This is especially useful for multiinstruments where the numerical scale is not next to all
bars/needles. Furthermore, an actual-value display is added.
An actual-value display shows the current value as decimal
number in a numeric display. The position of the actualvalue display loosly follows the current data value by using
a running average. Figure 2 shows a multi-bar and a multigauge instrument.

level = 100%). In this way, it is possible to use the LED
instrument if everything is running OK, and than switch to
a higher level on demand.

3. Focus+Context Process Visualization
The LOD idea itself leads to a Focus+Context (F+C) process visualization. The focus+context approach is a wellknown technique in information visualization. The surrounding environment, i.e., the context, makes this approach different from simple zooming-in, where an area is
displayed in another scale but the connection to the environment is lost.
According to Kosara et al. [4] the F+C methods can be
divided into three groups. The first, and widest spread group
of F+C methods are distortion-oriented or spatial methods.
The idea is to distort the display to allow a magnification
of interesting areas without losing the context which will
be displayed on a coarser scale. Examples are: fisheye
views [7, 2], stretched rubber sheets [8], etc. The second
group of methods are dimensional methods, which are suitable for objects with a lot of data associated with them. Objects in focus will be displayed using more dimensions of
the data. An example of such a method is the magic lens [9].
Finally, the last group of F+C methods is called cue methods. These approaches allow the user to select objects in
terms of their features, and not their spatial relations. An
example is the semantic depth of field approach [4] which
blurs different parts of the scene in dependence of their relevance.
Our idea is to use the LOD principle introduced in the
previous section for our F+C approach. The degree of interest corresponds to the level of detail of the instrument. This
can be considered, according to the above introduced categorization as a dimensional F+C method. Increasing the
level of detail, however, increases the size of an instrument,
and instrument overlapping possibly would occur. Some
kind of rearrangement of the instruments should be done
in this case which makes our method a spatial method too.
Therefore, our approach represents a combination of a dimensional and a spatial F+C method.

2.3. Levels of Detail

3.1. 3D Anchoring and Interaction, Collision Avoidance

Multi-instruments have not only the advantage of making it
easier to compare related values, but they save screen space
as well. This led us to the next new feature in process visualization, i.e., levels of detail (LOD). An example follows:
four single bar instruments are drawn at the finest level of
detail, the multi-bar instrument representing the same four
values represents the next lower level, a numeric instrument
which displays the average value and a LED instrument are
further (coarser) levels of detail. Figure 3 illustrates the
example, and gives the area usage for each level (highest

Virtual instruments represent real measuring sensors, that
are placed in a 3D environment, and send data to the system.
The user positions instruments on the screen, specifying the
instruments’ current and desired position. Since the real
sensors exist in a 3D environment, e.g., a racing car, virtual
instruments could be attached to the 3D model of the real
environment and then mapped to the screen. This attachment of an instrument to a 3D position of a 3D model is
called anchoring. In this way, the user can immediately recognize which data is coming from which data source. The

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 1. Solid bar (a), history bar with increasing value (b), two state (c) and constant
value (d) history bar

Figure 2. Bullets and actual value displays in
the multi-bar and multi-gauge instruments

Figure 3. Various LODs, building up a tree of
instruments, with corresponding area sizes

Figure 4. 3D anchoring: virtual instruments
follow the 3D model

user can rotate the 3D model, and the assigned instruments
will follow the movement. Figure 4 shows an example of
four instruments assigned to the four wheels of a schematic
car model.
In principle, anchored instruments, which follow a 3D
model, often would overlap. We developed a collision
avoidance system which will prevent the instruments from
overlapping. The algorithm implemented [6] uses a physically based spring model [1]. The process of automatic
placement is illustrated in figure 5.

Figure 5. Collision avoidance of virtual instruments: (a) start configuration, (b) rearrangement is going on, and (c) final solution

3.2. Focus+Context Rendering
The LOD principle and automatic instrument placement are
used for focus+context rendering. The idea is to use dif-

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 6. Changing the degree of interest

ferent levels of detail for different degrees of interest. The
instruments with the highest degree of interest will be represented using the highest LOD. After a level changes it is
sometimes necessary to rearrange the instruments. Automatic collision avoidance described in section 3.1 is used in
such a case. Figure 6 illustrates the change of levels, and
rearrangement of the instruments.
An instrument’s degree of interest can be increased either
explicitly or implicitly. By explicitly changing the degree of
interest the user selects the instruments that are more interesting.
Implicitly changing the degree of interest is coupled with
predefined, undesired system states. If an unwanted state
occurs, e.g., a value exceeds a predefined range, the instrument’s degree of interest is increased automatically, to notify the user and get his attention.

4. Application and Evaluation
The principles described in this paper are implemented in
a placement prototype [6] and in a commercial application
TTPView 3.0 [10]. The placement prototype realizes focus+context visualization as well as collision avoidance as
described in section 3. The TTPView 3.0 application is far
more complex. It is a commercial product which is intended
to be used on a daily basis.
TTPView is a high-speed bus monitoring tool for the
TTP system. The TTPView 3.0 is easily connected to the
system, and gets all information about existing data sources
from the system. The user can arrange virtual instruments
and monitor the system.

5. Conclusion
This paper presents several novel approaches to process
visualization. We added features to the virtual instruments and we presented enhancements to the entire processvisualization workflow.
The new features added to virtual instruments can be
summarized as: History encoding, which makes it possible
to display the values from the near past together with the
current value. Multi-instruments are capable of displaying
several values simultaneously making it easier to compare
redundant values. The levels-of-detail approach makes it
possible to use instruments of different sizes to represent
the same data.
The advanced features for virtual instruments made it
possible to improve the global monitoring system by applying: The focus+context principle, which allows the user to
explore particular instruments in more detail without loosing the overall context. 3D Anchoring was used to anchor
instruments on the 3D model. Collision Avoidance using
a physically based spring model was implemented to avoid
instrument overlapping.

This paper shows how InfoViz techniques can be applied
to process monitoring and visualization. We did not try only
to mimic the real instruments, but also to enhance them,
and the whole monitoring system, as well. As a result, a
system is realized which offers more information and uses
not much more screen space. It also gives the user more
flexibility. A longer version of this paper [5] as well as a
video are available at http://www.vrvis.at/vis/research/proclod/index.html.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to W. Rieger, H. Buchegger, W. Meyer, and the TTTech
company. Parts of this work were carried out in the scope of applied and basic research at the VRVis Research Center in Vienna
(http://www.VRVis.at/), Austria, which is funded by an
Austrian governmental research program called K plus.

References
[1] D. Baraff and A. Witkin. Physically Based Modeling: Principles and Practice. In Siggraph ’99 Course Notes, 1999.
[2] G. W. Furnas. Generalized Fisheye Views. In Proceedings of
the ACM CHI ’86, pages 16–23. Association for Computer
Machinery, 1986.
[3] T. A. Keahey. The Generalized Detail-In-Context Problem.
In Proceedings of the IEEE InfoVis 1998. IEEE Computer
Society Press, 1998.
[4] R. Kosara, S. Miksch, and H. Hauser. Semantic Depth of
Field. In Proceedings of the IEEE InfoVis 2001, pages 97–
104. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2001.
[5] K. Matkovi´c, H. Hauser, R. Sainitzer, and M. E. Gr¨oller.
Process Visualization with Levels of Detail. Technical Report TR-VRVIS-2002-016, VRVis Research Centar, Vienna,
2002.
[6] W. Rieger. Neue Strategien f¨ur Interaktive Processvisualisierung. Master’s thesis, Vienna University of Technology,
2002.
[7] M. Sarkar and M. H. Brown. Graphical Fisheye Views.
Communications of the ACM, 37(12):73–83, Dec. 1994.
[8] M. Sarkar, S. S. Snibbe, O. J. Tversky, and S. P. Reiss.
Stretching the Rubber Sheet: A Methaphor for Visualizing Large Layouts on Small Screens. In Proceedings of the
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pages 81–91, 1993.
[9] M. C. Stone, K. Fishkin, and E. A. Bier. The Movable Filter
as a User Interface Tool. In Proceedings of the ACM CHI
’94, pages 306–312. Association for Computing Machinery,
1994.
[10] TTTech Computertechnik AG, http://www.tttech.com.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

