Demystifying Venture Capital Investing
Mei Chuah
Accenture Technology Labs,
1661 Page Mill Road,
Palo Alto, CA 94304
mei.chuah@accenture.com
Abstract
Since the crash of the dot.coms, investors have gotten
a lot more careful with where they place their money [3].
Now more than ever it becomes really important for
venture capitalists (VCs) to monitor the state of the
startups market and continually update their investment
strategy to suit the rapidly changing market conditions.
This paper presents three new visualization metaphors
(Spiral Map, TimeTicker, and Double Histogram) for
monitoring the startups market. While we are focusing on
the VC domain, the visual metaphors developed are
general and can be easily applied to other domains.

1. Introduction
We present three new visual metaphors to help track
activity within the VC market and help uncover trends or
strategies that can help VC firms make more effective
investment decisions. Our analysis of the VC domain is
based on a data set of startups, VC firms, and VC
investments from VentureOne [5]. Our dataset contains
domestic startups and investments from VC firms that are
over 1 million in value, starting from the first quarter of
1994. Only investments from venture capital firms are
included. Angel funding and development funding (i.e.
funding from existing businesses, such as Intel or
Microsoft) are excluded. Finally, we only focus on
startups that IPOed between first quarter of 1994 and third
quarter of 2000. We chose to consider only IPOed
startups because they have obvious measures of success
and performance that are publicly available (e.g. market
capitalization, revenues, growth, and profits).

2. Monitoring Investment Flows (SpiralMap)
One of the most important tasks in venture investing is
to monitor the investment flows within the startups
market. This will give VC firms a good real-time view of
what their competitors are doing, which industries are
flourishing, which industries are reaching saturation, and
whether there is any advantage to being first within the
area (first mover advantage).
The SpiralMap in Figure 3 shows this information. It
represents a three level hierarchy of industry groups used
by VentureOne to categorize startups. Each industry is
represented by an oval. The oval position and text color

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

indicate the industry group to which it belongs (e.g. ovals
on the top-left corner with green names belong to the
healthcare industry group). The color of the oval
represents average investment in that industry. Figure 3
uses a green color scale where highly funded industries
(e.g., industry-2B) are shown in bright green and less
funded industries are shown in black. Currently the
industry ovals are used as a grouping mechanism to
indicate which sub-industries belong to which industries,
as such, their size do not correspond to any data encoding.
Each industry contains a set of sub-industries that are
represented by squares within the ovals. The color of a
square indicates the average investment within the subindustry. Finally each sub-industry square contains a set of
smaller squares each of which represents a startup. The
color of each small square represents the total investments
within a startup company. The startup squares are
organized in a spiral pattern [7]. Squares at the center or
inner portions of the spiral are the older startups (i.e.
startups that acquired seed investments or first round
investments at an earlier time period) while squares at the
tail or outer portions of the spiral are younger startups (i.e.
startups that acquired investments at a later time period).
This organization is important because it will show us
whether startups that penetrated the industry at an earlier
date have an advantage over the latecomers or vice versa
(first mover advantage).
The SpiralMap display can also be used to mine for
whitespace. Whitespace are industries or sub-industries
that are successful but relatively poorly invested in. These
are the areas that were unanticipated by the investment
community and will yield the most significant returns on
investment because they are highly profitable, and yet the
profits are divided over a smaller number of investment
dollars. The yellow highlights in Figure 3 indicate the top
20% of startups with the highest market capitalization
during IPO day. We are using market capitalization here
as a simple indication of startup success. Thus the subindustry squares with a lot of yellow are the sub-industries
with many startup successes. Whitespace therefore are
those sub-industries with relatively low average
investments (i.e. black in color) with a lot of yellow dots
(e.g., whitespace-1, whitespace-2, and whitespace-3).

Sub-industry1, sub-industry2, sub-industry3, and subindustry4 all within the industry-2B, may have high
startup success rates (many yellow dots), but they also
have relatively high average investment numbers (bright
green backgrounds) and as a result are less profitable.
There is a time slider at the bottom of the spiralMap
interface that allows users to view how the investment
flows are changing through time. We can also tell how
different industries and sub-industries are growing by
looking at the size of the spirals. Fast and rapid growth,
combined with relative low initial investments indicates
low barriers to entry, while a slow-down in growth would
indicate that an industry is reaching its saturation point.
Thus far we have shown average investment figures but
we could easily encode total investment or other relevant
attributes.
Our SpiralMap display shows similar hierarchical
financial data as the SmartMoney map [6] that was
originally derived from TreeMaps [4]. The SpiralMap
display, however, is unique in that it integrates several key
data features that are crucial in our VC investing domain:
• Spiral organization encodes first mover advantage:
The spiral organization of startup companies within a
sub-industry allows us to quickly determine whether
there is any advantage to being the first to penetrate
an industry by focusing on whether the center of the
spirals contain bright dots.
• Fixed startup positions: the size and therefore
positions of startups are fixed over time. This allows
us to easily see changing trends through time on a
startup, sub-industry, and industry level. In the
SmartMoney map, each company is tied to a square
and the square sizes are tied to a data attribute (e.g.
market capitalization). Thus the size and position of
companies change from one time slice to another
based on changes in the data attribute encoded.
• Aggregate figures at a sub-industry and industry
level are shown: The display shows detailed
information about each startup simultaneously with
aggregated figures of their parent sub-industry and
industry. This makes it easier to handle certain tasks,
for example the whitespace task described earlier.
The SmartMoney map only shows information about
individual companies. Aggregate results are visually
approximated from the gestalt view of the individual
companies.
• Size encodes the number of startups: In the
SpiralMap display, size of the sub-industry squares
encodes the number of startups within it. This shows
how saturated a sub-industry is, as well as indicates
the rate of growth (when used together with the time
slider). Both these features are important to our
domain. In contrast it is more difficult to see how
crowded an industry is using the SmartMoney map
because each company square has a different size.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

The two main weaknesses of the SpiralMap display are
1) it is not space-filing and therefore does not utilize space
as efficiently as the SmartMoney map, and 2) only a
single continuous data attribute (e.g. total investments)
can be shown at any one time. The SmartMoney map can
display two continuous attributes simultaneously through
size and color.

3. Monitoring VC performance over time
(Timelines & Time Ticker)
It is important to track the performance of different VC
firms and identify broader investment strategies that are
effective on a group or portfolio level. In Figure 1, we are
comparing the performance of the top 30 largest VC firms
in terms of total money invested, using timelines. Each
line represents a VC firm. The x-axis represents time, in
particular, it represents days-after-IPO. The y-axis
represents performance of the VC firms as represented by
the total returns per dollar of their portfolio. Figure 1
shows that timelines are useful when comparing a small
number of objects but become difficult to interpret when
comparing more than about five to ten objects due to
overcrowding.
In order to compare many VC firms simultaneously we
designed a new visual metaphor: the timeTicker. Figure 2
is an example timeTicker representation of the 30
companies shown in Figure 1. The timeTicker represents
each VC firm by a line. Each line is divided into multiple
time segments. Each time segment is filled in based on
how well a VC firm is performing at that particular time.
In addition to using the segment length to represent VC
firm performance, we can also doubly encode the same
information using segment saturation. I.e. bright green
encodes strong VC firm performance and black encodes
weak VC firm performance. The timeTicker
representation allows each of the VC firms to be viewed
much more accurately, and in much greater detail than in
Figure 1. Unlike the timelines display, we can easily pick
out the very poor performers (these are the lines with
many thin and dark bars) such as VC firm 2, 7, 10, 15, 16,
19, 21, 22, 23, 25; the mid-level performers (these are the
lines with many dark green and medium length bars) such
as VC firm 9, 18, 20, 29; and the good performers (these
are the lines with many bright green, and long bars) such
as VC firm 26, 27. We can also easily pick out the firms
with unusual performance patterns such as VC firm 1
which performs well at first and then languishes towards
the end; VC firm 8 which performs badly at first, but
significantly improves towards the end; or VC firm 30
which has a cyclic trend.
In the timeTicker display, we are only comparing
relative performances, i.e. how well a firm is doing at any
one time compared to all the other encoded firms during
that given time stamp. It is also possible to use an absolute
scale, but that may result in dwarfing problems on the
lengths of the timestamp bars. Note that comparing a data

attribute (e.g. VC firm performance) across a large
number of data objects (e.g. VC firms) over a given period
of time is a very common problem that arises in many
tasks across many different domains (e.g., managing
portfolios in the stock market).

4. Monitoring VC success with respect to
their size (Double Histogram)
In this section we examine whether large or small firms
end up having greater success. For this purpose we
designed the double histogram visualization (Figure 4). In
Figure 4 we represent the size (total money invested)
distribution of VC firms with a histogram. The large firms
are represented on the right of the x-axis and the small
firms are represented on the left of the x-axis. The heights
of the bars represent the number of VC firms that fall into
a given range of total investment as represented by the
black bars. In our double histogram display, each black
bar that constitutes the regular histogram contains a subhistogram (yellow bars). Specifically, each black bar is
divided into a set of rows, each of which represents a VC
firm. This VC firm line may be partially colored yellow
depending on which startups are currently selected (this is
similar to the SeeSoft system [2]). In Figure 4 we have
selected all the startups with low market capitalization on
their IPO date (i.e. the less successful startups). The VC
firm lines are colored based on what percentage of a
firm’s startup portfolio is in the selected startups set.
Figure 4 shows that the least successful startups (colored
yellow) mostly occupy the leftmost bars, indicating that
the smaller firms have a greater risk of failure.
Note that this correlation between size of VC firm and
portfolio success can also be explored using a scatter-plot.
However, the scatter-plot display can sometimes contain a
high degree of occlusion depending on the distribution of
values of the two data attributes being compared. In
addition, the scatter-plot display does not readily show the
number of firms that fall within each total-investment
segment.

higher growth rate may indicate lower barriers to
entry and vice versa.
iii) “Saturation point”: Determine the number of startups
an industry can comfortably support.
iv) “Whitespace”: Determine the whitespaces, or areas
of success that may not be widely apparent.
TimeTicker: The timeTicker display monitors the success
of VC firms by showing portfolio performance, over time.
The strength of the timeTicker display is that it allows
many VC firms to be compared simultaneously unlike
traditional timeline displays. This method is more
generally applicable to a large variety of domains
including stock portfolio management, sales tracking of
different product lines through time, or customer tracking.
DoubleHistogram (Histogram2): Unlike traditional
histograms, the double histogram allows us to explore the
relationships between multiple attributes. For example in
Figure 4 we are exploring the relationship between the
market capitalization of startups and the total investment
of VC firms that contain those startups within their
portfolio. The double histogram is most useful when there
is too much occlusion in the scatter-plot representation of
the same data, or when it is important to be able to
retrieve object counts based on a data attribute.
Note that the data set we analyzed may contain errors,
and may be incomplete as stated in section 1. In addition,
market conditions may change and these may alter the
results that are discussed here. It is precisely for this
reason that the visualization tools presented in this paper
should be used on a regular basis with updated, real-time
data so that the strategy models used by VC firms can be
quickly updated to suit changing market conditions.
In the future we plan to link quantitative data to more
qualitative information such as how the management team
within startups, and how the relationships between people
and products can affect company success. We believe that
qualitative data feeds can provide external context that
may explain particular quantitative changes.

5. Conclusion
In this paper we developed three novel visualizations
(spiralMap, timeTicker, and double histogram) to analyze
the VC investing domain. All the tools are linked to each
other through painting [1] so that selection of objects in
one display will cause corresponding objects in the other
displays to get highlighted as well.
SpiralMap: The SpiralMap display tracks the flow of
investments into different startups and industries so that
VCs may keep track of the “hot” plays on a daily basis:
i) “First mover advantage”: Determine whether early
penetration in an industry leads to greater success.
ii) Industry growth: Monitor the size of an industry in
terms of the number of startups currently within it. A

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

6. References
[1] Becker, A., and Cleveland, W.S., Brushing Scatterplots.
Technometrics, May 1987, vol.29, no.2, p.127-142.
[2] Eick, S.G., Steffen, J.L., and Sumner Jr., E.E., Seesoft – A
Tool for Visualization Line Oriented Software Statistics, IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, 1992, p.957-968.
[3] Konrad, R, VCs turn off the tap on funding. CNET News.
[4] Shneidermann, B., Tree visualization with tree-maps:2-d
space-filling approach, ACM Transactions on Graphics, January
1992, vol 11, no.1, p.92-99.
[5] Venture One, http://www.ventureone.com
[6] Wattenberg, M., Visualization the Stock Market, CHI’99
Extended Abstracts, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, 1999, ACM,
p.188-189.
[7] Weber, M., Alexa, M., Muller,W., Visualizing Time-Series
on Spirals, IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization,
2001.

Figure 1: Performance of top 30 largest VC firms in terms of total
money invested. X-axis represents time and y-axis represents
performance in terms of returns per dollar invested.

Figure 2: TimeTicker representation showing the
performance of the top 30 largest VC firms in terms of
total money invested (same data as in Figure 1). The xaxis represents time after IPO, while saturation and bar
lengths encode performance of VC firm.

Figure 3: SpiralMap display showing investment flows in the startups
market. Bright green represent high avg. investment for an industry or subindustry while black indicates low avg. investment. The yellow highlights
indicate the top 20% startups with the highest market capitalization.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 4: Double histogram showing the
relationship between size of VC firm and the
success of startups within their portfolio. The
x-axis encodes the size of VC firms in terms of
millions invested. The y-axis encodes the
number of VC firms of a given size. The yellow
highlights indicate startups with low market
capitalization.

