Angular Brushing of Extended Parallel Coordinates
Helwig Hauser, Florian Ledermann, and Helmut Doleisch
Hauser@VRVis.at, flo@subnet.at, and Doleisch@VRVis.at
VRVis Research Center in Vienna, Austria, http://www.VRVis.at/vis/

Abstract
In this paper we present angular brushing for parallel coordinates (PC) as a new approach to highlighting rational
data-properties, i.e., features which – in a non-separable
way – depend on two data dimensions. We also demonstrate
smooth brushing as an intuitive tool for specifying nonbinary degree-of-interest functions (for focus+context visualization). We also briefly describe our implementation as
well as its application to the visualization of CFD data.
Keywords: information visualization, parallel coordinates,
brushing, linear correlations, focus+context visualization

1. Introduction
For many years now, parallel coordinates (PC) [6, 5] have
been well-known and an often used technique in information visualization (InfoViz). Multi-dimensional data-sets
are visualized by drawing one poly-line for every datapoint across coordinate axes which are laid out in parallel,
side-by-side. The poly-lines intersect the coordinate axes
at points which correspond to the respective components
of the particular data-vector. Thereby, up to a dozen data
dimensions (or even more) are well visualized, especially
when the visualization is combined with proper interaction
features such as real-time re-ordering of coordinate axes or
interactive brushing in single dimensions [8].
Brushing is a very effective technique for specifying an explicit focus during information visualization [1, 10]. The
user actively marks sub-sets of the data-set, for example, by
using a brush-like interface element. If used in conjunction
with multiple linked views, brushing can enable users to understand correlations across multiple dimensions [1, 4].
Focus+context visualization. Brushing also is very useful
to steer a drill-down into the visualization of really big datasets – by specifying a (limited and limiting) focus, more
details can be shown for the selected data-points. This relates to another very important InfoViz concept which is
focus-plus-context (F+C) visualization [3]. The basic idea
of F+C visualization is to jointly visualize highly interesting
parts of the data in detail as well as the rest of the data-set

Figure 1. Reading between the lines: whereas
most of the poly-lines have a pos. slope between
the 2nd and the 3rd axis, just a few don’t – those
have been emphasized using angular brushing.

in reduced style, for orientation and improved navigation.
Degree-of-interest functions. For specifying which parts
of the data are to be drawn in detail, i.e., for specifying the
focus, a degree-of-interest (DOI) function is used [3], usually assigning a value of 1 or 0 to each data-point, depending on whether the data-point is of current interest or not.
Brushing is an effective method to actively (and explicitly)
assign values of ½ to data-points of interest [1, 11].
Brushing extensions. In addition to standard brushing,
several useful extensions have been proposed in literature.
The introduction of composite brushes [8], for example,
enabled users to more specifically define their focus. The
combination of brushing and non-binary DOI functions [8]
proved to be useful for data-sets with gradual changes in
their data attributes, for example, data from scientific simulation [2].
In this paper, we demonstrate angular brushing and
smooth brushing as two effective extensions to interactive
brushing of parallel coordinates (Sect. 2). Afterwards, we
briefly present some implementation issues (Sect. 3). The

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

Figure 2. Extended parallel coordinates, a sample view of the cars data-set: cars with six cylinders were
emphasized through brushing, histograms are laid over axes, and one data-point is shown with all details.

application itself and some results from visual data analysis are demonstrated in Sect. 4. A longer paper, describing
more extensions of our prototype like composite brushes,
histogram-overlays per axis, a very flexible axis-layout, a
detail-on-demand feature, etc., is available from VRVis as a
technical report (http://www.VRVis.at/vis/).

see whether data-points exhibit high or low values in single dimensions, but also their relation can be understood.
More specifically, the slope of the line-segments between
two axes tells the user, whether there is a positive or negative correlation between values (of course assuming that the
user set up a proper visualization mapping). Outliers also
can be easily found with respect to two data dimensions –
when all but a few line-segments have a positive slope, then
the few others clearly stand out (see Fig. 1).
In this paper, we demonstrate how this feature of PC easily can be exploited for an extended brushing technique, i.e.,
angular brushing. In addition to standard brushing, which
primarily acts along the (parallel) axes, we enable the space
between axes for brushing interaction, as well. The user can
interactively specify a sub-set of slopes which then yields
all those data-points to be marked as part of the current focus. See Fig. 1 for an example, where negative slopes have
been marked between the second and third axis.
Angular brushing as described above is a useful extension to PC, also because it very well corresponds to the effective visual cues provided by PC. In addition to composite
brushes which are composed multiple single-axis brushes
by the use of logical operators, angular brushes allow the
selection of (non-separable) rational properties with respect
to two of the data dimensions. When compared to composite brushes by the use of a scatterplot visualization (see
Fig. 3), we clearly see that brushes based on logical operators select sub-sets which are aligned with the display axes,
whereas angular brushes select sub-sets which are aligned
with the diagonals when visualized in a scatter-plot.

2. Extended Brushing for Parallel Coordinates
Brushing effectively enables the user to (explicitely) specify his or her focus. In parallel coordinates, this usually is
accomplished by marking a certain data sub-set of interest
according to values within a single data dimension. In the
cars data-set [9], for example, a user could focus on cars
with six cylinders by brushing the respective portion of the
cylinders-axis (cf. Fig. 2).
In our application of visually investigating multidimensional data-sets originating in a physically-based simulation of dynamic processes based on computational fluid
dynamics (CFD), we found standard brushing of PC very
useful, however, we needed to go further. The requirement
was to specify a focus not only in dependence of one data
attribute (one dimension), but to do so with respect to at
least two of them – like brushing all those data-points whose
Þ -velocity is larger than the respective Ü-velocity. The consequence was to introduce a new brushing technique which
we call angular brushing.

2.1. Angular Brushing of Parallel Coordinates
One strength of PC is its effectiveness of visualizing relations between coordinate axes. Bringing axes next to each
other in an interactive way, the user can investigate how values are related to each other with special respect to two of
the data dimensions. This way, it is not only possible to

2.2. Smooth Brushing and Non-Binary DOIs
Many well-known F+C techniques in InfoViz such as fisheye views [3], for example, do not use a discrete distinc2

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

——— angular brushes ———

——— composite brushes ———

AND-brush

angular brush

OR-brush

angular brush,
after axis flipping

Figure 3. Comparing composite brushes (on the left) and angular brushes (on the right), using PC (top row)
and scatterplots (bottom row): composite brushes address “horizontal/vertical” features, whereas angular
brushes emphasize “diagonal” ones.

Figure 4. Linking and brushing, an example: in a scatter-plot (shown on the left side), smooth brushing
was used to mark data-points of low pressure and low velocity; a linked 3D view (on the top right) shows the
same data with the brushed data-points high-lighted; thirdly, the PC view (on the lower right) also shows the
same data, also high-lighting the brushed sub-set.

3

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

tion between focus and context, but allow a multi-valued or
even continuous transition, which inherently supports the
mental connection between data-points in focus and their
context. This corresponds to a degree-of-interest function,
which non-binarily maps into the ¼ ½ -range.
Brushing easily combines with non-binary DOI functions [8], i.e., when using smoothly delimited brushes [2].
Thereby, at the brush boundaries, fractional DOI-values are
assigned. When composite brushes are composed through
the use of logical operators, fuzzy logic is employed to aggregate final DOI-values for every single data-point.
In conjunction with PC we extend the interactively specified brush by a certain, user-defined percentage to accommodate a smooth gradient of DOI-values at its borders.
When combining smooth brushes through logical operators,
we apply the Łukasiewicz norm, known from fuzzy logic as
a comparably large norm [7], i.e., a norm which (when applied repeatedly) only slowly converges to ¼ and therefore
better conserves the transitional DOI-gradients.

was found to be useful, primarily because 2D-composite
brushes are specified more easily in a scatter-plot.
Figs. 3 and especially 4 show results of data exploration
by the use of PC. The data shown is the result of a simulation of flow through pipes shaped as a T-junction. Flow is
coming from the left and the top (Fig. 4, top left).

5. Summary and Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented angular brushing as a new
technique to effectively select data sub-sets which exhibit
a data correlation along two axes. We also showed how
smooth brushing can be used, even in combination with
composite brushes. More details, more images, a short
video, as well as a longer technical report are available via
http://www.VRVis.at/vis/.
We conclude that the worth of a visualization by the use
of parallel coordinates increases drastically when interaction features like axis re-ordering, etc., are added.
Acknowledgements. As (partially) being part of VRVis’ basic research on visualization (http://www.VRVis.at/vis/), this
work also was funded by K plus (http://www.kplus.at/).
The authors also thank AVL.com for providing data as well as
Robert Kosara for his valuable hints.

3. Implementation
To deal with real-world data-sets – in our case consisting
of ½¼ –½¼ data-points each – we quickly experienced the
limitations of a brute-force implementation of parallel coordinates. Especially as we also needed semi-transparency,
coloring, and anti-aliased line-segments, load is high on the
graphics hardware during PC visualization.
In the following, we briefly describe some of the approaches we utilized to still provide real-time response:
(1.) Coherence is exploited during interaction by re-using
as much visual output as possible. If one axis is modified
during interaction, for example, line-segments are only redrawn locally. (2.) Progressive rendering provides immediate feedback through a preview-style of rendering, i.e.,
without anti-aliasing or semi-transparency. As soon as there
is time, high-quality results are computed. (3.) Bi-threaded
implementation de-couples rendering and interaction. One
thread serves the user interface and guarantees interactive
response, while the other thread deals with rendering.

References
[1] R. Becker and W. Cleveland. Brushing scatterplots. Technometrics, 29(2):127–142, 1987.
[2] H. Doleisch and H. Hauser. Smooth brushing for focus+context visualization of simulation data in 3D. In
Proc. of WSCG 2002, pages 147–154, Plzen, Czech Rep.
[3] G. W. Furnas. Generalized fisheye views. In Proc. of the
ACM CHI ’86 Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 16–23, 1986.
[4] D. Gresh et al. WEAVE: A system for visually linking 3-D
and statistical visualizations, applied to cardiac simulation
and measurement data. In IEEE Vis. 2000, pages 489–492.
[5] A. Inselberg. A survey of parallel coordinates. In H.-C.
Hege and K. Polthier, editors, Mathematical Visualization,
pages 167–179. Springer Verlag, Heidelberg, 1998.
[6] A. Inselberg and B. Dimsdale. Parallel coordinates: a tool
for visualizing multidimensional geometry. In Proc. of IEEE
Visualization ’90, pages 361–378.
[7] E. P. Klement, R. Mesiar, and E. Pap. Triangular Norms,
volume 8 of Trends in Logic. Kluwer Acad. Publ., 2000.
[8] A. Martin and M. O. Ward. High dimensional brushing for
interactive exploration of multivariate data. In Proc. of IEEE
Visualization ’95, pages 271–278.
[9] P. Vlachos and M. Meyer. StaLib – data, software and news
from the statistics community. http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/, 2002.
[10] M. O. Ward. XmdvTool: Integrating multiple methods for
visualizing multivariate data. In Proc. of IEEE Visualization ’94, pages 326–336.
[11] G. J. Wills. 524,288 ways to say “this is interesting”. In
Proc. of IEEE Symp. on Information Visualization, pages
54–61, 1996.

4. Application and Results
In our application, we investigate multi-dimensional datasets which originate in CFD simulations with a dozen of
data dimensions, or more. During flow simulation, values
like temperature, pressure, velocity, as well as others, are
computed for all cells within a detailed CFD grid.
Parallel coordinates proved to be very useful for data investigation. The interactive character of our implementation allows for fast and flexible data exploration, even when
simultaneously investigating multiple dimensions. Linking PC and other types of views (like a 3D SciViz view,
cf. Fig. 4, top right) and using our brushing features eased
data exploration. Also the combination with scatter-plots
4

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2002 (InfoVis’02)
1522-404X/02 $17.00 © 2002 IEEE

