Co-Cited Author Maps as Interfaces to Digital Libraries:
Designing Pathfinder Networks in the Humanities
Howard D. White, Jan Buzydlowski, and Xia Lin
College of Information Science and Technology
Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA 19 104 USA
whitehd@drexel.edu,janb@drexel.edu, linx@drexel.edu
Abstract

capturing intellectual structure in a subject domain [4].
Publication bylines show that the technique has now diffused intemationally, but its lines of diffusion are obscure;
adopters seem as likely to have leamed about it through
reading as through traceable ties with the originators. The
upshot, however, is that ACA has been vetted by many
independent observers. Their reports are generally encouraging; ACA tends to deliver intelligible results with high
face validity.
Its recent prominence in the work of Chaomei Chen in
Britain is exciting because he has begun to implement the
idea, seen in [4], of using co-cited author displays as visual information retrieval interfaces (VIRIs) to digital libraries 115-71. Through most of its history, ACA has been
limited to producing static two-dimensional maps that
convey how aggregations of citers have related the leading authors of a field over some time period. When published on paper, such “field’s-eye views,, are contributions
to intellectual history, but little more. With Chen and the
new Web technologies, searchers have the prospect of maps
that are three-dimensional, color-codable, interactive links
to document sets implied by the authors’ names. These
ACA maps would add value to the search process by allowing literature retrievals to be based not on who wrote
what, but on something more interesting and less readily
available-who has been recurrently used with whom.
Those doing the “using,, in this case are citers in particular fields of scholarship or science, which means that the
maps ground retrieval in the perceptions of scholars and
scientists rather than indexers and catalogers. Articles and
papers by these citing scholars and scientists are what, in
a live interface, co-cited author names might retrieve.
We are not aware of any current system that routinely
provides such VIRIs for ordinary customers on demand.
One prototype aside from Chen’s is the Kohonen feature
map of 120 authors in information science that Xia Lin
has placed on the Web [8]. Kohonen’s neural-network
algorithm produces “self-organizing maps,, (SOMs)
through iterative unsupervised leaming of similarities in

Using data from the A r t s & Humanities Citation Index
f o r 1988-1997, we are attempting to generate co-cited
author maps in real time that can serve as interfaces for
document retrieval. Our novel approach is to start the
maps by entering the name ofa single author. Our system
obtains a rank-ordered list of the other authors who are
most often co-cited with the input name (e.g., the top 50)
and then systematically pairs these other authors in turn
to obtain their co-citation counts. The resulting matrix
can be passed to a mapping program, which groups the
authors meaningfully to show the structure of the field
implied by the input authors name. At present we are
experimenting with Pathfinder Networks (PFNETs) as the
mapping program, and show a PFNETfor 25 authors in
hermeneutics, a majorfield of the humanities. The documents co-citing the mapped authors are candidates for
retrieval. We discuss desirable features and design considerations in retrieval interfaces based on PFNETs.

1. Introduction
Initiated almost two decades ago by Drexel University’s
White & Griffith [ 11, author co-citation analysis (ACA)
reveals scholarly fields in terms of salient linkages among
oeuvres. ACA produces maps in which authors’ names
are algorithmically positioned according to how frequently
items in their oeuvres are cited together by later writers.
Authors brought together by the algorithm may represent
identifiable research specialties, meaningfully placed with
respect to each other [2, 31. The raw data are commonly
drawn from the online citation indexes of the Institute for
Scientific Information (ISI), which is based near Drexel
in Philadelphia.
Because ACA can be conducted with fairly modest
means, it has always appealed to researchers, such as
dissertation writers, who want an economical way of

25
0-7695-0743-3/00 $10.00 0 2000 IEEE

We hope to use rapidly generated PFNETs as one interface to our 10-year A&HCI database, Kohonen feature
maps of the same data being the other. The short-term
goal is to test both kinds of interfaces for user acceptability. At best, what users currently retrieve is bibliographic
descriptions of articles and other writings from the journals covered by ISI. However, IS1 and the entire library
world are moving toward providing not only bibliographic
descriptions but also the full texts of items retrieved.
Hence, our long-term goal is to create co-cited author maps
that could serve as VIRIs to full-scale digital libraries.
While our first trials are being conducted in A&HCI, our
work has relevance across the spectrum of scholarly and
scientific disciplines that cite precedent work.

the features of objects [9]. Lin applied it to the co-citation
matrices analyzed by White & McCain [lo] and generated a map that clusters the information scientists into several identifiable subject specialties. Users can click on a
mapped author’s name (e.g., “Salton,, or “van Rijsbergen,,)
to pass it to the Alta Vista search engine, which will return
Web pages mentioning that author.
Chen’s innovation has been to base his VIRIs on author co-citation data cast as Pathfinder networks (PFNETs).
Both Kohonen feature maps and PFNETs can accommodate far more authors in co-cited author displays than the
multidimensional scaling and clustering programs customarily used in “Drexel-style,,ACA [ 111, and both lend themselves readily to rapid development as VIRIs. The advantages of Link Kohonen map of information scientists over
the “traditional,, presentation of the same data in [ 101 are
set forth in [ 121.
However, Kohonen and multidimensional scaling programs are alike in that both simply display similar authors
as neighboring points in subject space. While the PFNET
program, too, does this, it also finds every author’s best
pairing (or pairings) in terms of highest co-citation counts
and connects these best pairings with lines [13-141. Thus,
instead of floating ambiguously in space, every author in
a PFNET is explicitly bonded to at least one other author.
As a result, cluster memberships and relations between
clusters are very easy to see. Moreover, authors who share
highest co-citation counts with several other authors stand
out as stars, in the sociometric sense.
We conjecture that PFNET clusters for a given field
may be even more interpretable to domain experts than
comparable clusters in other forms of mapping. In many
cases, they may also repay analysis as social networh,
using the concepts and software that have appeared in that
fast-growing interdisciplinary specialty in recent years.
We currently are creating PFNETs with author co-citation data from the 1988-1997 files of the Arts & Humanities Citation Index, which IS1 gave our college as a
research grant in 1998. This database records citations to
many “world greats,, in literature, philosophy, and the
arts-persons like Dante or Plato or Picasso, whose names
are likely to be known to educated people in general.
With such illustrious figures on call, it is of continuing
interest to ask the key ACA question mentioned abovewho has been recurrently used with whom? The answers,
of course, depend on what has been going on in recent
humanistic scholarship and criticism. Academic journal
writers do the citing that brings famous citees together in
the PFNETs. Of course, 10 years of A&HCI files also
contain many thousands of names of citees who are not
major culture heroes and not even famous outside of small
comers of academe. These names, too, will appear in
PFNETs if they have been cited often enough.

2. Technical Background
Our A&HCI database, residing on a Sun Workstation
with a Solaris operating system, has about 1.26 million
bibliographic records with 59 data fields. To work with
files so large, we use BRS/Search software from Dataware
Technologies. BRS/Search is an industrial-strength engine
that offers many retrieval capabilities, such as pattern
matching, adjacency searches, and relevance ranking. It
is comparable in functionality to the Dialog system, with
which it was formerly a commercial competitor. For instance, one of its functions is the TALLY command. Like
RANK in Dialog, TALLY orders by frequency the terms
that co-occur with an input term (or terms) in a selected
field of a retrieved set of records.
The latter capability is needed because our new way of
generating co-cited author maps differs from earlier practice at Drexel and elsewhere. Past researchers have
preselected the entire group of co-cited authors to be
mapped. This entails creating a judgment sample-a
lengthy task if scores of names are involved. In contrast,
we are experimentally generating maps with a single name,
such as “Plato,, or “Dickinson E,, or “Lawrence DH,,, as
the starting point. We assume, in other words, that a
searcher will need only an author’s name to call a map
into being. The map will perspectivize the literature from
the standpoint of that author. For example, if Plato is chosen, the searcher might ask for the 50 names that co-occur
most often in article bibliographies with Plato’s. These
authors will then be systematically paired and their COcitation counts obtained for transfer to a mapping program.
We can speed up mapping by using these raw counts as
input, rather than converting count profiles to Pearson r’s,
as in the past.
Our system permits both internal and extemal access.
For the internal platform, a stand-alone UNIX tool suite
with a command-line interface allows the passage of tex-

26

authors is connected with the fewest links-in effect, the
most essential links-when q equals the number of authors minus 1.
Figure 1 displays 25 co-cited authors as a PFNET. A
single name, that of a famous nineteenth-century Protestant theologian, Friedrich Schleiermacher,was entered into
our database to obtain the 24 other authors most often cited
with him in the journal literature in our AbHClfiles. Each
of these authors was then systematically paired with every other in the set to obtain a 25 x 25 matrix of co-citation counts. This matrix in tum was passed to KNOT software for the PFNET (q = 24, r = -). The “sumame-initials,, form of the names in the labels reflects direct downloading from records created by IS1 conventions.
The map unites authors from religion, philosophy, and
literature, along with that multi-authored sociometric star,
the Bible. Names are present not only from the sixteenth,
eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries, but also
from antiquity-a chronological mix common in humanistic scholarship, but highly uncommon in science.
Schleiermacher was German, and most of his top co-citees
are also German (Tillich, a refugee from Hitler, became a
U.S. citizen); the remainder are French, Swiss, or Greek.
The map exhibits strands of Continental philosophy and
theology being drawn into the English-speaking world;
that is, the majority of articles citing the European masters appeared in Anglo-American journals during 19881997.
These invisible citing articles are, of course, what retrievals based on the map would reveal. The map is not
intended to retrieve works by the authors on view unless
such works happen to be among the citing articles just
mentioned.
The scholarly activity implied by the mapped names is
contemporary hermeneutics, which might be glossed as
theorizing on how texts can o r should be interpreted, a
major concem in the humanities. As a representative figure of romanticism and philosophical idealism, Schleiermacher (1768-1 834) is still influential on two fronts: Biblical hermeneutics, or the interpretation of scripture; and
literary hermeneutics, or the interpretation of literature.
The two are united in the central feature of the map, a
cycle of names anchored by the Bible at the lower end and
by the iron triangle of Nietzsche-Derrida-Heidegger, all
with four direct links apiece, at the upper. The philosophers in or attached to the cycle may be conjoined in this
map principally because of their interest to phenomenological literary theory (which would include reader response theory); the remainder, radiating out from the Bible
at lower right, are probably more assignable to scriptural
studies.
While Schleiermacher’s link to Gadamer reflects his
highest co-citation count, it should be recalled that he is

tual data to and from the BRSBearch engine. This suite
consists of three tools: find-rel, find-occ, and
upper-to full.
The first,find-rel, asks the user to enter a name of interest, so as to form the set of documents citing that author. It then invokes TALLY to return a list of up to 99
authors who are most frequently co-cited with the input
name. (It is possible to enter more than one name, separated by Boolean operators). The second tool,find-occ,
takes the set of names produced fromfind-re1 (or from
any user-generated list) and creates an upper-triangular
matrix of co-citation counts by conjoining all authors
painvise with Boolean ANDs. For example, given authors Plato, Brown, and Aristotle, “Plato AND Brown,,
might appear in ten documents, “Aristotle AND Brown,,
in five, and “Plato AND Aristotle,, in 657.
The upper-triangular matrix suffices for computation
in most mapping programs. However, the third tool,
upper-toJull, can convert the upper-triangular matrix of
find-occ to a square symmetric matrix if required by other
software packages.
An Apache Web Server gives Internet access to the
project. For the Web interface, a user can type in an author
name and the system will retum 50 related authors, usually in a matter of seconds. With the Web interface, moreover, the user can also ask the system for a map visualizing the co-citation relationships of the authors.
The Web interface not only allows the display of the
co-citation map but also allows the user to interact with
the map. Work has begun on implementing a zoom feature to allow for closer inspection of dense author clusters, and the regeneration of a map based on selected clusters. While we are initially using Kohonen self-organizing maps (SOMs) based on Link prototypes, work is also
in progress to develop PFNETs as an alternative.
KNOT software from Interlink creates PFNETs for 50
authors in even less time than it takes to obtain author cocitation counts. We hope to produce an interface with features similar to KNOT’S that can be generated and used
for retrieval in real time.

3. A Sample PFNET
Devised by cognitive psychologists [ 151, PFNETs are
computer-produced graphs of associations among entities,
represented (when relations are symmetrical) as edges connecting nodes-in our case, as undirected lines connecting authors. Perceived similarity between entities is rendered as a Minkowski distance parameter r, which can be
set to infinity when co-citation counts for author pairs are
presumed to be no more than ordinal measures. A second
parameter q can be set to restrict the number of edges between nodes. In the interest of parsimony, every pair of

27

linked to everyone in the map by at least 12 co-citations
(indeed, almost everyone is linked to everyone else; there
are very few co-citationcounts of zero among them). There
can be little doubt that Schleiermacher is well-placed by
ACA and PFNET technology. As implied above, ACA
shows the context of other names in which a given author’s
name repeatedly appears, thereby providing direct aid toward fruitful searches of a literature.
Even a reader who has never encountered these contexts can expect an ACAmap to anticipate statements like
the following, from a discussion of Heidegger in a wellknown book called Literary Theory [16, p. 571: “The word
‘hermeneutics’ was originally confined to the interpretation of sacred scripture; but during the nineteenth century
it broadened its scope to encompass the problem of textual interpretation as a whole. Heidegger’s two most fa-

mous predecessors as ‘hermeneuticists’ were the German
thinkers Schleiermacher and Dilthey; his most celebrated
successor is the modern German philosopher Hans-Georg
Gadamer.,,
All four names of the last sentence meet in the title of a
single monograph [17], as they do on the map. In fact,
brief accounts of hermeneutics can be found that discuss
many ofthe names on the map [e.g., 18-19; or try pairedauthor Web searches], which helps to validate ACA as a
procedure.

4. Notes on Design
Let us assume that VIRIs based on author co-citation
analysis will sometime be available for retrieval of scholarly writings in the humanities, and that at least some of

Figure 1. Map of 24 Authors Co-Cited with Friedrich Schleiermacher

28

them will take the form of Pathfinder networks. Figure 1
is a hypothetical example. How might these VIRIs best
be designed?
We are fairly adamant on the desirability of clear, noncryptic labeling of all the author-nodes the instant the map
is formed. The entire set of names should also be stably
on view, requiring minimal repositioning of the nodes (or
the viewer’s position with respect to the nodes) to see all
the labels. KNOT software does this quite well, although
the more authors the map includes, the greater the chance
that some labels will overlap others and block them from
view. Above all else, humanists are word people, and any
display or presentation metaphor that does not immediately let them see the names of their orienting authors will
not, we think, be well received.
The implication, possibly surprising, is that maps as
interfaces might best present simple, two-dimensional networks of relatively few well-labeled authors (no more than
50). It is true that PFNETs (and Kohonen maps) can handle
hundreds of names, but we question whether humanists,
or indeed users in general, want that level of complexity
in a single interface. The experience of “flying through,,
virtual worlds to discover the identities of hundreds of cryptic nodes palls very quickly. Even the 25 nodes of Figure
1 take some time to absorb, and probably no one would
choose more than a few of them as a basis for retrieval.
Although it would be good if one could retrieve documents simply by clicking on single names in maps such as
Figure 1, the key seems to be to get users to focus on
authors inpairs, as these set contexts for each other. However, this is not entirely straightforward, for several reasons.
1) As currently implemented, PFNETs lack indication
of the strength, or weight, of the linkages between nodes;
a co-citation count of one between two authors, if that is
their top-ranked count, will produce a link that looks exactly like the link between two authors whose top-ranked
co-citation count is vastly greater. Therefore, retrievals of
the articles co-citing different pairs of authors may vary
widely in magnitude and quality. At minimum, it is desirable to have a quick way of alerting the searcher to the
size of the retrieval associated with a particular link. In a
live interface, this might be done by showing the co-citation count as a pop-up when the cursor touches a given
link on the map, but the meaning of the pop-ups would
need explanation. Table 1 gives the counts for the various
pairs seen in the map. (They would be higher in the full
version ofA&HCZ, which runs from 1980 to the present.)
2) If retrievals on paired authors are made from the
entire database without further constraints, there is danger of grave losses in precision (i.e., many irrelevant items
will have to be discarded). The highest single co-citation
count in Table 1, for example, is that between Plato and

Aristotle; some 657 items mentioning them jointly can be
retrieved. But surely the humanist who generates a map
because of an interest in Schleiermacher does not want to
retrieve the entire literature in AdHCZ that makes use of
both Plato and Aristotle; rather, it is the Plato-Aristotle
combination in the context of Schleiermacher studies that
is wanted.

Table 1.
Counts of Articles Co-Citing Linked Pairs
PLATO
BIBLE
HEIDEGGER M
KANT I
HABERMAS J
DERRlDA I
HEGEL GWF
HEGEL GWF
RICOEUR P
HEIDEGGER M
DERRlDA J
PLATO
BIBLE
BIBLE
GADAMER HG
HEIDEGGER M
DILTHEY W
GADAMER HG
BIBLE
BIBLE
KANT I
LUTHER M
GOETHE JWV
SCHLEIERMACHER F
BARTH K
BIBLE

ARISTOTLE
GOETHE JWV
NIETZSCHE F
NIETZSCHE F
FRANK M
FRANK M
RICOEUR P
BIBLE
NIETZSCHE F
DERRIDA J
NIETZSCHE F
DERRIDA J
BULTMANN R
EBELlNG G
BIBLE
SCHELLING FWJ
HEIDEGGER M
DILTHEY W
PANNENBERG W
TILLICH P
FlCHTE JG
EBELING G
SCHLEGEL FV
GADAMER HG
TlLLlCH P
TROELTSCH E

657
99
97
97
97
96
96
95
94
93
93
90
85
82
81
72
6R
68
62
62
61
55
52
51
50

31

The solution here seems to be to make all paired-author retrievals not from the whole database, but from the
set of articles citing Schleiermacher that was used to produce the original ranking; his name will be implicitly
ANDed with any further combinations. Or perhaps the
two domains of retrieval, the wide and the narrow, could
be presented to the searcher as options.
3) At least initially, the links may powerfully channel
searchers’ impressions as to what is possible-for example,
it may be thought that Nietzsche can be searched only with
the other authors to whom he is directly connected. How
can the searcher be led to realize that author-nodes not
linked by the PFNET algorithm are also viable possibilities for combination?
One approach might be to present a search window
alongside the map and state that any pair of authors on the
map can be dragged-and-dropped into it to define a retrieval. The name on which the map is formed (e.g.,
Schleiermacher) could be automatically placed in this
search window to improve precision. Lin [20] has created
such a drag-and-drop interface for ANDing medical subject headings before they are used in Medline retrievals; it
may be adaptable to co-cited pairs. Teams led by Fowler

29

[lo] H. D. White and K. W. McCain. “Visualizing a Discipline: An Author CO-CitationAnalysis of InformationScience, 1972-1995.,, Journal of the American Society for
Information Science 49, 1998,pp. 327-355.

[2 1,221 have also produced relevant interfaces.
All the retrievals on author-pairs in Table 1, and on
author-pairs generally, have long been possible on Dialog without a VIM. In Dialog’s A&HCl, if one forms
the set of items that cite Schleiermacher and then uses
RANK to list the authors most often co-cited with him,
one has the option of viewing (and downloading) the
bibliographic records associated with any co-cited name
on the list. Any other co-cited pair, such as Barth K
AND Ricoeur P, can be easily searched as well. So what
is gained by displaying a PFNET? The answer is that a
PFNET structures browsing in a way that Dialog now
does not. The PFNET takes any author’s co-citees into
two dimensions to reflect their co-citations with each
other, and then usefully simplifies the result by showing
only the strongest linkages.

[ 111K. W. McCain. “Mapping Authors in Intellectual Space:
A Technical Overview.,, Journal of the American Society
for Information Science 41, 1990,pp. 433-443.

[ 121 H. D. White, X. Lin, and K. W. McCain. “Two Modes of

Automated Domain Analysis: Multi-dimensionalScaling
vs. Kohonen Feature Mapping of Information Science.,,
Structures and Relations in Knowledge Organization. W.
M. el Hadi, J. Maniez, and S . A. Pollitt, eds. Wurzburg,
Germany: Ergon Verlag, 1998,pp. 56-63.
[131C. Chen. “GeneralisedSimilarityAnalysis and Pathfinder
Network Scaling.,, Interacting with Computers 10, 1998,

pp. 107-128.

5. References

[ 141C. Chen. “Bridgingthe Gap: The Use of PathfinderNetworks in Visual Navigation.,, Journalof Visual Languages
and Computing 9,1998, pp. 267-286.

[l] H. D. White and B. C. Grifith. “Author Cocitation: A
Literature Measure of Intellectual Structure.,, Journal of
the American Society for Information Science 32, 1981,
pp. 163-172.

[151R. W. Schvaneveldt,ed. PathfinderAssociativeNetworks.

Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1990.
[2] H. D. White and K. W. McCain. “Bibliometrics.,,Annual
Review of Information Science and Technology 24, 1989,
pp. 119-186.

[16] T. Eagleton. Literary Theory; An Introduction. 2d ed.
Minneapolis,MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1996.
[17] R. E. Palmer. Hermeneutics: Interpretation Theory in

[3] H. D. White. “Author CO-CitationAnalysis: Overview and
Defense.,, Bibliometrics and Schol-arly Communication.
C. L. Borgman, ed. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1990, pp.
84-106.

Schleiermachec Dilthey, Heideggec and Gadamer.
Evanston, IL: Northwestem University Press, 1969.
[ 181 A.

Kerby. “Hermeneutics.,,Encyclopedia of Contemporary Literary Theory; Approaches, Scholars, Terms, I. R.

[4] H. D. White and K. W. McCain. “Visualization of Literatures.,, Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 32, 1997, pp. 99-168.

Makaryk ed. Toronto, Canada: Universityof TorontoPress,
1993,pp. 90-94.
[19] R. E. Palmer. “Hermeneutics.,, The New Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics. A. Preminger and T. V.
F. Brogan, eds. New York: MJF Books, 1993,pp. 516520.

[5] C. Chen. “Visualising Semantic Spaces and Author CoCitation Networks in Digital Libraries.,, Information Processing & Management 35, 1999, pp. 401-420.
[6] C. Chen and L. Carr. “Trailblazing the Literature of
Hypertext: Author CO-Citation Analysis (1989-1998).,,
Proceedings, 10th ACM Conference on Hypertext
(Hypertext ‘99). http://www.brunel.ac.uk/-cssrccc2/papers.

[20] X . Lin. Medline Search Assistant.
research.cis.drexe1.eddmedlinel

http://

[21] R. H. Fowler, W. A. L. Fowler, and A. B. Wilson. “Integrating Query, Thesaurus,and Documents through a Common Visual Representation.,, Proceedings,Associationfor
Computing Machinery Special Interest Group in Information Retrieval 14thAnnualIntemationalConference(SIGIR
‘91). New York: ACM, 1991,pp. 142-151.

[7] C. Chen and L. Carr. “Visualizingthe Evolution of a Subject Domain: A Case Study.,, Proceedings, IEEE Visualization ‘99. http:// www.brunel.ac.uk/ -cssrccc2/papers.
[8] X. Lin. Map of Information Scientists. http://
faculty.cis.drexel.eddsitemap/snQ/citation.html

[22] R. H. Fowler,A. Kumar, and J. L. Williams. “Visualizing
and Browsing WWW Semantic Content.,, COM ‘96: 1st
Annual Conference on Emerging Technologiesand Applications in Communications. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE
Computer Society Press, 1996, pp. 110-1 13.

[9] X. Lin. “Map Displays for Information Retrieval.,,Journal of the American Society for Information Science 48,
1997,pp. 40-54.

30

