Content-based Retrieval of 3D Models in Distributed Web Databases by Visual
Shape Information
Jobst Loffler
GMD - German National Research Center for Information Technology
Schloss Birlinghoven, D-53754 Sankt Augustin, Germany
Jobst.Loeffler@gmd.de

Abstract

Keywords

sufficient or the production of additional metadata is to expensive or not possible at all. Critical problems, which have
to be solved, are to speed-up the retrieval process, to improve the quality of search results using relevance feedback
given by the user and to reduce the amount of transmitted
data needed for the retrieval process [ 11. To meet these requirements built-in database functionality for content-based
retrieval on the server side in connection with an interactive
visual client tool can be used for work with distributed digital documents. The possibility to built an index over the
signatures generated by a content-based retrieval system for
database contents allows to speed-up the retrieval in large
collections by using a table look-up technique instead of a
search over the entire database. Using interactive remote visualization of the retrieval results on the server enables the
user to restrict the search space by giving a relevance feedback. Model segmentation and extraction of visual shape
information provide the user with a method to select parts of
3D models for download which helps to reduce the amount
of transmitted data, especially when the 3D data are complex.

Digital documents, distributed 3D databases, content-based
retrieval, shape segmentation.

2 Introduction

Digital documents assembled of different components
like text, images, video, audio and 3 0 models are supported
today by many distributed applications. This paper presents
a new approach to retrieve 3 0 models aspart of digital documents using content-based image retrieval functionality.
Tofind a 3 0 model best-jitting the user’s query, shape information is extracted from the retrieved models and a score
is generated by comparing shape images with the graphical user input. A distributed database environment with a
WWW interface is presented and used as a generic implementation platform for this technique. The new retrieval
method for 3 0 geometry is then described by extending the
generic architecture in two steps with a server-side module and an interactive client display. I t is outlined how this
method can be used for partial geometry download of 3 0
models in digital libraries.

1 Motivation

Collections of heterogeneous digital documents with 3D
geometric content are used today in a variety of applications like medical support systems, product design tools,
systems for computer supported cooperation or distributed
information systems like digital libraries. To work with the
information contained in these documents a user needs a
well designed interface that enables retrieval and manipulation of heterogeneous documents. A combination of WWW
technology and databases in distributed environments is a
widely used approach [2]. An implementation of a distributed WWW-database environment for retrieval in heterogeneous digital documents is presented in this paper. Retrieval of text and images is often a built-in functionality of
today’s database systems and can be used in distributed en-

The information accessible through the WWW is increasing in its amount and heterogeneity. Distributed digital documents can contain all types of data like text, images, video, audio or 3D geometry. Content presented in
the form of digital documents is more and more stored dynamically in databases. Therefore users, who want to work
with content of distributed databases in the Web, need methods for retrieval and visualization which support the special requirements of distributed environments and heterogeneous content. The ability to use content-based retrieval
techniques for complex data like 3D geometry or images is
important, if the information provided by metadata is not

82
0-7695-0743-3100
$10.000 2000 IEEE

of structure and content information. Furthermore a collection of such digital documents together with an environment
to use the documents describes a simple form of a digital library.

vironments. In the case of 3D geometric models as well as
video and audio data content-based retrieval is more complex, and therefore, not supported as built-in functionality.
A new method for the retrieval of 3D models and download
of single 3D objects, which uses content-based image retrieval functionality of a database, is the main focus of this
paper. It is described as an extension of a generic distributed
architecture.
For this purpose segmentation and image generation of
3D objects is used. Shape information contains an object’s
contour, bounding area and surface texture. A shape image
is a binary mask of a 3D object generated by a rendering
tool. Retrieval of geometric models is performed by using
a score that is generated by comparison of shape images of
objects with a graphical user input. This user input can be
an already existing image or a sketch drawn by the user.
With this method 3D models in collections like digital libraries can be retrieved and parts of large models can then
be downloaded by users. Some advantages of this technique
are the possibility of content-based search in 3D model collections with unknown structure, e.g. to produce metadata
for automatically generated 3D models, and the ability of
previewing and partitioning large models before downloading. This second advantage is interesting for cooperative
work with complex 3D models in distributed environments:
content and structure of a document can be adapted to the
connection bandwidth and the local computing performance
of users.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 3 introduces
a generic distributed architecture for digital documents and
common retrieval techniques. In section 4, the technique for
retrieval of 3D models by shape information is described.
In section 5, an extension for semi-automatic retrieval and
partial geometry download is presented. Finally, in section
5 and 6 results are presented, conclusions are drawn and
points for future work are outlined.

3.1 A distributed WWW-database architecture
The above document definition facilitates management
and use of collections of heterogeneous documents by
means of database and WWW technology in a distributed
environment. The architecture presented here is assembled
of a database and a WWW server with an internal module
for a server-side scripting language on the one side and a
WWW browser with plug-ins and additional external applications on the other side. The client and server are connected via Internet using the HTTP protocol. The use of
the server-side scripting language PHP [4] allows embedding of commands in HTML and controlling the database
via SQL statements. On client-side the WWW-interface of
the database uses HTML-forms to let the user select document components by name, format and other metadata. The
described environment is shown in Figure 1.

+

n

r - - - - 1

I

text
I
images
@ 3D geometry
I
video

Select by
- name
- format etc

0 isplay with.
- Dluains
external
applications

Figure 1 . Distributed WWW environment for
digital documents in databases.

3 Heterogeneous digital documents in distributed environments
3.2 Retrieval of digital documents using contentindependent metadata

A digital document assembled of data like text, images,
video, audio and 3D geometry is described best by separation of structure and content. The structure, commonly described by content-independent metadata, gives the source,
the format, the author and so forth for the document components. The content of a document means the data belonging
to a component, e.g. image data in an appropriate image
format. A widely used standard for content-independent
metadata is the Dublin Core [3], which describes a document by a fixed set of attributes like title, author, format,
resource identifier etc. The content of a document is linked
to the document by the resource identifiers included in the
metadata. A heterogeneous document is then a digital unity

A standard method for retrieval in databases is querying
by metadata. This kind of retrieval is structure-based which
means that a text search is performed over the existing metadata in the database. For improved performance with large
databases, an index for searching through the metadata is
created and maintained. If an SQL query statement is successful and a component is found, e.g. an image or a 3D
model, the metadata are displayed or the content is transmitted to the client browser by the HTTP protocol. On clientside a plug-in or an external application is started which can
handle the data described by the given MIME-type.

83

Besides structure-based retrieval of digital documents,
also content-based methods exist, these are applied directly
to the content. Examples for content-based retrieval are
full-text search and image retrieval with feature vector techniques. In the next section a content-based retrieval method
for visual content is described. It is then used to retrieve 3D
models as part of digital documents.

are: Virage Search Engine by Virage Corporation, QBIC
by IBM Corporation and Visual Retrievalware by Excalibur
Technologies Corporation.

3.3 Content-based visual retrieval using perceptual features

The described method for content-based image retrieval
is now applied to shape images of 3D objects which are generated using a server-side scanning module. The 3D models
selected from a database are processed in this module with
a ray scanning method, which uses a ray tracer for segmentation and image generation of objects of the 3D model [7].
The output of the virtual scanning are shape images of all
objects visible in certain views which are automatically chosen as representative for the model. The next steps are generation and comparison of the feature vectors of all shape
images with the input image given by the user. The retrieval
process together with the internal extraction of shape images is shown as an example in Figure 2. For every model
processed by the scanning module a score is generated by
the database system which allows to find the best-fitting 3D
model compared to the user's graphical input.

4 Retrieval of 3D models by visual shape information

Applying numeric descriptions of perceptual features of
images - like color, texture, shape, image structure or spatial relationships - for visual information retrieval is a commonly used technique. A content-based visual retrieval system processes the information contained in image data and
creates an abstraction of its content in terms of visual attributes. Any database query operations deal solely with
this abstraction rather than with the image itself. Thus every
image inserted into the database is analyzed, and a compact
representation of its content is stored in a feature vector,
or signature. The feature vector used here contains information about the following visual attributes: global color,
local color, texture and structure (shape) [5].The visual attributes_xi are the components of the n-dimensional feature
vector f,, where n is the number of used features:

L=(

:I)

Content-based

2 71

The matching process requires that feature vectors be
generated for the comparison image and each image to be
compared with it. Images are seldom identical, and therefore matching is based on a similarity-measuring function
for the visual attributes xi and a normalized set of weights
wxi for each feature. A score is generated which represents
the relative distance dxi for each feature between two images being compared. The degree of similarity S(A,B) for
two images A and B is then computed by evaluating the
weighted sum of the distances, or scores [ 5 ] :

Input:
User's Sketch

n

S ( A ,B ) =

C(%,* dZt( A ,B ) )

Retrieval Output:

(1)

3D Model

i=O

If the degree of similarity for the visual attributes is less
than or equal to an adjustable threshold, the images match.
A default search model compares the signature of the query
image to the signatures of all images stored in a database.
Because the visual properties are represented as points in a
multi-dimensional metric feature space, an index structure
can be created. Using an index avoids linear search through
the entire database and improves performance [ 6 ] . Examples for visual information retrieval systems available today

Figure 2. Example for visual .3D retrieval:
user input (above), internal shape information
(middle) and retrieved 3D model (bottom).
This score expresses accordance between parts of a
model or the whole model with the user's query. The re-

84

5 Semi-automatic retrieval and geometry
download of parts of large 3D models

H TTP

v

Large digital document collections containing 3D models require possibilities for semi-automatic retrieval to restrict the search space. When in addition the geometric
models are complex and of large size, it is furthermore interesting for users to be able to select only parts of them
for download. This is described here using again the distributed environment of the above sections. The architecture
is extended by an interactive image display on the clientside. This interactive display enables the user to view preselected models that are processed by the server-side retrieval module. The client can interactively manipulate the
3D view on server-side and select a 2D area within the display which is used to select bounding boxes of objects. With
this functionality it is now possible to retrieve 3D models
semi-automatically and select single 3D objects for geometry download. The extended WWW architecture is shown
in Figure 4.

best fitting model
]geometry

I

‘1 I

score value

I
I
I

Figure 3. Distributedenvironment for contentbased retrieval of 3D models.

trieved model is then shown by metadata as a link on the
return HTML-page of the client browser for further preprocessing on the server or is directly transmitted to the client’s
local computer.

Step a: Select model by

- name

Figure 3 shows the distributed environment again, now
extended by the content-based retrieval module which is assembled of the virtual scanning component and image comparison component. The input of the module are 3D models stored in the database, the output are numeric signatures
for each model. The performance of the system can be improved by creating an index over the signatures of all 3D
models in the database off-line and using this index for retrieval. When a user’s graphical or image input is sent to
the server, a signature for this image is generated and compared with the signatures of the database content. For this
purpose the index over the shape images of the 3D objects
is used. The best-fitting model is selected by evaluating the
score values given by the similarity metric. To optimize the
search the parameters for the feature vector generation and
the similarity threshold can be changed via the WWW interface. The server-side retrieval module is implemented as
an Java application, which is controlled by PHP scripts.

Steps b8-c: Select object by
-

image area
or view

geometly
:“parism
I

shape areas
of 3D objeds

I
I
l

lnteraceve dsiplay
image of 3D model

I
I

Figure 4. Distributed environment for semiautomatic retrieval and partial geometry
download.
The retrieval process can be described in three steps,
which lead to a new search or a download of geometric object data:
Step a: Models are preselected by metadata like name
or format and a list of selected models is presented to the
user.
Step b: Now a first run of the content-based retrieval
with a graphical user input is performed. The user can
view retrieved models using images generated by the virtual scanning component. It is possible to adjust views for
a new retrieval and to give a relevance feedback using the
score.

To improve the retrieval results an approach for semiautomatic retrieval with additional classification by the user
is intended. The client should be able to preselect document
components by metadata to restrict the retrieval space beforehand. For the presented approach this means that a form
of interactivity like relevance feedback is useful and that a
user should be enabled to choose their own views for scanning of 3D models. A technique for this semi-automated
retrieval and for the download of parts of large models is
described in the next section.

85

Step c: If no new retrieval is intended, the user searches
visually in one model and marks a 2D image area for an
object on the display. A comparison of this image area with
the shape areas of the processed 3D model identifies the
object, which is intended to be downloaded.
If a structure of the 3D model is stored along with the
metadata, the object can be found easily by its identifier.
If no structure of the model is known in the document, the
object is delivered directly out of the scanning module using
the internal scene structure.

3
Input:
User's Sketch

6 Results
The content of the 3D database used for testing comprised different types of 3D geometric data like objects produced by modeling tools as well as objects produced with
a 3D scanning device. The scanned 3D mesh of a marble
bust shown in figure 5 is an example which was produced
at our institute for a digital library project. The 3D models
were stored in the database as large binary objects with no
additional information of their structure and shape provided
by metadata. In figure 5 further examples of the collection
of digital 3D models stored in the database are presented.

Retrieval Output:
3D Model

Figure 6. Visual 3D retrieval with object
sketches: user input (left side) and retrieved
3D model (right side)
The generic architecture for metadata-based retrieval of
distributed digital documents was tested with all types of
data, whereas special effort was spent on testing the contentbased retrieval method for 3D models in the WWWdatabase environment. The test results showed that the proposed technique for content-based retrieval of 3D data in
distributed Web databases worked well in connection with
the content-based image retrieval system provided by the
used database [5].Figure 6 shows a retrieval example with
an object sketch as user input (left side) and the retrieved
3D model (right side). This example demonstrates the possibility to retrieve parts of 3D models and to download them
as geometry.

7

Conclusions and future work

A distributed architecture for retrieval and work with heterogeneous digital documents was presented. A method
for retrieval of 3D models using content-based image retrieval functionality of a database system was introduced
and an implementation within the generic distributed architecture was described. To optimize the search results a
semi-automatic retrieval technique, which makes relevance
feedback and geometry download of single 3D objects possible, was presented. The advantages of retrieval of 3D
models using content-based techniques was outlined for distributed Web databases like digital libraries.
Next steps will be the improvement of the retrieval functionality by evaluating different content-based image retrieval systems and their benefits for 3D model retrieval.
An extension of the system using MPEG-7 [8] descriptor
schemes is planned. The longterm aim is the realization of

Figure 5. Examples of 3D models in the
database.

86

a cooperative 3D visual interface for digital library documents in distributed environments, which allows adaptability of structure and content. Another important direction of
work will be the evaluation of the approach presented here
for the protection of intellectual property rights of valuable
content in distributed visualization environments. The possibility to retrieve and visualize digital 3D documents without the need of transmission of protected data, while other
unprotected data of the same document can be downloaded,
is a great benefit which offers a flexible method for working
with distributed database content.

References
[ 13 J. Yi, D. Chelberg, ”Model-based 3D Object Recogni-

tion Using Bayesian Indexing”, Computer Vision and
Image Understanding, V01.69, No. I , 1998, pp. 87-105.
[2] D.W. Fellner, M. Zens, ”Management and Workflow of
Electronic Documents using a 2nd-Generation WWWServer”, Proceedings WebNet 99, 1999, pp. 354-359.

[3] S. Weibel, J. Kunze, C. Lagoze and M. Wolf, ”Dublin
Core metadata for Resource Discovery”, IETF Znformational RFC, (http:Nwww.ietf.orglrfc/rfc2413.txt), 1998.
[4] L. Atkinson, Core PHP programming: Using PHP to
Build Dynamic Web Sites, Markt und Technik, ISBN:
013020787X. 1999.
[5] Oracle& Visual Information Retrieval User’s Guide
and Reference, Oracle 8.1.5 Documentation, 1999.
[6] A. Del Bimbo, Visual Information Retrieval, Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, ISBN 1-55860-624-6,1999.
[7] A. Glassner, Principles of Digital Image Synthesis
V01.2, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, ISBN 1-55860276-3, 1999, pp. 987-1052.

[SI E. Paquet, M. Rioux, ”The MPEG-7 Standard and
the Content-based-Management of Three-dimensional
Data: A Case Study”, International Conference on Multimedia Computing and Systems, 1999, pp. 375-380.

87

