Extracting Geometric Models of Muscles from the Visible Human Data
Feng Dong, Gordon J. Clapworthy, Jialiang Yao, Meleagros Krokos
Department of Computer & Information Sciences, De Montfort University,
Milton Keynes MK7 6Hp, United Kingdom.

(fdong, gc, jyao, melk]@dmu.ac.uk
Abstract

Among all the approaches regarding human modelling,
those based on anatomy may have the greatest potential. A
recent example by Savenko et al. [81 adapted work by Van
Sint Jan et al. [9,10] on knee kinematics to create an
improved joint model for figure animation that is more in
keeping with the biomechanics data that is now becoming
available.
If the models are to represent effectively the full
complexity of the human body, then muscle simulation is
one of the fundamental areas that has to be addressed.
There exists a wide variety of irregular muscle forms.
Muscles fall into several categories, such as fusiform,
unipennate, bipennate, multipennate, triangular, and muscles
within a category may, in fact, be quite different from one
another. Muscles also stretch across joints and are arranged
alongside or on top of each other, so there is regular
interaction with other moving or deformable parts of the
anatomy.
In fact, muscle structure is so complex that it is unlikely
that a general muscle model will succeed. This provides the
motivation of the current work on anatomy-based muscle
simulation in which the geometry of each individual muscle
is modelled according to its features.
This paper introduces the concepts behind this work and
describes how muscle features were extracted from the
Visible Human data to build the geometric models. Each
muscle was built individually, based on its own features.
The objective of this modelling approach is to build a
graphics model that is closer to the real anatomical structure
than previous work. The initial focus has been on the muscle
structure of the lower limb and the knee joint. However, the
techniques could be applied equally well to modelling any
other muscular structures within the body.
The structure of the paper is as follows. A summary of
models developed by previous authors is presented in
Section 2, and the major features of our approach are
developed in Section 3. Early results are illustrated in
Section 4 and the nature of current and future work is
described in Section 5.

Miiscle simulation should be an inrportant component of
hirtrrarr tnodellirig, but to date there have been f e w attempts
io d r t n ~ n ~ t r a rnuscle
te
structures in an anatoniically-correct
ivaj.. This paper proposes a feature-based approach to
trri~.scle tnodelling which attempts to provide models f o r
/ r ~ ~ t t r ~ i t tirusculnture
r
based on the real anatomical
sii~iictiirrs.Tlirse models provide a good visual description
i i i r t l f~iriir ( I sound basis f o r fiirther developnients towards
i t r ~ ~ l i ~ ~ r l l j ~ - ~sitnulation
i ~ ~ i i r a t eof Iiurirari bodies. To allow
/?it. the \c:irle Lqariety of rnuscle shapes encountered in the
Dortj.. i l i e geometric models are based on rnuscle features
itlrirrified fr-otrr radiological data. These results are realistic
rtrorlel.~with correct ariatotnical structures.

1. Introduction
I-luman simulation is an area of computer graphics that
has attracted much attention for many years. Computer
games and the entertainment industry are making increasing
use o f avatars, and the modelling both of body shape and of
body movement continues to improve.
As technology has progressed, the methods adopted to
tackle the complex problems involved with body modelling
have become increasingly sophisticated, and the flood of
technical publications in this area shows no sign of abating.
Nevertheless, it is clear the considerable work remains to
be done in providing models that fully represent the
complexity of the human body and that allow animators to
express the subtlety of form and movement inherent in the
human figure.
Researchers that have been engaged in this area include
Hodgins & Pollard [ 13, Gleicher [2], Laszlo [3], Funge et al.
[4], Maurel & Thalmann[S], Scheepers et al. [6] and
Wilhelms & Gelder[7]. In most of the published work, the
authors have adopted very simplified models. These models
might be suitable the authors’ purposes, but cannot truly be
considered to represent the functioning of an actual body.

362
0-7695-0743-3/00 $10.00 0 2000 LEEE

2. Related work

3. Geometric modelling

In many recently-published papers, the human figure is
represented using a layered model, rather than a simple linesegment skeleton. Such a model normally has four layers,
consisting of a skeleton, muscle, fatty tissue and skin.
This is an important step in the direction of
anatomically-based modelling and can be found in the work
of, amongst others, Chadwick et al. [ 113 who presented a
method for layered construction of flexible animated
characters, Kalra et al. [12] who built a single system of
simulating a virtual human which allows real-time
animation, Gourret et al. [ 131 and Turner et al. [14].
However, none of these built each individual model in an
anatomically-based way. Other work includes that of Chen
& Zeltzer [15] who developed a finite-element model to
simulate the force of a few individual muscles and visualise
the deformations, and Maurel & Thalmann [5] who did a
case study on human upper-limb modelling for dynamic
simulation, which performed a biomechanics-based analysis
on both skeleton and muscles.
Our work is closer to that of Scheepers et al. [6] and
Wilhelms & Gelder [7], in which muscles were modelled
according to their anatomical structure.
Scheepers’ work was motivated by an artistic study of
anatomy; it used ellipsoids as the graphical primitives for
the muscle belly on which a more sophisticated model was
built. However, we argue that, as muscle form varies
greatly, the use of any specific kind of primitive will create
an artificial effect in both shape and texture.
Wilhelms & Gelder introduced a general muscle
primitive, the “deformed cylinder”, to model various types
of muscle. Human intervention was necessary to modify the
default muscle type to create the particular form required in
each case. The muscle deformation was greatly simplified,
as the purpose was mainly to produce good visual effects.
The motivation for our work comes from a
biomechanics-based project, VAKHUM, funded by the
European Commission. Part of this project relates to the
teaching of functional anatomy, so it is important to develop
a model that is not only visually accurate, but is sufficiently
robust to demonstrate muscle shape and behaviour for a
wide variety of movements while requiring as little
intervention as possible.
We do not claim that the model we present here is, at the
moment, totally anatomically accurate, but we do feel that it
represents progress towards such a model.
The VAKHUM project will produce complete sets of
high-quality biomechanics data and will be a rich source
from which to extend the current muscle models to include
other tissue types and, thus, provide a comprehensive
resource for human simulation containing a greater degree
of medical accuracy than is presently the case.

A muscle is normally attached to the bones at two
locations, through tendons. One attachment is mostly fixed
and is called the ORIGIN, while the other is considered to
be the more movable part and is termed the INSERTION.
For simplicity, most of our muscle models contain both the
muscle bodies and their tendons in one geometric surface.
This is because, from a geometric viewpoint, the tendons
can be regarded as extensions of the main muscle bodies.
Thus, we consider that the muscle models are attached
directly to the bones.
To create the geometric models, we first find the
geometric features of the muscle from well-segmented
Visible Human data and build the models based on these
features. Two advantages of this approach are that the
resulting shape is very realistic and that little human
intervention is required. In this section, we discuss the two
key techniques relating to this issue:
0
analysing and extracting the features from the muscles
modelling the muscle geometry via B-spline surfaces.

3.1 Analysis of the features
We analyse the geometric features of a muscle via its
cross-sectional contours on the 2D slices in the data. Within
the slice, we require the straight line p =xcos6 +ysin6 ,
which is defined relative to the local x-y co-ordinate system
within the slice. Here, p is the distance from the origin to the
line and 8 defines the line direction - see Figure 1.

Figure 1. Straight line p = xcos6 + ysin6

For each contour, we compute the following features:
Area, S
S is computed as the number of pixels inside the contour.
Direction Radius, R( @),andDirection Diameter, D( 8)
The direction radius R(8) and diameter D(8) are the radius
and diameter along 8 , respectively, and can be defined as

we) = -2l 0r m

363

m p ,

o(e)= R ( o ) + -

As we know, subdivision can be used to create uniform
and non-uniform B-splines: starting from the mesh of
control points, we obtain the B-spline surface by
subdividing the control mesh repeatedly. This subdivision
scheme is used here to fit a B-spline surface to the key
contours. The algorithm starts by initialising the mesh of
control points to an ellipsoid that approximates the muscle
shape, then successively employs the following steps:

'[

2

n(p.n+e)dp ,

where n(p,8) is the number of intersections between the
contour and the straight line. In this work, R(8) is used to
calculate the Circumference (see below), and D(8) in four
directions { O", 45", 90", 135" } is to used as features.
CircutnJerence, L

Subdivision. For a fixed control-point mesh, compute the
B-spline subdivision (we use subdivision level 5 in
practice) to produce the points r&,......riii.

Once we define R( e),then L can be computed as
?n

Matching. For each data point Co.......,
on the contours,
find the closest point among ii,,......ni,.
Direction Concavity, Con(@

4. Results

Direction concavity can be used to measure the concavity
along direction 8. If we define
./(U) =

then

I

F(p,O)dp+

Con(@ = D ( 8 ) /.I(8) ,

where F(p,8) = I if the straight line intersects the contour.
e k e FIp, 3) = 0.
As in the case of D ( 8 ) . me >elect 4 directions ot' Coir( 8)
{ 0".4.5''. OO", 135" ) as features.
Ge/leru/ Concfrlity, GCorl

GCoii is a general measurement of the concavity of the
contour
GC'O!I = I.I?Lf,,,
3n

';I

.I,,, = - J ( O ) t l O
'J-t

l h e s e features of a contour form a multi-dinien4onal
vector !S, D(0). D(4.5). D(Y0). D( 135). L. Con(O), Co/i(45),
Con(YO), Con( 13.5), GCO/l/.
Based on the feature vector of each contour, we select
some key contours and put them into a set, which is used for
the geomztric modelling at the next step. The distance
between the feature vectors of two successive key contours
musi be beyond a pre-defined threshold.

3.2 B-spline expression
Figure 2. Results of Muscle Modelling

The geometric models are represented by third-degree Bspline surfaces, the input for which are the key contour sets
that were built in Section 3.1.
The problem is then as follows: given several contours,
find a B-spline control polygon mesh to fit the data.
Our solution is based on subdivision and is similar to that
of Hoppe et al. [16], but uses B-splines rather than the Loop
scheme since our goal is a B-spline representation.

Figure 2 shows results from the geometric modelling. The
upper picture illustrates models of individual muscles, while
the lower one shows a model of the whole leg. Using the
algorithm described in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, these muscle
models were produced with little human intervention.
By using the B-spline expression, the models are very
concise. Table 1 indicates the size of some of the models.

3 64

Also, from Figure 2 we can see that the muscle shape varies
greatly from one to another. It would be very cumbersome
to have to produce these manually.

References
1. J.K. Hodgins and N.S. Pollard, “Adapting Simulated
Behaviors for New Characters”, Proc. SIGGRAPH’97, pp.
153-162, 1997
2. M. Gleicher, “Retargetting Motion to New Characters”, Proc.
SIGGRAPH’98, pp. 33-42, 1998
3. J. Laszlo, “Limit Cycle Control and its Application to the
Animation of Balancing and Walking”, Proc. SIGGRAPH ’96,
pp. 155-162, 1996
4. J. Funge, X. Tu and D. Terzopoulos, “Cognitive Modeling:
Knowledge, Reasoning and Planning for Intelligent
Characters”, Proc. SICGhlAPH’99, pp. 29-38, 1999
5. W. Maurel and D. Thalmann, “A Case Study Analysis on
Human Upper Limb Modeling for Dynamic Simulation”.
Journal of Compurer Methods iri Bioriiechariics atid
Biomechanical Engineering, V01.2, No I , pp. 65-82, 1999
6. F. Scheepers, R.E. Parent, W.E. Carlson and S.F. May.
“Anatomy-Based Modeling of the Human Musculature”,
Proc. SIGGRAPH’97, pp. 163-172, 1997
7. J. Wilhelms and A.V. Gelder, “Anatomically-Based
Modeling”,Proc. SIGGRAPH’97, pp. 173-180, 1997.
8. A. Savenko, S.L. Van Sint Jan and G.J. Clapworthy. “A
Biomechanics-Based Model for the Animation of Human
Locomotion”, Proc GraphiCon ’99,Moscow. pp 82-87, I999
9. S. Van Sint Jan, G.J. Clapworthy, M. Rooze, “Visualization
of Combined Motions in Human Joints”, IEEE Cornpitto.
Graphics & Applications, Vol. 18, No 6, pp 10-14, 1998
10. S.L. Van Sint Jan, P. Salvia, G.J. Clapworthy and M. Rooze.
“Joint-Motion Visualization using Both Medical Imaging and
3D-Electrogoniometry”, Proc I 7rh Congress I~irernariotiul
Society of Biomechanics, Calgary (Canada),August 1999
11. J.E. Chadwick, D.R. Haumann and R.E. Parent, “Layered
Construction for Deformable Animated Characters.”,
Computer Graphics, Vol. 23, pp. 243-252, 1989
12. P. Kalra, N. Magnenat Thalmann, L. Moccozet, G. Sannicr.
A. Aubel and D. Thalmann, “Real-time Animation of
Realistic Virtual Humans”, IEEE Compicter Graphics mid
Applications, Vo1.18, No5, pp. 42-55, 1998.
13. J. P. Gourret, N. Magnenat Thalmann and D. Thalmann.
“Simulation of Object and Human Skin Deformations in
Grasping”, Computer Graphics, Vol. 23, pp. 21-30, 1989.
14. R. Tumer and D. Thalmann. “The Elastic Surface Layer
Model for Animated Character Construction.” In : N.
Magnenat-Thalmannand D. Thalmann (eds), Communicating
with Virtual Worlds, Springer Verlag, pp. 399-412, 1993
15. D.T. Chen and D. Zeltzer, “Pump it up: Computer Animation
of a Biomechanically Based Model of Muscle Using the
Finite Element Method.”, Computer Graphics, Vol. 26, No.2,
pp. 89-98, 1992
16. H. Hoppe, T. DeRose, T. Duchamp, M. Halstead, H. Jin, J.
McDonald, J. Schweitzer, W. Stuetzle, “Piecewise Smooth
Surface Reconstruction”,Proc. SIGGRAPH ’94, pp. 295-302

Table 1. Model Sizes in Terms of Control Points

Muscle Name
Vastus Lateralis
Rectus Femoris
Semimembranosus
Sartorius
Soleus

Model Size
10 x 20
8 x 16
7x6
36 x 6
l o x 18

5. Conclusion
This paper describes a general approach to human muscle
simulation in which we attempt to deal with each muscle
based on its individual features, so it is representative of the
real anatomical structure. The purpose of this paper is not
just to achieve a good visual result, but also to provide a
good base from which to produce a more comprehensive
human model with greater medical accuracy in the future.
Features are extracted from well-segmented radiological
data to establish the muscle models. This is a simple way to
set up realistic muscle models with little human labour and
it produces realistic-looking muscle models across the
whole range of muscle types, while retaining the correct
anatomical structures for all the muscles.
The VAKHUM project, funded by the EC, will gather
highly-accurate data on joint motion, including secondary
motions. Combining the muscle model developed here with
an accurate model of joint movement will provide, for the
first time, a realistic three-dimensional picture of the
interaction of bone and muscle during joint movement.
W e believe that the work in this paper brings us one step
closer to realistic human modelling. We feel that we are
now well placed to extend the work to consider more
advanced issues, such as muscle deformation, volumetric
modelling of muscle and tendon fibres, the configuration of
which exhibits great variation within the muscle volume
amongst the various muscles. This issue is interesting not
only because modelling the complicated configuration is a
challenge, but also because fibre orientation is important to
the way in which a muscle contracts.

Acknowledgements
This research is supported by the Information Society
Technologies Programme of the European Commission
within the project VAKHUM (IST- 1999-10954), and the
Chinese National Natural Science Fund (No.69703004).
We express our great appreciation of the assistance and
support provided by Dr. Serge Van Sint Jan, Dept. of
Anatomy, University of Brussels .

365

