Visual Communication for the Masses
James L. Mohler
Department of Computer Graphics
Purdue University

Abstract
Visualcommunication is vitally important to a
variety of disciplines. Generally information is communicated in a way deemed appropriatefor the discipline,
governed by established rules based on prior research.
However, when communicating to general audiences en
masse, it is imperative that information be presented as
simply as possible - the rules governing specialized
scientific communication may or may not be applicable.
In short, accessing information should be straightforward, allowing the user to eflciently gain the knowledge
for which they are searching. Visual content that is
presented should be clear, concise and accurate. With
this in mind, this contribution discusses issues related to
delivering spatially oriented data to the generalpopulace. Communication through computer graphics should
befor the masses as much as it isfor individual disciplines. As such, thefirst portion of this paper examines
issues related to visual communicationfor the mass
population. The later halfof this contribution examines
one such resource being usedfor visualization and
communication at Purdue University.

communication and success within a variety of fields.
Typically content within scientific visualization deals with
spatial ability related to information that is physically
derived, while information visualization deals with semantic
relationships that may or may not be linked to physical
phenomena [9]. In both, spatial ability is paramount to the
creation, design, communication, interpretation and
understanding of information.
At a minimum, most researchers agree that spatial
ability includes at least two fundamental capacities:
visualization and orientation. The capability to mentally
construct objects and environments from pictorial or
multiview drawings as well as from verbal descriptions of
events, processes, objects or environments is defined as
visualization. The second attribute, orientation, is the
relationship of the object or environment to the viewer and
includes the ability to transform oneself or objects in the
environment mentally. The combination of these two
components generally forms the accepted basis for spatial
ability and the capacity for understanding and manipulating
mental imagery [lo].
Because spatial ability is foundational to many
disciplines, experts spend significant amounts of time
developing and testing techniques for increasing the spatial
abilities of students.Numerous techniques are deployed and
debated in an effort to increase this cognitive capacity within
students. However, the goal of this paper is not to support
or refute the research being performed to enhance spatial
abilities or the communication of spatial information to
specialized audiences. Rather, its focus is toward the
concem for the visualization ability of the general populace
and the means by which information can be communicated
to them using web-based media. Such materials should be
govemed by principles of design, communication, scientific
visualization, information visualization, human computer
interaction and technology. However, it is known that the
spatial skills of most people are quite limited and that this
usually limits their understanding of spatially oriented data.
So, too, materials designed for a general audience must also
take this into consideration.

Keywords: visualization, communication, visual communication.

Introduction
Even with the resurgence of literature that includes
spatial ability as a factor of intelligence and even after 75
plus years of research conceming it, spatial ability is still
an ill-defined construct. Researchers have defined spatial
ability as composed of a myriad of different faculties and
they do not agree on all aspects of identifjlng and classifying
it [I, 2, 31. Indeed, many researchers have suggested that
the cognitive phenomena cannot be taught, nor that it can
be improved with practice. They state that it is an innate
ability [4,5,6]. However even at the time of these studies
several findings indicated the contrary, stating that spatial
ability could be improved with instruction [7, 81.
Regardless of the various intricacies of conflicting
viewpoints, it is true that spatial ability is vital to study,

105
0-7695-0743-3100 $10.00 0 2000 IEEE

Tufie’s analysis of the goal of informationvisualization
is simple, yet very true. Presenting the multivariate nature
of information in an oftentimes-constrictingmedium is the
primary difficulty of information and scientific visualization.
Whether information is based upon physical, biological,
imaginary or human aspects, the dimensionality of media
must be utilized in a way that is logical and appropriate for
the information. If a static page is used, certain constraints
exist as so aptly discussed by Tufte. However, constraints
also exist where interactive media is concerned. In both
scenarios, the standards for the presentation of data,
established by the interdisciplinary constituents that have
defined these rules through research, must be followed to
ensure that communication occurs. It must do so in a way
that maximizes impact and minimizes misinterpretationof
the message. Due to the shear mass of information that must
be consumed, comprehended and analyzed in today’s world,
messages that are difficult to interpret may be completely
ignored as Lindstrom indicates [ 161:

Information Visualization
When it concems the creation of information tools for
a mass audience, how should these tools be designed?
Should web-based communication resources assume a
certain level of visual ability? With media that compound
the possibilities provided to the user, how should users
interact with information and what techniques work best?
Given that the bulk of most mass audiences are
challenged when it comes to visual abilities, careful
consideration must be given to the methods used to
communicate to a mass audience. Communicating
information that is spatially dependent to a mass audience
must take into consideration the spatial ability weaknesses
of the general population, as well as the cultural and
environmental differences that might exist within it. These
materials must provide (a) appropriate and assiduous
labeling [ l 11, (b) obvious affordances and logical
informational controls [12], and (c) symbol systems that
are familiarto that audience [ 13,141.In general,information
resources for mass communication must be conscientiously
designed for the wide range of variables that exist within
the viewers. Often information designers create such
materials assuming a certain level of spatial ability. More
frequently, information is communicated at a level that
challenges the spatial ability of the audience for which it
was originally intended due to poor labeling, illogical
interfaces, or culturally based symbol systems that are not
global in nature.
Of the prominent researchers examining information
visualization and the presentation of visual materials, Tufte
presents the essence of the mission of information design
as well as its limitations [ 151. He describes the constraints
that the two-dimensional world poses on the communication
of information in the opening pages ofhis book Envisioning
Information:

The most striking paradox of the information age is
this: the more information we produce, the less
time we have to assimilate it. Even so, we are told
to expect the volume of information to continue to
multiply exponentially, theoretically without end.
That presents a profound challenge to businesses
and business people, who must find ways not only
to distill information into knowledge but also to
overcome the information repellents that people
naturally exude as the data swarms increase. In an
environment where an increasing volume of
information vies for the attention of individuals and
businesses with a finite capacity to absorb what is
being offered, your message can be easily lost,
misinterpreted, or ignored outright.
Business communication must happen faster, it
must be precisely targeted, and it must hit with the
maximum impact. How well you execute those
three requirements will determine, to a large extent,
how you are measu red by your customers and your
competition (pp. 3-4).

Even though we navigate through a perceptual
world of three spatial dimensions and reason
occasionally about higher dimensional arenas with
mathematical ease, the world portrayed on our
information displays is caught up in the twodimensionality of the endless flatlands of paper and
video screen. All communication between the
readers of an image and the makers of an image
must now take place on a two-dimensional surface.

Lindstrom and Tufte wrote in a day when desktop
computers with high-powered capabilities were limited much of our information design today has extremely rich
media available. Focusing design for the screen is less
limiting in that new media provides more avenues for
communication and, more importantly, direct interaction
with information. Whether it is mental or physical, it is
interaction that is key to the transmission and retention of a
message. The passive organism cannot exist nor succeed in
the communication process. In all individuals, active
processing must be made to occur.

Escaping thisflatland is the essential task of
envisioning information -for all the interesting
worlds (physical, biological, imaginary, and
human) that we seek to understand are inevitably
and happily multivariate in nature. Notflatlands.

106

For example, Lindstrom states, "that individuals retain
20 percent of what they hear, 40 percent of what they hear
and see, and 75 percent of what they hear, see, and do (p.
26)." Similarly,two other studies concur with this statement.
A 1987 study indicates that interactivity yields a 25 percent
increase in information retention [ 171 and a series of six
studies conducted from 1990 to 1992 show that users of
multimedia have a 55 percent gain in understanding over
traditional materials. These later studies indicate that
materials are understood 60 percent faster and long-term
(30-day) retention ranges from 25 to 50 percent higher [ 181.
Many more studies in a variety of disciplines show the
similar results as it relates to the positive affects of
interaction on retention -- interactivity appears be a global
variable that can increase retention.
Thus, in an effort to increase the efficiency and
effectiveness of web-based information, interactivity,
metaphorically based interfaces and three-dimensional
virtual worlds must all be exploited as much as the
technology and other limitations will allow. Similarly,
animation and sound must be used where applicable. All
these features extend the dimensionality of media, making
it more apposite for the communication of complex
information.

A narrated virtual tour of campus with integrated VR
components.
The ability to navigate the major academic buildings to
highlight specific accessibility-related information,
specialize facilities and the location of other intenal
points of interest.
Identification of fraternities, sororities, co-operative
housing, residence facilities, and parking facilities.
Visual representation of the local bus routes system in
relation to the campus.
Addition of a variety of information sections such as
general university information, historical information, .
the linkage between content web sites (departmental and
academic) and geographic information provided in the
Virtual Visit.
Maps and directions of the local city and surrounding
areas.
Adherence to the W3C WAI Priority I and/or I1
specifications.
Tracking of usage statistics.
The remainder of this contribution describes some of
these revisions, the technologies that were used to implement
them, and the problems that were encountered.

The Purdue University Virtual Visit
Using principles described by Tufie [161, Marcus [121
and others, in the summer of 1998 the Department of
Computer Graphics began developing a web-based
communication resource (in which visualization is a primary
factor) for individuals interested in attending and visiting
Purdue University's West Lafayette campus. The result was
an interactive campus map that provides information about
the various campus buildings using text, photographs and
VR elements. It also provided the ability to search for
specific buildings and the means for the user to navigate
the campus using a unique, vector-based graphical user
interface. The completed interactive site, titled The Purdue
University Virtual Visit,became available in August of 1998
[19]. The main interface for the site is displayed in Figure

-..

-I

.-

Figure 1. The Purdue University Virtual Visit v1.0
interface.

1.

Following its release, the Virtual Visit gained significant
attention because it provided easy acce ss to geographic
information commonly requested from a variety of
individuals. As a result of many presentations and meetings,
hrther additions to the site were proposed and supported
by the University and other agencies. These additions
included

Interface, Content and User Enhancements
Of the changes made to the Virtual Visit, one (of the
most significant was the redesign of the interface to include
easier navigation and to allow for the inclusion of a broader
range of content. The primary version of the site included a
single map and thus a single controller was sufficient (see

A narrated multimedia overview to provide an attractive
means for enticing users into the site.

107

Figure 1). However, with the addition of a multimedia
introduction, a narrated tour, 2D maps of campus as well as
other informational areas, it was decided that an interface
redesign would be needed. The existing interface could not
be modified appropriately to accommodate the additional
information. Also, it was believed that the redesigned
interface would acknowledge the significance of the rework
that had been performed. Figure 2 shows the revised
interface with its major controls located directly beneath
the heading bar.

aspect of this change was that the Java applet used required
complete 360 degree panoramas.

-

Figure 3. Tab controls were used to allow immediate
access to any of the maps.

Database Implementation

.o @

A crucial aspect to creating and maintaining large
web sites is the use and implementation of databases.
Databases provide several advantages not the least of which
include the ease of data management and the ability to query
various classification types. Additionally, database-driven
sites allow content fluidity and dynamism.
One of the significant problems of version 1.O of
the Virtual Visit was the mass of data used within the site.
Because the site included text and graphic data on every
campus building (totaling greater than 140), it was decided
that the structure for the site would be revised to store all
building and other asset data within a database rather than
as statically generated HTML pages. This would enable
quick addition of buildings to the site and easy modification

I

Figure 2. The Virtual Visit interface was redesigned to
allow a greater amount of content.
As with the first version, thc second version
utilized Macromedia Flash, a vector-based authoring tool.
Several new features of the software were utilized, such a
variable-based fields, scripting control within the software,
and extemal communication to databases and other scnpting
languages. The flexibility provided by the software allowed
almost anything to be generated. For example, to
accommodate the 3 D and 2 D maps, tab controls were added
to the main content screen to allow immediate access to
any of the maps contained within the Campus Map section,
as shown in Figure 3. A significant aspect of the map
components is that each is less than 150 KB, meaning that
over the slowest of modems each component requires
approximately a minute and a half of download time.
An additional change as a result of the IV'99
conference was the integration of Java applets for the VR
components used within the site. As per discussion at that
meeting, it was decidcd that a Java applet could more readily
deliver the VR componcnts with much less download timc
than the prior technology, Apple QuickTimeVR. Through
the use of Java applets, the data delivery requirement for
the VR components was reduced from 200 KB each to 50
KB each. Additionally, because Java applets were used, no
plug-ins where required for viewing. The only negative

SQL Database

Figure 4. Virtual Visit database structure.

108

of data already associated with the site. To implement the
structure shown in Figure 4 and given the technologies
available, the final implementation was based around
Microsoft SQL Server and Active Server Pages (ASP). As
shown in Figure 4, the vector-based map, designed in
MacromediaFlash 4, would pass the selected building name
to an ASP page. ASP would in turn pull the associated data
from the database to populate the building pages. Similarly,
managing the building data would be accomplished using a
custom-created management console with a similar process.
Key to revising the site for use with the database was
finding ways for the database to not only house content but
also directives for the display of the content. For example,
clicking on each building in the map initiates a pop-up
window in which text and graphic content about the building
is displayed as shown in Figure 5. Because the amount of
text changes per each building, it was desired that the size
of the pop-up window also fluctuate so that the content
would fit appropriately. The size specificationsfor the popup windows would be stored as a field in the building's
recordset. However, the implementation of this capability
required a somewhat complex workaround using frames
and JavaScript.

2ndmhp *.v ¶r>L"?...V.
mL*y2%:.--=-=---

r,.rs.-yM

the building name passed to it. The ASP code then generates
the appropriate JavaScript and HTML code. Up to this point
the code is generated for the window, but not yet called
(the pop-up window is not yet initiated). To open the popup window, contained within the generated page is an onload
Javascnpt function. This opens the pop-up window once
the appropriate code is dynamically written to the blank
frame. It is this sequence of events that allows both the
content and directives to be stored and dynamically pulled
from the database, Figure 8 shows the ASP code that is
loaded into the blank frame.
Heada tram

,
r

Content frame

Footer frame

Hidifen frame

Figure 6. The frameset structure for the Virtual Visit
includes a hidden frame.

B

Figure 5. Pop-up windows were used to display
information about each building.

+

The main aspect of allowing the pop-up window size
parameters to reside in the database was the inclusion of a
blank frame at the bottom of the frameset structure for the
interface. As shown in Figure 6,the frameset group included
a header section, a content section, a footer section, and a
blank 1 percent frame at the bottom.
As shown in Figure 7, when the user clicks on a building
in the map (located in the content section of the frameset),
an ASP page is directed to load into the blank frame at the
bottom of the frameset. During this call, the building name
is passed in the URL to the ASP page from the Flash map in
the content window. When the ASP page is loaded, it
dynamically pulls its content from the database based upon

.-_
.-*..
- _-...
"I-.
... ......

0

Figure 7. The process for dynamically generating
content and directives.

109

eh@Language=VBScript%>

Purdue community. Additionally, the database used for the
Virtual Visit is also serving as a means to provide a unified

<YOset dataconn = server.CreateObject("AD0DB.Connection")
dataConn.ConnectionString= "DRIVER={SQL Server};
SERVER=sotdb2.tech.purdue.edu;DSN=cg; UID=cgweb;
PWD=Graphics"
dataConn.Open
set cmd = server.CreateObject("AD0DB.Command")
setrst = server.CreateObject("AD0DB.Recordset")
cmd.ActiveConnection= dataconn
strSQL = "SELECT * FROM Ljlmohler].blddataWHERE name = "
tempstr = ""' & Request.QueryString("bldname") &
strSQL = strSQL& tempstr
cmd.CommandText= strSQL
set rst = cmd.ExecuteY+
<HTMD<HEAD>
<SCRIPT LANGUAGE="JavaScript"x!-function openbldwin(args) (
var name = navigator.appName
var URL = window.1ocation.href
var mylocation = unescape(URL.substring(O,(URL.lastIndexOf("/")) +

approach to delivering media assets throughout the
university. Future work on this initiative is being proposed
as is work on the Virtual Visit site.

References
[l] Pellegrino, J., Alderton, D. & Shute, V. (1984).

""I

Understanding spatial ability. Educational Psvcholoeisf
19, 3, 239-253.
[2] Lghan, D.F. (1979). Spatial abilitv: A review and
reanalysis of the correlational literature (Technical Report
No. 8). Palo Alto, CA: Aptitude Research Project, School
of Education, Stanford University.
[3] McGee, M. G. (1979). Human spatial abilities: Psychometric
studies and environmental genetic, hormonal, and
neurological influences. Psvchological Bulletin, 86, 889918.
[4] McFie, J. (1973). Intellectual imbalance: A perceptual
hypothesis. British Journal of Social Clinical Psvcholopv,
12, 433-434.
[5] W%kin, H. (1969). Social influences in the development of
cognitive style. In D. Gaslin (Ed.), Handbook of
SocializationTheorv and Research, New York RandMcNally.
[6] Smith, I. M. (1964). Spatial Ability. San Diego, CA: Knapp.
[7] Debono, E. (1976). Teaching Thinking. London: Temple
Smith.
r81
- - Brinkman. E. (1966). Programmed instruction as a
technique fo; improvingspatial visualization. Journal of
ADdied Psvchology, 3,2, 179-184.
-191_Fowler, R. H., Fowler, W. A. & Williams, J. L. (1996). 3D
visuaiization of W N k semantic content for browsing and
query formulation. The Proceedings of WebNet'96.
Association for the Advancement of Computing in
Education, Charlottesville, VA producer and Distributor].
[lo] McCuistion, P. (1990). Static vs. dynamic visuals in
computer assisted instruction. ASEE Annual Conference
Proceedings, 143-147.
[Ill Morville, P. & Rosenfeld, L. (1998). Information
architecture for the World Wide Web. Cambridge: OReilly.
[I21 Marcus, A. (1992). Graphic design for electronic
documents and user interfaces.New York ACM Press.
[ 131 Gardner, H. (1984). Frames of mind. New York: Basic
Books.
[ 141 Horton, W. (1991). Illustrating computer documentation:
The art of presenting information maphicallv on paper and
online. New York John Wiley & Sons.
[15] Tufte, E. R. (1990). Envisioning information Cheshire, '
CN: Graphics Press.
[161 Lindstrom,R.L. (1994). The Business Week guide to
multimedia oresentations: create dvnamic presentations
that inspire. New York: McGraw-Hill.
[17] Kolowski, N. (1987, February). Development of
interactive instution materials. Instructional Delivem
Systems, 1, pp. 8.
[18] Adams, G. L. (1992, March). Why interactive?
Multimedia and Videodisc Monitol; 10, 20-24.
[19] The Purdue Universitv Virtual Visit [Online]. Available:
http://www.tech.purdue.edu/resources/map/.

1))

var H = <% Response.Write rst.Fields("pageheight") YO>
var W = <YOResponse.Write rst.Fields("pagewidth") YO>
if (name== "Microsoft Intemet Explorer"){
var myW = screen.availWidth
var myH = screen.availHeight
if( myW==l60011 myW==2048 11 myW==3200){
var myW = myW/2 )
) else (
var myW = window.outerWidth
var myH = window.outerHeight

varcenterH = myH*S-H*S
varcenterw =myW*S-W*.5
var mystring ="status=yes,resizable=yes,scrollbars=no,toolbar=no,
location=no,menu=no,height="+ H + ",width="+ W
openbld=window.open(mylocation + 'bldimghdex.asp?bldname='

args,

+

"openbld",mystring)

openbld.moveTo(centerW,centerH)
} /I-->

4SCRIP-E=AD>
<BODY TEXT="#000000"BGCOLOR="#FFFFFF"
LINK="#CC9900"VLINK="#993366"ALINK="#993366"
onload="openbldwin('<%=Request.QueryString("bldname") Y&');">
</BODY>
4HTMD

Figure 8. The ASP code for the building pages.

Conclusion
The process used to dynamically generate content and
directives for web pages has many applications. Throughout
the Virtual Visit site this technique is used to store as much
data as possible within the database while providing
maximum flexibility. Such techniques significantly reduce
the number of pages required for a web site and are a
necessity when databases are used as the backbone for
extensive sites.
Although the Virtual Visit continually being revised
and updated, the response to it has been tremendous. The
new version, release in April of 2000, is continuing to evolve
and is becoming a more widely used resource within the

110

