Information Visualization in Locating Obnoxious Facility:
some examples with mono and bicriteria models
Carlos Ferreira'.', Beatriz Sousa S a n t o ~ " ~

Sec@o Aut6noma de Gestiio e Engenharia Industrial, Universidade de Aveiro - Portugal
Departamento de Electr6nica e Telecomunicaq6es, Universidade de Aveiro - Portugal
3
CIO - Centro de Investigaqiio Operacional, Lisboa - Portugal
4
IEETA - Instituto de Engenharia Electr6nica e Telematica de Aveiro - Portugal

'

consequences. This is usually due to two important
factors:
- i t is not economically viable to install i n ever!
community its own facility;
- people, in spite of agreeing on the necessity 0 1 having
those facilities, naturally wish to have them installed as far
as possihle from their communities (ensuring, however.
the service).
This second point is usually reierrcd as the NIhl13)'
(Not-In-My-Back-Yard) syndrome [ I]. The reasonahlc
response to i t . in order to minimise the afl'ectcd peoples'
reaction, is tu make them understand the reason of the
chosen soltilion. For this to he possible, objective and
understandahlc procedures arc needed. Operation
Research (OR) methods have been used 121; namely
Location and Location-Routing models have been
developed for this type of circumstances and applied to
real cases 131. In these cases, the traditional optimality
criterion of "closeness", (i.e. a desire to locate the facility
as close as possible to the customer) is replaced by the
opposite criterion, i.e., how far away from the customers
can the facility be placed ensuring accessibility to the
demand points. In this context monocriteria models have
been used to locate obnoxious facilities [4] using as only
criterion the distance to the community. However, this is
often an over-simplified representation of the reality, since
other factors can be as relevant as the distance in the
location of the facilities. Thus, a better approximation
consists in using also other criteria (such as demand,
different types of cost, risk, equity, environmental issues,
etc.) in multicriteria Location models [ 5 ] .Even this use of
several criteria in the location may prove insufficient,
since in these problems, location and routing decisions are

Abstract

1 : Iiitroductioii
The ever-gro\viiig consciousness of the populations
to environmental prohlcins inadc their resolution a high
priority in many societies. Educators, politicians (whatever
affiliation they have), the mass media and the population
in general seem to agi-ee in defending the environment
preservation. However two questions are difficult to
overcome:
- who should pay the costs of solving these problems?
- where to locate the unpleasant facilities (as sewage
plants, landfills, incinerators) necessary to their solution?
Concerning the first question, what usually has been
done is taking the administrative way, i.e., forcing all
citizens to pay. The second question is more critical: the
location of this type of facilities in the neighbourhood of
any community results, generally, in a strong reaction that
may degenerate in public order alteration, having serious

439
0-7695-0743-3/00 $10.00 02000 IEEE

-

intimately related and combining both provides, in fact, a
better modelling [6,7]. However each of these
improvements implies an increase in complexity. Although
these methods could be used without the support of
specifically developed computational means, their
application to real-life cases will, in most circumstances,
be jeopardised by the huge demanded effort.
The "traditional" way of obtaining a solution or set
of alternative solutions for a real case of Facility Location
involves the following steps that must be performed by an
OR expert:
- obtaining the co-ordinates of the communities to be
served, as well as the possible locations for the facilities,
usually using a map;
- obtaining the needed parameters for the model to be used
(such as weights of communities, maximum and minimum
allowed distances);
- calculation of several distance matrices, needed for the
formulation of the model;
- introduction of the formulated model in a specific OR
software package, as CPLEX [8], which will produce a
solution; all these data is usually input and output in
numerical form;
- interpretation of the produced solution, usually made
using a graphical representation that have to be produced
by the user;
- repeating from the second step, until the obtained
solution is considered adequate.
Each of these steps can be very time consuming and
error prone. Moreover, some of these procedures demand
a lot of expertise in the used models as well as Operations
Research methods in general. As a consequence, the use of
Visualization and Human-Computer Interaction methods,
in order to facilitate the complete process becomes of the
utmost importance [9].
In this paper we will present the Visualization and
Human Computer Interaction issues and proposed
solutions concerning a set of specific cases of Location
and Location-Routing of obnoxious facilities, for urban
waste processing, using different approaches [9,10,11].
All the presented cases have been studied through the use
of prototypes developed for Windows platforms.

2: Visualization issues
The studied examples of obnoxious Facility Location
correspond to three different approaches of increasing
complexity:
- focused on an efficiency criterion (usually a distance):
monocriteria models;

considering also environmental criteria: bicriteria
models;
- combining location of the facilities with routing (i.e.,
optimising simultaneously the location of the facilities and
the routes that should be used for collectioddistribution of
the wastes).
As referred previously, several procedures involved
in all these approaches can be greatly facilitated by using
simple visualization and interaction techniques. The issues
and the found solutions for making easier these procedures
are presented in the next sections. All the described
visualization solutions were developed to be integrated
into a decision support software package and took into
consideration the profile of its target user. This user will
be in general someone with higher education (however not
necessarily an OR expert), having a good knowledge of
the task, at least reasonable computer literacy and that
most probably will use this methods infrequently.
According to this profile interaction and information
visualization methods were developed having as main
concem the ease to learn and remember [ 12,131.
Several interaction and information visualization
issues were encountered in all the studied cases; others
were specific only to some of them. Some of the most
interesting ones are concemed with:
- inputting and visualising locations;
- inputting links among communities and facilities;
- visualizing information concerning input or solution
characteristics (e.g. visual code used to represent different
values of each type of data as community size or facility
cost and risk) in decision space;
- visualizing solutions in criteria space;
- using time to facilitate the perception of the information
(e.g. animation of vehicle routes of each solution or
visualization of input data or solution characteristics at
different times).
All these issues will be illustrated with specific
examples; however it seems possible their generalisation
to similar cases.

2.1: Inputting and visualising locations
Obtaining the co-ordinates of the communities to be
served and potential locations for the facilities to be
installed is usually the first procedure. This is done using a
map where all the locations are marked and making some
measurements. This is a time consuming, repetitive and
error prone task that may be much alleviated if the input of
the co-ordinates can be made through direct manipulation
on a digitised version of the map. This involves some

440

problems of calibration and requires some care with the
feedback given to the user. In fact, the simple superimposition to the map of any glyph marking the location of

The visualization of the locations on the map has the
advantage of providing context and making the perception
of the distances implicit from it, however, numerical
feedback should also be provided in order to allow a more
accurate perception of the same distances.

Figure 3- Visualising input communities and
potential location of facilities, using more
concrete distinct icons, without a map.

Figure 1- Inputting and visualizing locations on
the map using abstract visually distinct icons.
The graphical representations (icons) corresponding
to communities and potential facility locations should be
at least visually distinct, as in figures 1 and 2, but
preferably also conceptually distinct, as in figure 3 [12].
They should, as well, be visible even when superimposed

In spite of the referred advantages, superimposing
the locations on a map may result difficult to read (as in
figure l), depending on the complexity of the map and
number of locations to be displayed [14,15]. Therefore, it
may be useful to provide an alternative mode of
visualizing the input locations just as a graphlc, i.e.,
without the map as background, as shown in figures 2 and
3, using two different approaches to icon design. In figure
2 the icons are abstract, while in figure 3, icons are more
concrete: houses represent the communities and factones
represent facilities. This last approach seems more
intuitive and easy to remember, however the
corresponding icons may prove too complex to
supenmpose on a map.

I

2.2: Inputting and visualising links
Direct links among communities and facilities have
also to be established by the user numerically or
graphically. Using a method analogous to the one used to
input the locations, by direct manipulation on a map can
also make this time consuming and error prone task much
easier. However another less direct but also effective
method consists in having a table with all communities and
facilities in columns and rows where the user must select
the corresponding cell and a symbol “X’ will be

Figure 2- Visualizing locations of communities in
a graphic. The population of each community is
represented by the radius of the circle

44 1

visualized layer by layer. The proposed visualization
method (shown in figure 3) uses a set of controls (check
boxes), that can be activated and deactivated by the user,
in order to select the information he or she wishes to be
displayed simultaneously. This approach provides a great
flexibility, since it is very easy to select the set of
information useful at any time.

automatically
entered,
indicating
that
the
community/facility of that row is connected to the
community/facility of the corresponding column.

Figure 4- Establishing graphically a link between
two communities (C7 and C3).
To establish a link graphically a rubber band echo
[16] was used to help the user defining the right link (as
illustrated on figure 4). In any case, it is possible to use
both methods together.
The graphical representation used for the links is a
simple straight line connecting the two locations, which
results well in most cases [ 111.

2.3: Visualising input and solution information
In all the studied examples of facility location, it is
necessary to input, apart from the locations and links,
some other information, corresponding to any community
or potential facility location. Examples are:
- demand (size) of each community
- type (capacity) of each facility
- necessary investment for each facility
- operation cost of each facility
- assigned communities to each installed facility
- vehicles needed to the collectionldistribution
- capacity of each vehicle
- risk associated to each vehicle
- cost of each vehicle
- existing links among communities and facilities
- route followed by each vehicle
- all routes simultaneously
In the simpler example of facility location that was
considered, corresponding to a monocriteria location
problem, only the size of the communities and the existing
links among them and potential facility locations need to
be input and visualized. In this case, the small amount of
information allows its simultaneous visualization; the
choice of the icons is not very critical. Also the obtained
solution is simple to visualize, since it consists in a set of
installed facilities and corresponding community
assignment (i.e., each installed facility serves certain
communities). Even an unsophisticated visualization, as
the one in figure 5, may be enough.
However, in the most complex example considered,
the location-routing [ l 11, all the information listed above
(plus some other) must be visualized, and thus it should be

Figure 5- Visualising the solution of a simple
example: facilities and assigned communities with
corresponding sizes
In this complex case, icons assigned to each type of
entity and related characteristics that have to be visualized,
as communities, facilities, vehicles, links and routes and
their characteristics, should be as concrete as possible for
the sake of readability. Figure 6 shows all the used icons.
Note that communities and facilities have two different
icons, one for the visualization of input information and
another for the visualization of the results (obtained
location-routing solution). This is due to the fact that the
input and output information have to be visualized in
different ways. The first case (input) corresponds to the
problem definition; so draft symbols are used. In the
second case (output), which corresponds to the obtained
solution, more detailed representations are applied. This
differentiation is based on the fact that some facilities are
not implemented by the solution and it is useful to
represent simultaneously both types of facilities (those not
implemented by the solution are represented by the draft
symbol, the same as for input).
In order to avoid ambiguities, the visualization of the
characteristics corresponding to communities, facilities
and vehicles is made only if they are present on the

442

display. This constraint becomes necessary since the
symbols used to represent the capacity and cost are the
same for facilities and vehicles (as can be noticed in figure
6).

Characteristics

I

user to search for and compare them, as well as to decide
each to choose in regard to those compromises.
Figure 7 illustrates a case of visualizing alternative
solutions in a bicriteria location problem, which is
effectively accomplished using a two-dimensional graphic
where each altemative is a point in a 2D space of the
criteria [lo].

Demand of service: m~

I

Facilities

U--+1
Characterishcs

B

Capacity:
Investment:
0 eration Cost: :F:V

I

Vehicles

Characteristics

& ! $ %

Capacity:
Risk:

8

’

Figure 6- Icons of communities,facilities, vehicles
and their characteristics used in the visualization
of information corresponding to input and results
in the location-routing problem.

Figure 7- Visualising alternative (non-dominated)
solutions in decision and criteria space for a bicriteria location problem.
The complexity of visualizing alternatives in criteria
space when three (or more) criteria are used increases
dramatically, since it will imply visualization in three- or
higher-dimensional spaces. The authors of this work have
already performed some experiments with three criteria,
but no general visualization solution was proposed.

The use of icons to represent the characteristics
(which are in fact variables that can assume values in an
interval) allows only the representation of a small number
of different values. Thus, to avoid confusion and difficult
interpretation, only three levels of characteristics are
represented: low, medium and high; however, the numeric
values must also be available.

2.5: Visualising information using animation
In the location-routing problem each altemative
solution includes not only a set of installed facilities and
assigned communities, but also a set of routes for
collectioddistribution. The effective visualization of the
routes is very important to the proper understanding of the
corresponding solutions; they can be visualized as a set of
links forming a closed circuit. Each route begins on a
facility, passes through several communities and ends on
the same facility. This information may be conveyed
simply as a list of all locations connected by that route in
textual form. For instance, F3 - C2 - C1 - F3 means that a
vehicle leaves facility F3, passes the community C2 and
after C1 and returns to F3. However this is not easy to
understand by the user.

2.4: Visualising information in criteria space
Until now just issues conceming visualization of
input or solution information on the decision space (where
communities and facilities exist) have been addressed.
Though in (bi- or multicriteria) location examples that use
more than one criterion, visualizing solutions in the socalled criteria space may be very useful. In fact, in this
kind of location problems, there is no unique solution, a
great number of altemative (non-dominated) solutions may
exist, corresponding to different “compromises” among
the used criteria. Thus visualizing the altemative (nondominated) solutions in the criteria space may help the

443

[2] Bloemhof-Ruwaard, J., P. van Beek, L. Hordijk, L.

An effective visualization of the routes is not easy to
obtain since the visualization area can become too
cluttered. As animation is a very efficient form to visualize
a continuous phenomenon 1171, it was used to visualize
one route at a time. Five images (shown in figure 8) are
displayed sequentially, giving the illusion of a vehicle
moving along the route. This technique seems very
effective and easy to understand by the user [l 11.

Wassenhove, ‘Interactions between operational research
and environmental management’, European Journal of
Operational Research, vol. 85, 1995, pp. 229-243
[3] Erkut, E., V. Verter, “Hazardous Materials Logistics”, in Z.
Drezner (ed.), Faciliiy Location: A Survey of Applications
and Methods, Springer Series in Operations Research,
Springer-Verlag, 1995, pp. 467-506
[4] Erkut, E., S. Neuman, ‘Analytical models for locating
undesirable facilities”, European Journal of Operational
Research, vol. 40, 1989, pp. 275-291
[5] Caruso, C., A. Colorni, M. Paruccini, ‘The regional urban
solid waste management system: A modelling approach”,
European Joumal of Operational Research, vol. 70, 1993,
pp. 16-30
[6] Min, H., V. Jayaraman, R. Srivastava, ‘Combined locationrouting problems: A synthesis and future research
directions’, European Journal of Operatioiial Research,
vol. 108, 1998, pp. 1-15
[7] Boffey, B., J. Karkazis, ‘Location, Routing and the
Environment’, in Faciliiy Location: A Survey of Applications and Methods, ed. Z . Drezner, Springer Series in
Operations Research, Springer-Verlag, 1995, pp. 453-466
[8] Using the CPLEX Callable Library (v.4.0), CPLEX
Optimization Inc., Incline Village, Nevada, USA, 1996
191 Ferreira, C., Problemas de Localizapio e DistribuiGdo

Figure 8- Bitmap images used for the animation of
the routes.

3: Conclusions
Several relevant issues of information visualization
and user interaction, to support decisions in the area of
Obnoxious Facility Location, were presented and
illustrated with specific examples. The visualization and
interaction methods used are, in general, quite simple;
however their use is of great importance since the
complexity of the Operations Research methods involved
makes their usage in real cases very difficult. The authors
consider this application area, a typical case where
visualization can, more than facilitating the use of the
certain methods, greatly increase their applicability. In
fact, it can make the difference between these methods
being used or not used at all.
The proposed solutions for the visualization of all the
information needed to support the decisions are specific to
particular models; however the addressed issues and many
of the solutions proposed are relevant to other decision
making scenarios where large quantities of information
have to be presented to the user.

MulticritCrio - aproxirnapks e estudo de algurw ca.so.s
coin irnplicaC8e.s arnbientais, PhD thesis, Universidade de

Aveiro, 1997
101 Ferreira, C., B. Sousa Santos, M E . Captivo, J. Climaco,
C.C. Silva, ‘Multiobjective location of unwelcome or
central facilities involving environmental aspects - a
prototype of a Decision Support System’, Belgian Journal
of Operation Research, Statistics and Cotnputer Science,

vol. 36, 1996, pp. 159-172
111 Ferreira, C., A. Barbosa de Melo, B. Sousa Santos.
“Supporting Decisions Concerning Location-Routing of
Obnoxious Facilities: An Example of Visualization and
Interaction Techniques”, Proceedings of ICEIS’ 99,
International Conference on Enterprise Irlforrnation
System, Setubal, Portugal, 1999, pp. 74-81
[I21 Mayhew, D., Principles and Guidelines in Software User
Interface Design, Prentice-Hall, 1993
[ 131 Shneiderman, B., Designing rhe User Interface- .\frafegie.\
for effective Human Cornputer Interaction, 3rd ed.,

Acknowledgments

Addison-Wesley, 1998

The authors wish to express their gratitude to Andreia
Melo, Claudio Silva and Ant6nio Barreiros, which have

[ 141 Tufte, E., The Visual Display of Quantitative Information,

developed prototypes for applications to support Facility
Location, as practical assignments in Visualization and HumanComputer Interaction MSc courses.

[ 151 Tufte, E., Envisioning Illformation,

Graphics Press, 1983
Graphics Press, 1990
[16] Foley, J., A. van Dam, S. Feiner, J. Hughes, Cornputer
Graphics: Principles and Practice, 2nd edition, Addison
Wesley, 1990
[17] Brodlie, K., L. Carpenter, R. Eamshaw, J. Gallop, R.
Hubbold, A. Mumford, C. Osland, P. Quarendon,

References
[ll Chatterji, M. 1987, ‘Hazardous materials siting: an overview
of problems and policies’, in Hazardous Materials
Disposal: Siting and Management, ed. M. Chatterji,
Avebury, Gower Publishing Company, pp. 3-57

Scientific Visualization, Techniques and Applications,

Springer-Verlag, 1992

444

