Hypermedia Aided Learning (HAL)
A Viewpoint on Delivering Education in the New Millennium
M. Dastbaz
South Bank University, School of Computing and Information Systems, Centre for Multimedia
Dastbaz@sbu.ac.uk
usage beyond our imagination. Furthermore the advances
in telecommunication technology has led to the emergence
of a global network of tens of millions of people referred
to as the Internet.
While the emergence of these technologies were
greeted with scepticism, there is now a clear shift of
emphasis and a sense of urgency by educators both in the
USA and in Europe to adopt and integrate the technology
into the education system. Multimedia, and particularly
Multimedia on-line (the WWW), has emerged as one of
the most exiting and fast growing areas of IT development
within the last five years. The scope and pace of the
growth of MM industry is phenomenal. Current statistics
indicate that 10.6 million people (18% of the population)
in UK used the Internet in 1998, 6 million from home,
representing a 76% growth over the previous year (NOP).
The figure for the USA is 83 million (30% of population IntelliQuest). Overall there are estimated to be 165
million people on-line world-wide in May 1999.
Furthermore, according to a study carried out by the
“Multimedia Task Forces” of the European Commission:
“Multimedia investment levels within educational
institutions should increase by more than tenfold by the
end of the decade. From a dismal starting point of $43
million in 1994, it is expected to amount to $460 through
out Europe by the end of 1999”. According to the same
report the educational multimedia market could expand at
a 45% annual growth rate into the next decade. A
breakdown of the educational multimedia market in
Europe reveals that Business education market is the
largest sector with a 48% share.
The “global” nature of the technology driven education
also raises some very important questions. Borders and
countries no longer bind the competition between
education institutions. The WWW provides a global
”virtual campus” that students from all over the world
could attend. Education could be delivered where and
when is demanded. This clear shift in teaching and
learning paradigms from time and placed bound
instruction to free, exploratory and self-paced constructive
approach has also raised fundamental issues about the

Abstract
This paper will discuss the emergence of Multimedia
systems and with it the emergence of hypermedia as a
new and powerful learning medium. The effects of this
new technology on Computer Aided Learning (CAL) as
well as problems associated with CAL are discussed. The
paper will argue that Hypermedia Aided Learning (HAL)
could remedy some of the problems associated with CAL
and pave the way for a new generation of powerful
learning tools to emerge. Evaluation of HAL as a
learning resource is also presented. The problems
associated with HAL and the prospect ahead are also
discussed.

1.Introduction
“We must not be seduced by the novelty
nor must we let the opportunities they present
pass us by ...” Newble & Cannon (1991)

Few would argue that we live in a technological age.
Indeed the introduction of technology into teaching and
education has been described as constituting a ‘fourth
revolution’ in education (the other three being the
development of schools, the emphasis on writing as
opposed to speech, and the invention of the printing press;
Knapper, 1980). Self (1983) noted that if it is our ethical
and moral responsibility to educate pupils in order to help
them live a worthwhile life, and if the technology and
particularly computers can in fact enhance this process,
then computers should be used in education.
The 1990’s saw significant advances in the computer
hardware and software technology that facilitated the
emergence of practical Multimedia (MM) systems. The
emergence of CD-ROM technology, the integration of
sound and video into personal computers as well as the
move away from text-based operating systems to graphic
based systems, opened the way to a Multimedia revolution
that has extended the boundaries of personal computer

44
0-7695-0743-3/00 $10.00 8 2000lEEE

did not allow this because of separation of authoring from
the learning environment.
Viau and Larivee (1993) in defining hypermedia as a
‘new educational technology’ point out that with
hypermedia the idea is not to develop simulation or
tutorials as in CAL, but rather to develop tool kits that
learners can use as they wish. They further note that
technical capabilities offered by MM to CAL design means
that it is possible to create interactive textbooks in which
learners can explore, research, examine, analyse and even
modify the information presented.
Existing research (see among others Haddon et a1 1995;
McAteer 1995; Dastbaz & Kalafatis 1996; Lisewski &
Settle 1996) and literature confirms that MM allows the
development of a new kind of CAL packages that enables
the learner to move freely from one medium to another and
view the knowledge in its diversity of formats and in large
volumes, unthinkable up-to very recently by even the most
enthusiastic admirers. As Friedlander (1989) pointed out
MM will revolutionise CAL allowing us to redraw our
ideas of what is possible to accomplish in the classroom.
We will discover not only new ways to teach, but new
subject matters to bring into classroom.

education system in its present structure.

2. Hypermedia Aided Learning
Jacobs (1992) stated that:
“Where as CAL can hardly be said to have a had a
wide-spread effect on teaching within higher education,
the new multimedia technology will, according to the
gurus, dramatically change its fortunes” and went on to
conclude that there is possibly no future for hypermedia as
a learning resource.
However the predication made by Jacobs (1992) and
other critics (Clark, 1992 ; Ritichie 1992) have been
proven to be premature and largely inaccurate. Multimedia
has expanded beyond all expectations over the last three
years. Current statistics indicate that Multimedia has grown
from a $4.1 billion to a $22 billion industry, with business
and education being the main beneficiaries of the emerging
technology. According to a recent study carried out by the
European Commission: “Multimedia investment levels
within educational institutions should more than tenfold by
the end of the decade. From a starting point of $43 million
in 1994, it is expected to amount to $460 through out
Europe by the end of 1999”. This rapid expansion and the
pace of changes taking place, largely dictated by the PC
industry,. have forced a re-think on the part of many
educationalists to review and explore the possibilities
offered by MM and the ways in which the new technology
could be integrated into education.
For decades progress of CAL packages within the
education system were hampered by a number of issues
such as presentation of subjects in the face of limitations
imposed by the ‘text-based’ systems. Areas such as hard to- reach events like a theatrical performance, or a therapy
session, or a volcano in eruption, or a group interview or
the visual effectiveness of a particular advert were all out
of rich for CAL packages that at best could communicated
a description of the events listed, in a similar fashion to
written text.
The emergence of MM and the integration of video and
sound have enabled CAL designers to create a much richer
learning environment. The technical advancements have
also allowed designers to design and develop for much
greater levels of inter-activity within CAL systems.
Hutchings et a1 (1992), noted that although hypermedia
encompasses the modes of learning and interaction
associated with conventional CAL, also allows greater
learner control, access to MM learning materials and a
variety of modalities of interaction with the learning
material which are only now becoming apparent. They also
point out that MM allows CAL packages to be developed
for those who advocate learning through construction of
knowledge. According to them traditional CAL packages

3. Evaluating Hypermedia as a
Learning Tool
The issues related to the learning process, education,
evaluation and testing of any educational package, have
been discussed widely over the past three decades. In a
1977 report published by Kemmis, Atkin and Wright, for
the Centre of Applied Research in Education, the authors
pointed out some of the difficulties and noted that, “For the
evaluator it is always difJicult to see what students have
learned in ways which respect the values of the teacher as
they are expressed in the rationale of an educational
“package” and as they are realised in its design.“
Knussen et a1 (1991) also stated that approaches taken
to evaluate computer-based learning are varied and this has
led to isolated pockets of evaluation and lack of a single
definition for this process. This problem is exacerbated
when new tools such as hypermedia packages are
introduced. (see Dastbaz & Kalafatis (1996) for detailed
discussion on possible evaluation methodology for HAL).
Among the issues to be investigated in evaluating HAL are:
Should HAL. be viewed as a means of course delivery,
replacing teacher in the classroom?
Should HAL be used as a learning aid i.e. like a
tutorial?
Should HAL used as a powerful referencing and
research tool? or a combination of the above.

45

To achieve this goal a hypermedia package that
contained parts of the core Market Research module was
designed and developed (see Dastbaz & Kalafatis (1996)
for a detail discussion on design issues in developing HAL
packages), using extensive sound, animation and video
enhancement to the existing material.

Our research also explored the three key aspects of
students learning, including Recall, Understanding and
Competence (the test had 3 different sections: a multiple
choice section dealing with Recall; a section requiring
short descriptions that dealt with understanding and a
section where students where asked to designed a
questionnaire, in order to evaluate competence) . The result
of our evaluation showed that while students using HAL
performed better with respect to Recall part of the test, the
group attending traditional lectures and tutorials performed
significantly better compared to all other groups with
respect to the competence part of the test questions.

4. Research Issues, Advantages and
Disadvantages of HAL
Research on the effects of hypermedia in learning and
the advantages and disadvantages of hypermedia is a
relatively new field that has been making steady progress
over the last five years. Research on HAL is now
attempting to deal with not just the technical issues
involved but also with the pedagogical issues that should
also guide us in the way we plan for the integration of the
technology into the education system. Davis & Crowther
(1995) note that hypermedia facilitate active learning, that
states effective learning occurs when students actively
engage in the subject matter concern. They also add that
hypermedia courseware also facilitate experimental
learning, where students learn well by exploring and
experimenting. According to them, since hypermedia offers
the opportunity to simulate reality, therefor it can be used
to facilitate experimental learning.
Researchers have identified two types of problems and
shortcomings with hypermedia systems. These are
technical problems (in term of design and developments of
hypermedia systems) and theoretical problems (associated
with hypermedia systems and the theory of learning).
Conklin (1987) commenting on the first type of problems
points to two major shortcomings: “getting lost in hyperspace” and “the cognitive overhead”. Conklin (1987)
points out that along with the power to organise
information, much more complexly, comes the problem of
having to know, where you are in the network and how to
get to some other place that you know or think exists. This
could also be called a “disorientation problem”. He also
identifies what he calls “cognitive overhead” as another
major shortcoming associated with hypermedia systems.
He states that the other fundamental problem with using
hypermedia is that it is difficult to become accustomed to
the additional mental overhead required to create, name,
and keep track of links. The problem of cognitive overhead
also occurs in the process of reading hypermedia which

Figure I. Screen Capture from the Hypermedia Package
Using 163 first year BIT students, the package was then
evaluated and compared against a variety of learning
experiences. Four different learning groups, including
traditional lectures and tutorials; open learning, a HAL
group and a group combining both lectures and HAL were
organised where students were exposed to the same
learning material but in different learning environment. The
written test that followed the learning phase revealed no
significant difference between traditional mode of learning
and HAL,. Also, students in both these two groups
performed significantly better than the open learning
group.

Figure 2. Screen Capture from the Hypermedia Package

46

tends to present the reader with a large number of choices
about which links to follow and which one to leave alone.

outright rejectionism as well as being overwhelmed by the
fast moving technological advances that is presented.

6. References

5. Where Do We Go From Here?

[ l ] Clark, D. (1992); “Multimeeeja ..... who needsya”;
CTISS File, Number 14 October 1992.

So! Where do we go from here? As can be deduced
from the literature and a number of research projects (see
among others Haddon et a1 1995; McAteer 1995; Lisewski
& Settle 1996; Dastbaz & Kalafatis 1999) hypermedia
systems offer enormous potential for creating rich
environments for learning. Further advancement of
technology, such as collaborative MM networks, Internet
and the WWW are constantly creating new opportunities
for new forms of learning to take shape.
It is also clear that the technology is still in its infancy
and a that number of technical issues such as video and
animation compression, communication speed, etc. remains
to be resolved.
It is therefore necessary to be cautioned about this new
tool and note that if computers are cognitive augmenters
and hypermedia is the next step in cognitive augmentation,
then surely a variety of psychological and social problems
will develop (Turkle, 1984). As Marcchionini (1988) quite
correctly pointed out hypermedia systems offer education a
window of opportunity to augment the traditional methods,
materials, and strategies of learning and teaching. Further
research needs to be carried out in order to provide
answers to some important questions such as:
Can teacher - student interaction be totally
replaced by hypermedia systems ?
0
What is the effect of loss of interaction on less
able students?
0
Do present course formats provide suitable
structures that could or should form the basis of
hypermedia courses?
0
What are the effects of the growing community of
world wide web and the emerging technology on the
hypermedia development and its future enhancement ?

[2] Conklin, E.J. (1987); “Hypertext: An introduction
and survey”; IEEE Commter 2(9) September 1987,
17-41.
[3] Dastbaz, M. & Kalafatis, S.P. (1993);
“Multimedia, Marketing & Education”; MEG Annual
Conference 1993.
[4] Dastbaz, M. & Kalafatis, S.P. (1996); “Does
Hypermedia Work”; Proceedings of CTI 7’h Annual
Conference - April 1996.

[5] Dastbaz, M. & Kalafatis, S.P. (1999); “Multimedia

- Hypermedia vs. traditional modes of course
delivery”; Proceedings of World Marketing Congress
Vol. IX, 23-26June 1999.
[6] Davis, M. & Crowther, D, (1995): “The benefits of
using multimedia in higher education”; Active
Learning, 3:3-6.
[7] Haddon, K. et aL(1995): “Can Learning via
multimedia benefit weaker students ?”; Active
Learning Number 3 pp.22-27.
[8] Hutchings, et al (1992); “ Authoring and
evaluation of hypermedia for education”; Computers
Education, 18(1-3):pp.171-177.
[9] Kemmis, S. et a1 (1977); “How do students learn:
Centre for applied research in education”; UEA
Norwich.

Perhaps the most realistic and immediate future could
be for hypermedia courseware to be used as, (a) a
complementary learning tool along side traditional modes
of course delivery or/and (b) a replacement of specific
elements within a core module.

[ 101 Knapper, C. K. (1980); “Evaluating instructional
technology”; J. Wiley & Sons, New York 1980
[ l l ] Knussen, C. et a1 (1991); “An approach to the
evaluation of hypermedia”; Computers in Education,
17(1): pp.13-23.

Finally, we agree with Marchionini and Crane (1994)
that the multifaceted evaluations of the interactions
between emerging technologies like hypermedia and
complex human processes like learning needs further
investigation before clear conclusions and guidelines could
be developed. It is therefore necessary to avoid both

[12] Liseweski, B. Settle, C. (1995): “Teaching with
Multimedia: A Case Study in Weed Biology”; Active
Learning, 3:28-35.
[ 131 Jacobs, G. (1992); “An interactive learning
revolution?”; The CTISS File,l4(0ctober):pp.3-5.

47

[ 141 McAteer, E. (1995); “A Little Bit of Everything”;
Active Learning Number 3 pp.22-27.
[ 151 Marchionini, G. (1988); “Hypermedia and
learning: Freedom and chaos”; Educational
Technology, Nov. 1988,:pp.8-13.
[ 161 Marchionini, G. & Crane, G. (1994); “Evaluating
hypermedia and learning: The Preseus project”; ACM
Transactions on Information Svstems, 12(l):pp.5-34.

[17] Ritchie, I. (1992); “MM vs. Reality”; The CTISS
F&l2(0ctober):pp.6-8.
Self,J. (1983); Micro Computers in Education
[I81 Turkel, S . (1984); “The second self Computers
and the human sprit”; New York: Simon and Schuster.
[ 191 Viau, R. and Larivee (1993); “Learning tools
with hypertext: An experiment”; Computers
Education 20( l), pp.11-16

48

