2009 Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Information Hiding and Multimedia Signal Processing

Image Retrieval in Multimedia Databases: A Survey
1

Yihun Alemu, 2Jong-bin Koh, 1Muhammed Ikram, 2Dong-Kyoo Kim
Department of Computer Engineering, Ajou University
South Korea, Suwon

1

{yihuna,engr.ikram}@gmail.com,

{nitefly,dkkim}@ajou.ac.kr

research works on image databases rely on low level
features-either text or image features, that lead it with a
number of limitations to get an exact query result.
The task of image retrieval is to find and retrieve the
most similar figure for a given query. However, image
retrieval is a complex process that inherits techniques
from different fields like pattern matching, information
retrieval and computer graphics.
Typically image in multimedia database is searched
based on keywords, features and/or concepts. But the
problem, specifically in feature based retrieval, lies on
the vast number of attributes to express the image: size,
color, shape, texture, location, position, domain, etc.
Moreover, the complexity in the nature of twodimensional image data gives rise to a host of problems
that alphanumeric information systems were never
designed to handle [5].
Given tremendous amount of image data, capabilities to
support efficient and effective image retrieval have
become increasingly important. There are two general
approaches for image retrieval: the text-based
approaches apply traditional text retrieval techniques to
image annotations or descriptions where as the contentbased approaches apply image processing techniques to
extract image features and retrieve relevant images. One
obvious approach is to describe the image contents
verbally, typically using keywords. Once the verbal
descriptions are obtained, text search techniques can be
applied to retrieve images in the database allowing
query-by-keyword, but this assumption is seldom met
since manual labeling is too expensive. The other
approach is to represent images with nonverbal
descriptions which can be reliably computed from
images. Such descriptions are image features based on
color, shape, and texture. Conventional content-based
image retrieval (CBIR) methods use these image
features to define image similarity [21].

Abstract
In the past decades the advancement in the area of
database management systems shifts towards
multimedia. Multimedia information is very expressive,
self explanatory, narrative, etc. Now a day the
development of digital media, advanced network
infrastructure and the easily available consumer
electronics makes the multimedia revolution to run in an
alarming rate [4]
Inline with the advancement of database technology that
incorporates multimedia data, an open question that
always rose in the technology is how to retrieve/search
images in the multimedia databases. There are a huge
number of research works focusing on the searching
mechanisms in image databases for efficient retrieval
and tried to give supplementary suggestions on the
overall systems.
The growing of digital medias (digital camera, digital
video, digital TV, e-book, cell phones, etc.) gave rise to
the revolution of very large multimedia databases, in
which the need of efficient storage, organization and
retrieval of multimedia contents came into question.
Among the multimedia data, this survey paper focuses
on the different methods (approaches) and their
evaluation techniques used by many of recent research
works on image retrieval system.
Many researchers develop and use lots of approaches
towards image retrieval. This paper, in general,
classified image retrieval into text based and content
based, including the newly growing ontology based
image retrieval system as one focus.
We address, in this paper, the challenges, techniques
and evaluation methods used in image retrieval systems
through a detailed look of most recent works
1. Introduction
Multimedia databases have emerged as the natural
solution to manage the vast growing of multimedia
information. Multimedia databases and the internet not
only enhance each other, but have a dramatic impact on
developers, network administrators, content providers
and users [17]. By its very nature, multimedia databases
need a large storage area than other conventional
databases since they stores mainly of images and audio
video. An image database contains a large collection of
images with similar features that makes the querying
mechanism problematic. And currently, many of the
978-0-7695-3762-7/09 $26.00 © 2009 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IIH-MSP.2009.159

2

In general, both in text based and content based image
retrieval systems, the bottleneck to the efficiency of the
retrieval is the semantic gap between the high level
image interpretations of the users and the low level
image features stored in the database for indexing and
querying. In other words, there is a difference between
what image features can distinguish and what people
perceives from the image since human perception is
complex and seems to be dependent on context, purpose,

681

emotion, psychological
individual cases.

ground

and

many

find a hybrid reduced representation that links sets of
keywords and images. Unfortunately, to identify
meaningful relations between keywords, LSI needs high
amounts of data. This requirement can only be met
when a relatively large quantity of text—rather than just
a few keywords—is associated to every image.
It is those important difficulties that boosted research
activities in the field of CBIR in the early 1980s. CBIR
came into being to solve those problems inherited by
text based systems, and currently many of the
researches in image retrievals concentrated on the
advancement of CBIR systems in many directions from
simple low level features to a combined visual and
human interactive systems for better achievement. The
next part of this survey paper reviewed in detail about
such systems with respect to the current state of the art.

more

2. Text Based Image Retrieval
With the development of the Internet, and the
availability of image capturing devices, efficient image
searching, browsing and retrieval tools are required by
users from various domains, including remote sensing,
fashion, crime prevention, publishing, medicine,
architecture, etc. To address these problems, many
general purpose image retrieval systems have been
developed under two basic frame works: text based and
content based [1].
It is back to 1970 that the text based image retrieval has
got its attention. Early on, keyword-based search has
become the leading paradigm for querying multimedia
databases; while it has lots of limitations.
In text based image retrieval systems the first thing to
do is providing textual descriptions/annotations for
images, which is very tiresome, inefficient, and
expensive and has a problem of undesirable mismatch
due to annotation impreciseness. Text annotation is
extremely tedious in large image collections. To provide
text descriptions or annotations, two approaches can be
applied.
The
first
approach
acquires
descriptions/annotations manually by human annotators.
The second approach is to automatically annotate
images using machine-learning techniques that learn the
correlation between image features and textual words
from the examples of annotated images [3]. In both
cases manual labeling is too expensive while automatic
methods are not reliable. Automatic image classification
yields limited access, in such a way that only few
objects (like faces or cars) can be recognized reliably
from general images [5], [21].
Another problem in the use of keywords is the
complexity between words and concepts due to
synonymy (different words denote the same concept) or
homonymy (same word denotes different concepts) and
many search criteria cannot be well described by a few
keywords [12]. Current researches [12], [3], [7]
conclude that key word based searching can not be
successful alone. In finding a target image, the content
of the image and the image features play an important
role. It is also suggested that [12] since images might
have no annotations, or incompletely annotated, a joint
use existing text annotations and visual features can
provide a better retrieval results.

3.

Content Based Image Retrieval (CBIR)
systems
Many of today’s image retrieval systems rely on CBIR
with varied techniques ranging from single feature
vector to combined visual and conceptual image content
descriptions and ontology. This survey tried to give
detailed view of most of the traditional and recent CBIR
systems with respect to their methodological approach
and performance analysis. In CBIR, images are indexed
by their visual content, such as color, texture, and
shapes. Moreover, the fundamental difference between
content-based and text-based retrieval systems is that
the human interaction is an indispensable part of the
latter system. Humans tend to use high-level features
(concepts), such as keywords, text descriptors, to
interpret images and measure their similarity.
Eventhough the field of CBIR has been extensively
researched in recent years, none of the proposed
approaches has achieved satisfactory performance due
mainly of the semantic gap; expressing the discrepancy
between the low level features that can be readily
extracted from the images and the high level
descriptions that are meaningful to the users [1], [12]
Image content can be described at various levels. It may
regard perceptual features (also known as contentdependent metadata) like color, texture, shape, structure
and spatial relationship, or semantic primitives (also
known as content-descriptive metadata) such as the
identification of real-world objects and the meaning of
the images [19] , and image retrieval using low-level
visual features is a challenging and important issue in
content-based image retrieval. However, most of the
CBIR systems focused on perceptual (low level)
features.

In recent years indexing and retrieval approaches based
on keywords and visual features together are getting
attentions. A work by [27], which can be a good
example of such approach, solved to some extent the
problem of synonymy and homonymy using LSI (latent
semantic indexing). LSI can also be applied to the joint
visual and keyword-based feature vectors in order to

3.1. Low level (basic) features
Multimedia contents, in general, can be represented as
keyword based, feature based and/or concept based;

682

arrangement of image intensities [22]. Color histogram,
color coherence vector (CCV) and color moments
(CMM) are the common approaches for color feature
representation of an image where as filter banks and
AM-FM models have been used as a common model to
represent texture of an image. Those techniques,
however, are all global methods in that they extract the
visual metadata of the whole image (globally). Global
methods have the advantage to have a compact
representation and that the extracted visual metadata can
be, under certain constraints, efficiently compared and
indexed using a Spatial Access Method. The main
disadvantage is that in these approaches, there is no
information about the spatial distribution of colors
inside the images. Thus, images with very different
spatial layout may have similar representations [19]. In
order to take spatial distribution into account, several
regional methods have been developed [19], [14], [25],
[21], [1]. The color based clustering (CBC) system is
the one advocating regional systems. In regional
methods, an image is segmented in a set of regions
accordingly to a predefined visual property and each
region is represented individually. [19] uses a single
linkage clustering algorithm, which is a hierarchical
type agglomerative algorithm together with their
defined distance function for similarity matching.
In their experiment, the comparison has been done
against the global (GCH, CMM and CCV) and partition
based (Grid and CSH /color shape histogram/) color
histogram approaches based on 20,000 Corel Corp Jpeg
images, and the CBC system out performs all the above
5. However the CBC system didn’t compare with other
low level feature based systems to check its
performance.

most of the CBIR systems based up on the basic low
level features (color, texture, shape and spatial
relationship). As most researchers agree, due to the
difficulty of inferring semantic meaning from low level
features, none of CBIR systems are satisfactory.
Including yahoo and Google, many well known search
engines currently are limited to textual keywords. Due
to the increasing demand of better management and
retrieval of multimedia data, the next generation
multimedia databases are looking for better performance
from CBIR systems. Despite the difficulty of extracting
exact images features, the vital step in CBIR system is
feature extraction. From the vast amount of research
works based on low level features, color is the dominant
one due to its robustness and independent to the size and
orientation of images.
It is also said by [28] as, most systems use color and
texture features, few systems use shape feature, and still
less use layout features. The retrieval on color usually
yields images with similar colors. Retrieval on texture
does not always yield images that have clearly the same
texture, unless the database contains many images with
a dominant texture. Searching on shape gives often
surprising results. Apparently the shape features used
for matching are not the most effective ones.
Color is a visual feature which is immediately perceived
when looking at an image. It is one of mostly used
visual features in retrieval and it can also be used to find
the location in an image and to differentiate a large
number of objects [22]
Texture is an innate property of virtually all surfaces. It
represents the regularity, smoothness/coarseness of the
image. Texture gives a direction sense to the spatial
Image A

Image B

Matching of virtual regions

A1
B1
A2

A11

A12

B11

B21

A2

A3

B12

B22

B2

A3

Fig. 1 decomposition of real regions into virtual regions for matching, CBC system (taken from [19])

this will allow the user to search on different resolutions
based on a hierarchical histogram representation.

To increase the effectiveness of color based image
retrieval, multi resolution similarity technique has been
proposed [14]. To improve the quality of color
histogram search and to get a better query result, [14]
proposes to take partitions/sub histograms instead of
taking a histogram as a whole to represent an image;

The multidimensional histogram, actually, is a bit
complex but it is a good alternative for the common
histogram based image similarity search. In their system,

683

algorithm) together with wavelet transformation. The
IGA adopts the users’ choice as fitness and a user can
increase/decrease the effectiveness of a color
indefinitely and interactively until he/she gets his/her
desire. However the efficiency test [23] used is not good,
they evaluate it with respect only to comparing with
their own past work and use ten students for
performance analysis. Despite their evaluation, it is new
to use psychological test in their work for measuring the
users’ satisfaction

an image is divided into regions with homogenous color
distribution and a histogram is developed to each region
of an image. Such statistical information of an image
serves as abases for similarity measures. The system
differs from other related work in that the similarity
measures lies on the sub histogram families than the
entire histogram and the effectiveness measure is
independent of the size of the result set.

With same color feature again, attribute combination is
also a new alternative approach for better image
retrieval. As people cognition to color is considered to
be multi layer and multi profile, attribute combination
of different granularity, under local and global color
feature based systems, can extract color features of
individual child/segmented blocks of images more
efficiently [25]. Image retrieval based on quotient space
granularity theory includes two parts: describing images
under different granularities to obtain attribute features
and select a reasonable optimal guide line function to
combine attribute functions in different levels [25]. It
adopts global color feature based on histogram and local
color feature based on DCT and SVD. It combines the
color histogram approach (global) and local color
feature extraction (DCT and SVD) with multi level
quotient space granularity combination and get a better
performance with respect to those independently applied
methods.

Histograms
Subhistogram

Normalized
subhistograms

Fig.2 Histograms with subdivisions and normalizations (taken from
[14])

The system uses sub histograms of images and a
similarity measure for the sub histogram than the entire
histogram as a whole and it goes on through a
hierarchical similarity to find the target image. The
system is evaluated based on a new effectiveness
measure in addition to the common precision/recall
measures. The effectiveness measure has four
parameters; the number of relevant images in the
database (R), the number of returned images (E), the
number of returned relevant images (Rr), and the
number of missed relevant images (Rm = R−Rr ) ,
where the detail of the formula is there in the reference.
The system is compared with several approaches (Adapt,
WBIIS, Color histogram and Color layout) and it proves
to be better than those approaches, however it needs still
some level of improvement by incorporating multiple
image features. Further more, it opens an issue for how
much the level of detail goes for histogram subdivision
to support user’s queries, which is not answered there.
And since subdivision of histograms have no limit; it
may lead to an unmatched query result.

3.2. Combined features
Using a combination of visual features and concept
oriented interactive manner yields a more effective
search result in image databases compared to the
traditional CBIR system using single visual feature and
simple linear combined low level visual features. To
address the challenge of semantic gap reduction for
image retrieval, many of recent CBIR systems tried to
make full use of image information to extract features.
Many methods have been used in CBIR system,
including methods based on color [19], [5], [14], [23],
[25], based on texture [2], based on shape [6], based on
spatial relations [13] and so on. Most CBIR systems
allow query formulation with user setting of relative
importance of features (e.g., color, texture, shape, etc) to
mimic the user's perception of similarity. Similarity
matching is crucial in retrieval systems to understand
new concepts with existing ones. Similarity matching
function is multi level, until the most primitive distance
measures or correlation metrics are used at the leaf level.
They, [10], proposed a learning algorithm that adapts
similarity matching function from ranking errors
feedback by the user. User can reorder the retrieved
images and the system uses both short term and long
term (dubbed) learning in user specific mode. The

A further recent work to low level feature based CBIR
incorporates users. Incorporating human intuition and
emotion into retrieving images is vital for effective
result [23], [20]. Such kind of human oriented systems
facilitate the search in both explicit and implicit queries.
In such method, [23] use IGA (interactive genetic

684

The approach by [9] implemented only for facial images
in which the database of images are assumed to be of
same type, which is for limited domain. The usual
precision/recall performance measure has been used
based on the number of independent components and
window size, and evaluate their system by varying these
performance. To improve performance and to
differentiate more informative and less informative
regions in human facial images, the system incorporates
learning.

overall approach is good specifically for homogeneous
data set; it was also tested based on facial features (chin,
eyes, nose, etc.) and achieved a better result.
In CBIR), image has various inherent features which
reflect its content such as color, texture, shape, spatial
relationship features etc. How to organize and utilize
these features effectively and improve the retrieval
performance is a valuable research topic [24]. The
techniques of organizing and searching images based on
their content are still in its early stage. And research by
content now is very demanded specially in the area of
multimedia databases. In similarity measures using
shape, texture, color, etc. weight has limited expressive
power, for instance the size and color of an image may
not be equally treated with shape of the same image.
Such and related difficulties lead [11] to propose
another alternatives-the object query language for
describing the image in terms of regions and properties
of regions.
In their scenario, a user can construct, with the help of
the system, his/her query automatically based on a set of
images selected and/or rejected by the user. In addition,
to have a sufficient number of similar properties, the
system composes a set of regions having a vast amount
of properties like saturation, intensity, area, perimeter,
adjacency, etc. using an efficient segmentation process.
This work uses a genetic algorithm with abstract data
types and inheritance classes to represent example and
counter example images in different regions. The
structure of the algorithm uses 9 colors, 5 sizes, 5
vertical and horizontal positions. It contributes a user
friendly query based system on simple predicates and
unary/binary operations, it also avoids the explicit
weight measures and uses properties list by end users
based on the given example and counter example
images; and it is flexible for reusing the system for other
cases by incorporating additional features through its
object orientation nature [11].
Some of the limitations, they pointed out, to be adjusted
later through extra works include; segmentation and
semantic overhead to express images, no relevant
feedback mechanism to facilitate subsequent queries
and it misses the idea of aggregate functions to compare
images from sets of regions in a many-to-many
relationship. Even though it is efficient for geometric
figures (mainly of regular polygons), it might be
challenging for area, intensity, color, etc of irregular
shaped bodies.

Query images

Retrieved images using regression analysis

Fig. 3. Results of facial image retrieval from a learned system where
three query images are used (taken from [9])

Like the simple visual feature based traditional CBIR
system, clustering/segmentation is one of the modern
image retrieval approaches proposed by many
researchers. An approach proposed by [22] uses a new
clustering algorithm that converts image information
into a ratio (Fisher Discriminant) that will depend on the
inter cluster and intra cluster distances. The Fisher
Discriminant is effective in classification of images and
provides a logical group of the image pixels, not only
considers the means of the classes but also the variance
of each class in the classification process [22]. This
work also employs a distance function to rank images in
the database according to their similarity. The similarity
is measured as the distance between the statistical
distributions like means and variances that represent the
cluster centers and the pixel attributes. A widely used
clustering method is the k-means algorithm where the
pixels in the image are initially assigned to a fixed
number of classes. The main disadvantage of this
approach (k-means) is that the process has to be iterated
many times before the final classification yielded, and
also the effect of each pixel on the objective function is
not taken into consideration. In contrast, [22] used the jmeans algorithm to overcome those problems in kmeans. In the retrieval process, two features are
extracted from each segment; color (based on histogram)
and texture (being represented by calculating busyness
factor t for each pixel). Moreover, the classification
using J-means clustering is very effective in the sense
that for each pixel assignment the means and the

Similarly, [9] proposed multiple query examples to
retrieve not only images similar to individual examples
but also images which actually represent a combination
of the content of query images. Using machine learning,
for generating the most appropriate feature combination
from multiple examples, can yield a better search result.

685

said by [15], Color feature is often broadly used to
describe the images which are difficult to be segmented
and needn’t to consider space information. Texture
feature is more efficient to describe images with
complicated textural content such as lawn, sandlot, etc.
Shape feature can describe the shape information of
image object well, especially when the image with clear
edges and object. Spatial relationship can describe the
inter-relationship of objects in an image.
Segmentation based on image feature vectors is
different from the classical segmentation which is based
on spatial area. With this idea, [15] used ISODATA
clustering method for image segmentation.

variances of all the classes are taken into account. After
the first iteration, most of the pixels are assigned to
proper classes. The spatial constraints are activated in
the subsequent iterations. One major problem with this
spatial term is at the edges, because at the edges the
neighboring pixels need not belong to the same class,
and hence they introduced an edge pixel detector so that
the spatiality is not enforced on the edge pixels.

Fig. 5 image retrieval system structure for combined features

An interesting approach in their experimental method is
composing different images from different domains
(landscape, animal, cars, constructions, etc), and the
system is compared with single low level feature based
retrieval systems.
A recent work on CBIR [26] incorporates granularity
theory to the combined low level visual features. They
propose color information of image (based on histogram)
and texture feature (based on gray level co-occurrence
matrix/GLCM/) as both methods are considered to be
quick and effective classical algorithms. The work
contributes much in the application of granularity theory
in image retrieval, but it also lacks on comparing it to
other combined feature approaches. Here in [26], a
better result obviously obtained compared to methods
adopting only single retrieval algorithms. The absence
of automated/intelligent behavior can be taken as one
limitation to be included for further work and their
optimal guideline function is not fully described too, as
stated there.
To make retrieval more intelligent and interactive, a
CBIR system should also incorporate other related
complementary disciplines such as the knowledge based
system, computer vision, data mining, neural networks
and so on. A more recent approach proposed by [24]
focuses on intelligent concept oriented search. As they
said, traditional image retrieval based on visual-based
matching is not effective in multimedia applications.
Consequently, the modeling of high-level human sense

Fig. 4 the clustering of color images (taken from [22])

This work, [22], used four different kinds of evaluation
techniques; precision, recall, false alarm rate and miss
rate and it is compared with three image retrieval
approaches in which two of them were clustering-based
image retrieval using J-means clustering and k-means
clustering respectively and the other one is image
retrieval using global features. It is observed that the
new j-means algorithm is better in retrieval. Even
though including spatial terms has a significant impact
in retrieval process, it would have been more expressive
if it uses additional features (than color and texture)
with an advanced user interactive algorithms. In
addition, automatic and self organized computation of
the number of segments can lead the system for better
retrieval.
It is obvious that, as the combined features increase, let
alone the time and space complexity, the retrieval
effectiveness also get improved. A system developed by
[15] is based on the combination of four image features;
color feature (HSV color histogram), texture feature
(co-occurrence matrix), shape feature (moment invariant
based-on threshold optimization), and spatial
relationship feature (based-on the Markov chains). As

686

Above are the detailed reviews on major recent works
of CBIR systems. Researchers in the area are still doing
more on image retrieval by expanding the scope to the
advanced retrieval strategy incorporating high level
semantic and ontology scenarios.

for image retrieval has been a challenging issue over the
past few years. Most of contemporary CBIR systems
explored to look for the primary features to present an
image. However, the related efforts are not satisfactory
enough due to the gap between low-level features and
high-level concepts, and hence problems still exist in
traditional classification-based image retrieval. For
example, different users making different query-terms
perhaps want to look for the same kind of images.
Here, [24] adopts the application of data mining
together with query decomposition techniques for image
searching. Their intelligent concept oriented search
(ICOS) uses the image-concept query decomposition
(ICQD) technique to decompose a query image into
several concepts to touch the user’s mind.
Concept oriented search get the desired high level image
through the help of ICQD. It includes effective
annotation, association, mining and visual ranking for
conceptual objects and has intelligent search method to
enhance high level concept image retrieval.

Semantic based image retrieval: it is among the recent
works of image retrieval systems that focuses mainly on
the techniques which can reduce the semantic gap of
CBIR systems [1], [12]. An improved support vector
machine (SVM)-based active relevance feedback frame
work together with a hybrid visual and conceptual
content representation and retrieval is one approach
proposed by [12]. The approach employs the global
color, texture and shape where the shape content is
described by Hough transform. For the semantic
resource it uses WordNet as it is better in many aspects
to that of Cyc and ConceptNet. However computing a
conceptual feature vector for every image is the major
overhead of the method. From the experimental
evaluation of [12], employing both visual and conceptbased feature vectors visibly improves the quality of the
results compared to using visual features alone, and
projecting the keywords on all the key concepts gives
better performance than projecting only on their key
super-concepts. Further more, [12] believed also that the
joint use of the conceptual content representation
together with their new relevance feedback framework
contribute to a significant improvement of the retrieval
results.
A similar approach has also been proposed by [1], using
fuzzy based system to decrease the semantic gap in
CBIR systems. In the system, a fuzzy modeling
approach has been developed to model the expert
human behavior in the image retrieval task, which
makes the system more powerful and expert based.

Fig. 6 the frame work of ICOS (from [24])

The system has two major phases; training phase (to
generate association rule) and concept retrieval phase
(in which the images matching the concept queries from
the users). It also uses an integrated classification,
mining and search engines.
The system has been evaluated based on precision, Fmeasures (for image-concept query decomposition
under different classification thresholds) and
performances for different sizes of experimental data.
One of its strong side, unlike most CBIR systems, is
evaluating the efficiency with a database of images of
non fixed size. It looks better than the traditional CBIR
systems using sequential comparison strategy, despite
the overheads on concept ontology.

Fig. 7 structure of the proposed fuzzy system for image retrieval (as
given by [1])

687

converted to a set of terms and incorporate them into the
knowledge base.

The evaluation shows that, the proposed fuzzy system
improves the precision–recall performance of the CBIR
systems.
Ontology based image retrievals: it is beyond the two
major image retrieval paradigms, text based and content
based. In practical applications both have limitations.
Ontology-based image retrieval has the potential to fully
describe the semantic content of an image, allowing the
similarity between images and retrieval query to be
computed accurately [8], [7]. Semantic technologies like
ontology and the XML markup language provide tools
for a promising new approach to image retrieval based
on implementing semantic understanding of image
content.
Ontology-based image retrieval has two
components: semantic image annotation (focuses
mainly on the description of image content) and
semantic image retrieval (to allow searching and
retrieval based on image content).
Ontology refers to a formal representation of a set of
concepts within a domain and the relationships between
those domains, and semantic annotation is to describe
the semantic content in images and retrieval queries.
Through semantic annotation, both images and retrieval
queries can be formalized as XML files [8]. An
ontology based image retrieval system basically uses
these two concepts: ontology and semantic annotation.
Besides this, semantic annotation of an image or
retrieval query still needs the intervention of a human
being which is an open research area making it
automated and interactive similar to some of the
combined visual feature based CBIR systems do.

Fig. 8 work flow of the system proposed by [7]

The system uses the widely known description logic for
representing knowledge in terms of classes, and
relationships between classes use a match making
algorithm to bind user specified queries with the
knowledge base. The system is compared with Google
(key word based approach) and other ontology based
approaches. Its important privilege lies on its flexibility,
easy to add more domains with out changing the entire
architecture. One major bottle neck in such system is the
extra burden in creating the ontology, knowledge base
construction and the accuracy of image feature
classification.

Another advanced method proposed by [7] is the
ontology with multi modality based image retrieval
system. Researchers argue that such ontological
searches for images are very efficient especially for
images with complicated content and ambiguous
semantics. Single modality refers to either the text or
image features of a domain specific image, where as
multimodality refers both. The goal is creating machineprocess able queries for such kind of diverse domain
specific images, in their example, using both text and
image features.

4. Conclusion
A wide variety of researches have been made on image
retrieval in multimedia databases. Each work has its
own technique, contribution and limitations.
Inline with the advancement of science and technology,
images play an important role in transmitting
information. Hence, together with the mechanisms for
storing and processing in multimedia databases,
retrieval of those stored images is always a question in
the area.
As a survey paper, we might not include each and every
aspect of individual works, however attempt has been
made to deal with a detailed review of the most
common traditional and modern image retrieval systems

Currently the work is applied to animal domain,
categorizing the system into three aspects: first, domain
knowledge of the animals including scientific name,
distribution, habitat, etc, second, animal images and
third the association between domain knowledge and
image features for ontology construction. The ontology
again has three main components: animal ontology,
textual description ontology and visual description
ontology. By further classifying each component
hierarchically, the low level features of images will be

688

from early text based systems to content based retrieval
and ontology based schemes. We review those works
mainly based on the methods/approaches they used to
come up to an efficient retrieval system together with
the limitations/challenges and the evaluation
mechanisms used. And we tried to give a constructive
idea for further work in each approach we reviewed.
We observed that, most of the single visual feature base
CBIR systems use color and the combined system use a
combination of almost all visual feature types. Further
more, many of the works in image retrieval have been
done for online system, and hence further work is
needed to adapt those techniques in enterprise levels.
On the other hand, most of the methods didn’t include
the self learning scheme. A user’s query sometimes may
give no result due to new parameters used beyond the
knowledge base collections; in such cases it is better
that the system stores the new knowledge from the user
and use for other subsequent queries.
We believe that our work is not a complete, but a part in
multimedia data; since multimedia data includes both
audio and video (for instance MPEG-7 is the known
technology that covers a wide range of applications
including DVD, CD and HDTV). Hence, a more
comprehensive review containing all multimedia data
types is needed for more contribution in the area.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.

19.
20.

References

21.

1.

Abolfazl L., M. Shahram Moin, Kambiz Badie: Semantic–
Based Image Retrieval: A Fuzzy Modeling Approach.
IEEE (2008)
2. B. Vermaa, S. Kulkarni. A fuzzy-neural approach for
interpretation and fusion of colour and texture features for
CBIR systems. Applied Soft Computing, 2004, 5(1): 119130.
3. Chen Zhang, Joyce Y. Chai, Rong Jin: User Term
Feedback in Interactive Text-based Image Retrieval.
SIGIR’05, August 15–19, 2005, Salvador, Brazil.
4. Chrisa T. and Stavros C.: An MPEG-7 query language and
a user preference model that allow semantic retrieval and
filtering of multimedia content. Multimedia systems 2007,
vol. 15 no 2(87 p)
5. Daniel L. Swets and John J. Weng: Efficient ContentBased Image Retrieval using Automatic Feature. IEEE
1995
6. George Gagaudakis, Paul L.Rosin. Incorporating shape
into histograms for CBIR. Pattern Recognition, 2002, 35(1):
81-91.
7. Huan W· Song L · Liang-Tien Chia: Image retrieval with
multi-modality ontology. Multimedia Systems (2008)
13:379–390
8. Hyvönen, E. Saarela, S., Viljanen, K.: Ontology based
image retrieval. In: Proceedings of WWW2003 (2003)
9. Jayanta B., Koustav B., Santanu C.: Multiple ExemplarBased Facial Image Retrieval Using Independent
Component Analysis. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
IMAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 15, NO. 12, DECEMBER
2006
10. Joo-Hwee Lim, Jian Kang Wu, Sumeet Singh, Desai
Narasimhalu: Learning Similarity Matching in Multimedia

22.
23.

24.

25.
26.

27.
28.
29.

689

Content-Based Retrieval. IEEE Transactions on knowledge
and data engineering, vol. 13, No 5, 2001
José Martinez and Stève Marchand: Towards Intelligent
Retrieval in Image Databases. 1998 International
Workshop on Multimedia Database Management Systems
Marin F., Nozha B., Michel C.: Semantic interactive image
retrieval combining visual and conceptual content
description. Multimedia Systems (2008) 13:309–322
Mario A. Nascimento, Veena Sridhar, Xiaobo Li. Effective
and efficient region-based image retrieval. Journal of
Visual Languages & Computing, 2003, 14(2): 151-179.
Martin H., Alexander H., Daniel K., Markus W.: Multi
resolution similarity search in image databases.
Multimedia Systems 10: 28–40 (2004)
Pengyu Liu, K. J., Zhuozheng W., Zhuoyi Lv: A New and
Effective Image Retrieval Method Based on Combined
Features. Fourth International Conference on Image and
Graphics IEEE 2007.
Pentland, A., Picard, R.W., Sclaroff: Content-based
manipulation of image database. International Journal of
Computer Vision, Fall (1995)
R.
B.
Johnson:
INTERNET
MULTIMEDIA
DATABASES. Printed and published by the IEE, Savoy
Place, London WC2R OBL, UK. (1998)
Ren XuePing, Wan Jian, Xu XiangHua: An Approach
ofImage Retrieval based on Bayesian and AAM. IEEE
International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics October 8-11, 2006, Taipei, Taiwan
Renato 0. S., Mario A., Alexandre X.: An Adaptive and
Efficient Clustering-Based Approach for Content-Based
Image Retrieval in Image Databases. IEEE 2001
S. M. Ghazanfar, S. K. Hasnain: A Framework for
Interactive Content-Based Image Retrieval. IEEE INMIS
2005
Shingo Uchihashi, and Takeo Kanade: CONTENT-FREE
IMAGE RETRIEVAL BASED ON RELATIONS
EXPLOITED FROM USER FEEDBACKS. IEEE 2005.
Sridhar R., Avula, Jinshan T., Scott T., Acton: An objectbased image retrieval system for digital libraries.
Multimedia Systems (2006) 11(3): 260–270
Sung-Bae Cho and Joo-Young Lee: A Human-Oriented
Image Retrieval System Using Interactive Genetic
Algorithm. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS,
MAN, AND CYBERNETICS PART A: SYSTEMS AND
HUMANS, VOL. 32, NO. 3, MAY 2002.
Vincent. S., Ja-Hwung Su, Hao-Hua Ku, Bo-Wen Wang:
Intelligent Concept-Oriented and Content-Based Image
Retrieval by Using Data Mining and Query Decomposition
Techniques. ICME 2008.
Xiangli Xu, Libiao Z., Zhezhou Yu, Chunguang Z.: Image
Retrieval Using Multi-Granularity Color Features. IEEE
2008.
Xiangli Xu, Libiao Zhang, Xiangdong Liu, Zhezhou Yu,
Chunguang Z.: Image Retrieval Using Multi-Granularity
Features of Color and Texture. Fifth International
Conference on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery
IEEE 2008.
Zhao, R., Grosky, W.I.: Narrowing the semantic gap—
improved text based web document retrieval using visual
features. IEEE Trans. Multimedia 4(2), 189–200 (2002)
Remco C. Veltkamp, Mirela Tanase: Content-Based Image
Retrieval Systems: A Survey. Technical Report UU-CS2000-34, October 2000
Atsuo Yoshitaka, Tadao Ichikawa: A Survey on ContentBased Retrieval for Multimedia Databases. IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA
ENGINEERING,
VOL.
11,
NO.
1,
JANUARY/FEBRUARY 1999

