Optimal Hierarchical Adaptive Mesh Construction Using FCO Sampling
Panagiotis Dafas, Ioannis Kompatsiaris and Michael G. Strintzis *
Information Processing Laboratory
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
540 06 Thessaloniki, Greece
{ pdafas,ikom} G3dion.ee.auth.g

Abstract
This paper introduces an optimal hierarchical adaptive
mesh construction algorithm using the Face-Centered Orthorhombic lattice (FCO) sampling which is a natural extension of the quincunx lattice to the 3-dimensional case. A
scheme for construction of adaptive meshes is presented.
Initially, a highly detailed and densely sampled regular
mesh is obtained froin geometry scanning or from a non
optimal polygon mesh. The adaptive triangle mesh is constructed by using jixed position vertices along with an efficient adaptive triangulation technique. The decimation
is based on FCO sampling and surface estimation Jilters.
The result is a progressive sequence of meshes consisting of
more triangles wherever sharp edges exist and fewer in uniform plane regions. Experimental results demonstrate the
usage arid Performance of the algorithm.

1. Introduction
Today we can accurately acquire finely detailed, arbitrary topology surfaces with millions and in fact recently
billions of vertices. Such models place large strains on computation, storage, transmission and display resources. Compression is essential in these settings and in particular progressive compression, where an early, coarse approximation
can subsequently be improved through the transmission of
additional bits. While compression of images has achieved
a high level of sophistication, compression of surfaces is a
relative new area which is currently evolving.
Several progressive and adaptive triangle reduction techniques have been presented in the literature. Delaunay
triangulation was used in [ 11, where a planarity criterion
was used to decide which vertices should be removed.

Quadtree-based methods [3] were proposed mostly for radiosity meshing, where the mesh was controlled by the illumination gradient. In [4] an algorithm was presented so
as to minimize an energy function explicitly modeling the
competing requirements of conciseness of representation
and fidelity to the data. In [5] the wavelet transform (WT)
was used as an overall mathematical framework controlling
the data approximation. It was assumed that the WT provides a local spectral estimate of the data and describes local
variations which define the coarseness of the surface mesh.
Although the performance of the above algorithms has
been in many ways quite satisfactory, several persistent
problems remain unresolved. Particularly troublesome are
the high computational cost of local triangulation, due to
the requirement of extensive work on data structures and
list management (as is often the case with Delaunay triangularization) and the lack of a consistent hierarchical representation of the approximated surface, which is useful in
many applications [ 6 ] , [7]. Work done on irregular subdivision is presented in [8] and in [9] progressive meshes are
introduced, and complete correspondence between vertices
in different levels of the hierarchy is established, something
that cannot be easily achieved for triangledfaces at different
levels.
In [2] the generalization of signal processing tools such
as downsampling, upsampling and filters to irregular connectivity triangle meshes was presented. In this paper the
generalization of the well known and useful in many applications FCO subsampling interpolation scheme [ 11, 12, 101
is presented. This paper introduces the optimal hierarchical
adaptive mesh construction using FCO sampling. The hierarchical representation of meshes achieved by the adaptive
triangulation method provides:
0

*This work was supported by the PENED99 and AMEA projects of the
Greek Secretariat of Research and Technology.

33 1
0-7695-0743-3100$10.00 0 2000 IEEE

Mesh Simplification: The meshes created by modeling
and scanning systems are seldom optimized for rendering efficiency. These meshes can be replaced by
almost indistinguishable approximations, which have

more triangles in regions of high detail and fewer in
uniform regions.
0

0

0

0

0

Progressive Transmission: Progressive mesh transmission provides, during the transmission state, low-detail
mesh approximations. This is useful, for instance, in
browsing through large databases and in Internet-based
applications.
Prioritized transmission of the mesh: In addition to
the hierarchy of meshes, each level in the pyramid of
meshes must be transmitted in a prioritized way. In
this manner, the rendering performance is optimized,
even if the transmission is not entirely completed for
each level in the pyramid of meshes.

Figure 1. Bounding box of a 3D object.

Correspondence between successive scales: Straightforward correspondence between triangles of successive levels allows properties of the mesh to be calculated at lower levels and be propagated through the
pyramid

Figure 1. The binary sequence x[n] is constructed in the
following way

x[n] =

Selective refinement: Sometimes it is desirable to
adapt the level of refinement in selected regions where
the interest of user is focused.

1 if n E surface
0 if n surface

The procedure for deriving this binary sequence from unorganized scanned points and non optimal meshes is described in the sequel.

Computational efficiency: The computational efficiency of the algorithm is important so as to produce
rapidly the required multiresolution representation.

2.1. Regular Mesh From Unorganized Scanned
Points

This paper is organized as follows. In the next Section
the construction of the initial dense regular mesh is presented. In Section 3 the decimation of the dense mesh using Fco subsampling and surface estimation filters is given.
Finally, in Section 4, experimental results demonstrate the
efficiency of the algorithm.

The sequence in (1) is obtained in a straightforward manner from the unorganized points by simply selecting the appropriate resolution distance d and rounding all points to
the nearest value of an integer multiple of d. Specifically,
if fii is a point from the set of unorganized points, then the
new points ni are
ni

2. Regular Triangle Mesh Construction

= round(&) = k d,

where llni - k d(l 5 I(ni- 1 dll, V1 : integer
Initially, a regular mesh is constructed at the highest detail level of our mesh hierarchy. This regular mesh is obtained from unorganized points captured by three dimensional range scanning or from a non optimal polygon mesh.
In both cases an appropriate discrete distance d is chosen
depending on the application and the surface is described
by dense fixed position vertices inside its bounding box. In
this manner, the information of the surface is described by a
three dimensional binary sequence with region of definition
the bounding box of the surface:

# k.

2.2. Regular Mesh From Non Optimal Meshes
In this case the set of fixed position vertices will be constructed from an initial non optimal mesh defined by a set of
3D vertices and their interconnected triangles. For each 3D
point n as defined in (1) a sequence xdist is found representing the distance of the 3D point n from the surface of the
model defined by the set of interconnected triangles. Each
triangle defines a plane with normal vector [U b c dlT. For
the estimation of zdist [n]the closest triangle to the point is
used. Thus,

where [nl,722, n 3 I T denotes the position of the vertices in
the 3D space and ni E [Ni,min,.. . , Ni,maz]as shown in

Zdist[nI

332

=

uno

+

bn1

Ju2

+

+
b2

c722
+

+d

c2

(3)

Y

Y

6

Y

Y

1

4

’I

Y

Figure 3. Possible triangulations using first
order vertices.

Figure 2. FCO subsampling. At each stage k
the points marked with k leave from the lattice

LAT(M~-~).

The binary sequence (1) can be obtained as follows:

(a)

By using the sequence 3:dist[n], a 3D point is part of 3: if its
distance from the surface is less than

y.

(b)

Figure 4. Possible triangulations using first
and second order vertices.

2.3. Surface Estimation
Since the set of fixed position 3D points describing the
surface is available, an efficient triangulation algorithm is
appliedin order to reconstruct the surface at the highest detail. A regular triangle mesh will be constructed using only
the vertices with coordinates (721, 722, n3) of the non zero
elements of the z[n]sequence.
The Face-Centered Orthorhombic lattice (FCO) is a natural extension of the quincunx lattice to the 3-dimensional
case, and is in fact quincunx in all dimensions [ 113. The
FCO sampling matrix M is defined by

M = [ 1’ I -1
:

:]

0

.

the axes are constructed. The nodes “0’ are retained
from FCO sampling of all nodes in the bounding box
and nodes “1” are first order neighboring nodes, meaning that they are only one vertex away from node “0”.
Each time z[n] = 1 for “0’ and at least one “1” node
the finite number of possible triangles as shown in Figure 3 are constructed. In this step both vertical and
horizontal surfaces are triangulated.

Step 2 In this step the triangles shown in Figure 4 as

5

well those resulting from rotations of rads around
the axes are constructed. Again nodes “0” are derived from FCO sampling of the initial bounding box
and nodes “2” are used for triangulation. In this step
oblique surfaces are triangulated.

(5 )

At Figure 2 the FCO subsampling procedure is presented.
At each stage k the points marked with k leave from the
lattice LAT(Mk-’). Note that a finite power of the FCO
sampling matrix is an integer multiple of the identity matrix:
M3 = 231.
The construction of the regular wireframe will be based
on the the fixed position vertices and the FCO sampling matrix and is implemented in the following three steps:
0

Step 3 In this step the triangles shown in Figure 5 as
well those resulting from rotations of f rads around
the axes are constructed. In this step first, second and
third order neighbors are used for triangulation.
The result of the triangulation procedure is a regular triangle mesh. Examples of the triangulation algorithm are
given at the experimental results Section. Note that in this
phase no nodes are discarded due to a FCO subsampling

Step 1 In this step the triangles shown in Figure 3 as
well those resulting from rotations of rads around

333

3

Figure 5. Possible triangulations using first,
second and third order vertices.

procedure. The FCO matrix is used only in order to define
the positions for triangulation.

3. Initial Regular mesh Decimation
Given the initial regular mesh constructed as described
in the previous Section, the algorithm generates successive
lower density meshes consisting of more triangles wherever
sharp edges exist and fewer in uniform plane regions due to
the use of the surface estimation filters.
At each stage k of the subsampling FCO procedure, the
“surface estimation filters” gk (n),gk+l (n) and g k + 2 (n) are
applied to the surface in order to identify whether planar
surfaces which can be simplified exist. Vertices of the triangular mesh which belong on a planar surface are rejected
according to the procedure described in the following. The
surface estimation filters represent an averaging procedure
around each node and their output is used in order to determine whether any planar surfaces of any orientation exist
which are then simplified. The filter gk,,; (n) is applied at
stage k of the algorithm and ni indicates the estimation of a
planar surface along the ni direction.
The information of the surface of the model is represented by the binary sequence with non zero values being
the vertices of the triangular regular mesh. In the following
relations, function fi(n1, 122,123) returns the coordinate of a
vertex if z(n,,n2,n3) equals one for this vertex:

gk+2,ns ( n l , 122,723)

=

cic.

(nl fi,nZ ,n3+j
3 z(m+i,nz,n3+j{
f3

For each stage IC the following errors are estimated in
order to be used for the determination of any planar surfaces
en1 = fl(nl,n2,123) - gk,nl (121,122, 123)
e,, = f2(721,n2,n3)-gk,na(n1,n2,123)
e,, = f3(121,n2,n3) - gk,n3(121,122,123)

(7)

These differences are an estimate of the surface roughness.
More specifically
0

Point

(121,122 .n3)

lies on a plane if

e,, = enz = e,, = 0

Each of the following relations is in fact an averaging of the
neighboring to ( n l , n 2 , n ~coordinates
)
in different directions. In all summations i and j take the values -d, +d.

334

Figure 6. Example of application of filter
Figure 7. Stages of the hierarchical triangulation procedure for a plane region.

g/c,nl (721, 7 2 2 , 7 2 3 ) .

Using these differences point (nl ,7 2 2 , 7 2 3 ) is rejected if it
belongs to a plane or along an edge since it carries no information. In this case, point (721 ,7 1 2 , 7 2 3 ) belongs to a uniform
region that can be represented with fewer and larger triangles.
An example of this operation can be presented with the
help of the Figure 6. We assume that all nodes lie on the
same plane and that there are no nodes lying outside this
plane in this region. In this case, filter g/c,nl( 7 2 1 , 7 2 2 , 7 2 3 ) is
applied to node (721 ,722,723):

Function f 1 ( 7 2 1 , 7 2 2 , 7 2 3 & d ) = 0 since we assume that
there are no nodes lying outside this plane in this region.
If we perform the above operation for g k , n 2 ( n l ,7 2 2 , 1 2 3 ) and
g k , n 3 ( 7 2 1 , 7 2 2 , 7 2 3 ) we reach that e,, = enz = e,,
= 0,
indicating that (721,722 ,7 2 3 ) lies on a plane as is the case.

3.1. Hierarchical triangulation
Every time that a vertex is rejected from the mesh the hierarchical triangulation algorithm simplifies the mesh at this
specific region. In this way the final mesh will have more
triangles wherever curve planes exist and fewer in uniform
plane regions. The mesh simplification procedure is shown
in Figure 7.

4. Experimental Results
(b)

Several examples of the triangulation algorithm are
shown in Figures 8 and 9. In Figure 8a the original model
of the “Sphinx” surface is represented while in Figure 8b a
regular mesh is generated for this surface. In Figure 9 a regular mesh with different value of the resolution parameters
d is generated for the surface “Sphere”.

Figure 8. (a) Initial model “Sphinx”(b) Regular
mesh of the “Sphinx” with resolution parameter d.

335

References
[ l ] W. 3. Schroeder, J. A. Zarge, and W. .E Lorensen,
“Decimation of triangular meshes,” in Proc. SIGGRAPH ’92,1992, pp. 65-70.
[2] I. Guskov, W. Sweldens, P. Schroder, “Multiresolution Signal Processing for Meshes,” in Proc. SIGGRAPH ’99,1999.
[3] H. Samet, “The quadtree and related hierarchical data
structures,” in ACM Comp. Survey, 1984, vol. 16, pp.
187-260.
[4] H. Hoppe, T. DeRose, T. DuChamp, J. McDonald, and
W. Stuetzle, “Mesh optimization,” in SIGGRAPH ’93,
Annaheim, California, August 1993.
[5] M. Gross, 0. Staadt, and R. Gatti, “Efficient Triangular Surface Approximations Using Wavelets and
Quadtree Data Structures,” IEEE Trans. on Visualisation and Computer Graphics, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 130143, June 1996.
[6] William Horn Gabriel Taubin, Andre Geuziec and
Francis Lazarus, “Progressive forest split compression,” in SlGGRA PH 98 Conference Proceedings.
ACM SIGGRAPH, 1998, pp. 123-132, Addison Wesley.
[7] Oliver G. Staadt, Markus H. Gross, and Roger Weber,
“Multiresolution compression and reconstruction,” in
IEEE Visualization 97, Roni Yagel and Hans Hagen,
Eds. IEEE, November 1997, pp. 337-346.

[8] I. Guskov, W. Sweldens and P. Schroder, “Multiresolution Signal Processing for Meshes”, in SIGGRAPH
99 Conference Proceedings. ACM SIGGRAPH, 1999,
pp. 325-334, Addison Wesley.
[9] Hugues Hoppe, “Progressive meshes,” in SIGGRAPH
96 Conference Proceedings, Holly Rushmeier, Ed.
ACM SIGGRAPH, August 1996, Annual Conference
Series, pp. 99-108, Addison Wesley, held in New Orleans, Louisiana, 04-09 August 1996.
[ 101 I. Kompatsiaris, D. Tzovaras and M. G. Strintzis, “Hi-

erarchical Representation of Surfaces Using 3D Polygon Meshes,” Submitted for publication to IEEE Image Processing. Sept. 1999.
[ 111 D. Tzovaras and M. G. Strintzis, “Optimal Construc-

tion of Reduced Pyramids For Lossless and Progressive 3D Volume Data Coding,” in IMDSP’98, Austria,
Jun. 1998.

(c)

Figure 9. (a) Initial model “Sphere” (b) Regular
mesh with resolution parameter d, (c) Regular
mesh with resolution parameter 2d.

[ 121 I. Kompatsiaris, D. Tzovaras and M. G. Strintzis, “Hi-

erarchical Representation of Surfaces Using 3D Wireframes”, in 8-th International Conference in Central
Europe on Computer Graphics, Visualization and Interactive Digital Media ’2000, Plzen, Czech Republic,
February 2000.

336

