Abstract Data Visualisation in the Built Environment
Matthew Pilgrim
Centre for Znnovative
Construction
Engineering,
Loughborough
University

Dino Bouchlaghem
Loughborough
University, Departmenl
of Civil and Building
Engineering

Dennis Loveday
Loughborough
University, Department
of Civil and Building
Engineering

communication between professionals and alternatives
must be sought.
This paper presents an initial study of scientific data
visualisation and its effective use in the thermal analysis
of buildings. Visualisation in this context is focused on
the analysis and exploration of data to gain greater
insight, and falls into two broad categories [2]:
Visualisation, where the user is looking to understand
the problem;
Presentation, where the user is presenting results to a
third party.
The objective of the work reported here is to aid the
engineer in understanding the output from a thermal
simulation programme, in this example applied
specifically to the case of the response of the building to
external (weather) and internal (heat gain) stimuli and the
effects of design options on this response. Further work
will seek to develop tools for aiding communication of
the knowledge gained during analysis to fellow engineers,
architects and clients.
The purpose of the paper presented here is to bring to
the attention of the reader the findings previously
presented in a earlier paper [3], and to extend these by
discussing the importance of both improved presentation
techniques and the use of a more abstract building
representation.

Abstract
Research on data visualisation is undergoing major
developments in a number of difSerent fields. These
developments include investigating ways of applying
visualisation techniques and systems for more eficient
manipulation, interpretation and presentation of data. In
the built environment field, the potential of new
visualisation technologies to enhance the presentation of
performance data obtained as output from simulation
programmes has remained almost unexplored.
The primary aim of the work summarised here was to
commence the development of a method for visualising
the data produced by thermal analysis tools. Two
applications are presented here. The first is designed to
automatically process the output within a commercial
spreadsheet. The second is designed to display the
solution in three dimensions to aid spatial recognition
and data navigation.
This paper presents, through small-scale user tests,
that each of the proposed applications signijkantly
improves some of the attributes associated with usability,
namely: learnability, eficiency, memorability, errors and
satisfaction. Advice is given on the key aspects that
require attention when the full method is developed.
Finally, it should be possible to develop low cost data
visualisation tools to improve the overall usability of a
thermal analysis tool within a built environment practice.

2. Building Performance Visualisation
In a recent report [4]on the use of Virtual Reality (VR)
in the construction industry, the section on building
performance (3.3.2) discusses the role of VR as an
integral component of a performance toollut. As the
definition of VR becomes increasingly wider-ranging, its
boundaries broaden to encompass desktop 3D graphics
and technologies such as VRML (Virtual Reality
Modelling Language), making ‘VR’ more accessible to
the construction industry. Example projects include
OSCON (Open Systems for CONstruction), which uses a
VRML interface integrated with an object-orientated
database to support construction processes [ 5 ] . More
specifically tailored to building performance is a group

1. Introduction
It is recognised that, given the complexity and
diversity of the modern non-domestic building, the level
of realised performance (in the indoor environment) is
increasingly dependent upon the level of integration in the
design process [l]. As a result of this, and the rapid
increase in computational power available, thermal
analysis tools are becoming more comprehensive and
their results more extensive and complex. The traditional
methods for presenting the output data are rapidly
becoming insufficient as a means for clear

0-7695-0743-3/00 $10.000 2000 JEEE

Michael Holmes
Ove A m p & Partners,
Research &
Development

126

approximately 60% of effort involved in a typical
simulation goes into the analysis and communication
of the results and cite this as a strong incentive to
produce powerful and intuitive visualisation tools.
Increased Simulation: the effect of the two benefits
detailed above is to promote the use of simulation in
the construction industry. Simulation assists the
developer, the architect and the HVAC designer to
compare design alternatives and to choose between
them, as well as the designers to select and
dimensionalise technical systems [ 151.

project reported by Malkawi [6] which developed a single
room model (in VRML) to visualise the effects of a wall’s
The virtual
construction on space conditions.
environment allows a user to test various combinations of
building components (wall material, window size, etc)
and to visualise thermal distributions whilst experiencing
an interior space. This system is reportedly limited to the
pre-calculated results and construction elements.
Another important issue is information management
within both building design and VR tools. Whyte [7]
argues that data transfer between the two is neither
reliable nor desirable; instead, VR techniques need to
become accessible within the specialist building design
tools. However, care should be taken when combining
systems, as the complexity of modelling real world
systems in 3D/CAD packages could result in very
inaccurate results [8]. Engeli [9] has demonstrated one
such successful combination in his paper ‘Virtual Reality
Design Environment with Intelligent Objects and
Autonomous Agents’; here, the author describes the
agents as enhancing the support of the user by solving
specified tasks. Although the agents employed are
tailored to architectural design, they could be extended to
become energy or performance agents. The current
literature details many efforts to combine VR techniques
with building design, examples are:
Sketch design stage - ‘Pangea’ [ 101
Architecture and urban planning - ‘VR-DIS’ [ 111
Detailed airflow - ‘Phoenics VR’ [ 121
Although there is much to learn from each of these
examples, there remains no definitive technique for
representing building performance data to support the
detailed analysis of design options.

4. Current Practice
The first stage of the study reported here was to
identify current practice in the use of simulation within a
large civil engineering company. In addition to the
feedback received in the day-to-day support (by the
principal author) of the analysis software, a workplace
observational study was conducted. In this context, the
‘observations’ consisted of monitoring engineers using
thermal analysis software in the course of their normal
work and recording key tasks. This revealed that each
engineer was spending a significant amount of time
searching, formatting and manipulating the output within
commercial spreadsheet packages. The following critical
tasks were identified as being the most significant:
Inspection of predicted internal temperatures and the
monitoring of peak conditions.
0
Location of glazed elements transmitting significant
solar radiation.
0
Identification of high internal surface temperatures.
Monitoring the effect of the size of ventilation
apertures on the internal conditions and space air
change rate.
In addition to the above, it was often necessary to
answer such questions as:
Why is room/surface ‘x’ so hodcold?
0
Why does so much of the transmitted solar radiation
pass back out of window ‘x’?
Which window should have additional blinddshades
added?
0
What is the floor area?
Some of the above questions may require collaboration
between colleagues to obtain the correct answer; at
present, this means e-mail, telephone and/or personal
meetings to discuss the problem. Aouad [5] states that
traditional computational techniques have failed the
construction industry due to the amount and complexity
of the information to be processed. He goes on to report
that modern visual technologies can resolve many of these
issues by providing three-dimensional interfaces that
allow construction professionals to use the visual model
as the medium for communication, interaction and
interrogation.
The following section details the

3. Benefits
The benefits to be gained from appropriate use of
visualisation should not be underestimated. The benefits
are as follows:
Effective simulation: by supporting cognition,
visualisation
improves
the
accuracy
and
completeness with which users achieve the specified
goals. Card [ 131 states that there are six major ways
in which visualisation amplify cognition: (1) by
increasing memory and processing resources
available to the users, (2) by reducing the search for
information, (3) by using visual representations to
enhance the detection of patterns, (4) by enabling
perceptual inference operations, (5) by using
perceptual attention mechanisms for monitoring, and
(6) by encoding information in a medium.
Efficient simulation: visualisation can reduce the
resources expended in relation to the effectiveness
by which the specified goals are achieved. Schulz
[I41 notes that in the BMW motor company,

127

system and have only limited access to ‘high-end’
machines. It would also be advantageous if the system
was capable of producing visualisations that could be
published online, thus supporting collaborative viewing
between various parties.

requirements set for a prototype system to achieve this
goal.

5. System Requirements
Here we describe the criteria set for a prototype
visualisation system. The basis for these is the constraints
found within an everyday working environment of an
engineering practice and the quantity/format of the data to
be presented.

5.4. Data Format
The system’s underlying data structure should be
defined in line with present standards so as to allow data
transfer between the analysis tools and the visualisation
application. There are many existing standards, each with
a particular focus. For example, STEP (Standard for the
Exchange of Product model data, I S 0 1993) and the IAI
(International Alliance of Interoperability, [20]) have
been successfully demonstrated in several European
projects such as ATLAS, COMBI, COMBINE and
CIMsteel [21]. Further to this, recent developments in
XML (Extensible Markup Language, [22]) indicate it
could become the future standard for data communication
on the Internet, since it allows custom schema to be
defined and exchanged, making it possible to develop
lightweight and flexible versions of other data structures.
For the purpose of the prototypes described next, an
ASCII file format was adopted and combined with a
custom data structure to reduce development time.

5.1. Data Capacity & Structure
In contrast to the other industries such as
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD), Medicine, Social
Sciences and the Environment [ 16, 17 , 18 & 191 the data
sets used within the built environment are relatively
small, but are often complex in nature. They are typically
of a relational or object orientated structure and may
contain time dependent values. They are, however, not
volumetric. CFD results consist typically of values of
temperature, velocity and moisture content for each cell in
a relatively simple data structure. The thermal results
consist of data on many different levels of detail (site
building+ room
surface
fabric) and for various
month
day
hour and sub-hour
time periods (year
time steps). Therefore the prototype system should be
capable of displaying different levels of detail at different
time steps, as opposed to large volumes of data for a
single (or limited) time-step.

+
+

+
+ +

+

5.5. Customisation & Presentation Techniques
From the observational study undertaken and
mentioned earlier, it is apparent that as well as the key
tasks identified, engineers often perform a variety o f
custom tasks such as data checking (i.e. checking
averages against rules of thumb) and formatting. These
tasks were often performed to satisfy questions about, and
integrity of, the output and to aid visual recognition of
key data (i.e. highlighting maximums). It is therefore
considered important that customisation is supported by
the visualisation application. The presentation of the
results is key to the effectiveness of the application.
Extensive work has been carried out in this field and the
authors are currently identifying techniques most
applicable to building performance data, some of which
are discussed later in this paper. However, for the
purpose of the prototype, methods already familiar to the
engineers were utilised; this included basic charts, tables
and colour coded scales.

5.2. Cost
Many of the visualisation systems currently on the
market are seen as prohibitively expensive in relation to
typical project fees. There is, however, presently a surge
in the number of low cost technologies capable of
displaying the quantity and type of data required - these
range from 3D file formats to graphics libraries. These,
when combined with the power of visual programming
interfaces such as Microsoft’s Visual Basic, have the
power to produce effective visualisations for at least small
datasets, allowing rapid proof of concept. Further work
will ultimately consider more sophisticated systems for
the added usability and functionality they may offer.

5.3. Hardware Platform
To be effective in the workplace, the visualisation
system should require computational power the same as,
or preferably less than, that of the average CAD specified
PC. This constraint is due to the nature of the
environment in which the visualisation must be
undertaken, i.e. the everyday working environment of a
civil engineering practice. Such practices typically
operate desktop PCs with the Windows NT operating

6. Proposals
As a result of the observational study two applications
were proposed:
a method to automatically process the output within a
spreadsheet (MS Excel), aiding the engineer to gain a
quick and efficient insight into the data. The
spreadsheet tools were developed over a period of

128

0

The prototype (Visual Basic Viz Application)
presented here is designed to read geometry/ results files
produced by an in-house analysis program and to produce
the desired visualisation, indicated by the dashed box in
Figure 1.
The format of these files is presently applicationspecific, although future work will be based on the
aforementioned standards, thus allowing other analysis
programs to be coupled to the system. The visualisation
consists of:
Default web page - includes an overview of the
system and navigation instructions.
0
Framed web page - consisting of the following
frames.
0
Navigation Bar -links to predefined camera
positions and analysis data.
0
Results Overview -an overview of the selected
room’s surface details.
Results Display -detailed results for the selected
object (room, surface or window).
3D Content - contains a proprietary 3D plug-in to
display a representation of the building’s geometry
(based on the analysis model).
The building representation was created by generating
a generic world within the proprietary authoring software.
This world contains the objects and script necessary to
read the geometry file and create A replica of the 3Danalysis model. When constructing (within the VB Viz
Application) the files necessary to produce the
visualisation, the user is given several customisation
options, such as: preview of the floor plan to locate
information points ( r d d a r k sphere in the foreground of
Figure 2.), positioning of default cameras and other
custom settings such as graph size.

several months and then released to all users of the
analysis tools.
a prototype web-based application, is designed to
display the solution in a three dimensional virtual
environment to aid spatial recognition and data
navigation. This was developed over a slightly
longer period of 1 year.

6.1. Spreadsheet
The immediate need to improve the efficiency of data
navigation and presentation has been identified within the
observational study and several macros for Microsoft
Excel have been produced (written in Visual Basic for
Applications) in response. These are application-specific
as they rely on the position of the data within the output
remaining in a fixed, pre-determined, position. Key
functionality includes:
Format & Graph: This macro applies formatting to
each cell of the spreadsheet to clearly define table
extents and key data. The macro also creates graphs
of a given day’s results (air temperature, airflow rate
and solar radiation) with the relevant headings and
legends.
Comparison: The most important aspect of design
analysis is often the comparison of options [23]; this
macro therefore allows multiple sets of results to be
compared (tabular form) and plotted automatically.
Jumping and Printing: This macro improves
navigation of data by facilitating the ability to jump
the cursor to a given section of data by simply
clicking a link to it. Printing has also been improved
by defining a pre-set format for each table of results
and allowing headers and footers to be automatically
generated from the files information (important for
Quality Assurance).

7. User Trials

6.2. Virtual Environment

Following the completion of the spreadsheet and
virtual environment applications, quantification of their
effectiveness was sought through a series of user trials.
The trials consisted of three small groups of users
completing an identical set of tasks using the following
output mechanisms:
Group 1: Plain spreadsheet (The control group).
Group 2: Spreadsheet with macros applied as in
Section 6. I .
Group 3: Virtual Environment prototype as in Section

The thermal analysis of a building is inherently A
multidimensional problem, from the initial concept
through to the isometric or perspective sketch, and to the
three-dimensional analysis model. However, this is
presently where the ‘3D’ chain ends, as the majority of
analysis output is presented in a static two-dimensional
format such as tables and graphs. The focus of this study
is to build on the natural affordance provided by virtual
environments to aid the 3D presentation of analysis
results. The project originally identified VRML as an
ideal technology for representing a building’s physical
form whilst having the ability to link key elements to the
relevant results. However, towards the end of the study a
proprietary 3D Internet technology was identified as
having additional scope. The system detailed below has
been implemented in both technologies, but for clarity, is
only presented using the proprietary technology.

6.2.
Tasks were based on the location and use of analytical
output produced by an in-house thermal simulation tool; a
total of 44 tasks were set, examples of which are:
How many translucent surfaces (windows) are there
in the room?
Which room has the highest maximum air
temperature?

129

8. Observation

Which opaque surface has the highest maximum
surface temperature?
Why is this likely to be the hottest surface in this
room?
All subjects were familiar with these tasks and, in the
case of Groups 1 and 2, they were also familiar with the
output mechanism. In the case of Group 3, a ten-minute
training session was given to familiarise the subjects with
both movement and location of results within the threedimensional environment. The tests were managed by
custom software developed to deliver each task in turn, to
monitor the given response and to record the time taken.
In addition to this, the software recorded the users’
responses to a statement about ease of task completion
(Figure 3).

Nielsen [24] suggests that software usability is closely
associated with five factors:
Efficiency - The virtual environment prototype has
shown improved performance by a reduction in the
time taken to both correctly and incorrectly perform
the given task.
Satisfaction - The user ratings suggest that the
majority of users felt the virtual environment
prototype was most effective in supporting the given
tasks, making them ‘easy’ to complete.
Learnability & Memorability - The data collected
was insufficient to clearly measure the effects of
learning or remembering tasks.
The increased
performance of the virtual environment prototype is
based on a range of factors which are likely to
include elements of learning, but will also be largely
based on improved support of searching and locating
data.
Errors - The virtual environment prototype has been
shown, on average, to support greater accuracy than
the spreadsheets used within the control group.
Further to the above, several other observations were
noted during testing:
Users -became disorientated within the virtual
environment and often misunderstood the compass
facility.
The majority of users within Groups 1 & 2
(spreadsheet output) did not make use of built in
mathematical functions such as MAX, which can be
used to locate a maximum value e.g., a surface
temperature.
Users in Group 3 were not sufficiently familiar with
the virtual environment to perform some of the tasks.
Future work will therefore need to investigate the
effects of training on group performance.
The atmosphere in the training room when Group 3
performed the test was noticeably jovial, with
comments like ‘hey look you can fly upside down!’
This highlights short-term novelty, which may have
had some influence on the findings presented. It will
therefore be necessary to assess benefits over a
longer-term period in future tests.
Each of these observations will be used to refine and
ultimately develop a method for assessing the
performance of future prototype visualisation systems.
The work has also recognised the necessity to closely
examine the techniques used to present the data either
within the virtual environment or linked to the virtual
environment.

7.1. User Trials Results
Each test took approximately one and a half hours to
perform. The results were collated and processed to
remove rogue data and to mark the accuracy of the given
answers. Correct answers were assigned one point and
incorrect answers were assigned zero points. The average
accuracy and rating for each group was taken for all tasks
and is given in Table 1.0. The results indicate both
increased accuracy and perceived usability for Groups 2
and 3 when compared to the control group (Group 1). In
addition, there is some improvement in the consistency of
the accuracy and the feeling that the software supported
the given task. The virtual environment software (Group
3) achieved the best results in both cases, however the
difference between this and the preformatted spreadsheet
group (Group 2) is only small.
The average of ‘the time taken to perform each task’
was then calculated on a group by group basis. These
values were then summed task by task to give the total
accumulative time taken by each group to complete all
tasks (including incorrect answers), Figure 4 . The trend
lines (linear, all rz values > 0.99) indicate that there is no
significant difference between the response times of
Groups 2 and 3, though both groups show a clear
improvement over the control group (Group 1).
Conversely, if the data for incorrect answers is
removed, the results for the two spreadsheet-based
solutions (Groups 1 & 2) show similar performance
characteristics while the virtual environment prototype
indicates improved performance (Figure 5 ) . The latter
figure includes polynomial trend lines with rz values
greater than 0.99.
Due to the limited number of participants it has not
been possible to collate meaningful data for the analysis
of memorability or learnability. These measures are seen
as more subtle and will require a larger study to produce
accurate results. Addresses

130

brightness of colour being different from the increment in
represented value. One solution is the adoption of a scale
consistent with the apparent brightness of colours as
perceived by the shape channel, dark purple to light
yellow [26]. This scale has the advantage that each step
in perceived brightness represents an equal increment in
represented value.

9. Discussion of Improvements in
Presentation Techniques
We have shown how, through a process of maintaining
a three dimensional representation of a building
throughout the analytical process, it is possible to improve
upon the time taken to locate and report analytical results
with improved accuracy. In this context, the building’s
representation is used to support the user in the task of
locating relevant data for the correct element, where the
data is presented in a traditional graphical format (e.g.
tables and plots). A further performance improvement
might be achieved by more closely integrating the
building’s representation and the data presentation. For
example, by coding the dry and wet bulb temperatures in
surface colour and texture (e.g. bumpiness) it might be
possible to remove the necessity to display separate data
tables. As the quantity of data increases, this technique
will also apply limitations and may ultimately lead to the
need for more abstract representations in order to
rationalise the data concerned. The following sections
firstly detail some techniques used to improve traditional
methods of data presentation and secondly suggest a
method for moving to a more abstract form of data
presentation.

9.2. Abstractions
Abstraction can be defined as achieving effect by
utilising colour and forms that do not directly relate to the
object in question. In this context abstraction relates to
presenting building data without representing the building
itself. This differs from the work reported so far, which
sought to maintain the context to improve efficiency.
These seemingly contradictory approaches may however
be resolved by a process we shall term ‘fading’. An
example is given in Figure 6 . Here the user is initially
presented with a three dimensional building
representation in order to establish orientation and
context. To display further data the user is able to ‘fade’
the building shell ‘out’ and the abstract representation
‘in’.
This is achieved by adjusting the objects’
In this
transparency characteristics appropriately.
example the abstract space consists of a series of discs
(one per surface) connected by tapered bars to a central
point (conical) to form a basic nodal network. Once in
abstract space the user has the ability to explore larger
quantities of data in possibly more appropriate forms. An
application which uses a similar abstract approach is the
‘The Knowledge Garden’ developed by British Telecom
Research Laboratories [27]. The Knowledge Garden
represents information as an organic resource that
changes over time, and uses 3D plants as a metaphor.
The plants are grown from the results of an automatic
clustering process whereby Internet resources containing
related information are grouped together. Thus sports
related URLs and documents might be grouped and
represented as a small plant alongside similar plants for
other subjects such as cookery, fishing etc. Although the
plants have no direct relation to the data they present they
do allow the data to be presented in an intuitive and
structured fashion. A similar metaphor has yet to be
developed for presenting built environment analytical
data.

9.1. Traditional Methods
If we continue to present our performance data using
the traditional methods of plotting and colour coding, then
there are techniques that can be adopted which may
improve the presentation. These include guidelines such
as those given for ‘graphical excellence’ by Tufte [25]:
0
Show the data
Avoid distorting what the data have to say
0
Present many numbers in a small space
Make large data sets coherent
0
Encourage the eye to compare different pieces of data
0
Reveal the data at several layers of detail
Integral to achieving these is the optimisation of the
‘data-ink ratio’, that is, reduce the ink used to create a
graphic whilst maintaining the quantity of data displayed.
In contradiction to this there are certain circumstances
where adding a small amount of ink can improve the
quality of the information greatly. For example, a flat
image of a 3D object will only reveal a single view, but
by projecting the object’s shadow on to three
perpendicular planes (floor, side and rear walls) it is
possible to obtain a greater understanding of the object’s
form.
If the decision is made to present the data using colour,
then consideration should be given to the range and
increments used. The all too familiar colour order derived
from the spectrum red through to violet can lead to false
interpretations. This is due to the increments in perceived

10. Conclusion
This study has highlighted the potential benefits of
scientific visualisation for the representation of building
performance data. It has also:
Provided a model for which to develop further tests
to improve the way in which we measure such
benefits.

131

[ll] Coomans, M. K. D., H. J. P. Timermans, (1999),
“Visualisation of Building Data in VR-DIS”, Proc. of 1999
IEEE
International
Conference
on
Information
Visualisation, IEEE Computer Society Press, 14-16 July
1999, London, England.
[ 121 Bertol, D., (l997), “Designing digital space: an architect’s
guide to virtual reality”, New York, Chichester, Wiley.
[13] Card, S . K., J. D. Mackinlay, B. Shneiderman, (1999).
“Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to
Think”, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., San Francisco.
[14] Schulz, M., T. Reuding, T. Ertl, (1998), “Analyzing
Engineering Simulations in a Virtual Environment”, ZEEE
Computer Graphics & Applications, Vol. 18, No. 6,
NovembedDecember 1998, IEEE Computer Society Press.
[15] Markku, J., (1998), IEA-BCS ANNEX 30 “Bringing
Simulation to Application”, Subtask 2: Design Process
Analysis, Final report, draft June 24‘h 1998
[16] Cox, J. P., (1993), “The Visualisation of 3D Device
Simulation: Using AVS with an existing simulator”,
Proceedings of AVS ’93, 24-26 May 1993, Lake Buena
Vista, Florida, USA.
[17] Chen, P. C., (1993), “A Climate Simulation Case Study”,
Proc. Of IEEE Visualisation 93, IEEE Computer Society
Press. 25-29 October 1993, San Jose, USA.
[18] Kim, J. J. H., N. Dogan, D. L. McShane, M. L. Kessler,
(1995), “An AVS-Based System for Optimisation of
Conformal Radiotherapy Treatment Plans”, Proc. of AVS
’95, 19-21 April 1995, Boston, USA.
[19] Post, F. J., T. Van Walsum, F. H. Post, “Iconic Techniques
for Feature Visualisation”, Proc. of IEEE Visualisation 95,
IEEE Computer Society Press, 29 October - 3 November
1995, Atlanta, USA.
[20] http://www.interoperability.com/
[21] Wix, J., (1997), Information Models and Modelling:
Standards, Needs, Problems and Solutions, The
International Journal of Construction Information
Technology, pp27-3 8.
[22] http://msdn.mkrosoft.com/xml/general/intro.asr,
[23] Lebrun, J., (1998), IEA-BCS ANNEX 30 “Bringing
Simulation to Application”, draft of chapter 1, July 14,
1998
[24] Nielsen, J., (1993). Usability engineering, Boston (Mass.),
London: Academic Press
[25]Tufte, E., (1998), “The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information”, Sixteenth edition, Graphics Press, Cheshire,
Connecticut.
[26] Friedhoff, R. M., (1991), “The second computer revolution:
Visualization”, W. H. Freeman & Company, New York.
[27] Crossley, M., N. J. Davies, A. J. McGrath, Rejman-Greene,
(1999), The Knowledge Garden, BT Technology Journal,
vo1.17, no. I , Jan. 1999
[28] Preece, J, (l994), Human-Computer Interaction, AddisonWesley, Wokingham

Highlighted problems associated with the appropriate
presentation of data in both standard and abstract
forms.
0
Suggested methods
for improving standard
presentation techniques.
0
Postulated that the analysis results would be better
represented in abstract space.
Proposed a method for maintaining the building
context whilst navigating an abstract representation.
In addition, issues that require more detailed treatment
in the conduct of future trials have been identified. These
include the subtleties of measuring the applications
support of learning and memorability of information.
0

11. References
Shaw, M. (ed.), (1996), Computer Modelling as a Design
Tool for Predicting Building Performance, Proc. CIBSE A:
Build. Serv. Eng. Res. Technol. 17(2) Bl-B11
Larkin, S.,W. T. Hewitt, and A. J. Grant, (1997), “Systems
and Architectures for Visualisation”, Proceedings from the
1997 CERN School of Computing, Pruhonice (Prague),
Czech Republic, 17 - 30 August 1997
Pilgrim, M. J., D. Bouchlaghem, D. Loveday and M. J.
Holmes, (2000), “Visualisation in Building Design and
Analysis”, Proceedings of Construction Information
Technology 2000 International Conference, W78
CIB TG24, “VR Applications In Construction”,
htt~://www.bcn.ufl.edu/tg24/final/
Aouad, G., (1999), “Trends in Information Visualisation in
Construction”, Proc. of 1999 IEEE International
Conference on Information Visualisation, IEEE Computer
Society Press, 14-16 July 1999, ,London, England.
Malkawi, A.,(1997), Advisor to group project consisting:
Ogun Arslan, Ruchi Choudhary and JoAnn Render,
“Thermal
Analysis
in
Design”,
httD://wwwpersonal .umich.edu/-ireoder/Thermal/index.html
Whyte, J., D. Bouchlaghem, A. Thorpe, (1999),
“Visualisation and Information: A Building Design
Perspective”, Proc. of 1999 IEEE International Conference
on Information Visualisation, IEEE Computer Society
Press, 14-16 July 1999, London, England.
Whyte, J., (1997), “Housing Developers’ use of Virtual
Reality, Techniques for Communication of Design Intent”,
Section 2.5.3: ‘Simulation of Environmental Factors’, lst
Year Report, Civil Dept., Loughborough University.
Engeli, M., D. Kurmann, (1996), “Virtual Reality Design
Environment with Intelligent Objects and Autonomous
Agents”, Proc. of Design and Decision Support Systems
1996, Spa, Belgium.
[ 101 http://www.bartlett.ucl.ac.uk//web/Pangea/

132

12. Appendix
Group 1
Mean
SD
Accuracy (%)
Rating (7 = Easy, 1 = Hard)

76.4
3.36

30.5
1.05

Group 2
Mean
SD

Group 3
Mean
SD

87.5
4.72

89.3
4.84

22.5
0.80

Viz Application
Geometry

I

Figure 1. Process model

Figure 2. Screenshot - virtual environment prototype (4-room model)

133

24.2
0.60

R

I-

Figure 3. Usability software - rating based on a seven-point scale 1281

3000

2500

2000

'E
@

U

1500

i= 1000

500
0
0

10

5

15

20

25

35

30

40

45

Task, No.
Figure 4. User trials - accumulative time for 4 answers

3 0 00

11
.

~

9

..l_..._.ll..._

Groua 1

3,.

- 11.1.1....._1.._.1__....1_1_1....-....-.---..-.._.1.._1...1.1_.-..1..~....-.

Groua 2

A Groua 3

_l_______l_.__.__l

-Groua 1 Trend

I
.
'
"

lll_________
l
l
_
l
_

Groua 2 Trend

'~

-Groua 3 Trend

11

40

45

i

v1 2000

0
Q1

6 1500

E

i= 1000
500

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

Task, No.
Figure 5. User trials - accumulative time for correct answers

Figure 6 . Fading from a room to an abstract representation

134

35

