Visualizing Collaborative Filtering in Digital Collections
Victor Y. Chen, Cheryl Z. Qian and Robert F. Woodbury
School of Interactive Arts & Technology, Simon Fraser University, Canada
{yvchen, cherylq, rw}@sfu.ca
Abstract
The NEAR (Navigating Exhibitions, Annotations
and Resources) panel is a method of managing digital
collections and user preferences through collaborative
filtering and graphically revealing implicit data
relations such as sharing, reference and similarity. It is
implemented on A•VI•RE, an online multimedia
repository.
A•VI•RE
supports
semi-structured
collections (exhibitions) which containing various
resources and annotations. Its users are encouraged to
contribute, share, annotate and interpret resources.
Similar to the act of adding items into shopping carts
in the e-commence applications, a user’s activities of
searching, organizing and interpreting data in
A•VI•RE are considered as evidence of user’s
preferences. The design process of NEAR was guided
by several principles from the visualization literature.
It implements new navigation and communication
approaches that support discovery of relations. Having
tested NEAR with several users, we further analyze the
design, report the evaluation and consider its use in
other applications.

1. Introduction
Dealing with data relationships and user
preferences is becoming a widespread issue in novel
data-intensive application domains, such as digital
catalogs, real estate listings, e-commerce sites and
multimedia
databases.
Many
contemporary
applications face the problems of managing massive
data according to users’ personal interests. For
example, e-commerce websites (such as marketplaces
and electronic shops), provide information on millions
of products. Effectively supporting user search and
browsing over such large repositories entails the
problem of properly understanding user needs, filtering
out irrelevant items, helping the user to formulate the
most appropriate queries, and presenting results ranked
according to their presumed relevance. Similar issues
arise in multimedia databases, when the user looks for
objects similar to or quite related to a given one. In this

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

case, the problem is that the notion of similarity can be
a subjective one, thus the system has to “learn” it and
then to exploit the acquired knowledge about user
preferences to retrieve the most relevant objects
(Bartolini et al. 2001).
Recommender
systems
in
e-commerce
applications provide advice to users about products or
services in which they might be interested. The goal is
to offer an enhanced solution for each single user that
meets his or her needs more effectively and efficiently.
The design of academic repositories such as digital
libraries and scholarly forums also encounters the
problems of managing user preferences. Users of
online academic repositories, that is, researchers or
scholars, need support to navigate and search for useful
information from such databases. We note analogies to
e-commerce applications. Firstly, online customers
collect shopping items into their virtual shopping carts.
Similarly, researchers define favorite collections and
save related information in the collections. This
architecture of collection/resources appears in a variety
of application domains. Secondly, in many of the
decisions, people reply on the advice of others who
have made the decision before. Such information has
been largely captured through collaborative filtering
strategies. Researchers read annotations made by other
professionals frequently, and customers usually read
the item reviews or evaluations before they make the
shopping decisions. Thirdly, although all the activities
are taking place online, different social groups build up
naturally based on similar interests both in academic
repositories and e-commence applications.
Academic repositories may have much to learn
from the preference, filtering and search strategies used
in e-commerce sites. However, users of academic
repositories, usually have clear and explicit goals that
are not fully served by collaborative filtering ratings
alone. In the paper, we suggest that researchers can
benefit from a combination of recommendation-like
functions that imply underlying relations among data
such as similarity, co-reference, inclusion and
neighbors so that it is easier for them to collect related
data and build up understanding across data. We

implement this idea through designing a visualization
panel NEAR in an online multimedia repository system
A•VI•RE (Qian et al. 2006).

2. Collaborative Filtering in Digital
Collections
In many digital collection systems such as online
galleries (e.g. http://www.flickr.com) and digital
libraries (e.g. http://www.librarything.com/), users
organize exhibitions to demonstrate collected digital
materials, or write annotations to note or explain the
exhibiting items that interest them. Such activities
show users’ preferences over the objects. Similarly, a
user click on an item or look into the details of an
exhibition or annotation may also show the users’
preferences of the selected items.
CF (Collaborative Filtering) has been widely used
in recommender systems including e-commerce
systems such as Amazon.com (Linden et al. 2003).
Recommender systems apply knowledge discovery
techniques to make personalized recommendations for
information, products or services during an interaction.
In the process of decision making, people tend to make
use of the advice of others who have made decisions
earlier (Schotter et al. 2001). Based on building a
database of preferences of users or item-item matrix,
CF is one of the most promising technologies for
recommendation. The main idea is to automate the
process of “word-of-mouth” by which people
recommend products or services to one another
(Shardanand et al. 1995). The underlying assumption
of the CF approach is that users tend to have similar or
close preferences if they select the same thing.
In a big system, a large numbers of items may be
included in one single category, making it an
impossible task for a single person to review all of the
items and select the relevant or interesting ones.
Traditional scoring or rating system only get the
average evaluation score across all the users, and
ignore the special demands of an individual. Such
systems perform poorly in tasks where there is a large
variation of interests – such as music or movie
recommendation. CF systems accommodate user
preferences, which are important in a large online
gallery – there are so many different exhibitions with
different subjects and themes. The problem of guiding
the visitor to the most attractive area (for the visitor) is
a similar problem that may be addressed by
collaborative filtering.
In the past decade, much research has been done to
create a wide variety of CF algorithms, such as “useritem relevance model” (Wang 2006), “mixture models”
(Kleinberg 2004), “item based” (Sarwar 2001) and
“item-to-item” algorithms (Linden et al. 2003).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

However, it is still difficult to properly evaluate a CF
recommendation system (Herlocker 2004). Algorithms
designed for data sets that have many more users than
items (e.g., the MovieLens data set has 65,000 users
and 5,000 movies) would be entirely inappropriate in a
domain where there are more items than users. The
goal of different systems may vary as well. Some
algorithms may only focus on improving the
recommendation accuracy, and some systems are more
focused on how to avoid recommendation mistakes.
When a system is designed for recommending
decisions, it may be more essential to measure how
often the system leads to wrong decisions. This fact
suggests that maybe simply laying the recommending
list in front of the user is not the only solution. There is
an old Chinese proverb: “public clamour can confound
right and wrong.” In the process of decision making,
people tend to rely on the advice of others who have
made the decision before (Schotter et al. 2001). The
results of CF generated from greater numbers of users
is convincing. However, the “filtering” may also filter
out a lot of useful information. The opinion of the
majority has been considered in the CF, but the
minority has been ignored. If we can visually represent
all the relations drawn from collaborative filtering
among objects by taking advantage of users’ cognitive
systems, it may lead to another approach to help users
look at the object at a new level, to let him/her examine
the target more completely, to consider opinions from
both the majority and minority sides, and to improve
the decision making process of navigating or retrieving
data in the massive information space.

3. Research Project
Open access is a widespread international trend in
the academic world. Its purpose is to create free access
to sources of scholarly information, such as
professional documents, journal articles, theses and
books. The use of institutional repositories is a highly
attractive way of putting the open access idea into
practice. A•VI•RE (a Visual Rete, URL:
http://www.avire.ca), a generic repository for visual
material related to cultural disciplines, is designed as
an interactive online space where users in different
roles (such as curators, exhibitors, critics and viewers)
work together to create a larger social entity. Users can
upload resources, organize exhibitions and annotate
resources. In A•VI•RE, each exhibition and resource
has metadata as its attributes.
The information structure in the system has three
primary objects– resources, exhibitions and
annotations:
• A resource can be an image, a video clip, a
file of any type or even an entire website.

• An exhibition is a collection of exhibitions,
annotations and resources.
• An annotation is a mixture of text and
reference to exhibitions and resources.
• One resource can be used in multiple
exhibitions. Every exhibition or resource may
have one or more annotations.
In the system, one exhibitor may set up an
exhibition, add resources and write annotations.
Another exhibitor might use the same resources but
interpret them from a different perspective. A•VI•RE
thus provides a potentially complex information
structure among exhibitions, resources and annotations.
Users can potentially gain from the collaborative
construction of multiple views and interpretations
around A•VI•RE’s objects. The problem is providing
access to the data and relation web that users have
made. Our premise is that local links, that is, link paths
no more than a few links in length, can provide
meaningful access to a community of interpretation.

If two papers refer to the same paper, they are
bibliographically coupled. In contrast to bibliographic
coupling, if two papers are cited together by the same
paper, they are related by co-citation (Small 1973). In
Figure 1 (a and b), interrelationships between resources
(R1 to R2, R3 to R4) are build by co-citation by
exhibitions. In Figure 1 (c and d), interrelationships
between exhibitions (E1 to E2, E3 to E4) are built by
bibliographic coupling by resources.

3.1 Current Problems of A•VI•RE
Some navigational problems still exist in A•VI•RE
system. Firstly, it is hard to provide multiple
viewpoints of a resource. A resource can be collected
in multiple exhibitions and quoted in multiple
annotations, so it naturally bridges different
interpretations and connects potentially related ideas.
Secondly, it is also hard to see the relations among
exhibitions and annotations. When a user creates an
exhibition or an annotation, he might use resources
from other exhibitions. It is easy to find one resource
or exhibition through key word searching, but hard to
access specific relevant data elements. To search for a
specific image among over 3000 images, the user bears
a heavy cognitive load and must remember too much
information.

3.2 Collaborative filtering in A•VI•RE
We can make the similar collaborative filtering
assumption in A•VI•RE. Users upload or collect
resources and organize exhibitions to support one
centre theme. Users can setup his/her own exhibition to
use interesting resources from other exhibitions. Thus
organizing exhibition explicitly shows the user’s
preferences and such activity build up a strong relation
between these exhibitions. People make annotations to
critique or express their understanding on interesting
objects or exhibitions, anything referred in the
annotation should have strong relationship around the
main idea of the annotation.
In A•VI•RE, the collaborative filtering relations
are built based on co-citation and bibliographic
coupling relations among objects. The concept of
bibliographic coupling dates to 1963 (Kessler 1963).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 1. Relations among A•VI•RE objects
The number of co-citing objects or coupling
objects is a key factor determines the strength of the
relations. The more the objects, the stronger the created
relation is. In Figure 1, the co-citation relation between
R3 and R4 is stronger than the relation between R1 and
R1 because there are more objects co-citing R3 and
R4. Similarly, the bibliographic coupling relation
between E3 and E4 is stronger than the relation
between E1 and E2.
Through such co-citation and bibliographic
coupling relations, A•VI•RE is able to make
collaborative filtering recommendations such as
“people interested in exhibition (resource/annotation)
A
may
also
interested
in
exhibition
(resource/annotation) B”. Just as we discussed in
previous section, a single recommendation may not be
broad enough to fulfill user’s need of information
seeking. In the following section, we study to use
information visualization to present these interrelated
objects instead of simply recommending the “most”
related one.

3.3 Visualization Design
Graph visualization is a way of representing
structural information as diagrams of abstract graphs
and networks. Many real-world domains can be
represented as node-link graphs. There are two facets
of the design: the algorithm to reveal the data
relationship and the interface to present the outcomes.

On the algorithm level, there is a balance of two
challenges we need to solve, scalability and accuracy
(Sarwar 2001): A•VI•RE as a web application should
have the ability to handle multiple users using the
system simultaneously while searching millions of
information nodes with high accuracy and consistency.
On the interface level, we outline several
important design qualities we consider to be essential
in the design: spatial immediacy or compactness,
semantic immediacy, popularity, responsive &
communicative, history, orthogonality and chronology
(Chen 2007).

NEAR also provides interaction to enable users
see more relations among object. There are three kinds
of interactions in NEAR: cursor over, click and doubleclick (Chen 2007). In Figure 3, when the mouse cursor
brushes over a data element, the user can find more
inclusion relations between data elements and read the
description of the elements. To avoid flicking, a click
on an element freezes the relation view.

Figure 3. Mouse over on a resource to see the
including annotations/exhibitions

3.4 Collaborative Filtering and Interrelations

Figure 2. Screenshot of NEAR panel
In A•VI•RE, data relations and user preferences
are reflected by the user’s acts of organizing resources
into exhibitions and making annotations. To design a
panel that demonstrates the relations among data
elements in A•VI•RE, we consider two essential parts:
nodes (resources, exhibitions and annotations) and
their links. In Figure 2, the NEAR panel shows the
following: a list of all resources that belong to the
current exhibition; all related annotations; and all
exhibitions that share any resources in the list. It is
important to make the abstract image meaningful. So,
exhibitions, annotations and resources are represented
by content-based thumbnails where possible, otherwise
by type-based icons. Due to the limited capacity of
human’s visual working memory (Ware 2000), only
three to four variations for each attribute are provided
in the design.
Variations multiply by the Cartesian product of the
varying qualities. Orthogonality is important for user to
distinguish different attributes for the large amount of
varieties (exhibition nodes and annotation nodes have
432 varieties, and resource nodes have 9 varieties to
represent visit status and popularity). For example,
different shapes and layers represent size and visit
status. Blues of different saturations indicate
popularity. Red color represents preattentive important
elements (Qian et al. 2006).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 4. Branched-links to show interrelated
objects.
Inspired by Thread Arcs (Kerr 2003), to make the
graph compact, stable and clear, in NEAR, links are
used to show the interrelations among exhibitions,
annotations and resources (Figure 4). Smooth
continuous contours are used to connect nodes. The
curves bend toward the current focusing object. In the
upper image of Figure 4, any exhibitions sharing the
resources or annotations are linked. The middle image
shows all related annotations (they maybe co-cited by
exhibitions or refer to the same resource(s)). The
bottom image shows all related resources that been
included or referred in same exhibitions or annotations.
The amount of sharing is represented by the number of
branches from one node, and icons are lined up in the
creation time order. Nodes can also be responsive
when a related annotation or a shared resource is
opened in the background browser. Now in NEAR,
people can easily see the relations between same level
objects toward the current focusing object.
In NEAR, we want to support collaborative
filtering from different levels. A user may borrow
resources from other exhibitions as part of his own

exhibition. While building up his/her own exhibition,
he uploads/borrows related resources to support the
exhibition center theme. When the user makes
annotation, he should only collect related resources to
support his idea in the annotation. Around one
exhibition or resource, users may have different
opinions and they create different annotations, these
annotations carry information that may worth to read.
Thus, when the user looks at one exhibition, apart from
the direct linked resources and annotations, NEAR
should be able to present all related exhibitions.
Similarly, when the user is reading one resource, he
might be interested in related resources (although some
of the resource may be included in the different
exhibitions or annotations). When the user is reading
an annotation, he should be able to see other
annotations around the referred objects.
NEAR provides three views when the user focuses
on different object: exhibition view, annotation view
and resource view. These views make it possible that
“people
who
interested
in
this
exhibition/annotation/resource may also interest in
these exhibitions/annotations/resources”.

Figure 5. Exhibition Centric View
In Figure 5, exhibition centric view shows all
possible interest exhibitions with the exhibition the
user is visiting. From the left to the right, exhibitions
are placed in the chronological order. Since there are
many exhibitions bibliographically coupled with the
current exhibition, it is impossible to fit them into one
line. In this example, icons are arranged in two lines to
show all related exhibitions. A current exhibition is
indicated with the thick red border on the icon. Other
icons also display their overview information: size,
popularity and visitation status. Strength of the
relations is calculated by the number of
resources/annotations cited by both exhibitions. The
relation is shown by the edges (line and curves) on top
of the exhibition icons. Exhibitions may share a few,
several or many resources with the current exhibition.
These different levels of sharing are shown as one, two
or three edges respectively.
Since an annotation may include several resources
and can be included in several exhibitions, the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

following may interest the user: bibliographically
coupled annotations, bibliographically coupled
exhibitions, and co-cited annotations may exist by
being included the same exhibitions. Figure 6 shows all
annotations that bibliographic coupled with the current
annotation, all exhibitions includes the current
annotation and all resources been referred in current
annotation.

Figure 6. Annotation Centric View

Figure 7. Resource centric view
Resources can be interrelated through being
included in the same exhibitions or annotations. In
Figure 7’s resource centric view, users are able to
choose the different strength of the relationship (by the
number of objects co-citing the resources). The
exhibition and annotation area show all the objects
include (annotate) this resource.

5 Evaluation & Discussion
We aimed to learn two things from the user study:
to optimize the graph visualization design to
maximally match user’s common sense and to explore
the usability of NEAR in providing related objects as
recommendations to support information seeking.
Five people were invited to test the NEAR panel
in different circumstances. We showed three
participants the list of nodes examples and taught them
the meaning of linkages before their navigation. The
other two participants started to navigate without
taking any tutorial. The result showed that the tutorial

was essential because it took those two participants a
long time to figure out how to use the panel.
All of the participants gave positive evaluations to
the design. Three of them mentioned that it helped
their understanding of resources and described it as
very useful “menu” in term of supporting navigation.
They also found that the interrelated objects were
helpful on finding similar objects. However, they also
provided critique of the design. The high degree of
detail requires knowledge on the part of the viewer to
ascertain the differences between the icons. Some
participants have different opinions on meaning of
some nodes. The evaluation results show us clearly that
the panel is useful and supportive but not selfexplanatory.
In NEAR, we tried to visually recommend similar
or related objects to users with the similar interests. We
believe that the techniques and ideas of NEAR can be
applied onto other collaborative filtering systems and
other applications with the collection/resources
structure. Amazon.com’s recommendation system
suggests new customers with others’ shopping
experience with lines of text. A visualization method of
such of functions could be an interesting challenge.
NEAR’s devices can also be used to improve the
design of other academic applications such as the
academic citation index. ISI Web of Knowledge
(www.isiwebofknowledge.com) provides seamless
access to current and retrospective multidisciplinary
information from approximately 8,700 of the most
prestigious, high impact research journals in the world.
Its unique search method: cited reference searching
helps users to navigate forward, backward, and through
the literature, searching from all disciplines. Also there
are quite a few systems using collaborative filtering
algorithms successfully to recommend papers to
researchers (McNee et al. 2002). We believe our
design of NEAR can help to represent those implied
relations among literatures by graph visualization and
enhance the navigation efficiency.

6 Conclusions
Collaborative
filtering
strategies
of
recommendation system in e-commence applications
inspire this paper. Considering the qualities and
limitations of CF, our project aim to filter and visualize
the information of user’s activities and provide a more
subjective view of that information. This paper
describes the NEAR panel, a visualization technique
that can display relationship and qualities
simultaneously and reveal implicit relations such as
similarity, inter-reference and sharing built by users in
digital collections. We present this visual panel to
explore new navigation and communication

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

approaches. By quickly scanning and interacting with
NEAR, users can see not only implied relations but
also potential connections among different data
elements. Generally, our evaluation shows NEAR is a
supportive information retrivealing tool but not very
self-explanatory. We plan to further develop this tool
and apply the visualization design on other kinds of
information repositories with rich human interaction
information.

References
[1] Bartolini, I., et al. (2001). Feedback Bypass: A New
Approach to Interactive Similarity Query Processing.
Proceedings of 27th Intl. Conf. on Very Large Data Bases,
Roma, Italy
[2] Chen, Y. V. (2007). Revealing Hidden Structure:
Visualizing Bibliographic Coupling and Co-citation
Relations in Multimedia Collections. School of Interactive
Arts and Technology, Simon Fraser University. MSc: 128.
[3] Herlocker, J. L., Konstan, Joseph A.,Terveen, Loren
G., Riedl, John T. (2004). "Evaluating collaborative filtering
recommender systems." ACM transactions on Database
Systems 22(1): 5-53.
[4] Kerr, B. (2003). Thread Arcs: An Email Thread
Visualization. Proceedings of the 2003 IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, Seattle, Washington, IEEE
Computer Science Press. .
[5] Kleinberg, J., Sandler, Mark. (2004). "Using Mixture
Models for Collaborative Filtering."
[6] Linden,
G.,
et
al.
(2003).
Amazon.com
Recommendations, Item-to-Item Collaborative Filtering,
IEEE Internet Computing.
[7] McNee, M. S., et al. (2002). On the Recommending of
Citations for Research Papers. Proceedings of CSCW’02,
New Orleans, Louisiana
[8] Qian, C. Z., et al. (2006). NEAR: Visualizing
Information Relations in a Multimedia Repository. Smart
Graphics, 6th International Symposium, SG2006, Vancouver,
Canada.
[9] Sarwar, B., Karypis, George., Konstan, Joseph., Riedl.,
John. (2001). "Item-Based Collaborative Filtering
Recommendation Algorithms."
[10] Schotter, A., et al. (2001). Advice and Behavior in
Intergenerational Ultimatum Games: An Experimental
Approach, Department of Economics, New York University
New York.
[11] Shardanand, U., et al. (1995). Social Information
Filtering: Algorithms for automating "word of mouth".
Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in
Computing System, Denver, Colorado.
[12] Wang, J., de Vries, Arjen P., Reinders, Marcel J.T.
(2006). A user-Item Relevance Model for Log-based
collaborative Filtering. European Conference on Information
Retrieval (ECIR 2006).
[13] Ware, C. (2000). Information Visualization:
Perception for Design. San Francisco, Morgan Kaufman.

