Visualization Criticism – The Missing Link
Between Information Visualization and Art
Robert Kosara
The University of North Carolina at Charlotte
rkosara@uncc.edu

Abstract
Classifications of visualization are often based on technical criteria, and leave out artistic ways of visualizing information. Understanding the differences between information visualization and other forms of visual communication
provides important insights into the way the field works,
though, and also shows the path to new approaches.
We propose a classification of several types of information visualization based on aesthetic criteria. The notions
of artistic and pragmatic visualization are introduced, and
their properties discussed. Finally, the idea of visualization criticism is proposed, and its rules are laid out. Visualization criticism bridges the gap between design, art, and
technical/pragmatic information visualization. It guides the
view away from implementation details and single mouse
clicks to the meaning of a visualization.

1

Introduction

Two cultures exist in visualization: very technical,
analysis-oriented work on the one, and artistic pieces on the
other hand. The type that shall be called pragmatic visualization below is mostly practiced by people in computer
science with no background in art or design. A student once
put it aptly: Computer graphics is mostly computers, but
little graphics. At the same time, artists and designers often work on visualizations without much knowledge of the
technical work being done in computer science.
Information visualization (InfoVis) is such an inherently
interdisciplinary field that it requires a much more integrated approach. Since this is not the case right now, it
needs to be created from the two extremes that exist. In
analogy to a concept in the natural sciences [2], this could
be called the third culture of visualization. Such a third culture would consist not only of people working in the respective fields, but a strong interchange of ideas between them.
The techniques developed in both scientific and information visualization are certainly useful, but an clear picture

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

of what constitutes visualization and a foundational theory
are still missing. Even for the practical work that is being done, there is very little discussion of approaches, with
many techniques being developed ad hoc or as incremental
improvements of previous work.
Since this is not a technical problem, a purely technical approach cannot solve it. We therefore propose a third
way of doing information visualization that not only takes
ideas from both artistic and pragmatic visualization, but unifies them through the common concepts of critical thinking
and criticism. Visualization criticism can be applied to both
artistic and pragmatic visualization, and will help to develop
the tools to build a bridge between them.

2

Related Work

Several models of information visualization have been
proposed. Most of them are very technical and describe either the process of the visualization [4] or the data [17]. An
interesting recent paper [20] uses two criteria to differentiate between information and scientific information: discrete
vs. continuous data, and whether the spatial layout of the visualization is given or chosen.
Sack [16] compares InfoVis to conceptual art, and argues for the adoption of an aesthetics of administration:
rather than looking at the surface, evaluate the type of governance a particular visualization enables. Sack’s article will
be mentioned again below.
Goodman’s theories on art and language [7, 14] provide
an interesting approach to a classification of representation
and the visual. His ideas about visual languages resonate
well with information visualization, even though most visualizations do not fulfill his requirements for a language.
Studying them is still useful to learn more about visualization and its relations to other fields. Cox [5] suggests a generalized view on visualization metaphors than it is usually
understood, thus linking the elusive (and often misunderstood) concept of the metaphor to concrete technical implementations of visualization systems.

3

What is Information Visualization?

A good part of the confusion about visualization comes
from the fact that there is no clear or generally accepted definition of visualization. Such a definition would clearly vary
between fields, but at least within one field (like computer
science, design, illustration, etc.), it needs to be consistent.
Also, by understanding the differences between definitions
in different fields, we can identify elements that help in
building the bridge between them. These are not just the
similarities though, but also the differences that require investigation.
Examples for visualization are: architectural visualization, terrain visualization, 3D medical/volume visualization, 2D or 3D flow visualization, flow topology visualization, presentation graphics, abstract data visualization, information dashboards, music visualization, photomontage
or collage, traffic signs, traffic signals, sign language, icons,
visualizing oneself in a different job/situation, visualization
of concepts, drawing fractals, etc.
These are clearly very different types of visual communication, and many of them are not generally considered
visualization; others are, but only by specific groups. Why
is that? And how can we differentiate between them in a
way that is not ad hoc?
We consider the following criteria to be a minimal set
of requirements for any visualization. The remainder of
this discussion will concentrate on information visualization, but these criteria apply equally to scientific visualization.
It is based on (non-visual) data. The data to be visualized
must come from outside the program, and the program
must be able (at least in principle) to work on different
data sets. Also, visualization is not image processing
or photography; if the source data is an image and is
used as an image in the result, it is not being visualized.
It produces an image. Clearly, each visualization has the
goal of producing one or more images from the data,
and the visual must be the primary means of communicating the data. Other media can be part of a visualization, but the visualization must be able to stand on
its own.
The result is readable and recognizable. There are many
ways to transform data into images, most of which do
not allow the viewer to understand the underlying data.
A visualization must produce images that are readable
by a viewer, even if that requires training and practice. Visualization images must also be recognizable
as such, and not appear to be something else. The use
of additional elements (or even “eye candy”) is certainly possible, but must not take precedence over the
communication goals of the visualization.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Visualizations also have other properties like interaction,
visual efficiency, etc. And while these are certainly important, the above criteria appear to be sufficient to precisely
define information visualization the way it is generally used
in its technical sense.
While the first two criteria are quite obvious, the last
one is important for the rest of the discussion in this paper.
Manovich [26] defines visualization as “situations when
quantified data which by itself is not visual [. . .] is transformed into a visual representation.” Of course, any program that produces a visual output translates some kind
of non-visual information into a visual representation. But
Manovich’s definition requires the program to get data from
outside, and not just produce it inside itself. Still, the criterion is only necessary, but not sufficient: a transformation of
data into a visual shape does not imply readability. An example for a visual mappings from data for use as icons are
VisualIDs [15]: unique visual forms that are based on data,
but do not provide any information about it. One particular
class of visualizations that are data-based but not readable
are music visualizations like MilkDrop [23] (Figure 1c), but
most artistic visualizations also fall into this group.
In addition to readability, a visualization has to be made
with the intent to communicate data. This can be illustrated with an example of informative art [18]: a display
that looks like a Mondrian painting to show a bus schedule
(Figure 1b). The visualization is easily readable for those
who know how, but not recognizable as one. Consequently,
one of the authors of that work later developed a model of
the comprehension of ambient displays [8], which consists
of three steps: realizing that data is being visualized by the
image, understanding what is being visualized, and how the
display is to be read. Only when the user has reached that
last level can s/he make use of the display.
It can therefore be argued that the utilitarian appearance
of many visualizations actually serves a purpose, in helping
the user take at least the first step. The question remains,
though, if an aesthetically pleasing visualization has to appear like a work of art, or can be easily recognizable at the
same time.

4

Artistic and Pragmatic Visualization

Kelly [10] defines aesthetics as “critical reflection on art,
culture, and nature”. Critical thinking is the basis of all science, and also connects the technical approaches to pragmatic visualization with philosophy and artistic visualization. A particular type of critical thinking is an important
part of the process in design and the arts: criticism (see
Section 5). Aesthetic approaches are also being applied to
computer science in an approach called aesthetic computing [6].

a)

b)

c)

Figure 1. The gamut of data-based visualization. a) Parallel Sets [12] show data about the people
on the Titanic, and are readable and recognizable as a visualization; b) Ambient visualization [18]
visualizing a bus schedule are readable but require more effort and are not readily recognizable as a
visualization; c) Music visualization like MilkDrop [23] is also based on data, but not readable.

4.1

The Sublime

One aesthetic criterion of particular interest is the sublime. The sublime can be understood as that which inspires
awe, grandeur, and evokes a deep emotional and/or intellectual response. Works of art generally possess a sublime
quality, making them enigmatic and captivating at the same
time. Sack [16] equates its opposite, the anti-sublime, with
user friendliness, which is a central concept in computer
science. In fact, visualization is generally understood to be
a part of human-centered computing [11], and techniques
that are published at the main conferences and in journals
usually need to be evaluated in user studies [13]. They are
thus designed to remove any sublimity, and instead foster
immediate understanding.
While the sublime is just one criterion in aesthetics, it
is an incredibly useful one for this discussion. The databased visualization examples discussed above and shown in
Figure 1 can be easily classified using a measure of their
sublimity: while the classical technical information visualization is entirely anti-sublime, artistic visualizations are
primarily sublime.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The sublime subsumes the two criteria of readability and
recognizability, since for a work of art to be sublime, it cannot be easily readable (or user friendly). It must present
enough of an enigma to keep an audience interested without being easy to solve. The opposite is obviously true for
a tool that is designed to aid in data analysis.

4.2

Pragmatic Visualization

Pragmatic visualization is what we term the technical
application of visualization techniques to analyze data. The
goal of pragmatic visualization is to explore, analyze, or
present information in a way that allows the user to thoroughly understand the data. Card et al. describe this process
as knowledge crystallization [3], and the recent initiatives in
visual analytics [19] have used the slogan Detecting the Expected, Discovering the UnexpectedTM .
Visual efficiency is of course a key criterion for work in
visualization. The goal is to produce images that convey the
data as quickly and effortlessly as possible. User studies are
conducted to measure the speed and accuracy of users, and
to compare different methods and tasks [13].

While data is often hard to come by for pure academic research, the field is driven by the need to analyze and understand vast amounts of data, and the particular characteristics
of different data sets are often the motivation to develop new
methods.
Pragmatic visualization techniques are also often general, and can be applied to many different data sets. This
is considered a strength, because the user can gain experience with the method and apply that to different data, rather
than having to start from scratch again. There are of course
examples for very specific visualization techniques (e.g., for
real-time cardiovascular data in an intensive care unit [1]),
but most of the work can be generalized to many different
types of data.

4.3

Artistic Visualization

The goal of artistic visualization is usually to communicate a concern, rather than to show data. The data is used
as the basis, the raw material. It also provides a proof that
the concern in question is, in fact, real. This is perhaps why
artists call this visualization: the underlying problem may
not be visible, but is made visible through the piece.
Visual efficiency does not play a role in artistic visualization, quite the contrary. The goal is not to enable the user
to read the data, but to understand the basic concern. In
many ways, this step is the opposite of pragmatic visualization: rather than making the data easily readable, it is transformed into something that is visible and and interesting,
but that must still be readily understood. In other words,
artistic visualization has a sublime quality that pragmatic
visualization does not have.
Data collection is often an integral part of a visualization
art piece. The fact that the data exists at all can be used to
create awareness, and data flowing in in real time can make
the piece “live”.
An example for this is the Carnivore project, which was
named after the FBI program of the same name. The original Carnivore was a surveillance tool that made it possible to scan millions of emails each day, only extracting
the “meat” of all that traffic: suspicious emails that would
then be checked by hand. The artistic project of the same
name [27] “sniffs” the traffic going through a network, and
provides that data to different visualization modules. These
usually show small and partially obscured snippets of the
traffic, which the user recognizes as parts of web pages,
emails, etc., thus realizing how much of the network traffic s/he produces can be read easily.
Other examples include blog visualizations such as The
Dumpster [25] and We Feel Fine [24]. Both show information collected from the internet, and analyzed for certain
words. The overall visualizations do not provide a lot of
information, but the user can click on any of the animated

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

disks that represent postings, and read them.

4.4

Navigating the Space in Between

The fact that artistic and pragmatic visualizations are on
opposite ends of the sublimity scale (Figure 1), and thus
theoretically impossible to reconcile, should not deter us
from trying, though. Interaction in particular is a way to
enable the user to choose which side of a visualization s/he
wants to see. We Feel Fine has a mode that allows the user
to arrange the individual postings in ways that allow him
or her to read the relative sizes of male vs. female authors,
for example. Another example is Artifacts of the Presence
Era [21], which uses a metaphor of sediment deposits to organize images taken as a memento from the former building
of a museum. The presentation of the images is undoubtedly sublime, but the user can interact with the installation
and look for patterns and specific images.

5

Visualization Criticism

Art theory is art criticism – in order to write about art,
critics had to develop a vocabulary and a theoretical framework to put their work into. According to Britannica Online [22], “art criticism is often tied to theory; it is interpretive, involving the effort to understand a particular work of
art from a theoretical perspective and to establish its significance in the history of art.”
Both theory and a language are largely missing in visualization. The main method of communicating new ideas
is the research paper, which does not lend itself very well
to showing anything but static images. Interactions therefore tend to be neglected in papers and consequently also in
research work. Both images and interactions are usually described in what different parts look like, but not what those
mean to the user. The use of criticism is a possible path
towards developing parts of a theory and a language.
The first use of criticism in a visualization class (to
our knowledge) was in 2002 by David Laidlaw and Fritz
Drury in the course Virtual Reality Design for Science [9]
at Brown University and the Rhode Island School of Design
(RISD). A recent session on visualization education at the
Visualization Conference 2006 showed that many visualization researchers use critiquing in their visualization classes
now. What is more, some even report using the technique
for other classes they teach that are much more technical,
like software engineering. Why do the same researchers not
use the methods they see work in their classrooms in their
scientific work?
We therefore propose the use of criticism in visualization. Visualization criticism is an organized and welldefined channel to discuss work in visualization, and to receive academic credit for that (through publication). The

goal of criticism is as much to develop the basis for the criticism (language and theory) as pointing out problems with
specific visualization approaches.
Appropriating Kelly’s words, visualization criticism is
critical thinking about visualization.

5.1

Process and Rules

In the art world, critics are very rarely artists, and artists
usually do not work as critics. There are exceptions, but
they are rare, and are usually considered conflicts of interest. In the world of visualization, critics cannot be separate
from visualization researchers, and there are clearly advantages to that. The critical work will inform and guide one’s
creative and/or scientific work, and make one more aware
of decisions. This in turn will lead to more reflection, and
thus a more critical view overall and more theoretical work
in a natural way.
At the same time, of course, this produces a problem:
does a visualization researcher write critically about somebody else’s work because of genuine interest, or simply to
promote his or her own research?
We propose the following rules to guide the process of
visualization criticism, and to facilitate work based on critiques.
Neutral voice. Criticism must be expressed in a way that
states the facts and presents them in the most balanced
possible light. Inflammatory remarks or ad hominem
attacks are unacceptable. The goal of the critique is to
discuss the work, not the researcher.
Facts. Every statement must be backed up by facts that can
be independently checked. The perfect critique would
include original research work that was done to collect evidence to back up claims (e.g., a user study on
a particular aspect of a visualization). Mere opinions
or anecdotal evidence are not enough, unless accompanied by more reliable evidence that points in the same
direction.
No self-promotion. The critics’ own work can only be
cited as an example if there are also other examples,
and cannot be used as the gold standard. Ideally, the
critic will not use his or her own work as an example at
all, in order to increase the credibility of the critique.
Researchers are of course experts in their own work,
and since one of the goals of a visualization critique
is to lay the foundations for new creative work, a connection to the critic’s own work will be unavoidable in
many cases.
Clear goal. A critique must serve a goal. Simply criticizing a work for its shortcomings is not enough. The
critic must state an alternative solution in a way that

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

is clear and complete enough to provide the basis for
further research.
Despite all these rules, there is an expectation of a point
of view, or voice, from which a visualization critique is written. Just as technical papers are written in response to an
application need or to investigate a theoretical question, the
motivation for a critique will be apparent from the text. As
in art, there is not just one possible view on most things, and
plenty of room for healthy debate.
Visualization criticism will only be feasible from a pragmatic point of view if it can be published, and thus provide
academic credit. This is currently not the case, and theoretical papers in general are difficult to publish in the world of
pragmatic visualization. There is no sharp distinction between accepted types of publications (like design and user
studies) at some conferences and criticism, however, and so
it is conceivable that the boundaries will be pushed out further over time, until purely critical work will be publishable.
Visualization criticism can also work as an addition to the
peer review process (which in itself is pure criticism), especially when applied to preliminary work or submissions by
students.
Visualization criticism is geared towards information visualization, where more artistic approaches are generally
more acceptable than in scientific visualization. There is
no reason, however, why visualization criticism would not
be possible (and useful) in scientific visualization as well.

5.2

From Criticism to Theory –
to Application

The ultimate goal of visualization criticism is to provide
building blocks for a theory of visualization. Criticism is
where theory and practice meet, and each is used to develop,
evaluate, and validate the other. Impulses for new ideas on
both sides come from criticism, through the friction that is
caused when bringing the two together.
There will be many other aspects of a theory of visualization, of course, coming from computer graphics, perceptual
psychology, etc. But the specific questions that can be asked
from an artistic or aesthetic point of view are largely ignored
(and even unknown) so far. How do we attach meaning to
graphical objects? How should we represent different kinds
of data to make them easier to understand? What role do
metaphors play, and how can they be used? Etc.
Theory does not just exist for its own sake, but enables the designers of visualizations for concrete purposes
to draw not just from a huge pool of existing solutions, but
from principles and guidelines that are applicable in a much
broader way. This would be akin to an engineering field,
where the basic laws of nature (e.g., physics) are used to
build concrete and useful things (e.g., bridges).

Conclusions
Different kinds of visualization share some aspects, but
there are also considerable differences. These differences
are not a problem, but rather an opportunity. Only in understanding the differences between the different kinds of
visual communication can we learn more about our respective work, and how we might build bridges to others.
Clear criteria are needed to get a meaningful overview
over the currently rather amorphous mass of different visualization approaches that exist. Pointing out differences
must not be understood as a way of rejecting collaboration,
but as the first step towards a more informed and useful way
of working together.
By digging deeper, we discover common ideas and approaches, such as critical thinking. Appropriating ideas
common in the arts, but modeling them into a modus
operandi acceptable for a scientific discipline, we can build
new things that are much larger and richer than the sums of
their parts.

Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Michael Kelly and Warren Sack for very interesting discussions. Many thanks also
to Lars Erik Holmquist for permission to use the image in
Figure 1b.

References
[1] J. Agutter, N. Syroid, F. Drews, D. Westenskow,
J. Bermudez, and D. Strayer. Graphic data display for
cardiovascular system. In IEEE Information Visualization,
pages 163–166. IEEE CS Press, 2001.
[2] J. Brockman. The Third Culture: Beyond the Scientific Revolution. Touchstone, 1996.
[3] S. K. Card, J. D. MacKinlay, and B. Shneiderman, editors. Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision
to Think. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1999.
[4] E. H. Chi. A taxonomy of visualization techniques using
the data state reference model. In Proceedings Information
Visualization, pages 69–75. IEEE CS Press, 2000.
[5] D. Cox. Metaphoric mappings: The art of visualization.
In P. Fishwick, editor, Aesthetic Computing, pages 89–114.
MIT Press, 2006.
[6] P. Fishwick, editor. Aesthetic Computing. MIT Press, 2006.
[7] N. Goodman. Languages of Art. Hackett Publishing Company, 2nd edition, 1976.
[8] L. E. Holmquist. Evaluating the comprehension of ambient
displays. In Extended Abstracts of CHI 2004, page 1545.
ACM Press, 2004.
[9] D. F. Keefe, D. B. Karelitz, E. L. Vote, and D. H. Laidlaw. Artistic collaboration in designing VR visualizations.
Computer Graphics and Applications (CG&A), Visualization Viewpoints, 25(2):18–23, March/April 2005.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[10] M. Kelly, editor. Encyclopedia of Aesthetics. Oxford University Press, USA, 1998.
[11] A. Kerren, A. Ebert, and J. Meyer, editors. Human-Centered
Visualization Environments. Springer, 2007.
[12] R. Kosara, F. Bendix, and H. Hauser. Parallel Sets:
Interactive exploration and visual analysis of categorical
data. Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (TVCG), 12(4):558–568, July/August 2006.
[13] R. Kosara, C. G. Healey, V. Interrante, D. H. Laidlaw, and
C. Ware. Thoughts on user studies: Why, how, and when.
Computer Graphics and Applications (CG&A), Visualization Viewpoints, 23(4):20–25, July/August 2003.
[14] J. Lee. Goodman’s aesthetics and the languages of computing. In P. Fishwick, editor, Aesthetic Computing, pages
29–42. MIT Press, 2006.
[15] J. Lewis, R. Rosenholtz, N. Fong, and U. Neumann. VisualIDs: Automatic distinctive icons for desktop interfaces.
In Proceedings SIGGRAPH, pages 416–423. ACM Press,
2004.
[16] W. Sack. Aesthetics of information visualization. In C. Paul,
V. Vesna, and M. Lovejoy, editors, Context Providers. University of Minnesota Press, 2007.
[17] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for information visualization. In Proceedings Visual
Languages, pages 336–343. IEEE CS Press, 1996.
[18] T. Skog, S. Ljungblad, and L. E. Holmquist. Between aesthetics and utility: Designing ambient information visualizations. In Proceedings IEEE Syposium on Information Visualization (InfoVis), pages 30–37, 2003.
[19] J. J. Thomas and K. A. Cook, editors. Illuminating the Path:
The Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics.
IEEE Press, 2005.
[20] M. Tory and T. M¨oller. Rethinking visualization: A highlevel taxonomy. In Proceedings Information Visualization,
pages 151–158. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2004.
[21] F. Vi´egas, E. Perry, E. Howe, and J. Donath. Artifacts of the
presence era: Using information visualization to create an
evocative souvenir. In Proceedings Information Visualization, pages 105–111. IEEE CS Press, 2004.

Online Resources
[22] Britannica Online. Art criticism.
http://search.eb.com/eb/article-9343804.
[23] R. Geiss. Milkdrop.
http://www.nullsoft.com/free/milkdrop/.
[24] J. Harris and S. Kamvar. We feel fine.
http://www.wefeelfine.org/.
[25] G. Levin. The dumpster.
http://artport.whitney.org/commissions/thedumpster/.
[26] L. Manovich. Data visualisation as new abstraction and antisublime.
http://manovich.net/DOCS/data art 2.doc, 2002.
[27] Radical Software Group. Carnivore.
http://r-s-g.org/carnivore/.

