Notice of Violation of IEEE Publication Principles
“Harvesting Terrorist Information from the Web”
by Nasrullah Memon, David Hicks, and Henrik Legind Larsen
in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Information Visualization (IV), July 2007
After careful and considered review of the content and authorship of this paper by a duly
constituted expert committee, this paper has been found to be in violation of IEEE’s Publication
Principles.
This paper has copied portions of text from the sources cited below. The lead author, Nasrullah
Memon, was found to be solely responsible for the violation. The original text was copied
without attribution (including appropriate references to the original author(s) and/or paper title)
and without permission.
“Social Network Analysis as an Approach to Combat Terrorism: Past, Present, and
Future Research”
by Steve Ressler
Homeland Security Affairs, 2 (2), Naval Postgraduate School Center for Homeland Defense and
Security, July 2006
“Social Network Analysis and Information Fusion for AntiTerrorism”
by Pontus Svenson, Per Svensson, and Hugo Tullberg
in the Proceedings of the 2006 CIMI, 2006
“A Social Network Analysis of Aum Shinrikyo: Understanding Terrorism in Australia”
by Stuart A. Koschade
in Social Change in the 21st Century Conference, October 2005
“Untangling Criminal Networks: A Case Study”
by Jennifer Xu, Hsinchun Chen
in the Proceedings of the First NSF/NIJ Symposium Intelligence and Security Informatics, ISI,
June 2003
“NetIntel: A Database for Manipulation of Rich Social Network Data”
by Maksim Tsvetovat, Jana Diesner, Kathleen M. Carley
Carnegie Mellon University School of Computer Science ISRI - Institute for Software Research
International CASOS - Center for Computational Analysis of Social and Organizational
Systems: CMU-ISRI-04-135, March 2005
“Entity and Relationship Labeling in Affiliation Networks”
by Bin Zhao, Prithviraj Sen, Lise Getoor
in the Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning, 2006
“Information Awareness: A Prospective Technical Assessment”
by David Jensen, Matthew Rattigan, Hannah Blau

in the Proceedings of the Ninth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining; SIGKDD '03, 2003
“Binary-Relational Storage Structures”
by R.A. Frost
in The Computer Journal, Vol 25, No 3, Heyden & Son Ltd, 1982, pp. 358-367
“About TrackingTheThreat.com”
TrackingTheThreat.com, May 2006
“A First Look at Domestic and International Global Terrorism Events, 1970–1997”
by Laura Dugan, Gary LaFree, Heather Fogg
in the Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security
Informatics, ISI, May 2006
“A Network Analysis Model for Disambiguation of Names in Lists ”
by Bradley Malin, Edoardo Airoldi, Kathleen M. Carley
Computational & Mathematical Organizational Theory, 11, July 2005

Harvesting Terrorists Information from Web
Nasrullah Memon, David L. Hicks and Henrik Legind Larsen
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Aalborg University, Niels Bohrs Vej 8, DK-6700, Esbjerg, Denmark
Abstract
Data collection is difficult to do in any network
analysis because it is hard to create a complete network.
It is not easy to gain information on terrorist networks.
It is a fact that terrorist organizations do not provide
information on their members and the government rarely
allows researchers to use their intelligence data [1].
Very few researchers [2] [3] [4] collected data from
open sources, and to the best of our knowledge, no
knowledge base is available in academia for the analysis
of the terrorist events.
To counter the information
scarcity, we at Software Intelligence Security Research
Center, Aalborg University Esbjerg Denmark, designed
and developed a terrorism knowledge base by harvesting
information from authenticated websites. In this paper
we discuss data collection and analysis results of our ongoing research of Investigative Data Mining (IDM). In
addition, we present a system architecture of our
analyzing, visualizing and destabilizing terrorist
networks prototype, i.e., iMiner, and also describe how
we collected terrorist information using an Information
Harvesting System.
Keywords--- iMiner knowledge base, Information
Harvesting System, Hidden Hierarchy, Terrorist
Networks

1. Introduction
The threats we are facing from terrorists today require
new methods for modeling and analysis of terrorist
networks. In fact, civil security decision makers,
analysts and field operators fighting terrorism and
organized crime across the European Union / World,
need front-line integrated technologies to support their
cooperative work. The terrorists are no longer organized
in hierarchical structures, but instead consist of
individuals and groups that are loosely organized in
“dark networks”. Instead of large-scale military attacks,
they stage attacks or set bombs against unprotected
civilians, or seek to influence crowds of legitimate
demonstrators so that critical riot situations occur. In
order to construct decision support systems that take
account of these new factors, new, more powerful

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

models and techniques from several technological
domains need to be brought together and integrated.
Experience shows that networks can be unwound and
analyzed after events. Although it provides the necessary
evidence for bringing criminals to justice, it is then too
late to prevent loss of life and material damage.
Mathematical methods used in our research on
Investigative Data Mining [5] [6] are clearly relevant to
law enforcement intelligence work and may provide
tools to discover terrorist networks in their planning
phase and thereby prevent terrorist actions and other
large-scale crimes from being carried out. Relevant
patterns to investigate include connections between
actors (meetings, messages), activities of the involved
actors (specialized training, purchasing of equipment)
and information gathering (time tables, visiting sites).
Investigative Data Mining (IDM) offers the ability to
firstly map a covert cell, and to secondly measure the
specific structural and interactional criteria of such a cell.
This framework aims to connect the dots between
individuals and “map and measure complex, covert,
human groups and organisations”. Our method focuses
on uncovering the patterning of people’s interaction, and
correctly interpreting these networks assists “in
predicting behaviour and decision-making within the
network” [7]. IDM also endows the analyst with the
ability to measure the level of covertness and efficiency
of the cell as a whole, and also the level of activity,
ability to access others, and the level of control over a
network each individual possesses. The measurement of
these criteria allows specific counter-terrorism
applications to be drawn, and assists in the assessment of
the most effective methods of disrupting and neutralising
a terrorist cell. In short IDM “provides a useful way of
structuring knowledge and framing further research.
Ideally it can also enhance an analyst’s predictive
capability”.
IDM borrows ideas from social network analysis
(SNA) and graph theory techniques in order to connect
the dots and assist law enforcement agencies to
disconnect the terrorist networks. In investigative data
mining, a number of variations exist in the literature. One
is known as link analysis (see for example, [8] [9]). Link
analysis research uses search and probabilistic
approaches to find structural characteristics in the
network such as hubs, gatekeepers, pulse-takers [10] or
identifying potential relationships for relational data

mining. It is a fact that link analysis alone is insufficient
as it looks at one side of the coin and ignores complex
nonlinear relationships that may exist between attributes.
Another approach depends purely on visualization, such
as NetMap [11]. Unfortunately, tools that depend on
visualization alone -despite being useful to provide some
insight − are insufficient and rely on a user to carry out
many tedious and time consuming tasks, many of which
could be automated.
In addition to the previous discussion, most of the work
on link analysis or network visualization ignores the
construction of a hidden hierarchy of covert networks.
Uncovering a relationship among or within attributes
(connecting the dots) is an important step, but in many
domains it is more important to understand how this
relationship evolved. Hence, understanding network
dynamics and evolution is needed to complete the
picture. Once we understand the dynamics and evolution
of these relationships and construct the hidden hierarchy,
we can search for ways to disconnect the dots when and
if needed.
This type of research can be divided into two groups:
data collectors and data modelers. Data collection is
difficult for any network analysis because it is hard to
create a complete network: It is especially difficult to
gain information on terrorist networks.
Terrorist
organizations do not provide information on their
members, and governments rarely allow researchers to
use their intelligence data. To meet this challenge, a
knowledge base is designed and developed for storing
and manipulating of data collected from various
authenticated websites. In addition, we also developed
mathematical models for analyzing, visualizing and
destabilizing terrorist networks [5] [6] [7].

2. Network Research and Terrorism
The importance of network research in fighting the
war against terrorism was recognized even before the
attacks of September 11, 2001. The book Networks and
Netwars [12] which was released before the 9/11 terrorist
attacks, describes the increased network principles in
modern terrorist organizations. The premise of the book
is that the war is no longer a head-to-head battle of two
powers. There is no formal hierarchical-based enemy
like during the cold war. Modern war is netwar, a battle
by terrorists, organized criminals, and extremists with a
networked structure. These networked structures are
often leaderless and are able to attack more rapidly.
Novel approaches are needed to identify command
structures in these leaderless networks [5] [6] [7].
After the attacks of 9/11, the academic world has
increased the attention paid to network research for
terrorism as a result of public interest. The network
analysis of terrorist organizations can be divided into two
classes (as described above): the data collectors and data
modelers:

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Data Collectors
Data collection is difficult for any network analysis
because it is difficult to create a complete network. It is
not easy to gain information on terrorist networks. It is a
fact that terrorist organizations do not provide
information on their members and the government rarely
allows researchers to use their intelligence data [1]. A
number of academic researchers [2] [3] [4] focus
primarily on data collection on terrorist organizations,
analyzing the information through description and
straightforward modeling.
Despite their strength, Krebs’, Sageman’s and
Rodriguez’s works have a few key drawbacks. By
dealing with open sources, these authors are limited in
acquiring data. With open sources, if the author does not
have information on terrorists, he or she assumes they do
not exist. This can be quite problematic as the data
analysis may be misleading. If one cannot find an Al
Qaeda operative in Denmark in publicly available
sources, the researcher could assume there is no Al
Qaeda network. However, it is highly probable that this
is not the case, since terrorists generally try to keep a low
profile before committing an attack. The data collectors
can also be criticized because their work is more
descriptive and lacks complex modeling tools. Fostering
relationships with modelers could augment the work
being conducted by data collectors, as statistical analysis
might be able to take into account some of the limitations
of the data and provide an additional analytical
framework.
Data Modelers
Complex models that have been created that offer insight
on theoretical terrorist networks [13] looked at how to
model the shape of a terrorist network when little
information is known through predictive modeling
techniques based on inherent network structures. Using
a software tool known as DyNet, they looked at ways to
estimate vulnerabilities and destabilize terrorist network.
Carpenter, T. et al., [14] looked at some of the practical
issues and algorithms for analyzing terrorist networks by
discussing a number of ways to construct various social
network measures when dealing with terrorist networks.
Farley Jonathan David [15] also proposed a model for
breaking Al Qaeda cells.
A common problem for the modelers is the issue of
data. Any academic work is only as good as the data, no
matter the type of advanced methods used. Modelers
often do not have the best data, as they have not
collected individual biographies (like Sageman) and do
not have access to classified data. Many of the models
were created data-free or without complete data, yet do
not fully consider human and data limitations [1].
On the other hand, in our research we developed
mathematical models for further analysis of terrorist
networks. These models are implemented in a software
prototype which is integrated with a knowledge base for
terrorist events that have occurred in the past. In the

next section we discuss the main features of the software
prototype designed and developed in our research work.

3. System Architecture
The iMiner is an experimental system, which provides
the answers to the following questions.
• Who is likely to be an important person (node)
in the network?
• Why s/he is important?
• Which terrorist is highly/ less connected?
• What are various position roles in the network?
• Is there any command structure in the network?
• Is it possible to construct the hidden hierarchy
of the non-hierarchical networks?
• Which nodes represent key players?
• What is the efficiency of the network?
• How much of the efficiency of the network is
affected by eradicating one or more terrorists?

•

How can law enforcement agencies use (often
incomplete and faulty) network data to disrupt
and destabilize terrorist networks?
The system architecture of the investigative data
mining toolkit (iMiner prototype) is depicted in Figure 1.
The first stage of network analysis development is
intended to automatically identify the strongest
association paths, or geodesics, between two or more
network members. In practice, such tasks often entail
intelligence officials to manually explore links and try to
find association paths that might be useful for generating
investigative leads.
iMiner allows analysts to determine the hierarchy of
covert networks, which may help law enforcement and
intelligence agencies in understanding the structure of
the covert networks. In addition to this, intelligence
agencies can easily set the priorities for eradicating some
important nodes in the network by visualizing how much
the efficiency of the network is minimized by the capture
of a node.

Figure 1. System Architecture

4. iMiner Knowledge Base
The iMiner knowledge base has the following type of
tables
• Entities Master Table
• General Links Repository
• Domain Tables
• Entity Attribute
• Geodesic Values Tables
• Centrality tables
• Setting Tables
In the aftermath of the September 11th attacks, it was
noted that coherent information sources were not
available to researchers.
Information was either
available in fragmentary form, not allowing comparison
studies across incidents, groups or tactics, or made

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

available in written articles – which are not readily
suitable for quantitative analysis of terrorist networks.
Data collected by law enforcement agencies, while
potentially better organized, are largely not available to
the research community due to restrictions in distribution
of sensitive information.
To counter the information scarcity, we have
developed a knowledge base about the terrorist attacks
that have occurred in the past and the information about
terrorist organizations that were involved in those events.
This information is mostly collected from open source
media (but authenticated websites), such as
http://www.trackingthethreat.com/.
The focus of the knowledge base we have developed is
the agglomeration of publicly available data and the
integration of the knowledge base of investigative data
mining software prototype. The main objective is to

investigate and analyze terrorist networks to find hidden
relations and groups, prune datasets to locate regions of
interest, find key players, characterize the structure, trace
a point of vulnerability, detect efficiency of the network
and to discover the hidden hierarchy of the nonhierarchical networks.
The iMiner knowledge base consists of various types
of entities. Here is an incomplete list of the different
entity types:
• Terrorist organizations such as Al Qaeda
• Terrorists such as Osama Bin Ladin, Ramzi
Yousef, etc.
• Terrorist facilities such as Darunta Training
Camp, Khalden Training Camp, etc.
• Terrorist events/ attacks such as 9/11, London
7/7, etc.
The dataset also contains various types of relations
connecting instances of different entity types. Here is a
partial list of the various relation types:
• memberOf: instances of terrorist can be
affiliated with various instances of terrorist
organization.
• facilityOwner: instances of terrorist facility are
usually run by instances of terrorist
organizations.
• facilityMember: instances of terrorist are linked
to various instances of terrorist facilities if the
terrorist instance attended/ spent some time at
the facility.
• claimResponsibility: instances of terrorist
organization are linked to the instances of terror
attacks they claim responsibility for.
• participatedIn: instances of terrorist that may
have participated in instances of terror attacks.
The iMiner system applies a spider management
system as well as spiders to import data that is available
in the Web. We have developed a prototype system to
get information from online repositories and save it in its
knowledge base for analysis.
The analysis of relational data is a rapidly growing area
within the larger research community interested in
machine learning, knowledge discovery, and data
mining. Several workshops [16] [17] [18] have focused
on this precise topic, and another DARPA research
program — Evidence Extraction and Link Discovery
(EELD) —focuses on extracting, representing, reasoning
with, and learning from relational data.
We stored data in the knowledge base in the form of
triples,
<subject, object, relationship>
where subject and object may be entities of interest and
relationship is link between two entities. These triples
are also used in Resource Description Framework
(RDF).
The binary–relational view regards the universe as
consisting of entities with binary–relationships between
them. An entity is anything which is of interest and can
be identified. A binary–relationship is an association

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

between two entities. The first entity in a relationship is
called the subject and the second entity is called the
object. A relationship is described by identifying the
subject, the type of relationship, and object for example:
Bin Laden is leader of Al Qaeda can be written as (Bin
Laden. leaderOf .Al Qaeda).
N–ary relationships such as Samad got bomb making
training from Zarqawi may be reduced to a set of binary–
relationships by the explicit naming of the implied entity.
For example:
training # 1. trainee .Samad
training #1. trainer .Zarqawi
training #1. got training of .bomb making
There are several advantages and disadvantages of
using binary relational storage (Frost, R. A., 1982) such
as:
• Simple interface between a binary relational
storage structure and other modules of a
database management system consists of three
procedures:
(i) insert (triple); (ii) delete (partial
specification of triple); (iii) retrieve partial
specification of triple)
Retrieval requests such as “list all terrorists met
at Malaysia before 9/11” are met by issuing a
simple retrieval call (terrorist. met at Malaysia
before 9/11. ?) which delivers only that data
which has been requested.
• Multi-attribute retrieval may be inefficient. The
use of binary relational structure for multiattribute retrieval might not be the most
efficient method irrespective of the way in
which the structure is implemented.
To
illustrate this, consider the example: “retrieve
(the names of) all young (25 years old) married
terrorists involved in 9/11 attacks who attended
flight schools and got terrorist training in
Afghanistan”. Using binary-relational structure,
one could issue the retrievals:
(? .marital status. Married)
(? .age. 25)
(? .involved in. 9/11 terrorist attacks)
(? .attended. flight schools)
(? .got terrorist training. Afghanistan)
and merge the resultant sets to obtain the
required data. This is probably much faster
than having to do a sequential search through
the whole database, which would be necessary
if the database were held as a file of records
(name, age, marital status, etc.) ordered on
name. The sociogram of Al Qaeda network
integrated in software prototype iMiner is
depicted in Figure 2.
The entities are saved in a knowledge base in the
entity_profile table, which has the fields (entity_key,
entity_name, entity_type). Relationships are saved in
sequence of their involvement in a certain terrorism plot.
For example, all relationships, which are involved in the
9/11 terrorist attacks, are saved together thus forming
domains. Each domain has a table of relations (in which

minimum numbers of relations (i.e. only those which are
saved in that domain) are traversed in search operation
for any entity or its links. This strategy also reduces the
number of joins per query, yielding performance gains.
The next section discusses how we harvested data and
stored it in our knowledge base.

Figure 2. iMiner Knowledge base

relations are stored in the above given format) and each
domain is registered in the domain’s master table. These
domains are analogous to case files in local police
stations.
Investigating officers might be interested in visualizing
or analyzing relations in connection to any particular
case or terrorism plot, thus if the required relations are
saved together they are fetched quickly. Moreover the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

5. Information harvesting system (IIHS)
We have harvested terrorists’ information from the Internet,
that is, the iMiner system is bundled with a powerful spidering
engine to update its knowledge base by harvesting the

information present on different sources on the Web as shown
in Figure 3. At present it only supports one data source, as
discussed above, but it can be expanded to support many data
sources as per requirement. The main features of iMiner’s
Information harvesting sub-system are:

Figure 3. The iMiner Information Harvesting System
The iMiner’s Information Harvesting System (IIHS) has
three main parts,
• Spider Engine
• Page Grabber
• Database Manager
Spider Engine
The spider engine operates in two modes
1. Automatic Updating
2. Selective Updating
In the automatic updating mode, the spider engine
administers the whole spidering operation itself. It checks
each and every entity present at the data source, to bring out
new things about it. These new things can be new relations
with existing or new entities or new attributes. An attribute
might be an alias name or address, etc. Our iMiner’s spider
engine has a new entity tracker to track records of new
entities found in the process. It also tracks the entities
which are already updated to avoid re-spidering on them.
In the selective mode, iMiner notifies the spider engine
about the entities which need to be updated and new entities
found which are kept by the entities tracker and can be
added to the iMiner dataset.
Our iMiner’s spider engine is assisted by the entities
tracker and the information tracker to carry out its
operations effectively. The entity tracker not only tracks
entities but also initializes the entity extractor to extract
entities out of the HTML grabbed by page grabber.
Page Grabber
The Page Grabber takes care of the entire Internet
connection settings, proxies etc. Its main purpose is to grab
information present on the Web in HTML form. It needs
only a URL which is provided to it by the entity tracker and
11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

it hits that URL to grab the entire HTML present on the
URL.
Database Manager
The database manager carries out database operations and
coordinates the spider engine. It adds / updates new entities,
relations and metadata of entities extracted by the entity and
information extractor with the help of Relation, Entity and
Metadata Wrapper classes. Usually every data source
associates a unique identifier to each of its entities; the
identifiers attached to different entities on the
http://www.trackingthethreat.com/ site are also identified
and saved in the database along with the URL of the page
where the entity is present so that they can be used to
achieve speed while updating the entity profile next time.

6. The Original knowledge base
The http://www.trackingthethreat.com/ is a knowledge
base of open source information about the Al Qaeda
terrorist network, developed as a research project of the
FMS Advanced Systems Group. The main goal of this
project is to apply new technologies and software
engineering approaches to open source intelligence while
providing researchers and analysts with information about
Al Qaeda. This site contains information collected from
thousands of open source reports, documents, news stories,
and other places which are deemed appropriate. It is
presented in a concise and organized fashion as a
demonstration of some of the capabilities of Sentinel TMS.
The group has attempted to assign some degree of
credibility to its accuracy, though no representation is made
or implied that all data contained therein is completely
reliable.

This knowledge base represents the original open-source
knowledge base on Al Qaeda. It contains data in the form
of:
Entities: Discrete data elements that comprise people,
places, organizations, events, etc.
Relationships:
Information
about
the
personal,
organizational, transactional, and historical connections
between entities.
Metadata: Additional information about entities and
relationships that help form a more complete picture.
Notes and Documents: Unstructured text that provides
background information on entities, relationships, and
metadata.
As this knowledge base was designed and developed as a
research project it is as accurate as possible, nevertheless,
the resulting knowledge base has both strengths and
weakness —many of which are beyond our control. The
strength of this knowledge base is the inclusion of several
integrated technologies into this site to assist in name
identification, analysis, and disambiguation. The weakness
of the knowledge base includes potential media bias and
misinformation, lack of information beyond incident
specific details alone, and missing data which was not
available in the media. We review some of these strengths
and weaknesses in next section.
Knowledge base Strengths
The FMS Advanced Systems Groups is a partner of
Language Analysis Systems, Inc. (LAS), the leader in
providing multi-cultural name recognition software
solutions. The strength of this knowledge base is the
inclusion of several integrated LAS technologies into this
site to assist in name identification, analysis, and
disambiguation.
Investigative data mining is increasingly performed on
networks constructed from personal name relationships
extracted from text-based documents. In such networks, a
vertex corresponds to a particular name and an edge
specifies the relationship between two names. Before such
a network can be analyzed for centrality, grouping, or
intelligence gathering purposes, the correctness of the
network must be maximized. Specifically, it must be
decided when two pieces of data correspond to the same
entity. Failure to ensure correctness can result in the
inability to discover certain relationships or the cause of
generating false knowledge.
Names are not unique identifiers for specific entities and,
as a result, there exists many confounders to the
construction of correct networks. Firstly, the data may
contain typographical errors. In this case, the name
“Nasrullah” may be accidentally represented as
“Nasarullah” or “Nasurullah”. There exists a number of
string comparator metrics to account for typographical
errors, many of which are in practice.
However, even when names are free of typographical
errors, there are additional confounders to data correctness.
For example, there can exist name variation, where multiple
names correctly reference the same entity or the same name
correctly references multiple entities i.e., there can exist
name ambiguity. The original knowledge base developed
11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

by FMS Advanced Systems Group has integrated several
technologies into the knowledge base to assist in name
identification, analysis and disambiguation. The details are
not available about the algorithms or models used for
solving this problem.
Weaknesses of Open Source Knowledge bases
As discussed above, the original knowledge base has
some important strengths; we also recognize that it also has
important weaknesses that need to be understood when
drawing conclusions from the data. Three types of
weaknesses are especially important. First, all major open
source databases rely on data culled from news resources;
they are likely biased toward the most newsworthy forms of
terrorism (Fowler, W. W., 1981).
Although the original knowledge base under discussion,
includes events that were prevented by authorities (for
example the Bojinka terrorists plan), it is certain that some
potential terrorist attacks never came to the attention of the
media and are thus excluded. A related issue is that the
original knowledge base includes incidents covered by the
media where the perpetrators remain unidentified. Without
information concerning the perpetrator it may be difficult to
accurately classify the incident as terrorism. Also, various
media accounts of similar terrorist incidents may contain
conflicting information. Without measures of reliability in
news reporting, it is difficult for researchers to discern,
which source supplies the most accurate account.
The second issue is that the original knowledge base lacks
information on other important issues associated with each
terrorism incident. The third weakness is that the open
source databases also lack information on the psychological
characteristics, recruitment, and careers of members of
terrorist movements. It is a fact that the lack of data on
terrorist networks is mainly explained by their clandestine
nature.

7. Conclusion
In this paper we discussed data collection in the area of
investigative data mining. Although investigative data
mining is data-hungry, researchers can not approach
terrorists to find out about their membership structure, nor
do they have access to real data from government sources.
We presented how we collected data and developed the
knowledge base. We also discussed the strengths and
weaknesses of the dataset we have collected so far.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Ressler S., (2006). Social Network Analysis as an Approach to
Combat Terrorism: Past, Present, and Future Research.
Krebs, Valdis E. (2002). Mapping Networks of Terrorist Cells.
Connections 24, no. 3: 43-52.
Sageman, M. (2004). Understanding Terrorist Networks,
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Rodriquez, J. A. (2005). The March 11th Terrorist Network: In
its weakness lies its strength, XXV International Sunbelt
Conference, Los Angeles.
Memon Nasrullah, Henrik Legind Larsen (2006) Structural
Analysis and Destabilizing Terrorist Networks , In the

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.

16.

17.
18.
19.
20.

Proceedings of The 2006 International Conference on Data
Mining (DMIN 2006), LAS VEGAS, Nevada, USA, June 2529, pp. 296-302.
Memon Nasrullah, and Henrik Legind Larsen (2006). Practical
Algorithms of Destabilizing Terrorist Networks, In the
proceedings of IEEE Intelligence Security Conference, San
Diego, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag,
Vol. 3976: 398-411 (2006b)
Memon Nasrullah, and Henrik Legind Larsen. (2006).
Structural Analysis and Destabilizing Terrorist Networks using
Investigative Data Mining, In the proceedings of Advanced
Data Mining and Applications, Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence (LNAI 4093) Springer-Verlag, pp. 1037-1048.
Taskar Ben. et al. (2003) Label and link prediction in relational
data, in IJCAI
Workshop on Learning Statistical Models
from Relational Data.
Barlow, M., J. Galloway, and H. Abbass. (2002). Mining
evolution through visualization, Workshop at the 8th
International Conference on the Simulation and Synthesis of
Living Systems.
Stephenson, K. and Zelen, M. (1989) Rethinking Centrality:
Methods and Applications, Social Networks, 11, 1-37.
Klerks, P. (2002). The Network Paradigm Applied to Criminal
Organisations:
Theoretical nitpicking or a relevant doctrine
for investigators? Recent
developments in the Netherlands.
Connections 24(3): 53-65.
Arquilla J., David Ronfeldt. (2001). Networks and Netwars:
The Future of Terror, Crime and Militancy. RAND.
Carley, K. (2004) Estimating Vulnerabilities in Large Covert
Networks,” in proc.International Symposium on Command and
Control Research and Technology San Diego, CA,.
Carpenter, T., George Karakostas, and David Shallcross,
(2002). Practical Issues and Algorithms for Analyzing Terrorist
Networks. In proc. WMC .
Farley D. J. Breaking Al Qaeda Cells. (2003). A Mathematical
Analysis of Counterterrorism Operations (A Guide for Risk
Assessment and Decision Making) Studies in Conflict &
Terrorism, 26:399–411.
Dzeroski, S., De Raedt, L., and Wrobel, S. (2002) (Eds). Papers
of the Workshop on
Multi-Relational Data Mining. The
Eighth ACM
SIGKDD International
Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ACM Press,2002.
Getoor, L., and Jensen, D. (2000) (Eds). Learning Statistical
Models from
Relational Data: In the proceedings of AAAI
2000 Workshop, AAAI Press, Menlo Park CA.
Jensen, D. and Goldberg, H. (1998). Artificial Intelligence and
Link Analysis In the proceedings of 1998 AAAI Fall
Symposium., AAAI Press, Menlo Park CA.
Frost R. A. (1982). Binary Relational Storage Structures.
Computer Journal.
Fowler, W. W. (1981). Terrorism Databases: A Comparison of
Missions, Methods and Systems. RAND publications, Santa
Monica CA.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

