How Feasible Are Star Wars™ Mid-air Displays?
Ismo Rakkolainen
Tampere University of Technology, PL 553, 33101 Tampere, Finland
(Also CTO, FogScreen Inc., Helsinki, Finland)

{ismo.rakkolainen@tut.fi}
Abstract
There has been wide interest and even enthusiasm
towards 3D and mid-air displays for well over a century.
Recently many kinds of “holographic” displays have
been seen in sci-fi movies like Star Wars™ etc. Media or
3D display manufacturers nowadays often claim that a
specific novel display is like the ones seen in Star Wars.
We survey and assess if, how and to what extent the
Star Wars mid-air displays are realizable with contemporary display technology, what are the strengths and
weaknesses of various approaches, and when we can expect the mid-air displays to take over the display market.
Keywords--- Mid-air displays, 3D displays, immaterial displays, holography, FogScreen, Star Wars.

1. Introduction
Science fiction often inspires engineers and inventors to design gadgets according to the sci-fi visions.
There are scores of ideas that were first presented in
science fiction books, comics or movies, and later be
realized with novel technologies. Classical examples are
Jules Verne’s books, where many of the ideas have been
ridiculous at their times. Also some ideas e.g., in Harry
Potter™ movies have proved to be possible [1] to a
degree (invisible cloak, walk through a brick wall etc.).
You should never say “never”. The development of
science and technology has been incredible over the past
century. This does not however mean that all the crazy
ideas can ever be made real.
Mid-air or 3D displays seen in science fiction and
other movies (Star Wars, Star trek, Forbidden planet, Minority report, The first $20 million is always the hardest,
Illusionist, etc.) is a field of technology which has captivated general public’s and media’s attention. Mid-air,
“holographic” displays that imitate these sci-fi displays
are one of the Holy Grails in technology.
It is worth noting that the terms “3D”, “holographic”, and “mid-air display” are very obfuscated in media
and among general public. The confusion may partly be
due to sparse knowledge on novel display technologies,

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

as general public or editors in media are not supposed to
know deep details of everything. It is also partly due to
marketing needs of the companies. Being too academic is
not a virtue in business. Illustrations visualizing a 3D
display product often have to exaggerate or even fake the
effect due to clarity and appeal in marketing, as it is
virtually impossible to show 3D images on a 2D paper or
web page.
The display technology has continuously tried to
catch up with the visions with the means available at the
time. Just before the first photographs were made, stereo
viewing was invented by Wheatstone [2] . Stereo photographs and zoetropes with moving image sequences were
popular in the 19th century. Moving pictures created vivid viewing experiences in cinemas since the late 19th century, and TV did the same at home since the 1920’s. 3D
movies and 3D postcards intrigued general public since
the 1950’s, holography since the 1960’s, and 3D computer graphics, virtual reality, CAVE™, IMAX™ 3D
and other modern versions of 3D movies today.
There is a diverse range of different principles, techniques, patents, ideas and products to create the impression of a 3D image floating in free space, but none of
them have yet caught the mass market. Not all the related
ideas, patents or visions even work in reality!
3D displays try to artificially recreate the depth cues
we naturally perceive when viewing a real 3D object. For
example, stereoscopic imaging simulates binocular disparity cues by presenting slightly different images to the
left and right eyes. Virtual reality applications track the
user’s head and render appropriate 3D views for the
user’s point of view to simulate motion parallax. A midair display creates an image apparently hovering in air.
Mid-air and 3D displays are not necessarily synonyms.
Star Wars™ is a classic and the most popular sci-fi
movie series ever, showing many futuristic ideas and
technologies. The museum exhibit “Star Wars: Where
Science meets imagination” explains how to implement
many of the ideas.
In this paper we focus on mid-air displays seen in
the Star Wars movies. At the time of the first movies in
the late 1970’s, they were pure science fiction. We make
a short survey and assess to what extent the Star Wars
mid-air displays are realizable with contemporary dis-

play technology, what are the strengths and weaknesses
of various approaches, and when we can expect the midair displays to take over the display market. We first take
a look at the most important mid-air display types seen in
Star Wars in Section 2. In Section 3, we make a short
survey on related contemporary display technologies and
assess the applicability and shortcomings of various midair display candidates. In Section 4 we discuss some issues on their commercial emergence. Finally conclusions
are given.

2. Star Wars Displays
All the six Star Wars movies feature various mid-air
displays. We first describe the main types of them. All
the variants are not discussed due to space limitations.

2.1. Mid-air display with side-projection
The classical mid-air display is the “hologram” of
Princess Leia delivering a recorded message in the first
movie. Robot R2D2 on the side is projecting it to right
above a small table (which perhaps is a display device).
Similar displays are seen in all the other movies also.
This kind of a display seems to be implementable already
now, as described in the next Section.

2.2. Mid-air display with bottom-projection
The bottom-projection display is a slight variant of
the side-projection display. The images are seen above a
platform, and apparently the projection comes from the
platform below, which is technically the key difference
with the “Leia” scene. Apparently there is also a holocam in the platform for the two-way teleconference communication with the remote person.
A variant of the same is a hand-held miniature display, which is used to visualize things right above the device. It seems like the projection is coming from the
hand-held unit below. Apart from the projection source,
these displays seem to use the same elements as on the
“Princess Leia” scene. The image forming method remains a mystery with contemporary technology. One
possibility could be that the projection beam actually
comes from e.g., ubiquitous projectors in the environment, but there is no specific evidence for this.

2.3. Surrounding mid-air projection
Another type of display is the stellar map shown by
Obi-Wan Kenobi in “Episode II”. As he places a small
ball onto a holder, it explodes into a very large surrounding stellar map all over the room in just over one second.
It requires darkening of the room. The translucent stellar
objects also move a little in mid-air but do not appear to
be interactive. Apparently there is no way of doing
exactly this with today’s technology, but a CAVE or
other spatially immersive displays could render something remotely similar.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

2.4. Mid-air visualization table
A battlefield visualization on a command center is
shown in Episode II. The very large visualization table
seems to use several projectors to create rapidly moving
mid-air fighter jets above the table. The ground troop
visualization on the table may use some other type of
technique. It has very low resolution high above and on
the edges of the table. Limitedly this kind of a mid-air
display could be created with today’s technology, as
described in the next Section.

2.5. Mid-air outdoor advertisements
Yet another type of displays is very large urban outdoor mid-air advertising billboards of various sizes and
forms. They can be seen in the newer episodes. Apparently this is impossible with the state-of-the-art technology, but some distantly similar approximations can be
made, as described in the next Section.

2.6. Observations of the mid-air displays
It is good to remember that we are talking here about
movies, not observing reality. We can’t thus derive any
new laws of physics from the movies, but rather try to
assess which mid-air displays are possible according to
the contemporary physics and knowledge.
First of all, the “holographic” images in Star Wars
mid-air displays are clearly distinguishable from reality,
unlike in e.g., Star Trek’s HoloDeck, which provides a
total, ultimate immersion. The images seen in Star Wars
displays are relatively low-resolution, translucent projections in mid-air, which just do the job they are supposed
to do, and nothing more. There is also often very noticeable flickering, noise and stripes in the images.
The images appear to be visible from any viewing
angle and the objects change according to the motion
parallax of the viewpoint, but at least in some cases the
images could also be only 2D. No glasses are worn and
no haptics is used. The mid-air displays are ubiquitous in
the sense that they only appear when they are needed,
and disappear when they are not used anymore.
As the actual movie footage is viewed on a current
2D screen technology, it is impossible to tell if the image
in the movie screen is supposed to be stereoscopic or not.
We have no clues to assume it to be stereoscopic.
It is not clear if the images are technically really
holograms or not. In general the technologies are seldom
explained in the movies, they are just employed.
The mid-air displays generally do not appear to be
interactive or reach-through. On the other hand, in most
cases there is no reason to touch them, just like nowadays very few TV viewers go and touch the TV screen.
All these mediocre properties significantly ease the
task of producing a Star Wars display. The key issue
seems to be “mid-air”. Next we will peek the current display technologies.

3. Potential mid-air display technologies
Images, objects and user interfaces that seem to float
in mid-air or have real 3D extent, can be generated in a
variety of ways by artificially recreating the effects of
depth cues from natural viewing. We briefly discuss the
variety of such display types and categories here. For
more detailed discussion, thorough 3D display surveys
[3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [52] [53] are available.
All the 3D and mid-air displays try to achieve an illusion of depth, such that the viewer perceives a scene
with depth instead of a flat 2D image. Since the eye only
captures 2D images on the retina, 3D perception comes
from a variety of cues that imply depth in the scene.
Humans have a highly complex, delicate and sophisticated sensory fusion system. Huge information flow is
processed and only a small fraction gets through into our
consciousness. There are many photochemical, signal
processing and cognitional perception processes going
on in the brains and on the retina.
Humans have a natural ability to operate and perceive things in three dimensions, but the current 2D computer displays do not take advantage of that. Our eyes
capture two-dimensional images on the retina and the
human mind perceives distance or depth by using the
many available depth cues. Human depth cues of binocular disparity, motion parallax, vergence, and to a lesser extent, ocular accommodation, linear perspective,
shading and other cues are essential for 3D image perception [9] . Accommodation and convergence are linked
with one another at a muscular reflex level. Conflicting
cues are one of the leading causes for discomfort and
fatigue when viewing 3D displays.
Even though all 3D displays try to create an illusion
of depth or mid-air display, this can’t however contradict
the fundamental laws of physics. Photons must originate
in, or be redirected by some material, which can be behind, in front of, or within the space of the image, but it
must be present.

3.1. Stereoscopic and autostereoscopic displays
Stereoscopic displays provide slightly different images for the left and right eye. The brain merges the two
images into one with depth and thus creates the appearance of 3D objects that float in front of or behind the
screen. The viewing area for correct perspective is restricted, and user-worn glasses are required. Typical
techniques are active method with shutter glasses, and
passive methods which employ polarization, colored, Infitec [11] or ChromaDepth [12] glasses.
Autostereoscopic displays require no glasses or other user-worn devices for stereoscopic viewing. Ives’ patent in 1903 [13] was the first (lenticular) autostereoscopic process. The three principles for them [14] are a twoview display, head-tracked single-viewer display, or a
multiview display for multiple viewers. The correct
viewing area and resolution are typically very limited.
In both stereoscopic and autostereoscopic systems,
the viewer’s position can be tracked, which allows ren-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

dering images according to the user’s perspective. This
expands the viewing area and enables the user to experience parallax through head-motion and to get a more
life-like effect. They can also be used for spatially immersive displays like CAVE™ for a single viewer. Nontracked large-scale hemispherical screens like OMNIMAX theatres or Hayden planetarium in New York can
provide extremely immersive views for large audiences.
The strong point of stereoscopic and autostereoscopic displays is that their price has gone down significantly
due to the falling cost of LCD. They start to attract more
users, even consumers. Sharp’s miniature autostereoscopic displays are manufactured for mobile phones.
With no doubt, the stereoscopic and autostereoscopic displays can provide a stunning 3D effect for the
viewer. However, they only create the illusion of mid-air
displays, but the images do not really hover in thin air.

3.2. Head-mounted displays
Virtual [15] [16] and augmented [17] reality often
use head-mounted displays (HMD) which display images
directly in front of the user’s eyes. The viewer’s position
and orientation can be tracked to render motion parallax
cues, and the images can also be stereoscopic. HMDs
block out the environment and provide only a solitary
image. Artifacts such as optical distortions, misregistration, weight, tethers and lag are commonly experienced problems that detract from the sense of presence and
may cause eye-strain, head-ache, and other discomforts.
HMDs are clearly not the choice for mid-air displays.

3.3. Volumetric Displays
Volumetric displays [18] create a 3D image within a
volume, where the objects can be viewed from arbitrary
viewpoints without any eyewear. Eye accommodation is
correct since each point of light has a real origin in 3D.
There is a broad and diverse collection of methods,
technologies and ideas for volumetric displays. The basic
types are virtual image method where the voxels are
formed by a moving or deformable lens or mirror, and
real image method where the voxels are on a moving
screen or are produced on static regions. Some of the
approaches incorporate fibre optics, mirrors, oscillating
screens or stacked transparent LCD or OLED screens.
Commercial swept volume displays include HoloDeck Volumetric Imager [19] and Perspecta 3D [20] .
HoloDeck Volumetric Imager has an effective cross sectional resolution of 1024 x 768 by 360 rotational planes.
Perspecta’s 100-million voxel resolution is obtained by
presenting 200 radially-disposed slices consisting of 768
x 768 pixel images with hundreds of colours projected on
to a disc that rotates at 900 rpm. Experimental rotating
screen systems include helical screen Felix, SeeLinder
[21] , Twister [22] and Transpost.
The DepthCube Z1024 3D display [23] consists of
20 stacked LCD shutter panels that allow viewers to see
objects in 3D without the need for glasses. It enhances
depth perception and the viewer can focus on the planes

so the accommodation is correct. DepthCube doesn’t
limit the field of view, therefore allowing multiple
people to experience the 3D effect simultaneously.
Another technique uses laser beams to project a volumetric image on to a display medium which may consist of a volume of gas, liquid, aerogel or a solid glass
cube. The image appears to float inside the volume without the need of stereoscopic glasses, and the eye can
properly accommodate on it. Tiny image cubes based on
gated, two-frequency, up-conversion fluorescence [24]
[25] [26] can be viewed from almost any angle by
multiple viewers. Writing speed is low, they are very
small, extremely dim even in a darkened room, and as
they are made of solid glass, they are not exactly mid-air
displays and large glass cubes would weigh a lot.
Holodust [27] is another idea, which scans and illuminates flowing dust particles in mid-air by laser. It is
supposed to form a mid-air volumetric display. It has a
patent, but it seems to be only an unimplemented idea.
No prototypes or proof-of-concepts exist to this date. It
may be very complex to build in full color, and it requires very high-speed scanning and projection systems.
Most existing volumetric displays create their 3D
imagery in a fairly small enclosed volume that the viewer
cannot enter and they are not true mid-air displays. They
are more suited for computer graphics than video applications due to the difficulty in capturing suitable natural
imagery in 3D. They also have problems with image
transparency, low brightness and contrast, large size and
high cost. Yet another difficulty is that they can’t display
surfaces with a non-Lambertian intensity distribution.
TerrainTable [28] is a “2½D” volumetric, rapidly
changing visualization table that enables users to see and
interact with a 3D model. Using an array of vertical pins
beneath a silicone skin, the table can create curved surfaces within a limited tabletop area. It employs an overhead projector, and makes a convincing topographical
map. It could be a component for the display in Fig. 3.
A very peculiar volumetric display is the head inside
a crystal ball in Disneyland’s “Haunted Mansion” [29] .
The setup uses projectors and fiber-optics to animate it
life-like as if it was floating inside the crystal ball.
Interaction with the current volumetric displays is
limited, as they are not reach-through. The user interface
for e.g., Perspecta display can be made interactive by
external cameras, which track user’s hands on the dome,
but no direct contact with the objects is possible.

3.4. Holography
Holography enables to view 3D images at or through
a piece of film without any eyewear. The holographic
image appears in front or behind the film. Holographic
displays can reconstruct the same wavefront that a real
object would reflect. A hologram could be the ultimate
display technology, as it can produce all the 3D depth
cues that the human visual system uses to interpret and
perceive real 3D objects. Holographic images are best
suited for museums and other exhibitions. Combining
them with stereoscopic displays is also possible [30] .

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

In computer generated holography a computer calculates a synthetic holographic fringe pattern which is then
displayed using a spatial light modulator to generate the
desired optical wavefronts. It combines the ultimate
qualities of a traditional hologram with the dynamic capabilities of a computer display producing a true 3D real
image floating in space. Computer generated holography
would have several significant advantages, but currently
their implementation face severe challenges [31] . One of
the main drawbacks is the required extremely high bandwidth for high-quality images in the order of 100 Tb/s
[9] or alternatively monochrome very low resolution image. Other problems include immense computational resources required, very high need for pixels, information
content, and system performance. Computer generated
holography will not be practical for a long time.

3.5. Laser and other projections
R2D2 seems to project Princess Leia into thin air.
Laser (or other) projection thus seems to be a good candidate. Laser shows have been used as attractions at casinos, theme parks, cruise ships, concerts, sporting events
and night clubs. Projector technology has developed a lot
in the recent years, and the advances will probably continue. New LED, miniature and RGB laser projection
technologies are being developed.
Laser enables very high contrast ratio and incredible
effects with haze in air. Laser projection can even be
made onto a black scrim. When the laser hits the scrim,
an image appears to float in mid-air, since the scrim can’t
be seen. The image is however flat.
The laser beam itself is not visible, but the light reflecting from dust or particles in the air can be seen. Laser
shows employ smoke generators or such to catch the
beam, and thus they typically produce 3D volume effects
such as cones coming out from the projector. Laser projections can’t produce a “Princess Leia” effect in pure
air, as the beam should somehow be able to illuminate
only a very short range in mid-air, which is impossible.
The beam can not be switched on and off for a certain
distance only, and that’s why large mid-air displays in
Section 2.3 are not possible.
Spatial augmented reality [32] [33] employs multiple projectors to “paint” imagery onto real, arbitrary surfaces. It however relies on solid screen surfaces and only
gives an illusion of mid-air and augmented objects.
Recently a volumetric plasma emission display [34]
has been developed. It employs short laser pulses which
are focused to a point in air. The air turns into hot glowing plasma and produces a very loud and bright flashpoint. The method is slow, no colours are possible, it can
even be dangerous (no touching!) and may break the
equipment. The device produces only 100 dots per
second, which at 50 Hz refresh rate gives only 2 voxels
per frame. To increase the frequency, also higher energy
is needed. It was demonstrated at SIGGRAPH 2006
Emerging Technologies. The idea remotely resembles
some outdoor advertisement billboards seen in Star Wars

movies. However, it has big inherent problems and is
hardly practical in the presented form.

3.6. Floating images
Pepper’s Ghost is an old illusion sometimes used in
theaters. It uses a semitransparent glass and varying illumination between the direct view and the reflected view,
which can create an illusion of floating images.
Modern versions of floating images have no visible
screen, but instead they use various configurations of
concave spherical or half mirrors [4] . The image looks
as if it is floating in space. They can show a real object
or embed a 3D display panel. Also head-up displays,
which use projection onto mostly transparent surface,
form sort of a floating image and bring the displayed
information or gauges into the user’s field of view.
These displays can create an illusion of mid-air images, but they have constraints on viewing angles, depending on the configuration. They can however create
the Princess Leia illusion for some viewing angles without a visible screen, even though the half mirror aligned
45˚ in front of the spherical mirror is not penetrable.

3.7. Transparent projection screens
Transparent projection screens consist of a transparent acrylic or glass plate that is coated with a holographic
film, such that it only diffuses light projected from a 35º
angle. The viewer sees only the areas of the screen where
objects and light is projected. The result is a bright and
clear image apparently floating in air, although no walkthrough is possible. It is used as an eye-catcher in window exhibitions etc. The screen is only 2D, but it can give a sort of a mid-air effect. Some examples of the many
screen brands are dnp Holo Screen [35] and HoloClear
[36] . Impressive setups like Virgin digital launch [37]
can be created. If well done, it appears to the audience
that the projected objects look “real”.
Cheoptics [38] seems to be a variant of the transparent screens in a slightly different, upside down pyramid
construction. It can show images apparently floating in
thin air, but again, the glasses are not penetrable or accessible, and the whole construction takes a lot of space.
All these setups are not really mid-air displays, even
though they seem like that from afar. If the true mid-air
effect is not important and if well implemented, these
projection screens could create the mid-air effect of Princess Leia without a visible screen.

3.8. Immaterial displays
To be exact, there is no such thing as immaterial display, as some medium is always needed, be it air, dust,
gaseous or liquid particles or anything. However, this
category refers to non-solid displays and it seems a good
candidate for realizing Princess Leia and other effects.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

3.8.1. Water, smoke and fog screens
There are numerous projection screens using water,
smoke, fog or cryofog. The earliest example is the Ornamental Fountain [39] dating back to the end of the 19th
century. More recently, water screen shows such as
Aquatique Show [40] , Jeep Waterfall [41] and Disney’s
Fantasmic [42] spray sheets of freely flowing or high-velocity water to create impressive screens for large audience. The magnitude and wetness of these screens make
them impractical for indoor or small-scale applications,
as well as preclude the viewers from comfortably passing
through the screen and seeing clear images from short
distances. However, many of these water screens may be
large and look good if viewed from afar and on-axis.
Many primitive fog screen systems [43] [44] have
been used in art and entertainment, but the fidelity of the
projected images is low. This is caused by rapid dispersion of the fog due to friction and dynamic pressure difference in the flow, which disrupts the desired smooth
planar surface, causing severe distortions in the image, as
projected light smears and streaks into lines.
Very charming experimental systems like soap bubbles [45] , volumetric water display [54] and water domes [46] have been presented. However, none of these
non-solid screens can reproduce the Star Wars displays.

3.8.2. The FogScreen™ technology
The FogScreen [47] [48] [49] creates a walk-through
image floating in thin air and encourages the audience to
play with it. The patented FogScreen™ employs a large
non-turbulent airflow to protect a dry fog flow inside it
from turbulence. The wide outer airflow may get slightly
turbulent, but it is not visible. The inner fog layer thus remains thin and crisp, enabling high-quality projections
and the walk-through possibility. The image quality is
significantly better than with any previous methods. It is
the optimal method for high-quality particle screens.
The FogScreen devices create a one or two meter
wide projection screen and several units can also be linked seamlessly together. The fog flow gets more turbulent
further away from the device, but the screen stays usable
at least for the typical 4:3 screen ratio.
The FogScreen works very much like an ordinary
screen in terms of projection properties. Back-projection
is recommended, as it produces much higher brightness
than front-projection. This enables also to project different images on both sides without interfering each other,
as the majority of light is dispersed in forward direction
by the fog droplets. As the screen is slightly translucent,
the projector should be brighter than normally.
By adjusting the fog density, the screen can be made
almost opaque, or nearly fully transparent, in which case
only the bright objects are visible, as in Figures 1 and 2.
The images appear as if they are floating in mid-air. This
can be improved even further if projector’s contrast is
high and ambient light is low. The FogScreen can be
used in highly lit environments like trade shows and ex-

hibitions. In dark the effect is magical. A dark background drape is recommended for better effect.
The projected images on the FogScreen look the best
on-axis, but the screen is usable in almost all off-axis
directions. Only if viewed from a very large angle, the
adjacent pixels get increasingly mixed with each other
and thus the image gets a little blurry, as the screen’s
thickness is not infinitely thin.

screen can’t pass light in a tightly directed manner. The
light scatters to all directions.
Often the users want to interact with the displayed
objects, not just to view them. The permeability of the
FogScreen enables new imaging, visualization and interaction possibilities. Individual views for different users
can also be maintained.
The FogScreen can realize the Princess Leia effect
with side-projection very well, but bottom-projection is
not possible, as it is parallel to the screen. It can also be
used to create the other mid-air effects limitedly with
custom constructions, but those are not very general or
simple solutions.

4. When will mid-air displays hit the
mainstream?

Figure 1 The FogScreen mid-air display with
stereoscopy (here with ChromaDepth).
The fog is made of water, and no chemicals are
used. Water is broken into tiny fog particles so that they
appear to be very dry and soon evaporate to air. Also any
other particles that reflect or emit light can be used. For
laser projections with haze on air it can create a 2D
vertical walk-through screen in addition to the 3D rays
emanating from the laser.
The FogScreen has been used in entertainment, theme parks, science museums and to promote movies like
Harry Potter and Disney’s Enchanted. It has also been in
live TV shows and in an episode of Stargate™ sci-fi series. Recently it was featured on the Discovery Channel’s
future documentary “2057”. It is an obvious candidate to
realize many of the Star Wars mid-air displays.

Figure 2 A 3D model of hand bones on the midair FogScreen.
Pseudo-3D, virtual reality and stereoscopy with the
FogScreen is possible [50] as also seen in Figures 1 and
2. However, autostereoscopy is not possible, as the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Mid-air displays could revolutionize application
areas such as CAD, data visualization, digital signage,
tele-presence, simulation and entertainment. These displays enable a user to investigate, try out scenarios and
search the information and visual space to develop a better understanding of the underlying information.
Most consumers have not seen any kind of a modern
3D display, but they expect mid-air displays soon to
emerge, as they have already seen them in the movies
many decades ago. The expectations may be too high.
An orthodox “floating mid-air 3D holographic freespace projection” or the ultimate 3D “Holodeck” display
of Star Trek may never be possible [8] . It is not either
required. If we set our goal much lower, into the mediocre Star Wars mid-air display, it becomes much more
feasible. Perhaps the most important factor for the 3D or
mid-air effect is the user’s attitude, not technical high
fidelity. A good novel can be more “immersive” than
poor content with a high-end virtual reality system. Even
if we had 900 gigavoxels in mid-air, we still might have
nothing to watch (c.f., current hundreds of TV channels).
Just as an ordinary PAL or NTSC image does a reasonable job for television and contemporary applications,
so also must 3D or mid-air displays provide reasonably
priced, yet not necessarily perfect displays. Even though
the human eye is delicately and meticulously designed,
our visual system has some perceptual shortcomings
which can be taken advantage of. Many tricks and approximations can, and must be used in order to massproduce mid-air displays for general use. Even shortcut
technologies can amaze the audiences and make them
believe they are seeing magic. After all, it is the effect
what counts, not how it is done.
For any technology to penetrate the markets, most
importantly there are many non-technical issues to consider. Issues like revenue, marketing, early adaptors, consumer needs and acceptance, IPR, backward compatibility, price, timing, luck, etc. are paramount.
Why would anyone want to have a floating display?
It may be cool, but few want to pay a lot of money for it.
Currently the price is beyond reach of most consumers,
and there is very little ready-made content available.
With mass production, the situation may change.

Star Wars displays can be simulated and imitated
with many kinds of 3D, volumetric and other displays
and tricks. There are hundreds of various mid-air and 3D
display technologies and special effects, but very few
commercially successful products, and only few of them
will be commercially available for longer periods of
time. Previous attempts to market them have failed to
catch on. Most of the novel 3D display technologies are
still immature, and their use is currently limited to
special purposes and niche markets. Also no single approach is likely to dominate. The applied technology will
largely depend on the application. Mid-air displays can’t
be used e.g., for text processing.
Jepsen argues that the ultimate display is simply the
most feasible and suitable display for the job at hand and
can be manufactured [51] . She also notes that in the past
40 years, the display industry has only moved from CRT
to LCD. Historically, it takes a long time for a new display technology to mature and to get into wide usage. As
Jepsen says: “it is difficult for a company to stay in business if it has to wait 20 years to start making money”.
Display research is going on in a large number of
universities and companies. To promote the advance of
3D technologies, there are also many initiatives like 3D
Consortium, US Display consortium, 3DTV projects etc.
There is only place on the market for displays where
a demand meets a price. The price of mainstream 3D or
mid-air displays is an important factor and has to reach
affordable levels for customers. Any new technology is
initially expensive then gradually becomes affordable
and available. Eventually the production volumes may
become huge, so 3D displays have an enormous market
potential, but it takes time.
There is demand and the market is growing [52] .
Some predictions estimate that within 2-5 years, the 3D
display market will be $1 or even $10 billion [9] . Most
3D displays described here are prohibitively expensive,
but prices will become lower if produced by the millions.
They will ultimately get their hefty share of the huge
display market, which is currently about $100 billion!

Conclusions
We have shortly compared to what extent the existing displays match with some of the mid-air displays
seen in the Star Wars movies. We have described the
feasibility of mid-air Star Wars displays.
The closest to Star Wars mid-air displays in terms of
the essential reach-through, mid-air effect is the immaterial FogScreen technology. Princess Leia effect with
side-projection is trivial to implement. Bottom-projection
would be problematic and large surrounding mid-air displays covering the whole room are not possible with it.
Limitedly the mid-air visualization table and outdoor advertisements could be created. In many aspects, the FogScreen seems to be a short-cut technology to create a
“holographic”, Star Wars-like mid-air display.
It reach-through is not essential and just the visual
mid-air effect is enough, then other candidates include
obtrusive and non-mid-air technologies like spatially im-

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

mersive displays for surrounding projections, and some
volumetric or floating image displays and transparent
projection screens for limited illusions of mid-air effects.
All the presented approaches have their strengths
and weaknesses, and consumer demand, price, manufacturability and other practical issues will have a paramount impact on the emergence of mid-air displays. No
current technology is yet on a mature Star Wars level in
all aspects. Some of the displays can be implemented
with current technology, some others not. However, there are still a couple of centuries of time to develop them,
before the era shown in the Star Wars movies is at hand.

Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the EC within FP6 under
Grant 511568 with the acronym 3DTV, and by the Academy of Finland under Grant 114006.

References
All the web links checked on April 2007.
[1] R. Highfield. The Science of Harry Potter: How Magic
Really Works. New York, NY, USA. Penguin. 2003.
[2] C. Wheatstone. On Some Remarkable, and Hitherto Unobserved, Phenomena of Binocular Vision. In Philosoph.
Transact. Royal Soc. of London. vol. 11, 371-394. 1838.
[3] T. Fernando, N. Murray, G. Gautier, S. Mihindu, K. Loupos, P. Gravez, H. Hoffmann, J. Blondelle, S. Di Marca,
M. Fontana, W. Cellary, R. Aked, C. Garcia-Berdones,
A. Reyes-Lecuona, M. Marin, J. Perez, M. Fabbri, D.
Lichau. State-of-the-art in VR. Technical report, Intuition project. http://www.intuition-eunetwork.net/.
[4] J.-Y. Son, B. Javidi, K. Kae-Dal. Methods for displaying
three-dimensional images. In Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 94, no. 3, 502-523. March 2006.
[5] S. Pastoor, M. Wopking. 3-D displays: A review of current technologies. In Displays, vol. 17, no. 2, 100-110.
April 1997.
[6] M. Halle. Autostereoscopic displays and computer
graphics. In Computer Graphics, ACM SIGGRAPH,
31(2), May 1997, 58-62.
[7] T. Ni, G. Schmidt, O. Staadt, M. Livingston, R. Ball, R.
May. A Survey of Large High-Resolution Display Technologies, Techniques, and Applications. In IEEE Virtual
Reality Conference 2006, 223-236. March 2006.
[8] D. Hopper. Reality and Surreality of 3-D Displays: Holodeck and Beyond, http://www.hec.afrl.af.mil/publications
/ASC_00_2307.pdf, November 2000.
[9] L. Hill, A. Jacobs. 3-D liquid crystal displays and their
applications. In Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 94, no. 3,
575-590. March 2006.
[10] B. Delaney. Forget the funny glasses. In IEEE Computer
Graphics and Appl. vol. 25, no. 3, 14-19. May-Jun 2005.
[11] Infitec GmbH. Infitec filters. http://www.infitec.net/.
[12] M. Bailey, D. Clark. Using ChromaDepth to obtain inexpensive single-image stereovision for scientific visualization. In Journal of Graphics Tools, 1998, 3(3), 1-9.
[13] F. Ives. Parallax stereogram and process of making same.
U.S. patent 725567. April 14, 1903.
[14] N. Dodgson. Autostereoscopic 3D Displays. In IEEE
Computer, vol. 38, no. 8, 31-36. August 2005.

[15] I. Sutherland. The Ultimate Display. In Proceedings IFIP
Congress 1965, vol. 2, 506-508.
[16] I. Sutherland. A Head-mounted Three-dimensional Display. In Proceedings of Fall Joint Computer Conference
1968, AFIPS Conference Proceedings, Thompson Books,
Washington, D.C., vol. 3, 757-764.
[17] R. Azuma, Y. Baillot, R. Behringer, S. Feiner, S. Julier,
B. MacIntyre. Recent Advances in Augmented Reality.
In IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 25(6), 2435, Nov-Dec. 2001.
[18] G. Favalora. Volumetric 3D Displays and Application
Infrastructure. In IEEE Computer, vol. 38, no. 8, 37-44.
August 2005.
[19] Holoverse Inc. HVI. http://www.holoverse.com/.
[20] Actuality Systems. http://www.actuality-systems.com/
[21] S. Tachi, N. Kawakami, T. Yendo. SeeLINDER: The
Cylindrical Lightfield Display. In ACM SIGGRAPH
2005 Emerging Technologies, 15. July-August 2005.
[22] K. Tanaka, J. Hayashi, M. Inami, S. Tachi. TWISTER:
an immersive autostereoscopic display. In Proceedings
IEEE Virtual Reality 2004. 58-66. March 2004.
[23] LightSpace DepthCube. http://www.lightspacetech.com/.
[24] D. Ebert, E. Bedwell, S. Maher, L. Smoliar, E. Downing.
Realizing 3D visualization using crossed-beam volumetric displays. In Communications of the ACM, vol. 42, no.
8, 100-107. August 1999.
[25] solid FELIX. http://www.felix3d.com/all_index.php?url=
english_solidfelix.html.
[26] 3D Technology Laboratories Inc. http://www.3dtl.com/.
[27] K. Perlin, J. Han. Volumetric display with dust as the
participating medium. U.S. pat. 6997558. Feb. 14, 2006.
[28] Northrop Grumman. TerrainTable,
http://www.ms.northropgrumman.com/touchtable/.
[29] G. Liljegren, E. Foster. Figure with back projected image
using fiber optics. U.S. patent 4978216. Dec. 18, 1990.
[30] O. Bimber. Combining optical holograms with interactive computer graphics. In IEEE Computer. vol. 37, no. 1,
85-91. Jan. 2004.
[31] C. Slinger, C. Cameron, M. Stanley. Computer-Generated Holography as a Generic Display Technology. IEEE
Computer, vol. 38, no. 8, 46-53. August 2005.
[32] R. Raskar, G. Welch, H. Fuchs. Spatially Augmented
Reality. In First IEEE Workshop on Augmented Reality
(IWAR’98), 1998.
[33] O. Bimber, R. Raskar. Spatial Augmented Reality: Merging Real and Virtual Worlds. Wellesley, MA, USA. A K
Peters. 2005.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[34] H. Kimura, T. Uchiyama, S. Shimada. True 3D Display
Using Laser Plasma in the Air. In ACM SIGGRAPH
2006 Emerging Technologies. July-August 2006.
[35] dnp Holo Screen. DNP. http://www.dnp.dk/. Mar. 2007.
[36] HoloClear. HoloDisplays. http://www.holodisplays.com/.
[37] Dimensional Studios Ltd. http://www.eyeliner3d.com/.
[38] Cheoptics 360. http://www.cheoptics360.dk/.
[39] P.C. Just. Ornamental fountain. U.S. patent 620592.
March 1899.
[40] Aquatique Show. http://www.aquatic-show.com/.
[41] Jeep Waterfall.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z2LUz2WVcek.
[42] Fantasmic show. Disney Inc. http://disneyworld.disney.
go.com/wdw/entertainment/entertainmentDetail?id=Fant
asmicEntertainmentPage.
[43] Desert Rain. http://www.crg.cs.nott.ac.uk/events/rain/.
[44] Mee Fog Inc. http://www.meefog.com/.
[45] M. Nakamura, G. Inaba, J. Tamaoki, K. Shiratori, J. Hoshino. Mounting and application of bubble display system: bubble cosmos. In Proc. 2006 ACM SIGCHI Advances in computer entertainment technology, June 2006.
[46] Y. Sugihara, S. Tachi. Water Dome - An Augmented Environment. In Proc. of the Information Visualization
Conference, 548-553. July 2000.
[47] K. Palovuori, I. Rakkolainen. Method and apparatus for
forming a projection screen or a projection volume. U.S.
patent 6819487. November 16, 2004.
[48] I. Rakkolainen, K. Palovuori. A Walk-thru Screen. In
Proc. of Conference on Projection Displays VIII, IS&T /
SPIE Electronic Imaging 2002, 17-22. January 2002.
[49] FogScreen Inc. http://www.fogscreen.com.
[50] S. DiVerdi, I. Rakkolainen, T. Höllerer, A. Olwal. A
Novel Walk-through 3D Display. In Proc. SPIE Electronic Imaging, Stereoscopic Displays and Virtual Reality
Systems XIII. SPIE vol. 6055, 1–10. January 2006.
[51] M. Jepsen. Smoke, mirrors, and manufacturable displays.
In IEEE Computer, vol. 38, no. 8, 63-67. August 2005.
[52] Insight Media. 3D Technology and Markets; A Study of
All Aspects of Electronic 3D Systems, Applications and
Markets. March 2007.
[53] M. Schmitz, Human Computer Interaction in Science
Fiction Movies. http://w5.cs.uni-sb.de/~butz/teaching/iess03/papers/HCIinSF/. April 2007.
[54] S. Eitoku, T. Tanikawa, Y. Suzuki, K. Hirota, T. Iwai,
M. Hirose. Display Composed of Water Drops for Filling
Space with Materialized Virtual Three-dimensional Objects. In Proc. of IEEE VR 2006, 159-166, March 2006.

