Visualising Australian Indigenous Knowledge Practices Using The Game Engine
Theodor G Wyeld
{theodor.wyeld@adelaide.edu.au}

Keynote Abstract
Traditional perceptions about how to represent
cultural knowledge differ from region to region: India
has its isometric representation for which a convention
exists within a regional practice for its interpretation;
China adopts a similar technique in the form of a scroll,
which is as much about describing a story with visual
clues as it is about depicting a real scene; Japan extends
the Chinese scroll by adapting it to an unfolding screen.
In so doing, it gains both literal and metaphorical depth;
the Mesoamerican (Aztec, Mayan, and Incan)
communicates space of cosmic scale in the form of
elaborate two-dimensional chartings or mappings
completely filling the surface they are applied to; the
ritualistic art of indigenous Africans and Oceania
communicates their cultural narratives through carvings,
weavings, assemblages, ceremonies, song, dance, and so
on; and, in a similar manner, Australian Aborigines hold
memories in a virtual space described through abstract
sand paintings, dance and song. With few material
possessions and no written language, Australia’s
Aborigines impart their subconscious ethereal landscapes
by projecting them onto the physical world. Despite
being far from an exhaustive overview, and an over
generalisation of culturally alternate knowledge
representation, what could we (in the West) learn from
these diverse methods? Few are offered by the literature
on knowledge representation. Most discussion is
primarily from a narrow ontological point of view which
tends to facilitate the perpetuation of popular
understandings of the universality of visual media in the
West. Today, the sheer ubiquity of mainstream
(technologically processed) imagery threatens to
homogenise global visual communication.
A brief survey of contemporary versions of
traditional
indigenous
tangible
knowledge
representational forms suggests there has been a subtle
shift
from
three-dimensional,
tactile,
haptic,
representations – carving, impressions in sand, elaborate
weavings, assemblages, castings, masks – to twodimensional or flattened, printed, photographed, dyedon-cloth versions more easily sold to collectors, tourists,
museums, researchers and so on. This reflects the West’s
inherent reliance on two-dimensional recording media –
TV, print, film and so on.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Despite Gombrich’s [1] assertions that modern
methods of reproduction dilute the distinction between
sacred images and real things, ethnographic analyses of
the contemporary media transition of ritualistic imagery
from three-dimensional to flattened two-dimensional
suggests their underlying meanings may be retained. For
example, Inglis [2] claims, while India’s isometric
ritualistic imagery, particularly of ‘god pictures’ used for
worship, have been replaced by more realistic
chiaroscuro versions, their spiritual purpose remains;
similarly, the shift in traditional African sculpture motifs
to their contemporary production as wax-resistant dyed
batik cloths for the Western market still communicates
messages about their underlying cultural practices [3];
and, Aboriginal sand painting (similar in purpose to the
Hindu and Buddhist sand mandalas) was transferred to
paint on board in the 1970’s in response to the need for a
more permanent record. With clear organising strategies,
the impressions in sand map topological landscape
features, which can be loosely likened to an aerial view.
As a cultural ‘style’, these spatial narratives seem to have
survived the transition to a more permanent medium.
Whether they have lost their original, ceremonial,
spiritual, ritualistic, transitory, ethereal meanings
remains problematic, however [4].
Typically these ethnographic analyses of traditional
knowledge representation base their assumptions on
identifying the semantic information available (logical,
structured, enunciable, translatable). However, while
semantic information helps us to understand forms we
are not familiar with, it does not help us to appreciate its
aesthetic meanings, which are generally untranslatable
[5]. Indeed, in his Structure of Anthropology, LeviStrauss [6] draws a line between semantic and aesthetic
analysis. Semantic analysis, he claims, has to do with the
translatable relations between the perceptual signs that a
particular culture may give symbolic value – simply
relying on a cathartic response. Aesthetic analysis, on the
other hand, has no clearly identifiable semantic value.
Such a formulation is only tenable when we assign
semantic value to the representative form’s
translatability. According to Arnheim [7], however, the
translatability of these forms is a function of the aesthetic
education of the perceiver. Despite these hermeneutical
approaches to the study of ritualistic knowledge
representational forms – what the ideological meaning of
ritual symbols ‘stand for’ – there remains much which

simply can not be translated. Nevertheless, the
contribution the traditional custodians of these forms
make to the translatability of their aesthetic artefacts is
their ability to articulate and transfer their own cultural
practices to others [5]. It is only when the conventions
used to express these knowledge systems are
untranslatable that we find the need to learn their cultural
specificities. As with all conventions, once achieved,
such “confections make reading and seeing and thinking
identical” [8].
In this sense, we have much to learn. The
iconographic communications of world Indigenous
peoples predate the Western realist imagery that emerged
from the European Renaissance, by millennia. Yet it
continues to talk across the aeons uninterrupted. Its
messages, once decoded, are clear, concise, and
complex. In our hastening march towards greater
understanding of our own, technologically-mediated,
cultural practices we invent new ways to visualise their
complexities. It is debatable, however, how successful
many of these schemas will continue to be.
Perhaps the encodings of indigenous iconography –
at the same time mapping space, knowledge and
emotions – will provide a new medium for exploration.
This is not an easy path to follow, however. There are
many sensitivities to be observed. And there will be
some codes that can never be revealed as they are too
sacred to those who hold the key to their understanding.
Despite this, much can be gained from stepping outside
the prevailing paradigm, suspending one’s beliefs and
learning anew what has been know and transferred
across the generations as a human condition – to use
visual, haptic and other tools to exchange knowledge.
For the Australian Aboriginal, the embedding of
their cultural knowledge in its country of origin is
paramount. The increased accessibility of the 3D game
engine provides a platform for sharing of their cultural
knowledge embedded in a simulation of its country of

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

origin. As such, this talk addresses the communicating of
Australian Indigenous knowledge practices using a 3D
game engine. It provides an overview background of
Australian Aboriginal cultural heritage and how it has
been traditionally articulated; the embedding of
storytelling as a knowledge exchange medium in
‘country’ (sacred and spiritual lands) re-presented in a
game engine; and, notions of the efficacies of this
method as a knowledge visualisation schema that has
application in other fields. It will address some of the
more inaccessible questions raised as key challenges for
information visualisation in general.

References
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

Gombrich, E. H., 2000, Art and Illusion: A Study in the
Psychology of Pictorial Representation, Princeton
University Press, Princeton and Oxford.
Inglis, S. R., 1999, “Master, Machine, and Meaning:
Printed Images in Twentieth-Century India”, in
Unpacking Culture : Art and Commodity in Colonial and
Postcolonial Worlds, (eds.) Phillips, R. B. and Steiner,
C. B., University of California Press, Berkeley.
Willett, F., 2002, African Art, Thames & Hudson,
London.
Bardon, G., 1979, Aboriginal Art of the Western Desert,
Rigby, Adelaide, Australia.
Schwimmer, E., 1990, “The Anthropology of the Ritual
Arts”, in Art and Identity in Oceania, (eds.) Hanson, A.
and Hanson, L., Crawford House Press, Bathurst,
Australia.
Levi-Strauss, C., 1983, Structural Anthropology, (trans.)
Layton, M., University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill.
Arnheim, R., 1974, Art and Visual Perception : A
Psychology of the Creative Eye, University of California
Press, Berkeley.
Tufte, E. R., 2002, Visual Explanations, second edition,
Graphics Press, Cheshire, Connecticut.

