Analyzing a Digital Image in a Way that is Useful to a Student of Art.
Martin Constable
Prof. of Digital Painting
School of Art Design and Media
Nanyang Technological University
65 6316 8729

mconstable@ntu.edu.sg
Keywords: Digital painting, oil painting, image analysis,
Photoshop, old master, Hue, Saturation, Color, Tone, Art.

1. ABSTRACT.
When traditional artists are painting they will often look at their
work in a dark room (or sometimes by candle light). This filters
out most of detail information (which our eyes don't perceive
well in the dark) and also removes the color from an image. The
artist is then free to asses the paintings all-important tonal
structure as well as it's large masses.
There are many such tricks in the artist's lexicon and they all
serve to provide valuable feedback to the many complex
structures that underpin a manufactured image. This feedback is
especially useful to the student who is needful of an impartial
reflection upon their progress.
What are the equivalents to such tricks in digital practice? What
unique visual feedback do they offer and how can it be used?

2.2 Tone.
2.2.1 Overview
A crude way to imagine the place of tone in an image is as a
skeleton onto which the color is hung. Though this does quite
do justice to the reality of the situation, it nonetheless
demonstrates the importance of considering tone and color
separately. There were many ways that a traditional painter
does this. Besides looking at it in a dark room they would also
use something called a Claude glass.
A Claude glass is a device that does not see much use
nowadays. It is a mechanical device designed to simulate the
blurring typical of the French artist Claude (figure 1). 1
Variants of the Claude glass could tint an image, through the
use of colored or smoked glass. Old time directors of black and
white films used to sometimes check their shots by looking at
them through a sheet of colored glass. Both of these devices
would give a fair approximation of it's tonal values separate
from it's color values.

2. THE TECHNIQUES.
2.1 The Fresh Look.
When an artist, in the process of making a painting, looks at
that painting in a mirror one of the things they are looking for
is balance. In the course of it’s manufacture the geometry of a
painting may stray off-balance, but so slowly as to miss the
painter’s notice. Seeing the image in the mirror refreshes the
artist’s perceptions, enabling them to see the image with new
eyes.
This ‘fresh look’ is very important to the artist. I was once
phoned up by a painter (with whom I shared a studio) who
asked me to climb into his studio space and to turn to the wall
the painting he had left facing out after a hard night's work.
This was so that when he came into the studio the following
morning he could make his coffee, prepare his paints and only
look at the painting when he was mentally prepared for it. The
'shock' of seeing the painting freshly after an extended break
was what my friend was looking for.
There is no digital equivalent (that I know of) for a good nights
rest and a cup of coffee. However there are many digital
equivalents for looking at it in a mirror. An image can easily be
flipped in Photoshop using the Transform command (Command
T) and then selecting Flip Horizontal from the Contextual
menu. I tell my students not consider a digital painting
complete until they have done this at least three or four times.
Something as basic as stepping back from a painting is not
without it's sophisticated variants. Painters often keep cameras
or binoculars in their studios so that by looking through the
wrong end of the viewfinder or optic they can see their painting
as a tiny little image.
In Photoshop we can easily use the zoom tool (or it's keyboard
equivalent Command +) to supply us with a very small version
of the original.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 1: Claude Glassi.
We are all familiar with the histogram and how it can present to
us a map of the tone distribution within an image, but this does
little to inform us as to what is happening with tone specific to
the visual dynamics of the image.
Key to such an understanding is three tone specification. We
ideally need a good idea of where the darks, middles and lights
of an image are.

2.2.2 Tone Separation Technique 1: One Pass.
Photoshop offers us the Posterize Adjustment whose job it is to
simplify the tones into as many clear bands as are specified.
However, it will not do a tonal separation until you first
normalize all color information (i.e. turn the image into a grey
scale one).
On a target image (figure 2) we first de-saturate using the Hue
Saturation adjustment (figure 3). We follow this with a
Posterize set to three levels (figure 4). We can see it’s effects
1

A cheap Claude glass can be faked by smearing some
Vaseline on a small sheet of glass.

clearly with the light, middle and dark areas clearly visible as
three separate elements.

Figure 5: Rembrandt, Self Portrait, 1629.

2.2.3 Tone Separation Technique 2: Three Passes.

Figure 2: The target image (digital painting 1).

The tonal distribution of this Rembrandt painting can be more
easily seen if the three tones are separated into different passes
(figure 6). Each tone has been separated from the other and
mapped as a white value. See how it’s three tonal components,
though different to the actual painting, compliment it. The light
values are centered and focused, whilst the middle values and
dark values seem to mirror each other.

Figure 6: The three tones separated (from left: light, middle
then dark).

Figure 3: Image plus de-saturation.

This mapping was done using a different technique to the one
already described. First a new layer was made above the image.
That layer was filled with black and it's Blend If values in the
Layer Styles dialogue box were adjusted to match the following
(table 1).
Table 1: Tone map 'Blend If' values.

Light tones.
Middle tones.
Dark tones.

White point slider
position
170
85
0

Black point slider
position
0
170
85

Here (figures 7, 8 & 9) are those values as seen in the Layer
Effects > Blend If dialogue box. Note the way the black and
white sliders 'cross over' for the middle tones.

Figure 4: Final three level posterize.

Figure 7: Light tone 'Blend If' values.

Similar tonal organization can be seen in this Rembrandt self
portrait (figure 5).

Figure 8: Middle tone 'Blend If' values.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 9: Dark tone 'Blend If' values.
This was the resultant image (figure 10).

Figure 12: Upper tone clipping.
This curve is a bit difficult to see so in figure 13 the curve
progress has been clarified with a red line.
Figure 10: Three tone separation.
As you can see the tones have now become separated from each
other but it would be more useful if they were visible as white
values. In order to do this it is required that all non black values
be forced to white. In effect this is a Posterization, but not one
that can be done with a Posterize Adjustment.
Why not? Let us first ask what a Posterize is. The 'narative' of a
three level Posterize is that all the tones of an image below the
value of 85 are forced to zero, all the values between 85 and
170 are forced to 127.5 and all the values above 170 are forced
to 255.
These values, if put into a curve, would look like this (figure
11).
This curve is essentially fictional (it was 'photoshopped') as
Photoshop offers no reliable way to make such curves. This is
because the points on the curve can not be set to 'step' but will
always default to spline curve2.

Figure 13: Upper tone clipping: clarified.
Such extreme curves are a bit tricky to achieve in Photoshop.
To make them it is necessary to play with the Edit Mode
(figures 14 and 15). If the black point is first set to zero using
the default Adding Points edit mode (figure 14) this will
convert all the tones in the image to black.

Figure 14: Adding point edit mode.
If the mode is then changed to drawing (figure 15) a line can
then be drawn to 'clip' the upper or lower tones. Middle tone
clipping (i.e. a curve that 'bumps' in the middle) is possible but
fiddly.

Figure 11: Three Leval Posterize expressed as a curve.
Figure 15: Drawing edit mode.
We require a curve like the one in figure 12.
The resultant posterize will force all non black values to white.
2

A point on a curve whose input mirrors it's output. This
produces a smooth, even curve with no hard points. Stepped
curves are easy to produce in Apple's Shake. This might be
something that would be useful to implement in some future
version of Photoshop.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

2.2.4 Tone Separation Technique 3: Relative
Values.
It is not very representative to test such a tone seperation
technique on a Rembrandt painting. He was an artist famous for
having at least one white point and one black point in a painting
and a fair distribution of tones between those points.

Many things in painting are relative. When a painter is judging
the tone of an area they are not asking ‘how dark that area is’
but ‘how much darker is that area than this other area’. This is
crucial and at the heart of tonal production.

image. To activate it, drag the black or white point slider whilst
holding down the Option key.

For this reason the Posterize technique is not so useful on this
painting by Gwen John (figure 16). Technique 1 applied to the
image (figure 17) does not do justice to the organization behind
it's tone values.

Figure 19: Clipping display in Levels Adjustment.

Figure 16: Gwen John, The Convalescent, 1923-4

This feedback disappears when we release the option key but a
permanent version can be had using an adapted application of
the Blend If method already described. Instead of using
absolute values we target visually the darkest and lightest point
using the blend if sliders (figure 20). This subjective method
give us much truer feedback of the painting's tonal structure
(figure 21). See how the whiteness of the cup and the darkness
of the hair are now more apparent as being the darkest and
lightest points of the image.

Figure 20: Blend If subjective tone settings.
These particular settings give us a two tone separation with the
subjective darks and lights set against a neutral grey (grey Lab
values = 50, 0, 0). Unfortunately, due to the low tone values of
the original image, the result is rather hard to make out (figure
21). It would be better if we could force the darker tones to
black and the lighter ones to white. How do we do this?
Figure 17: Absolute three level posterize.
The reason for this is that in painting the portrait Gwen John
gauged her tones in relation to each other using dark grey (not
black) as her darkest point and light grey (not white) as her
lightest point (figure 18).

Figure 21: Subjective three level separation
Figure 18: Relative luminance range of a Rembrandt
painting and a Gwen John painting (aprox).
We therefore need a relative not absolute way of mapping out
tones. In other words we do not need it’s black and white points
but it’s darkest and lightest points.
Using the clipping display on the Levels Adjustment (figure 19)
we can get feedback on the dark and light tonal extremes of an

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

We can, if we want, use a set of curves to posterize the tones
into the values we want. However, it is easier and more elegant
to yet again adapt the Blend If technique to our needs. To force
the darks to black first make a new black layer and set it's Blend
If White Point slider to the same value that the black point
slider was in the previous layer (in this case 100). This forces
all values higher than 100 to black. Do the same with a white

layer (Blend If Black Point slider to 210) and you have this
(figure 22).

A three level Posterize (figure 24) shows us that most of the
image is of a middle tone and that the darks are concentrated in
the centre whilst the lights are round the outside. This, on it's
own, is interesting. This tonal structure is opposite to the usual
old master way of doing things (with lights in the middle of a
dark 'vista').

Figure 22: Subjective three level separation forced
black/white.

2.2.5 Tone Separation Summary.
So we have seen tonal Posterization achieved using three
different methods:
1.

De-Saturate using Hue-Saturation adjustment followed
by the Posterize Adjustment.

2.

A black layer with it's Blend If in Layer Effects adjusted
then (to force the whites) a Curves Adjustment on top.

3.

Blend If in Layer Effects then (to force the blacks and
whites) two another Blend Ifs in Layer Effects.

Figure 24: Three level posterize.
However, the real structure of the image is only visible when
we map out the most saturated areas as white with the least
saturated areas as black (figure 25). We can see that the centre
of attention is the highly saturated sun with an interesting
saturation play within the clouds.

In the days before the digital there was no way a traditional
painter could get such accurate feedback on their tone. This was
offset somewhat by the fact that the darkest and lightest areas of
a painting were usually applied only when the rest of the
painting had completely dried. This was because wet oil paint
tended to ‘leach out’ pure whites and blacks. Their separate
application meant that the darkest and lightest points usually
received careful consideration.
However, one thing that painters could never have even
dreamed of was a saturation map.

2.3 Saturation Map.
Saturation is easy to confuse with tone. Students are always
describing highly saturated colors as being 'bright'. In order to
master them we must think of these values (tone and saturation)
as being completely separate. To demonstrate here is a painting
by Claude Monet (figure 23).

Figure 25: Saturation map.
The easiest way to make a saturation map is to tell Photoshop to
convert all tones of the image into black and all colors into
white. This can be done via the Selective Color adjustment. Set
the Black values of Red, Yellow, Green, Cyan Blue and
Magenta to -100 and the Black values of Whites, Neutrals and
Blacks to +100.
The tone structure of this digital painting (figures 26 and 27) is
very simple: just a light thing inside a dark area.

Figure 23: Claude Monet, Impression: Sunrise, 1893.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

2.4 Color.
So we can map tone and color saturation. But what visual
feedback can we get of color itself? If we open Photoshop's
Color pallet (figure 29) we see that it offers a range ways to
change any selected color. Each model corresponds with a
Color Mode. A color mode is a method of encoding the color
in an image according to how it is stored in it's channels. Hence
RGB mode will have Red, Green and Blue channels and
CMYK will have Cyan, Magenta, Yellow and Black channels.

Figure 26: Digital painting 2.

Figure 29: Photoshop's Color Pallet.
However one can manipulate any given color using any of these
color models. Lets assume that you are working on a document
which is in RGB color mode.
Figure 27: Three level posterize.
However, it's saturation map (figure 28) shows us the
complexity of the saturation values. It is these values that is
responsible for the rich 'flicker' of the image.

RGB (Red, Green and Blue) is 'native' to your document, but
this is almost irrelevant. It is very un-intuitive (how much sense
to it make to turn a red into an orange by increasing it's green?)
however some knowledge of how it works is necessary if you
want to make any channel specific changes.
Lab (Lightness, a and b channel) has a reputation of being
optically perfect but only a handful of people in the entire world
seem to understand it and could never be an intuitive part of the
digital painters life.
CMYK (Cyan, Magenta, Yellow and Black) is interesting. It
came from the printing world but it has it's roots in the artists
color pallet: Blue, Red, Yellow, Black and White (white is
assumed to be supplied by the white of the paper). However, in
practice it is unwieldy and difficult to use.
HSB (Hue, Saturation and Brilliance) has the edge on all of
these. Using these three components you can neatly and
intuitively 'conceive' any color change you wish to apply.
The Saturation and Tone mapping that we have already covered
correspond neatly to the S and B components of HSB (i.e. the
Saturation and Brilliance). But what of Hue?
Hue is essentially the 'what color is this' component of a color.
But it is very different to the Saturation and Brilliance
components. Look at your HSB pallet. See how the S and B
sliders are ramps between two extremes. In contrast the H
slider is a veritable madness of variance. How can we get a
conceptual handle on it?

Figure 28: Saturation map.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Lets take this painting by John Constable (figure 30). Typical of
most Constable paintings (in fact of most landscape painting in

general) there is an isolated red component in the middle of all
that green.

Figure 33: Selective Color Adjustment.
Figure 30: John Constable, The White Horse, 1819
Place first a Hue Saturation adjustment layer above your image
and boost the Saturation all the way to the left (figure 31).

The painting will now look like this (figure 34). All it's colors
will have been isolated and enhanced. We can see clearly now
two patches of warm red on the far left and the left centre of the
painting. The muddy green has become a yellow with shadows
of cold magenta.

Figure 31: Boosted saturation.
Figure 34: Color isolation 1.
Your image will now look like this (figure 32). As you can see
there is much distortion.

This contrasting of warm and cool values is key to almost every
successful color arrangement. The spectrum is often assumed to
be easily dividable into warm and cool values with all reds
yellows and oranges being warm and all blues, greens and
purples being cold (figure 35).

Figure 32: Boosted saturation.
Now place a selective Color Adjustment layer (figure 33)
beneath the Hue Saturation. In it's dialogue box reduce the
black component of the blacks (in the pull down menu) to
-100%. This will convert all the black in your image to white.
Set also the grey values to -100% as well.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 35: Warm and Cool 1.
However, a truer picture can be had by assuming that red, blue
and yellow (the subtractive primaries) can each manifest as
either a warm or cool version. Shown below (figure 36) is a

rough approximation of a warm red and warm yellow mixing to
produce a warm orange, and a cold red and cold yellow mixing
to become a cold orange.

Figure 36: Warm and cool 2.

Figure 38: Color isolation 2.

Using such a model we can look at this painting by Alma
Tadema (figure 37). It is obviously a blue painting, but how is
such predominance achieved without producing a monotony?

Figure 39: Color isolation 3.
This digital painting (figure 40) is essentially tinted white
shapes held together by black drawn elements.

Figure 37: Lawrence Alma-Tadema. Silver Favourites. 1903
If we isolate the color elements (figure 38) we clearly can see
the blues tending towards purple in the middle and towards
green on the right.
By giving the same treatment to the Gwen John painting (figure
39) we can clearly see the blues running diagonally across a red
background.
Figure 40: Digital painting 3.
If we isolate it's color (figure 41) we can see the warmth of her
skin offsetting the cold of her T shirt.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

If we use the target droppers in either the curves or levels
dialogue box we can turn the grays into white, making the lines
stand our more (figure 44). Using this technique can see that
every object in the Giotto painting has it's associated outline.

Figure 41: Color isolation 4.

2.5 Lines.
What is a line? Any two different tones or colors meeting will
produce a line at the edge of their meeting. This line will be
sharp or soft according to how 'blended' the border is.ii
In pre-oil painting times paints were difficult to blend. This was
a natural limitation of the Tempera technique. Paintings were
therefore usually very hard edged (figure 42).

Figure 42: Giotto, The Mourning of Christ, c1302.
Photoshop offers us several ways to extract the linear elements
of this image. By far the best is by using the wonderful and
underused High Pass filter (Filter > Other > High Pass). It
requires that you play around with the radius setting, which is
best kept to low values. This will reduce all color and tone
information to a mid grey whilst boosting the edge differences
to black and white (figure 43).

Figure 44: Linear treatment 1.
With the invention of oil painting the blurred edge became
possible, thereby enabling us to describe an object without the
use of sharp lines. However, it was not until the invention of the
camera that this 'effect' really took on. This is understandable as
the blur didn't really exist until the invention of photography.
Look at this painting by Gerhart Richter (figure 45).

Figure 45: Gerhard Richter, Reading, 1994.
The linear treatment (figure 46) shows us clearly that the sharp
edges are limited to the foreground object (the woman). The
background is out of focus (this painting was done using photo
reference).

Figure 46: Linear treatment 2.

Figure 43: High Pass.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Linear treatment 3 (figure 47) of the digital painting 3 (figure
36) shows us that the lines do not cover the shoulders. These
'non existent' lines are essential to the success of the piece,
enabling the 'bleed out' of the figure into the background and
enhancing the 'high pitch' effect. See also that the lines on the
arms are much stronger inside the figure than on the outside.

This separation of inside and outside lines is a good thing to
bear in mind when constructing an image. They will often
manifest in different ways to each other

layer further up in it. This seems too obvious to be true but
many times I have seen students, wishing to composite a figure
against a new background, mask out the background against
and place it above the unmasked figure as opposed to visa
versa.

2.7 Others.
It would be wonderful if we could map separately all aspects of
an image. Though warm and cool has been briefly covered
there is no perfect way to map the two in the same way that
saturation can be mapped.
It would also be nice if we could map such things as: detail,
rounded/straight lines, the relative position of objects as they
intersect a ground plane, etc etc. However, currently Photoshop
is very far from being able to do such things.
Figure 47: Linear treatment 3.

2.6 Behind / In Front.
The placing of one object behind another one is a sure and
certain way to create space in an image.
Photoshop has no real idea of where something is in the Z
aspect of XYZ space. Whereas such information is easily
obtained from a 3d application (figure 48 and 49).

Figure 48: 3d render.
A Z map from a 3d render shows us in grayscale where an
object is in relation to it's distance from the camera. Black is
close, white is far.

3. PASSING JUDGEMNT
How is an artist expected to use all of this quantative feedback?
This is similar to asking how an artists is supposed to judge the
success of there art. There is so much subjectivity surrounding
this question that it is impossible to give a 'perfect' answer.
However, I offer the following as a rough working solution:
Such things as tone, saturation and color maps are, like all
maps, useless unless one has a good idea of where one wants to
go. An art piece is like a nested series of priorities: the largest
on top (the size and proportion of the canvas, the geometry of
the composition) followed by smaller, subservient ones (local
geometries, details and embellishments). Such purpose might
sometimes be difficult to identify in such data but it's presence
is often possible to detect. In other words: we might not know
what is the exact formal purpose of a thing but are still able to
recognize it as 'a purposeful thing'.
A rule of thumb I have found useful is if there are no
unexpended shocks to be had in viewing such data then one is
onto the right track. It is also true that most data, pulled from an
image, functions fairly well as a painting in it's own right. It's
abstracts are all sound with balance, ordered distribution and
purpose informing it's arrangement.

4. CONCLUSION
An understanding can be enhanced if accompanied by a
diagram. This is an extension of that simple pedagogical
principle: show don't just tell.

Figure 49: Z map.

Though only a few of these methods are useful in day to day
digital image production, they all have their place in the
teaching of visual principles.

Obviously Photoshop can not generate such information (but it
can use Z maps generated elsewhere as alpha channels sources
in the Camera Blue filter).

In digital painting the same tools that are used to develop,
change, enhance and distort an image can be also used to reveal
it's visual structure and thereby enhance an understanding of it's
strengths and shortcomings.

However, it is a rule of thumb that any object on a layer low
down in the layer stack is going to be behind any object on a

i
ii

The Claude Glass: Use and Meaning of the Black Mirror in Western Art. By Arnaud Maillet ISBN 1-890951-47-1.
Art and Visual Perception, Rudolph Arnheim ISBN 0-520-02327-7.

All digital paintings used are by the author.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

