Visualization of Knowledge Structures
Xia Lin*, Yen Bui*, Dongming Zhang**
*College of Information Science and Technology, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA USA
**Welch Medical Library, Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD USA
{xlin@drexel.edu, Yen.Bui@drexel.edu, zhang@jhmi.edu}
Abstract
In this article, Visual Concept Explorer (VCE), a
concept mapping tool, is introduced and its design
principles are described.
VCE creates dynamic
concept maps for the user and facilitates user’s visual
interaction to concepts and documents. Its central idea
is to make implicit knowledge structures explicit. As
an example of practical knowledge mapping
application, VCE has characteristics of both
information visualization and knowledge visualization.

1. Introduction
Information
visualization
and
knowledge
visualization are now often considered as two related
fields that have a lot in common but each has
developed different methods and perspectives on
visualization [13].
Information visualization,
according to Card, Mackinlay & Shneiderman [5], is
defined as “the use of computer-supported, interactive,
visual representation of abstract non-physically based
data to amplify cognition.” In other words, information
visualization focuses on extracting data structures from
a large amount of data and representing the structures
visually to the user. It is believed that information
visualization will help the user recognize “patterns and
structures” of information which otherwise might be
incomprehensible [14]. It will move the burden of
processing mass information away from the user to the
machine and convey understanding to the user through
visual presentation of semantic associations [9, 17]. It
will encourage more interactions between the user and
information and support communication and
collaboration among users [12, 16].
Knowledge visualization is much less clearly
defined because of several different schools of
thoughts. Canas et al [4], who developed the wellknown concept mapping tool Cmap, advance their
knowledge visualization based on the learning theories

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

proposed by Novak [8] and Ausubel et al. [1].
Burkhard, on the other hand, defines knowledge
visualization as “the use of visual representation to
improve the transfer and creation of knowledge”
between two or more people [3]. Tergan and Keller
appear to lean towards the “sense-making” definition
and describe knowledge visualization as necessary to
make knowledge explicit and help the user make sense
of information structures, especially when the subject
matter is complex [13]. In all the approaches, the
focus of knowledge visualization is on the
representation of conceptual knowledge via structure
visualizations to promote understanding.
Examples of knowledge visualization include
traditional information graphics or diagrams as well as
semantic networks, concept maps, and cognitive maps,
with concept maps as the most-studied type of
knowledge visualization. A wide range of computer
software for concept mapping is now available,
ranging from research products, such as Cmap Toolkit
(http://cmap.coginst.uwf.edu/ ), to commercial
products, such as Inspiration from Inspiration Software
Inc. (http://www.inspiration.com/home.cfm ). These
systems provide computerized graphical tools to
create, modify, and manipulate graphical objects to
facilitate the use of concept maps. A weakness of these
tools, however, is the manual process of concept map
creation. These tools help users build concept maps;
they do not extract information or knowledge from
documents or databases – this is where information
visualization techniques can help.
Whereas knowledge visualization fosters visual
representation for the purpose of learning,
understanding,
and
collaboration,
information
visualization aims to extract “truthful representation”
of knowledge structures to augment the use of
information through visual cognition. In this paper, we
present a research prototype, Visual Concept Explorer
or VCE,
that combines the characteristics of
information visualization and knowledge visualization.
VCE adopts visualization techniques for knowledge

mapping and creates a dynamic knowledge structure
upon user’s queries. It attempts to make implicit
knowledge explicit and encourages the user to interact
with the underlying concepts and documents. It is also
built as a search engine interface that can be used in
the real-world environment.
In the following sections, we will first have a brief
discussion on explicit and implicit knowledge structure
before introducing VCE and its interaction and
interface design. In the end, we will discuss the use of
VCE in real-world libraries..

2. Explicit
Structures

and

Implicit

Knowledge

Knowledge is often categorized as explicit
knowledge and implicit knowledge [2]. Knowledge
structures can also be created explicitly or implicitly.
In the field of library and information science, a typical
approach to create knowledge structures is to create a
domain thesaurus or controlled vocabularies. Domain
experts use their domain knowledge to select a group
of terms and construct term relationships through
relationships such as Broader Term (BT), Narrower
Term (NT), Related Term (RT), and synonyms. The

terms and the structures provide a consistent “concept
space” for document indexing and searching [7]. In
essence, this approach utilizes experts’ knowledge to
create an explicit knowledge structure and map
documents to this knowledge structure for searching
and navigation.
Another approach is to identify and create
knowledge structures from the text itself. Through
computerized linguistic or statistic analysis,
meaningful terms or phrases can be identified and their
relationships can be described through their usage
patterns. While this approach might not create a
comprehensive or consistent knowledge structures, it
often extracts implicit term relationships that are not
available in controlled vocabularies. For example, the
relationship between the terms “anthrax” and “post
office” is considered implicit as they are not
semantically related but they co-occur a lot in text due
to the incident of finding anthrax in post offices few
years ago.
The VCE system described in this article attempts
to make available both explicit and implicit knowledge
structures to help users explore the conceptual space
and find terms and documents that best match their
information needs. .

Visual Perception

Figure 1. A map display generated by VCE for the term “Perception”

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

algorithm [6] based on term co-occurrence
relationships among the terms. The algorithm uses
space, areas, and proximity to reveal term
relationships. The size of areas and the relative
distances among the terms are all decided by the
learning algorithm and the underlying data. The whole
map structure shows how these terms are related in the
context of literature thus is more useful in the search
environment than the original hierarchical structures
that emphasize on the logical relationships of the
terms.
VCE is also a search interface that directly links to
the PUBMED search engine. It encourages and helps
users explore the knowledge structures through various
interactive functions. The use can choose from two
types of displays – either the map display shown in
figure 1 or link display shown in figure 3, which is
generated from the same data using a different learning
algorithm, the Pathfinder Networks [10]. He or she
can also study the visual display through the panning
or zooming functions, or create a new display by
double-clicking a term on the display.
More
interactive functions are discussed in the sections
below.

3. VCE – A Visual Concept Explorer
VCE is implemented as a client-server application.
The client side is a visual interface implemented in
FLASH. It sends user’s requests to a Java Web
application where the requests will be redirected to one
of the three knowledge resources: a UMLS Knowledge
source that includes various controlled vocabularies,
the PUBMED search engine with the MEDLINE
dataset, and the learning algorithms for knowledge
structure creation. The client-server communication is
all done in XML protocol; and the Web application is
designed with an open architecture so that it can be
easily adapted to other controlled vocabularies and
search engines.
All the three knowledge resources are essential for
VCE as the mapping and visualization process in VCE
is essentially a process of merging and integrating the
human knowledge and computational abstraction
capabilities. Using the controlled vocabularies is to
utilize the huge investment of expert’s knowledge
embedded in the creation of the controlled
vocabularies. Using the search engine and indexing
term co-occurrence is to capture and utilize the implicit
knowledge the authors and indexers created through
their years of practice. Finally, this latent knowledge is
encapsulated and presented in a visual form through
the machine’s learning algorithms.
VCE is a concept mapping tool that creates
dynamic knowledge structures in real time for user’s
queries. Figure 1 is an example of the map displays
generated by the system for the term “Visual
Perception.” The map automatically classifies 25
terms closest related to “visual perception” into several
semantic clusters. The clusters are the result of
“learning” using the Kohonen’s feature map learning

User’s term

No

Match?

No

VCE let users interact with terms, documents, and
knowledge structures through multiple channels.
Figure 2 shows the interaction paths between users and
documents through VCE. If the user’s query matches
to a MeSH term (one of the controlled vocabularies in
UMLS), the system can quickly run a precision search
and create a visual display for the term (Channel A).
Otherwise, VCE will attempt to do various mappings.

Visual
Display of
Knowledge Structures

User

Match?

4. VCE Interaction Design

D
A

Yes

Indexing
Vocabulary
(MeSH)
Yes
Multiple
Vocabulary
resources
(UMLS)

User’s selection
of Indexing term

Precision
Search
User’s selection
of Indexing term

B

Yes

Equivalent
Indexing
terms?

No

C

Literature
List of
indexing
terms

Exploration
Search

Figure 2. The Multiple channel Approach for vocabulary mapping

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

It first expands the search from the single controlled
vocabulary source (MeSH) to a multiple vocabulary
system (Unified Medical Language System or UMLS)
and uses the unified concept ID (UID) of UMLS to
find the equivalent term in MeSH (Channel B on the
figure). When no equivalent MeSH term is found, the
system will send the user’s initial query to the search
engine and retrieve the top 200 documents that match
the query. All the indexing terms of the 200 documents
will be extracted and listed according to their
occurrence frequencies. Users then can select a term
from the list for mapping or exploration (Channel C)
Another important interactive function is the visual
Boolean query construction. There are three boxes on
the display which are colored red, green, and blue.
Regardless of the visualization type chosen, rightclicking on a term would allow the user to add the term
to either the red, green, or blue box. Each box can
accommodate multiple terms. The resulting Boolean
query will be the result of applying an OR operator to
terms within the same box, and then an AND operator
to concatenate the three boxes. A “Result” field
provides instant feedback to the user as to the number
of hits in the PUBMED database for the current query;
each time a term is added to the boxes, a quick search
will be automatically conducted and the number of hits
change interactively. This feature allows the user to
explore the relationship between terms while keeping
track of search results from the PUBMED database.

5. Visual Interface Design
A guiding principle of VCE interface design is
understandability. The maps, the associative
relationships, and the interactive functions supported
by the interface need to be clearly understandable to
the user. Taking as the theoretical foundation of the
design, we adopted Ben
Shneiderman’s Visual
Information Seeking Mantra: “Overview first, zoom
and filter, then details-on-demand” [12]. As a visual
overview of the entire medical domain might not be
very helpful, the Mantra was adjusted to fit more of a
search engine paradigm: “Search first, pan and
explore, then details-on-demand.”
The VCE interface is divided into six regions, or
components, each of which is associated with a
specific physical area of the application (Table 1).
These components are implemented as layers on the
interface. The main layer is the visualization space that
takes up the entire workspace of the application.
Others are placed on top of the visualization space as
“stowable bars” (meaning they can be hidden, or
stowed off to the sides). In this way, the user can
control which bars he sees, and thereby control how
much of the workspace is allotted to the visualization
space. Because each bar’s contents are independent of
that of the other bars’, it is easy for the user to choose
which bar to see based on the user’s preferences or the
task at hand. It also makes it easy to add a new type of
visualization or customize VCE to different databases
– only the relevant bars needed to be customized

Table 1: Six User Interface Elements
Name
Visualization
Layer
Visualization
Option Bar

Location
The
main
workspace
Left Bar

Permanence
Permanent

Database &
Search Bar

Top Bar

Stowable

Search boxes
& history Bar
Outline View

Right Bar

Stowable

Bottom Bar

Stowable

Pop-Up
frame

Center of the
screen

Pop-up is triggered
by the system only
when needed.

Stowable

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Function
Displays the current visualization and allows
user interaction
Allows user to choose the visualization
methods and the display options. Includes a
miniature map.
Controls what database and information are
used to match user’s terms and generate
maps of relevant terms.
Provides drag-and-drop Boolean searching
and search history functions
Displays the traditional hierarchical view of
the term relationships
To prompt user for specific decisions and to
relate warnings or errors

Figure 3. An example of link display within VCE
Several other interactive components supported by
the interface are particularly useful. The first is the
miniature map on the left bottom of the display; it
always show the entire map of the search term and a
movable square corresponding to the area that the main
display is zoomed in. The second is the focus and
remapping function. On the main display, clicking on
any term will move the focus to the term and a new
map for the term will be generated. The third is the
History function showing the list of terms the user has
visited; the user can click on any term in the History
list to go back to previous displays.

6. Use of VCE in Libraries
As a test to VCE’s usability and understandability,
we created a special version of VCE and integrated it
with the Johns Hopkins Welch Medical Library’s
MyWelch library portal. Several steps were taken
before testing the service with users. First, we
installed a separate server dedicated to VCE to ensure
that this testing would not interfere with regular
operations of the working library portal. This is an
important procedure when testing an experimental
system in a live working system. A separate Tomcat
server was installed to run the back-end supports for
VCE and the whole UMLS database was downloaded

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

to an Oracle database. Second, we added the MyWelch
logo to VCE and made the VCE visual components
consistent with other MyWelch components. This was
to ensure the continuity of the whole system so that
users would feel more comfortable to move from one
part of the system to another. Third, we added a
logging component to the VCE interface to log
relevant information such as user’s query, interactive
functions performed and the time stamp of each query
and each interaction task. Fourth, we created a tutorial
for using VCE that explains how to read the map
displays and how to use VCE’s interactive functions.
The tutorial was created with Macromedia FLASH and
included voices and easy-to-follow explanations. The
tutorial was made available within the VCE interface;
users could click on it to learn or review VCE
functionality any time during their interactions with
VCE. We found the tutorial had helped answer many
questions users had about the system.
The test run has just started recently and we have
had some log data for analysis. Overall, we are pleased
with the implementation and adoption process. VCE
has run smoothly within MyWelch and the mapping
and interaction response time is satisfactory to most
users. While the number of users who tried this VCE
service is still low, those who spent some time with the
service seem to be successful in their use of the
system. For example, the log data indicated that a user

started with a natural language search “natural killer,”
and found the MeSH term “Killer cells, natural,” and
after exploring the mapping, the user constructed a
MeSH-based Boolean query – “(Killer Cells, Natural)
AND (Cytotoxicity, Immunologic) AND (Receptors,
Immunologic)” -- this would have been a rather
difficult query to construct without the help of VCE.
These terms could be easily selected from the VCE
displays as they were linked to the term “Killer Cell,
Natural” on the map. It would otherwise have required
significant domain knowledge to bring them together
either from the MeSH hierarchy or from the direct
interaction to the search engine.
While VCE is a useful tool for helping users to
view knowledge structures and formulate effective
search queries, it remains a challenge to embed this
tool into users’ information seeking environment and
search tools they are currently use. The motivation for
those who have used the tool might come from just
curiosity. We do not have evidence that users continue
using VCE on a regular base. Future work includes
integrate VCE with PubMed search interface as an
assistant tool; Integrate with Meta-Search engine in the
customizable portal environment; Continue publicizing
this service in MyWelch and gather more data for
analysis; Conduct user survey to better understand the
needs from user groups. In particular, some focus
group discussion is also needed in order to understand
how the users interact with VCE and whether they
understand the knowledge structures created by
VCE.Wherever Times is specified, Times Roman or
Times New Roman may be used. If neither is available
on your word processor, please use the font closest in
appearance to Times. Avoid using bit-mapped fonts if
possible. True-Type 1 fonts are preferred.

8. References
[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

7. Conclusions
In this article, we described VCE, a concept
mapping tool that can be used as a search interface in a
practical environment. VCE has characteristics of both
information and knowledge visualization. It combines
knowledge structures automatically extracted from text
with knowledge structures created by human experts. It
provides various interactive functions to facilitate
user’s visual interaction to concepts and documents.
Overall, VCE demonstrates the promise of synergy
between information visualization and knowledge
visualization.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]

[17]

Ausubel, D. P., Novak, J. D., & Hanesian, H. (1978).
Educational psychology: A cognitive view (2nd ed.).
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Awad, E. M. & Ghaziri, H. M. (2004). Knowledge
Management. Pearson Education, New Jersey.
Burkhard, R. (2004). Learning from architects: the
difference between knowledge organization and
information visualization. In Proceedings of the
Eighth International Conference on Information
Visualization (IV04), pp 519-524. London: IEEE.
Canas, A. J., Carff, R., Hill, G., Carvalho, M.,
Arguedas, M., Eskridge, T. C., Lott, J., & Carvajal, R.
(2005). Concept maps: integrating knowledge and
information visualization. In Tergan, S. O. & Keller,
T. (Eds.): Knowledge and information visualization.
LNCS 3426 (pp. 203-219). Springer-Verlag Berlin
Heidelberg.
Card, S. K. Mackinlay, J. D.; & Shneiderman, B. (eds.)
(1999). Readings in Information Visualization: Using
Vision to Think. Morgan Kaufman Publishers.
Kohonen, T. (1997). Self-Organizing Maps. SpringerVerlag, Berlin.
Lancaster, F. W. (1986). Vocabulary Control (2nd
ed.). Arlington, VA: Information Resources Press.
Novak, J. D. (1977). A theory of education. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Robertson, G. G., Card, S. K., & Mackinlay, J. D.
(1993). Information visualization using 3D interactive
animation. Comm. of the ACM, 36(4), 57-71.
Schvaneveldt, R. W. (Ed.). (1990). Pathfinder
associative networks: Studies in knowledge
organization. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Shneiderman, B. (1996). The eyes have it: a task by
data type taxonomy for information visualizations.
Proceedings of Symposium on Visual Languages,
Boulder, CO, Proceedings of IEEE, pp. 336-343.
Shneiderman, B. (1997). Designing the User Interface:
Strategies for Effective Human-Computer Interaction
(3 ed.): Addison-Wesley Pub Co.
Tergan, S.; & Keller, T. (2005). Knowledge and
information visualization: Searching for synergies.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, LNCS 3426.
New York: Springer.
Tufte, E. R. (1990).
Envisioning information.
Cheshire, Conn.: Graphics Press.
Shamsfard, M.; & Barforoush, A. A. (2004) Learning
ontologies from natural language texts. International
Journal Of Human-Computer Studies, 60 (1), 17-63.
Viegas, F. B. & Wattenberg, M. (2006).
Communication-mind visualization: A call to action.
IBM Systems Journal. 45 (4), 801-812.
Wise, J. A.; et al. (1995). Visual the non-visual:
Spatial analysis and interaction with information from
text documents. Proceedings of INFOVIS 1995, IEEE
Press, Los Alamitos, CA. pp. 51- 58.

