A Real-time Dynamic Simulation Scheme for
Large-Scale Flood Hazard Using 3D Real World Data
C Wang, T. R. Wan, I. J. Palmer
EIMC, School of Informatics, University of Bradford, UK
{c.wang4@bradford.ac.uk, t.wan@bradford.ac.uk, i.j.palmer@bradford.ac.uk}
Abstract
We propose a new dynamic simulation scheme for
large-scale flood hazard modelling and prevention. The
approach consists of a number of core parts: Digital
terrain modelling with GIS data, Nona-tree space
partitions (NTSP), Automatic River object recognition
and registration, and a flood spreading model. The
digital terrain modelling method allows the creation of a
geometric real terrain model for augmented 3D
environments with very large GIS data, and it can also
use information gathered from aviation and satellite
images with a ROAM algorithm. A spatial image
segmentation scheme is described for river and flood
identification and for a 3D terrain map of flooding
region growth and visualisation. The region merging is
then implemented by adopting Flood Region Spreading
Algorithm (FRSA). Compared with the conventional
methods, our approach has the advantages of being
capable of realistically visualising the flooding in
geometrically–real 3D environments, of handling
dynamic flood behaviour in real-time and of dealing with
very large-scale data modelling and visualisation.

1. Introduction
Large-Scale flooding is a serious natural disaster that
frequently occurs in many parts of the world, in
particular in America, Asia and Europe, where many
countries have been at risk and people have suffered. In
2005, a horrible flood caused by the hurricane Katrina
nearly destroyed the whole of New Orleans in America.
More than twenty thousand people suffered the pain of
the flood and about forty thousand houses were
submerged. The cost of flood damage to New Orleans is
approximately $22.6 billion. In China in 2002, floods
reached more than 20 provinces, damages have been
estimated to $8.2 billion, and 110 million people have
been affected with over 1500 deaths. In UK, in August
2002, York and Pickering were hit by flooding following
very heavy rainfall, in which some areas had more than
the usual month's worth of rain in less than 24 hours.
Large scale flooding can cause huge damage and

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

negative effects on people’s lives and properties,
threatening local economy development and causing
destabilisation. Many governments are making huge
efforts and spending financial and material resources in
constructing flood defence systems and strategies for
natural disaster prevention. Currently, flood modelling
and simulation play a very important role and make a
real contribution to the work against natural disasters.
Developing suitable numerical models through
analysis of weather conditions and real time rainfall data
is one of the useful methods [19]. Ying et al. [21]
described a 2D numerical model which is based on a
finite volume method which simulated flood wave
propagation caused by a dam-break event. The intercell
flux was computed by the upwind method and the waterlevel-gradient was evaluated by weighted average of
both the upwind and the downwind gradient. Therefore,
the conservation of mass and momentum are guaranteed
and the scheme is easy to implement. The scheme is
extensively tested with various examples. However, this
approach obtained accuracy and stability at the expense
of increased algorithm complexity and high
computational cost. Dubicki and Stronska [6] proposed a
physical based flood forecasting system on the upper and
middle Odra. They developed a timely and reliable
forecasting system for the complicated river basin by
means of MIKE 11 River modelling software and the
flood watch forecasting system. Rainfall runoff
modelling,
hydrodynamic
modelling
and
the
implementation of flood watch for real time operation
were taken into consideration. The system developed
lacked the support of GIS data, and it would be difficult
to apply it to flood inundation mapping.
Recently, methods of using remote sensing are now
finding their place and applications in detecting and
forecasting inundation [9, 17]. Gianinetto et al. [8]
proposed a straightforward method for mapping the
inundated areas and for estimating flood water volumes
through the use of optical landsat multispectral data
integrated with topography data. The methodology relies
on spectral-temporal principal component analysis,
logical filtering with DEM data, image segmentation and
flood intensity estimation. A decision support tool for the
allocation of the resource destination was developed for

the reconstruction of the inundated municipalities.
Horritt [11] presented a rationale for assessing both the
accuracy and precision of uncertain predictions of flood
extent by means of remotely sensed images of inundation
patterns. They used two criteria to test for the calibration
and validation of a simple cellular flow model on a reach
of the River Severn.
Flood disaster prevention work has also been
extended to risk management, such as evacuation
planning and risk assessment. Hori and Shiiba [12]
suggested two types of micro simulation tools for the
performance-based design of a flood risk management: a
micro model-based simulation system of flood
evacuation, and an object-oriented simulation model of
communication processes among disaster prevention
agencies. The micro simulation model of flood
evacuation was based on parameterization of people’s
attitudes to flood risk and recognition of danger during
flooding. The second micro simulation tool was used for
expressing the concentration of the path of information
and unbalanced element task descriptions quantitatively.
Recent approaches have centred on natural disaster
prevention systems with integrated GIS data. Liu and
Miao [14] suggested a new method for construction of a
flood prevention information system integrated with a
geographical information system (GIS). A map
projection was applied to extend the transition from the
Earth’s surface to a horizontal surface. But their model
was developed for 2D environments. Haile and Rientjes
[10] suggested that simulated topographic properties had
a major effect on simulation results and topography
should be a major factor concerned in determining flood
inundation patterns over time. In their method, a 2D
module was activated when the simulation of the water
flow in the river reaches the river-bank overflow.
Tanigawa et al. [18] applied a diffusion equation model
into their flood simulation.
The work presented in this paper focuses on the
methodology of 3D visual simulation for the flood
modelling, and spreading with a geometrical real world
flooding environment. The paper is organised as follows.
Section 2 gives a general description of the flooding
simulation model proposed in the current work. Section 3
discusses the modelling of the flooding environment
using GIS data. Section 4 describes the image analytical
algorithm for river objects. In Section 5, details of flood
spreading and region merging methods will be provided.
Finally, conclusions are drawn in the last section of the
paper.

2. The Flood Model
The proposed flooding hazard system is outlined in
Figure 1, which consists of a number of input, output and
visualisation elements.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 1 Flood hazard model
The input elements contain digital GIS data,
information on rainfall data, river water rising level
monitoring information, and weather forecasting; the
output includes simulation results of predicted flood
spreading, geometrical-real 3D world reconstruction and
visualisation, visualised flooding information for risk
assessment and emergency response; the core part of the
system consists of terrain modelling using GIS data,
aviation/satellite image segmentation and river object
recognition and registrations, real-time river surrounding
regional geometric information analysis, and the flood
model. In this paper we will focus on the details of
reconstructing the real-world using digital GIS data, real
terrain image segmentation, river object identification
and real-time flooding river region growing.

3. Digital terrain construction from very
large GIS data
The approach used to construct the geometry of a
local earth region in 3 dimensional space is to create a
continuous rendered mesh of polygons, the process of
which requires converting digital GIS data into
geometrically-real world and a reliable accurate
interpretation of the data. In order to develop an efficient
space partition for real-time terrain generation capable of
dealing with very large GIS data, and motivated by the
widely used Octree algorithm [3, 5], we propose the
NTSP algorithm in the current work. The centre of a
local region has been assigned as a root node, which
stores all the vertices of the local region. This
arrangement makes it much easier to access GIS data for
constructing the world in real-time, and for navigation
towards neighbouring regions. The root node is divided
into nine parts represented by the corresponding nodes,
the process of which is the first subdivision. Each node
newly created can then be subdivided further to form a

new subdivision. The process will go on until a threshold
is reached. A suitable data structure is created for the use
of split and merge algorithm as a quadtree [20]. This
partition scheme is able to perform an out-of-core
rendering and to deal with massive GIS terrain data. It is
also easy to be implemented using hardware memory.
Since the root node location is assigned in real-time and
the reconstruction is made dynamically, the entire world
space can be navigated. The scheme implemented well
with ROAM algorithm [7], using an explicit binary
triangle tree structure, similar to Lindstrom’s binary
vertex tree [13]. It performs triangle splitting and
merging based on triangle diamonds.
Figure 2 shows a typical nine-terrain-node structure
used in the algorithm. The observer’s perspective
position is in N5, which is the centre of the local region.
As the observer crosses over any of the boundaries of
N5, a new node arrangement will be made; the updated
root node is assigned to the node located in the central
position of the region. Figure 3 shows a situation where
the navigation conducted by an observer moves towards
to right. The relative locations of N1, N4 and N7 will be
discarded and replaced by N2, N5 and N8. The nodes
N1, N4 and N7 will reappear in the right side but with
GIS data of the neighbouring region. As we only need to
use the nine nodes for world visualisation for navigation,
the method is very efficient and a whole world can be
visualized as long as the necessary GIS data available.
N1

N2

N3

11

12

13

N4

N5

N6

21

22

23

N7

N8

N9

31

32

33

[14] 2D projection map to 3D terrain reconstruction. The
node N5 is used for illustration. At layer 1, we can
display a large scale terrain reconstructed using a low
resolution data set. A higher resolution model is created
with higher layers; as indicated by Layer 2 with 9 region
elements, Layer 3 representing 81 region elements, and
so on.
The next task for reconstructing the earth region is
to implement map projections, which is to portray the
surface of the earth or a portion of the earth on a flat
surface. At present time, almost all GIS systems are
based on a Gaussian coordinate system, which is a Gauss
plane, a linear space. However since the Earth space is
nonlinear, the spatial reference and consideration must
be addressed by the projection. Unlike the Earth, most
other objects are defined with a positive-west longitude
system [23]. Although this seems like a trivial problem,
most GIS and remote sensing applications cannot handle
this longitude system. A simple shift in longitude values
can solve the problems. In the current work, a positiveeast longitude system is used and the positive-west
convention for output referencing and labelling.

Figure 2 Basic nine nodes of a local region
N1
11

N2

12

N3
13

N2
11

N3
12

N1
13

N4
21

N5
22

N6
23

N5
21

N6
22

N4
23

N7
31

N8
32

N9
33

N8
31

N9
32

N7
33

Figure 4 Pyramidal data arranged structure

Figure 3 Moving to right
As demonstrated above, the surface generated using
the method therefore is capable of dealing with a very
large earth region. When an observer moves closer to the
Earth surface region for details, it is necessary to use a
detailed or high resolution data set for the reconstruction.
An in-core process with a pyramidal data arranged
structure is proposed as shown in Figure 4 for processing
the terrain information and further for constructing 3D
terrain geometry using the NTSP algorithm. This work
can be considered as an expansion of Liu and Miao’s

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 5 The Skye terrain geometry

Figure 6 The far-distance view of the Skye
region reconstructed
Figure 6 shows the far-distance view of the Skye
region in Scotland reconstructed by the method proposed
in the current work. As shown in the figure, the
generated terrain geometry (Figure 5) is overlaid by
satellite image corresponding to the same geographic
area represented as the input to the virtual earth model.

4. Flooding image spatial segmentation and
river recognition
The scheme proposed in the current work consists of
two stages. The first stage process is to identify the river
objects via flooding image segmentation. The second
stage process conducts further searching and merging to
complete the segmentation on a map of pseudo image
intensity value, which is converted from the terrain
elevation data. To obtain the necessary information
contained in the image of the flooding environment, the
flooding image has to be segmented [4, 15, 16]. An
image spatial segmentation scheme is proposed in the
current work by an initial Gaussian blurring followed by
an intensity level image transformation based on colour
components. After that, a region merging process to
identify spatially homogenous regions by measuring the
distinguished flood features of intensity value, colour, or
texture. River boundaries will be identified by
discontinuity and similarity of the pixel values. It will be
then possible to calculate the river flow volume in realtime for flood monitoring and forecasting once aviation
or satellite images are available.
Figure 7 shows the result of a processed river image,
where the river object identified and river segments were
registered with a flag for further process. A larger scale
river region reconstruction is shown in Figure 8.

Figure 7 A processed
river image

Figure 8 3D river model
in real environment

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The second stage process will start when a flooding
event occurs. For modelling the flood region growing in
the current system a local earth region is reconstructed as
a linked cell grid system and neighbouring cell
connectivity must be examined in real time according to
the river water level. An algorithm called the Flood
Region Spreading Algorithm (FRSA) is proposed in the
current work, which explores the pseudo-intensity profile
for potential flood spreading. The flood region search
and merge process is conducted by a weighted cell
region adjacency graph. The similarity measure
associated with two neighbouring cells is found by firstly
calculating the mean intensity values of all vertices
associated for each cell, and then for the boundary
between the two. The down cell will be flooded if and
only if the flooded cell’s (up cell) mean value is greater
than the down cell’s mean value, and greater than the
minimum value of the common boundary. A connected
cell is identified as part of a flooded cell of the flood
region if its elevation level is under a dam threshold of a
neighbouring flooded cell. The process will be conducted
in all eight neighbouring directions around the cell
assessed. Flooded cells will be merged to become a large
cell, and so on. The configured flood region consists of
all flooded cells connected together and will then be used
as a flooding field. It is obvious that a flood that has
occurred may consist of more than one flooding field.
Because the cell is used for constructing the local earth
region model and for its high efficiency, a river cell
element scheme is implemented in the algorithm.
The FRSA will start at a cell or a location at a river
dam of the region, with greater danger for flooding
occurring due to its geometric profile. It will then spread
fast over the entire potential flood region. The algorithm
can be described as shown in the following flowchart in
Figure 9.

Figure 9 Flood Region Spreading Algorithm

5. Flooding Simulation experiments
It has been realized by the people around the world
that the development of a dynamic flood system [1, 2]
would improve people’s understanding of how the river
system works during a flood situation, and thus to make
the right decision when a real flood occurs. Flood
hazards happen in conditions of the water level of a river
overrunning the height of embankments or dams.
In a situation of circled hill regions, special
consideration must be made as the profile of the
landform has the characteristics of having low-central
area with surrounding high edges. Thus, there will be no
flood submersion when the water level is below the
height of the high edges of a circling hill region. The rain
flood model can lead to the mountain interior becoming
an inundation area as shown in Figure 10.
Figure 11 shows the simulation result for river
flooding using scheme proposed. The hill interior with
low altitude was not inundated as expected.

Figure 10 Rain flood

Figure 15 Stage 4
-large-scale flooding

The next experiment test was conducted for
simulating a part of Mississippi river. A great flood
occurred in Mississippi river in 1993. Damages
approached $15 billion, 50 people died and thousands of
people were evacuated. Figure 16 and Figure 17 show
the images of the actual scene of that time which are
obtained from Earth Observatory [22]. We use this for
our third test for validating the methods by comparing
simulation result with the images from the real flood.
Figure 18 is the 3D simulation of Mississippi river
before flooding and Figure 19 is the eventually flooded
area released by the 3D simulation result, which are
consistent with the Figures 16 and 17.

Figure 11 River flood

The second simulation test has been conducted for
simulating a potential flood of a region of middle and
lower reaches of Yangtze area in China. Figure 12
shows the stage of the river before flooding. When the
river water starts overflowing its bank, flood starts to
form as shown in Figure 13. As time increases, the flood
will spread into lower area as shown in Figure 14. Figure
15 gives the 3D simulation result of the inundation area
in large scale.
From the above simulation results, the whole flood
formation progress is clearly presented and will be useful
for further risk assessment.

Figure 12 Stage 1
-river before flooding

Figure 14 Stage 3
-flooding spreading

Figure 13 Stage 2
-flooding forming

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 16 River
before flooding

Figure 17 River
inundation area

Figure 18 Simulation of Figure 19 Simulation of
river before flooding
inundation area

6. Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a new simulation
scheme for large-scale flood hazard modelling for
prevention which consists of dynamic terrain modelling
with GIS data, NineNodeTree space partition, automatic
river object recognition and registration, and flood
spreading model. Simulations have been carried out and
show that the new flooding scheme is suitable for
realistically modelling and visualising flood hazard
events for natural disaster prediction and prevention. The
physical model is constructed using real-world
measurement data of GIS, in terms of digital elevation
data and satellite image data. NTSP is proposed for very
large data assessing, terrain modelling and visualisation.
The flood spreading algorithm is based on the FRSA
proposed. Further work will include flooding model
refinement of the algorithm, the use of a view-adaptive
cell density level for more accuracy, efficiency and
realism, terrain enhancement by adding 3D features, such
as trees and houses that will be recognised from images
(such as aviation and satellite images). In this case the
3D features identified will be reconstructed
automatically based on the information from the image
processing.

[9]
[10]

[11]
[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

K. Alfredsen, “Simulation of human impacts on flood
regimes – the design of an object-oriented integration
framework”, Proceedings of Hydroinformatics, The
University of Iowa, 2000.
K. Alfredsen and B. Saether, “An object-oriented
application framework for building water resource
information and planning tools applied to the design of a
flood analysis system”, Journal of Environmental
Modeling and Software, 15: 215-224, 2000.
N. Ahuja and C. Nash,“Octree representation of moving
objects”, Proceedings of Computer Vision, Graphics, and
Image Processing, 26:207–216, 1984.
D. Comaniciu and P. Meer, “Robust analysis of feature
spaces: Color image segmentation”, Proceedings of
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition '97, IEEE
Computer Society Press, 1997.
H. H. Chen and T. S. Huang, “A survey of construction
and manipulation of octrees”, Proceedings of Computer
Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing, 43:409–431,
1988.
A. Dubicki and K. Stronska, “Development of a physical
based Flood Forecasting System on the Upper and.
Middle Odra”, DHI- Water and Environment, Flood
Management Department, Denmark and UK, 2000.
M. A. Duchaineau, M. Wolinsky, D. E. Sigeti, M. C.
Miller, C. Aldrich and M. B. Mineev-Weinstein,
“ROAMing terrain: real-time optimally adapting
meshes”, Proceedings of the 8th conference on
Visualization '97. Phoenix, Arizona, United States, IEEE
Computer Society Press, pp. 81–88, 1997.
M. Gianinetto, P. Villa and G. Lechi, “Postflood
Damage Evaluation Using Landsat TM and ETM+ Data
Integrated With DEM”, Journal of IEEE Transactions on

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[16]

[17]
[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]

Geoscience and Remote Sensing, Vol. 44, NO. 1,
January 2006.
P. R. V. Gardingen, G. M. Foody, and P. J Curran,
Scaling-up: From Cell to Landscape, Cambridge
University Press, pp. 1-5, 1997.
A. T. Haile and T. H. M. Rientjes, “Effects of LIDAR
Dem Resolution in Flood Modeling: A Model Sensitivity
Study for the City of Tegucigalpa, Honduras”,
Proceedings of ISPRS WG III/3, III/4, V/3 Workshop,
"Laser scanning 2005", Enschede, the Netherlands,
September 12-14, 2005.
M.S. Horritt, “A methodology for the validation of
uncertain flood inundation models”, Journal of
Hydrology, IEE, 2005.
T. Hori and M. Shiiba, “Micro Model Simulation Tools
for Performance-based Design of a Flood Risk
Management System”, Journal of Natural Disaster
Science, Volume 26, Number 2, pp. 73-80, 2004.
P. Lindstrom, D. Koller, W. Ribarsky, L. F. Hodges,
N. Faust and G. A.Turner, “Real-time, continuous level
of detail rendering of height fields”, Proceedings of
SIGGRAPH 1996, August 1996.
Y. L. Liu and Z. H. Miao, “Key Technique of Floods
Prevention Information System Based on GIS”,
Proceedings of Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Symposium, 2005, IGARSS’05, 2005 IEEE International
Volume 6, pp. 4395-4398, 25-29 July 2005.
G. Ohashi and Y. Shimodaira, “Edge-based feature
extraction method and its application to image retrieval”,
Proceedings of 7th World Multi-conference on
Systemics,Cybernetics and Informatics, Florida, USA,
2003.
S. Ravela and R. Manmatha, “Retrieving images by
similarity of visual appearance”, Proceedings of IEEE
Workshop on Content Based Access of Images and
Videos (CAIVL ’97), pp. 67–74, June 1997.
L. C. Smith, Satellite remote sensing of river inundation
area, stage, and discharge: a review, Journal of
Hydrological Processes, 11: 1427-1439, 1997.
M. Tanigawa, T. Takahashi, T. Koto, I. Takeuchi and I.
Noda, “Urban Flood Simulation as a component of
integrated earthquake Disaster Simulation System”,
Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE, International Workshop
on Safety, Security and Rescue Robotics Kobe, Japan,
June 2005.
Q. L. Tan, S. W. Bi, J. P. Hu and Z. J. Liu, “Measuring
lake water level using multi-source remote sensing
images combined with hydrological statistical data”,
Proceedings of Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Symposium, IGARSS '04, 2004 IEEE International,
2004.
T. Ulrich, “Continuous LOD Terrain Meshing Using
Adaptive Quadtrees”, Game Technology, 2000.
http://www.gamasutra.com/features/20000228/ulrich_pfv
.htm
X. Y. Ying, S. S. Y. Wang and A. A. Khan, “Numerical
Simulation of Flood Inundation Due To Dam and Levee
Breach”, Proceedings of World Water and
Environmental Resources Congress, 2003.
Earth observatory url: http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/
Newsroom/NewImages/images_topic.php3?topic=life&i
mg_id=16881
http://webgis.wr.usgs.gov/pigwad/tutorials/planetarygis/p
lanetary_gis_faq.htm#mirror

