Hello World
(Illuminated Script)
Margaret Dolinsky
Indiana University Bloomington
{dolinsky@indiana.edu}
Abstract
“Hello World (Illuminated Script)” is projectionbased virtual reality art that illustrates the illumination
of the eye over the surface of a painting. The painted
surface is constructed and deconstructed as the visitor’s
gaze experiences the multiple aspects of a face on the
screen. The facial images transform as if they are
journeying forward into the eye and back again. The
portraiture is based on Eastern Orthodox iconography.
Keywords--- digital painting, projection, fine arts,
illumination, iconography, arts and humanities

1. Illuminated Script

religious icon “The Saviour” (1360) found in the Andrej
Rublev Museum in Moscow [1]. Rublev is the founding
father of Eastern Orthodox iconography and introduced
an emotional element to the Byzantine style.
The digital imagery of “Hello World (Illuminated
Script)” captures the viewer in a metaphoric journey that
resituates the traversal through the frozen moment
encapsulated in iconic portrait painting. The voyage
begins within the eye, continues outside of the eye and
reveals the face as it encounters the world. Ultimately,
the outer skin is exposed in its fullest form, three
dimensionally. The original 2D digital painting
restructures and reforms its self through 3D modelling
software. The painting and its multiple layers of facial
forms gradually reveal the subjective multi-faceted self.

“Hello World (Illuminated Script)” explores the
creative activity in digital paintings as frozen moments
of time. The images transform and animate through
projection technology. By presenting the facial elements
as multiple layers which manifests in drawing, painting
and 3D computer graphics, the visitor searches the
multiple layers that occur when resolving an image. The
work is also an effort to deconstruct the painted gaze and
illuminate an aesthetic path for viewers.
The animation “Hello World (Illuminated Script)”
got its name because Hello World is the first thing that
one usually learns in programming. This rudimentary
programming exercise allows the computer to respond in
what seems like a sentient manner. In my work, a visual
projection with a light stream creates an illuminated
version of this greeting and allows the computer to
appear as an otherworldly being. See Figure 1.
Through the interactive progression of viewing
computer images the visitor discovers the result of
computer scripting. Typically, computer scripting refers
to the positioning of language for declarations. In
computer arts, linguistic scripting occurs in conjunction
with the revelations of multiple layers of imagery.
“Hello World (Illuminated Script)” is an
interpretation of the painted gaze through the Russian

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 1. Hello World (Illuminated Script) by
M. Dolinsky. 2006. Animation still.

Only during one moment in the animation does the
visitor achieve the opportunity to see the fully formed
face in the moving images. The animation demands that
the visitor’s gaze holdfast through the sequence in order
to capture the full sense of the form. Through a series of
deconstructions, the visual imagery builds up and down,
moving forward and backward to reveal the journey
between inner and outer self. For one still frame of the
eyes being formed and looking out, see Figure 2.

In this creation, the projection screen becomes both
scenography and drama. The images are superimposed
on the actors, The lights and images flooding the stage
renders the space to be all the more immersive with
animated colors, shapes and form. See Figure 3. The
screens themselves surround the performers so that the
cyber networks of time and digital space create opposing
spaces of here and there, present and past. The evocative
and narrative moments are infused with the projection of
lights that act as both imagery and energy.

Acknowledgements
The Indiana University New Frontiers in the Arts
and Humanities Program, Mary Margaret Barr-Koon
Foundation, the Jacobs School of Music, the Early Music
Institute, the UITS Advanced Visualization Lab, and the
Hope School of Fine Arts have generously provided
support for the Fleury production.
Figure 2. “Hello World (Illuminated Script)” by
M. Dolinsky 2006. Animation still. In a
deconstruction series, the visual imagery
transforms between drawing and painting and
the inner and outer self.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]

http://www.christusrex.org/www2/art/icons.htm
http://www.artmuseum.iu.edu/
http://dolinsky.fa.indiana.edu/fleury

In early renditions of discovering computer-scripting
language, one learns how to program the computer to
respond “Hello World.” The animation reconstructs
welcoming computer scripting as a graphical scripture
that travels from within and without, revealing
conceptualizations of the self and illuminating artistry of
the scientific instrument, a computer. The final projected
animation represents a sacrament between spiritual
reconstruction and illuminated computer script.

2. Art in Performance
The first two public exhibitions of “Hello World
(Illuminated Script)” occurred at the Indiana University
Art Museum in the art exhibition “A Bloomington
Biennial: Faculty Artists from IU's Hope School of Fine
Arts” and a dramatic performance in January 2007[2].
The screen performance occurred during the unique
production of the French Medieval Latin liturgical drama
Interfectio Puerorum or “Massacre of the Innocents”
based on the 13th century Fleury Playbook [3]. The
Indiana University Early Music Institute, HR Hope
School of Fine Arts, and the School of Music joined
forces with Director Timothy Nelson staging the
Interfectio—arguably the most innovative Fleury play
with its dramatic story of infanticide and apocalypse by
King Herod shortly after Christ's birth.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 3. Performers interact with the imagery
and energy from projection light. Scene from
the medieval drama “Massacre of the
Innocents” presented in Bloomington, Indiana
with the Indiana University Early Music Institute,
IU School of Music, IU School of Fine Arts with
staging by Director Timothy Nelson.

