Evaluating the Comprehension of Euler Diagrams
Florence Benoy and Peter Rodgers
University of Kent

Abstract
We describe an empirical investigation into layout criteria
that can help with the comprehension of Euler diagrams.
Euler diagrams are used to represent set inclusion in
applications such as teaching set theory, database
querying, software engineering, filing system organisation
and bio-informatics. Research in automatically laying out
Euler diagrams for use with these applications is at an
early stage, and our work attempts to aid this research by
informing layout designers about the importance of various
Euler diagram aesthetic criteria. The three criteria under
investigation were: contour jaggedness, zone area
inequality and edge closeness. Subjects were asked to
interpret diagrams with different combinations of levels for
each of the criteria. Results for this investigation indicate
that, within the parameters of the study, all three criteria
are important for understanding Euler diagrams and we
have a preliminary indication of the ordering of their
importance.
Keywords

Euler diagrams, graph drawing.
1: INTRODUCTION

Euler diagrams, represented by interlinking sets, are
becoming a widely used technique in information
visualization. Often, items shown as dots or graphs are
present in the diagram to indicate which sets particular
items belong to. A simple Euler diagram is shown in Figure
1. The circular lines, called contours, intersect. The separate
areas produced by the intersections are called zones. In this
paper we label the contours. The zones can be described by
the contours in which they are contained. In this paper we
do not consider the outside zone not contained by any
contours. One of the main advantages of Euler diagrams is
that they allow the visualization of n-ary relationships,
using containment and intersection in a mathematically
rigorous framework. As a result they represent richer
concepts than alternative visualization systems, such as
graphs, which are restricted to binary relationships.
It should be noted that these diagrams are often inaccurately
called Venn diagrams. In fact, Venn diagrams are a special
case of Euler diagrams, where every possible zone is
present. The diagram in Figure 1 is not a Venn diagram
because the zones ac and abc are not present, whereas the
diagram in Figure 2 is a Venn diagram.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

b
a

c

Figure 1. An Euler Diagram with with contours: a,
b and c; and zones: a b c ab bc.

The automated layout of any kind of diagram carries with it
the problem of discerning the criteria for the layout that will
most effectively allow the user to interpret the diagram in
the intended way. For example, with graphs, certain
features such as line crossings are known to have an
inhibiting effect on comprehension and consequently most
algorithms have metrics that allow them to reduce the
number of crossings as far as possible. However, the effect
of other criteria and the possible interactions between
criteria in particular contexts is less well understood and in
practice may be based on cognitive theory and intuition on
the part of the researchers and their colleagues. Studies that
seek to validate (or otherwise) commonly used criteria by
empirical investigation have been pioneered by Purchase
[11,13].
The automatic layout of Euler diagrams has only recently
been investigated. A multicriteria optimizing system was
developed [6], which attempts to improve several metrics,
each of which represents an aesthetic feature of the Euler
diagram. However, the initial choice of both metrics and the
notion of optimal in connection with each of the metrics,
was ad hoc and the method employed defining the relative
weights assigned to them was not rigorous. This paper starts
the process of putting the use of such criteria on a more
scientific footing by describing an empirical investigation
that compares the effectiveness of metrics for laying out
Euler diagrams.
A challenging aspect of Euler diagram layout is embedding
the diagram, that is, going from an abstract representation,
where just the set intersections are known to a diagram with
a layout in 2 dimensional space, so visualizing the set
intersections. Generating such an embedding is not a fully
solved problem. Flower and Howse [5] implement a
mechanism for embedding Euler diagrams under strong

wellformedness conditions, where the contours must only
meet transversely without sharing line segments and only
two contours may meet at any point. As the wellformedness
conditions are relaxed, more diagrams can be drawn [4,12].
These embeddings are not typically aesthetically pleasing,
and hence work has been performed in improving the
layout of embedded diagrams [6]. This work was extended
to Euler diagrams enhanced with graphs [10].
The research question we address is the confirmation or
otherwise that three particular criteria really do facilitate the
comprehension of Euler diagrams and, if possible, to infer
an ordering of importance on these criteria. The
investigation described here relates specifically to Euler
diagrams but the associations are abstract. It could be
argued that with only abstract associations the possibility of
implicit associations from life experience coming into play
is reduced. The choice of criteria under investigation was
directed by the metrics used by the multicriteria optimizer
of [6]. Several of these metrics were amalgamated into
three criteria: Contour Jaggedness, Zone Area Inequality
and Edge Closeness. The outcome of the investigation
suggests that all three of these criteria, particularly Contour
Jaggedness and Edge Closeness have an important impact
on comprehension. However, it is apparent that as the
diagrams become more complex, interactions between these
criteria come into play and further investigation is
warranted.
Euler diagrams are used in a wide variety of applications
such as visualizing biological data (see Figure 2), visual file
system organisation (see Figure 3) and database queries
(see Figure 4). Further applications include the familiar use
of these diagrams to teach set theory in school, as well as
software engineering diagrams [7] and visualizing the
overlap of several diagnostic tests.
Euler diagrams are closely related to extended graph
notations such as hypergraphs and higraphs [8,9]. These are
graphs with some notion of containment and are widely
used. For example, several UML diagram types use variants
of graph notation extended with containment.
There are widely available software tools for visualizing
Euler diagrams. Microsoft PowerPoint 2003 includes a
‘Venn diagram’ option as one of its six built in diagram
types; in fact, this option produces Euler diagrams when the
number of circles increases beyond three. The site
venndiagrams.com has a database of over 10,000 diagrams
created by users of its online application, which visualizes
3-set Venn diagrams.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section
2 gives the design of the investigation; Section 3 details the
results, and our interpretation of the data. Section 4
summarizes the paper and gives some further research
directions.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Attribute A

Attribute B
8%

20%

15%

12%
10%

10%
25%

Attribute C
Figure 2. A visualization of biological data. The
areas of the zones relates to the percentages of
proteins having particular attributes.

Research

Bid doc
Bid costs

Research
Bid costs
Bid doc
IV study
Teaching
IV study
Tutees
Administration
Tutees
Budget
Meeting

IV study

Teaching
Tutees
Budget
Meeting

Administration

Figure 3. On the left is a Euler diagram based on VennFS
[3], showing an Eueler based visualization of a file system.
Here, unlike traditional hierarchical file views, shown on the
right, documents can be in more than one folder. The ‘IV
study’ file relates to both research and teaching, and can be
placed in both categories. Similarly, the ‘tutees’ file is in two
categories. In a hierarchical view either one of the categories
must be chosen, or the files must duplicated.

painters

poets
XIX Century
Figure 4. Based on [12] An Euler diagram representing
part of a multimedia database. Here, the diagram
indicates that there is only data on painters that are
poets or alive in the XIX century, and there is no data
for painters that are not also in either category.

Diagram Euler.4.9 variant hll

Diagram Venn.3 variant lhl

Diagram Euler.4.7 variant llh

Diagram Euler.4.9 variant hhh

Diagram Venn.3 variant lll

Diagram Euler.4.7 variant hlh

Figure 5. Some example diagrams.
2: EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN

2.1: The Criteria

The study was designed to gauge the effect of certain layout
criteria on the capacity of users to interpret Euler diagrams
correctly. To do this we tested the ability of subjects to find
the zones in Euler diagrams. The measurements for the
metrics were complex and in some cases a wide range of
measurements qualified for what was deemed to be a good
layout. We labelled each diagram with a level of low or
high according to each of the 3 criteria. The actual numeric
values could not be compared across criteria as the ranges
differed substantially. The subjective viewpoint held by the
implementers of the metrics was that despite these different
ranges over the three metrics, overall, the lower the metric,
the more likely the outcome was to produce a diagram
layout that was good. Each diagram had low or high levels
for each of the three criteria and each different combination
of levels is known as a variant of a particular diagram.
Hence, each diagram had 8 variants in all.

The criteria we chose to investigate were based on our
experience with automatically laying out Euler diagrams.
For a complete block design, the number of diagrams that
need to be shown to subjects increases exponentially with
the number of criteria. For this reason and because this was
a preliminary investigation of this type, we chose to keep
the design as simple as possible whilst still being useful and
we limited the study to just three criteria. We chose the
three that seemed most likely to facilitate comprehension.
This choice was based on the findings of research into
graph drawing aesthetics and the experiences of the hill
climbing optimizer team.
The number of contours and zones was limited by the actual
size of the screen display and by our estimation of what we
might reasonably expect our subjects to cope with, given
the task. The complexity range of the diagrams shown in
the main study was informed by what we learned in the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 6. This is a screenshot of the software with diagram Euler.4.7, variant hhl. The
zones in this diagram are: a b c d ab bc bd.

pilot studies, for example, we withdrew one of our initial
set of diagrams altogether, as too complex, see The
Experimental Methodology on page 5. Figure 5 gives some
examples of the diagrams presented to the subjects. There
were three different logical diagrams: Euler.4.9, a four
contour Euler diagram with 9 zones; Euler.4.7, a four
contour Euler diagram with 7 zones; and Venn.3, the Venn
diagram with 3 contours.
The chosen criteria were: Contour Jaggedness, Zone Area
Inequality and Edge Closeness. When describing the
diagram variants, the convention we use is to take the
criteria in the order: Contour Jaggedness, Zone Area
Inequality and Edge Closeness, so that hhh is high for all
the criteria, whereas, hlh is high for Contour Jaggedness
and Edge Closeness, but low for the middle criterion, Zone
Area Inequality.
The criteria in detail are:
•

Contour Jaggedness relates to the continuousness of the
contour lines. This means that smooth lines would have
a relatively low measurement and jagged lines a high
one. The diagram on the top left of Figure 5 has a high
Contour Jaggedness measurement, but is rated low for
the other two criteria.

•

Zone Area Inequality relates to the relative sizes of the
zone areas. An uneven distribution, with some zones
very large and some very small will have a high
measurement, whereas an even distribution with all
zones closer in size will have a low one. The diagram

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

on the top right of Figure 5 has a high Zone Area
Inequality level, but is low in the other two criteria.
•

Edge Closeness relates to the closeness of lines from
different contours. Diagrams with lines close together
for large sections have high measurements, diagrams
with lines always diverging will have low ones. The
diagram on the middle left of Figure 5 has a high Edge
Closeness level, but is low in the other two criteria.

2.2: Generation of the Test Diagrams

The starting point for all of the diagrams was generated
using the diagram layout method described in [6] with the
settings that had been assessed as the most effective. The
effectiveness of those settings was based on the visual
perception of the researchers. The quality metrics for each
diagram were recorded and then the diagram was adjusted
by hand in order to toggle one or two of the attributes from
the initial low measure to a high one. Maintaining uniform
zone areas whilst toggling the other two attributes of the
diagrams was not straightforward and the acceptable range
of numeric values for both the low and high measures of
Zone Area Inequality were uniformly wider than for the
other two criteria.
2.3: Software

The study required software that could display an Euler
diagram, take as input the zones the subject thinks are
present in the diagram, and output the results for all of the
diagrams at the end of the session. Figure 6 shows a screen
shot of the system in operation. The check boxes on the

right correspond to all possible zones for the given
contours. The subject then checks the boxes corresponding
to the zones that he thinks are present in the diagram. After
clicking “OK” for a diagram, the diagram was removed and
the timing was paused, allowing subjects to take a rest, if
they wished. The subject clicks the “Next” button to move
on to the next test. After all the diagrams were presented to
the subject, the results were displayed in a scrolling window
containing all the diagrams, the subject’s answer and the
correct answer.
It was considered that logging a subject’s responses using
the check box in the way outlined above was less prone to
accidental error than requiring the subjects to type in their
solutions. Also, having a list of possible zones would
further reduce the possibility of typing errors. It is
inevitable that for the more complex diagrams subjects will
develop strategies for finding solutions that will vary both
between and within the individual subjects. By including
the subject in our statistical models we hoped to take
account of this effect as far as possible.
2.4: The Experimental Methodology

The study consists of subjects attempting to choose the
correct zones for each of a sequence of Euler diagrams. For
the main study we had 3 different diagrams and 8
combinations of the three criteria: Contour Jaggedness,
Zone Area Inequality and Edge Closeness. This gives a
total of 24 main diagrams, some of which are shown in
Figure 5. The subjects were given one of 24 randomized
sequences of diagrams, this number is coincidentally the
same as the number of main diagrams. At the beginning of
the session the subjects were asked to read through a
handout explaining the requirements of trials. This was
accompanied by a verbal introduction to the material in the
handout and a by a demonstration of the task and the
opportunity to ask questions. Before the main set of
diagrams the subjects were given 8 training diagrams, each
of which was immediately followed by feedback on their
performance and the correct solution. At the end of the
session the subjects were given their results, in the form of
a screen display that showed them all the diagrams they had
been tested on, and an indication of how they performed on
each. They were then asked to fill in a questionnaire and
given a debriefing document explaining the nature of the
study.
We carried out two pilot studies to check our methodology.
The first was with six postgraduate students in the
Computing Laboratory. As in the main study, we paid the
students £5 for attending and a further £5 for a high score,
in order to motivate their performance. However, for the
main tests an additional prize of £10 was awarded to the
subject who performed the best. The subjects were told that
this prize would be awarded to the subject with the most
accurate result, using time as a tie-break. The first pilot
went well with all but one student scoring highly, and all
finishing within 45 minutes. We were concerned that
subjects may have become too familiar with the study
investigations, as the majority of them had taken part in

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

previous pilot studies [1,2], therefore we conducted another
pilot study using contacts at the University of Brighton,
where we had eight subjects. Again, these subjects were in
the main postgraduates, but also included two members of
staff. This time two subjects experienced real difficulties,
with low numbers of correct solutions and taking well over
an hour to finish. Two subjects indicated in the
questionnaire that the tests had a high difficulty level.
Consequently we reduced the number of main test diagrams
to 24 from 32 by removing the 8 variants of one diagram
that results from the pilot indicated were the most difficult.
Whilst at Brighton, we invited members of staff,
experienced in empirical studies to observe the trials, and
comment. They indicated general satisfaction with the
methodology; however they did suggest that we reduce the
high score threshold, so that more students in the main
study would reach the threshold. This would support the
idea that the additional payment was simply an incentive to
take the tasks seriously as the purpose of the study was to
evaluate the layout criteria not the subjects.
The subjects for our main study were computing
undergraduates. We used computing students both because
they were the most accessible, and because they have some
knowledge of set theory which is taught using similar
diagrams during the first year of study. Hence, the subjects
would not require an introduction to Euler diagrams, only to
the problem specification and the environment. Also these
students could well be representative of the population from
which practitioners who might use or be involved in the
automated generation of Euler diagrams might be drawn.
Each task by each subject was monitored in two ways: i)
the time taken to complete the task and ii) whether the task
was successfully completed or not. A task was successfully
completed when all of the zones present in the diagram and
only those zones present in the diagram had been ticked.
3: RESULTS

This section is in three parts, first, the data is summarised in
two bar charts, second the statistical results are presented,
and finally an interpretation and discussion of these
outcomes is given.
For the purpose of this analysis, recall:
There are 3 distinct diagrams Venn.3 - the complete Venn
diagram with 3 contours and 7 zones, Euler.4.6 – an Euler
diagram with 4 contours and 6 zones and Euler.4.9 – an
Euler diagram with 4 contours and 9 zones.
variant – a diagram variant is distinguishable by the ratings
of high or low associated with the 3 qualities:
•

contour jaggedness

•

zone area inequality

•

edge closeness

There were 3 distinct diagrams, with 8 variants of each so
24 tasks in all.

There were 49 subjects taking part in the study.

Average Times by Variant & Diagram
Successes Only
100

Seconds

correct – a subject either successfully identifies all of the
zones in the diagram in which case he succeeds or he does
not, in which case he fails. We have not considered the
results for partially correct failures as the reasons for not
identifying the zones correctly could be very diverse, for
example a distraction. Our analysis simply focuses on the
correct solutions.

80
60
40
20

3.1: Summary of the Data

A subject’s score is the number of tasks completed
successfully. The scores ranged from as little as 3 to the
maximum 24. Of the 49 subjects, 5 scored less than 12, but
11 scored the full 24. 85% (42) of the subjects scored 17 or
more out of the possible 24 and 77% of the subjects (38)
scored 20 or more out of 24. The average times for each
subject over all 24 trials ranged between approximately 30
and 90 seconds. It is interesting to note that over the high
scores there is a wide range of average times whereas over
the low scores there are relatively more high average times,
suggesting that those people with low scores actually spent
more time trying to find the correct solution.
The data in Figures 8 and 9 is ordered by the overall
number of successes by variant in order to highlight any
difference between performance over a particular diagram
and performance overall. For each variant of each diagram,
Figure 8 displays the total number of successes. The lowest
number of successes occurs when Contour Jaggedness,
Zone Area Inequality and Edge Closeness are all high, but
the highest number is not when they are all low, although
the difference between the successes for lll and both lhl
(Zone Area Inequality high) and hll (Contour Jaggedness
high) is small. Note that when Edge Closeness is the only
attribute that is high (llh) the number of successes in the
most complex diagram Euler.4.9 is far less than when both
Contour Jaggedness and Zone area are high (hhl), giving a
preliminary indication of the importance of edge closeness
as the diagrams become more complex.

Successes by Variant & Diagram
Successes (Max 49)

50
40

0

hhh

hlh

llh

Venn.3

lhh

hhl

Euler.4.6

lll

lhl

Euler.4.9

Figure 9
Figures 9 displays the average times, for each variant of
each of the 3 diagrams, Venn.3, Euler.4.7 and Euler.4.9
ordered by the number of successes as in Figure 8. As in
Figure 8 there is an indication, as expected that the more
complex the diagram the more difficult it is to discern
which zones are present and which are not. The shortest
times are actually associated with the variant that is low for
all three attributes (lll).
Statistical Analysis
The investigation was carried out with a randomised
complete block design. Each of the 24 different diagrams
was presented to each subject allowing a within subject
design. The data is considered with respect to i) success or
failure and ii) the time taken for each task. Tables 1 – 3
show which factors and interactions were significant with
their p-values (most are <0.01). The p-value is the
probability that the null hypothesis: the variation is random
and that the factor has had no effect, is rejected when it is
true.
Success or failure

Success is modelled as 1 and failure as 0. Since the
dependent variable is discrete with only two possible
values, the logistic regression model is used. All factors
were taken into account including the session and the
possible interactions between the diagrams and individual
criteria and between the criteria themselves. The outcome
of statistical analysis is shown in Table 1.

30

Factors

20
10
0

hhh

hlh

llh

Venn.3

lhh

hhl

Euler.4.6

lll

lhl

Euler.4.9

Figure 8

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

hll

hll

p-value
<0.001

Subject, Diagram, Jagged, Edge

0.002

Session

0.004

Jagged.Zone

0.028

Jagged.Edge
Table 1 Success or Failure

Time taken

The distribution of the data over the time is slightly skewed,
so the analysis is carried out over ln(Time) allowing a
normal distribution. An analysis of variance performed over
ln(Time) for all of the data returned similar significant
effects to that over success or failure, as shown in Table 2.
p-value
<0.001
0.003
0.004

Factors
Diagram,
Jagged,
Diagram.Jagged.Edge,
Diagram.Unmooth.Zone
Zone
Diagram.Zone.Edge

Edge,

Table 2 Analysis of Variance –Time (All data)

However, the times in Table 2 include those for incorrect
solutions. Although this data is not inconsequential, there
could be many reasons for incorrect solutions, apart from
having difficulty in understanding the diagram. For
example, the subject may simply misread the check box
label or be concerned that the trial is taking too long. Hence
an analysis was also conducted over the correct responses.
An analysis of variance over the time taken as ln(Time) for
correct solutions returns the effects shown in Table 3.
p-value
<0.001

Factors
Diagram, Subject, Jagged, Edge, Zone,
Diagram.Jagged.Edge, Diagram.Jagged.Zone

0.010
0.028

Diagram.Zone.Edge
Diagram.Edge

Table 3 Analysis of Variance – Time (Correct data)

The means over correct responses and ln(Time) for Degree,
Year of Study and Gender do not indicate significant
differences, but, of the 49 subjects, only 6 were studying
joint honours degrees, only 6 were female and the number
of subjects over the Years 1, 2, and 3 was 31, 17 and 1
respectively, so there is a lack of evidence with regard to
these parameters.
3.2: Our interpretation of the results and discussion

A primary concern when evaluating subject responses,
especially with respect to understanding is that the subject
should understand the tasks they have been set. A score as
low as 3 out of 24 suggests that the subject may not have
understood the object of the tasks. However, the
predominance (77%) of scores of 20+ is an indicator that
for the most part the subjects did understand the nature of
the tasks they were set.
The data by variant and by diagram (figures 8 and 9) serve
to indicate that the diagrams vary in complexity of
understanding as expected, namely, in ascending order of
difficulty: Venn 3, Euler 4.7 and Euler 4.9. Since the nature
of the task is such that the whole diagram must be inspected
in order to find the solution, the ordering simply confirms
expectation that as the number of contours increase and the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

number of zones increases, identifying the zones becomes
harder.
The indication of an effect by Diagram, seen in figures 8
and 9 is also confirmed in tables 1, 2 and 3. From Table 1 it
appears that Contour Jaggedness and Edge Closeness are
more important than Zone Area Inequality, but as the times
are taken into account first over all data and then over the
correct solutions the importance of Zone Area Inequality
becomes apparent. From all three statistical tests there is
strong evidence to suggest that all three factors under
consideration are important both as independent factors and
as interactions with Diagram. Note that the interaction
between Diagram, Zone Area Inequality and Edge
Closeness is more apparent in the data over the correct
solutions.
The interaction between Diagram, Contour Jaggedness and
Edge Closeness (Tables 1 and 2) is also evident in Figure 8
which shows that when Contour Jaggedness and Edge
Closeness are both low the number of successes for each
diagram is almost the same; however, when both are high,
i) the number of successes decreases and ii) the time taken
for success increases, rapidly in proportion to the increase
in complexity of the diagram.
The evidence here strongly suggests that all three of the
chosen criteria affect the understanding of Euler diagrams,
most particularly Contour Jaggedness and Edge Closeness.
Closer inspection of the differences between the means for
ln(Time) for correct solutions (success) allows an ordering
on these criteria (ascending): Zone Area, Contour
Jaggedness, Edge Closeness. However, given the evidence
to suggest that interactions become more pronounced as the
diagrams become more complex, it would not be sensible to
predict a weighting between these criteria until further
investigations have been carried out.
4: SUMMARY

This work is a preliminary step into using empirical
evidence to support decisions concerning the metrics that
mandate automated layout of Euler diagrams. Our
investigation shows there is strong evidence to support the
three chosen factors as important with regard to diagram
layout.
It appears that the interactions between criteria become
more pronounced as the diagrams become more complex,
and in the light of this, further investigations could be
conducted. By reducing the number of tasks and increasing
the complexity of the diagrams it may be possible to qualify
by degree the relationships between the various criteria of
diagram layout and specify more precisely which
interactions are the most important.
There is also a need for further work to expand the criteria
investigated as other factors such as contour size and line
intersection angle could affect the understanding of Euler
diagrams. Another possible area of investigation relates to
the notion that some Euler diagrams cannot be drawn

without triple points, contours sharing line segments or
contours taking figure of eight shapes, and it would be
useful to discover the implications of such features on user
comprehension.
Other important future work is in looking at the
effectiveness of Euler diagrams in the context of application
areas. This could include investigations examining how
users interact with Euler diagrams when attempting to
complete real world tasks. Many of the application areas
rely on graph enhanced Euler diagrams, and so it would be
useful to initiate investigations into the comprehension of
these structures.
REFERENCES

1. John Bovey, Florence Benoy, and Peter Rodgers. Using
Games to Investigate Movement for Graph
Comprehension. Proc. Advanced Visual Interfaces: AVI
2004. pages 71-79. ACM, May 2004.

5. J. Flower and J. Howse. Generating Euler Diagrams,
Proc. Diagrams 2002, Springer Verlag, 61-75.
6. Jean Flower, Peter Rodgers, and Paul Mutton. Layout
Metrics for Euler Diagrams. In Seventh International
Conference on Information Visualization (IV03), pages
272-280. IEEE, 2003.
7. J. Gil, J. Howse and S. Kent. Towards a Formalization
of Constraint Diagrams, Proceedings of Human-Centric
Computing (HCC 2001) Stresa, Italy, IEEE Computer
Society Press, 72-79. 2001.
8. David Harel. On Visual Formalisms. Communications
of the ACM. 31(5). pp. 514-530. 1988.
9. Higraph web page: http://db.uwaterloo.ca/~gweddell/
higraph/higraph.html.
10.P. Mutton, P. Rodgers and J. Flower. Drawing Graphs in
Euler Diagrams. Proc. Diagrams 2004. LNAI 2980.
Springer Verlag. 66-81.

2. John Bovey, Peter Rodgers, and Florence Benoy.
Movement as an Aid to Understanding Graphs. In
Seventh International Conference on Information
Visualization (IV03), pages 472-478. IEEE, 2003.

11.H.C. Purchase, R.F. Cohen and M. James. Validating
Graph Drawing Aesthetics. Validating Graph Drawing
Aesthetics. GD95, LNCS 1027. Springer-Verlag, pages
435-446. 1995

3. R. De Chiara, U Erra and V. Scarano. VENNFS: A
Venn-Diagram File Manager. Proc. IEEE Information
Visualization (IV03). pages 120-126. 2003.

12.A. Verroust and M.-L. Viaud. Ensuring the Drawability
of Extended Euler Diagrams for up to 8 Sets. Proc.
Diagrams 2004. LNAI 2980. Springer Verlag. 128-141.

4. S. Chow and F. Ruskey. Drawing Area-Proportional
Venn and Euler Diagrams. Proc. GD2003. LNCS 2912.
Springer Verlag.

13.C. Ware, H.C. Purchase, L. Colpoys and M. McGill.
Cognitive measurements of graph aesthetics.
Information Visualization, 1(2), pages 103-110, 2000.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

