WET: a prototype of an Exploratory Search System for Web Mining to assess
Usability
Víctor Pascual, Juan Carlos Dürsteler
Web Research Group. Department of Information and Communication Technologies
Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
{victor.pascual@upf.edu, jcarlos.dursteler@upf.edu}
Abstract

Analysing the evolution of a site and the behaviour
of its users has become a crucial work in order to let the
webmasters and the owners of web sites to enhance their
site in terms of structure and contents. Data mining
techniques provide many metrics and statistics useful to
understand the structure of a website, and the use its
users make of it, but they are still not easy to interpret
and to understand. Most of these metrics can also be
combined, in order to discover new trends and patterns.
We present a preliminary prototype of an exploratory
search system for web mining which main goal is to
provide a set of tools and visual representations that
allow the user to explore and to decide how to represent
the available data. This approach defines a system that
will help us to evaluate the usability of the implemented
interactions and visual metaphors.
Keywords--- Information Visualisation, Usability,
Exploratory Search, Radial Tree.

1. Introduction
The importance of the Web has increased rapidly
due to its massive usage and its ability to facilitate
business transactions. This evolution has created an
increasing interest in its growth and usage.
A website must be easy to navigate and users must
be able to effortlessly find the information they look for.
That means that it must contain the information that the
webmaster wants to show, but also the information
related to it that the users look for.
In order to improve the site and to satisfy the users’
requirements, there is a need to formulate an
understanding of how the site is structured, how the
existing content is linked and how the users behave once
they are inside the site. In other words, there is a need to
understand and discover the patterns that lie beneath a
website.
A lot of information can be extracted from a
website. Each and every simple piece of information that

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

can be retrieved can also be of a crucial importance in
order to discover a new trend or behaviour of the users of
a site, or even of the evolution of the structure of the site
itself with time. The information sources in that case, are
the public files that make up the website and all kind of
log files that can be stored in the web server or even on
the users' computer (for instance, cookies).
Web mining techniques must be used to extract this
information. Web mining is the overall process of
discovering potentially useful and previously unknown
information or knowledge from the Web data. This
process can be categorised into three areas of interest
based on which part of the Web to mine [1]:
•
•
•

Web Structure Mining (WSM): Involves mining
the web document’s structure and links.
Web Content Mining (WCM): Describes the
discovery of useful information from the content
of a website.
Web Usage Mining (WUM): Deals with the data
from Web server access logs data resulting from
users’ interactions.

Although web mining techniques are very powerful,
the amount of information they provide could lead to an
overwhelming amount of data difficult to interpret and to
digest. Most of the commercial and non-commercial
systems existing nowadays do not provide a way to
facilitate the navigation and exploration of such data.
The intertwining disciplines of Information
Visualisation and Exploratory Search represent a good
approach to provide the user a better way to understand
Web Mining data. Information Visualisation has to be
addressed not just for its knowledge transfer capabilities,
but also for its value in creating an appealing
environment that encourages the user to explore and to
navigate trough the data space.
Moreover, adding several ways to interact with such
a system will suggest the creation of an Exploratory
Search system. A big amount of data and an appealing
way to represent it is not enough to help the webmasters
find new trends and patterns. In Exploratory Search,

users generally combine querying and browsing
strategies to foster learning and investigation.
On the other hand, as stated in [2], “as the
information visualisation community matures, the
evaluation of information visualisation techniques is
becoming more prevalent”.
With our work we aim at developing a customisable
exploratory search system for WUM and WSM data to
further amplify the perception of extracted patterns or to
visually explore new ones. This tool will help us
understand and identify the strong and weak points of the
visualisation and interaction techniques embedded in our
system assessing its usability.

2. Related Work
There are currently numberless of tools that help
webmasters to analyse a website. Most of them are
dedicated to show statistics based on WUM represented
in a difficult way to understand and to encourage the user
to find patterns beneath the combination of data.
Furthermore, these tools have shown a limited success
due to the often overlooking of the need to understand
website’s content and structure [3].
For this reason there is a big interest in the InfoVis
community to develop visual metaphors and interactive
systems to enable pattern detection using a representation
of the structure of the website to address the visualisation
of WUM [4][5][6][7][8].
Other approaches like in [9] build the structure of
the website based only on the information extracted from
the log files. This interesting point of view focuses on the
visited pages but does not cover other pages non-visited
that can be also interesting to visualise and to take into
account.

2.1. Website Structure Mining
WSM takes advantage of the graph theories [10] to
find representative metrics to understand key points
beneath the web structure.
Depicting a website is a challenging task as any
system intending to do so has to deal with a huge amount
of nodes and links. Moreover, screen real estate
limitations make unfeasible to show every page and
every link simultaneously in big websites.
Therefore several visual metaphors have been used
to represent the hierarchical structure of a website taking
advantage from tree visualisation techniques such as
Cone Tree, Hyperbolic Tree 2D [11] and 3D [12], Radial
Tree [9], Balloon Tree [13], Treemaps [14], Polyplane
[15] and Dome Tree [6].
Most of these approaches often fail, as they end up
with cluttered visualisations difficult to interpret and
understand. Hence, filtering and clustering techniques
must be applied in order to reduce the complexity of
visualising such an amount of items.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

2.2. Web Usage Mining
Most of the efforts in Web Mining research have
been focused on WUM. The importance of
understanding the users’ behaviour has motivated the
research community to develop new and more precise
algorithms.
There is a wide range of algorithms [16] that goes
from the easy calculation of the hits of a webpage, to the
statistical models used to find user sessions and to extract
the most common users’ paths.

3. The Website Exploration Tool (WET)
In this paper we present a prototype to assess
usability called WET, standing for Website Exploration
Tool, for WSM and WUM.
This system incorporates techniques from
Information Visualisation and Exploratory Search to
provide the user an interactive experience to browse web
mining data. One of the main features of this software is
an interactive menu that allows the user to decide the
mapping between the different collected metrics and
some visual attributes. Analysing the behaviour of the
users with it will give us an understanding on how the
users prefer to see the information.

3.1 Architecture of the system
The system is made up of separate modules that
perform the following functions:
•
Crawling the target website to find the structure
of its webgraph.
•
Analysing the log files by parsing them and
producing informative variables derived from the
log file contents
•
Storing the information regarding structure and
usage in database that serves a central repository
of the data gathered
•
Visualising different visual metaphors and
enabling the Interaction with the user
A crawler and a web log parser are used to retrieve
the information needed to hold the web mining process.
The information collected by them is stored in a data
warehouse based on a relational database to allow crossqueries. These are used to support the web mining
process to extract derived information from the data. At
the current stage of development the web mining system
takes advantage of the retrieved information to compute
WUM and WSM metrics.
A GraphML [17] file is generated containing all the
collected metrics combined with the gathered structure of
the webgraph. This file is used as input of the
visualisation engine, which run a set of algorithms to
depict the structure of the website, and the collected
metrics on top of it.

Figure 1. The architecture of WET
The visualisation engine is based on Prefuse1, a Java
framework for the development of interactive
information visualisation applications [18].

3.2. The Web Mining System
The web mining system is composed by the WSM
and the WUM subsystems.
The WSM subsystem is formed by a crawler from
W3C2 that collects the information of the website
structure. This software has been modified to support
connectivity to a relational database, which is the core of
the data warehouse system. Thus, the information of the
crawler is cleaned and stored into the database.
The process of WUM can be divided in three stages:
•
pre-processing
•
processing
•
integration
The pre-processing stage is in charge of cleaning the
log files and deleting the non-relevant entries. We
consider non-relevant entries to those related to
automatic collection systems (i.e. spiders of Google or
Yahoo!), and entries related to images, videos and
Cascaded Style Sheets.
The processing stage is centred on managing the
logs files to extract valuable information related to the
users’ behaviour. Hits per page and queries used to reach
the documents of the website are examples of WUM
metrics collected.
The integration stage stores the gathered
information into the storage system, making relational
links between the structure of the site and the collected
information.
A perl script has also been used to collect the
Google PageRank available at the Google Toolbar.

3.3. Visualisation and interaction system
A set of visual metaphors has been preselected for
the tool based on their ability to represent large graphs,
their popularity and usability interest.
•
Radial Tree [5]
•
3D Hyperbolic Tree [12]
•
Treemap [14]
•
Force Directed Layout [19]
As a first approach, the visual metaphor selected to
visualise the structure of the website has been the Radial
Tree [20]. A Radial Tree is a well known visual
metaphor that consists on placing the root of the tree, in
that case the home page of the website, in the centre of
the graph.
The remaining nodes are laid out on concentric rings
spanning out from the root. The angular position of each
node depends on the size of the area assigned to it. This
area depends on the population that lay under the node;
hence nodes with a large number of descendants will
have a bigger space than those with fewer descendants.
At the moment of writing, the Radial Tree uses the
Breath-First-Search algorithm for link selection in order
to ignore the symbolic and back links.
A user interface has been developed with Swing,
which can be easily integrated with Prefuse.

1 http://www.prefuse.org
2 http://www.w3.org/Robot/

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 2. A screenshot of WET

The user interface can be divided into three different
areas: the toolbox, the right menu and the display.
The toolbox is placed at the top of the screen. It
contains a set of tools to explore the visualisation like
zooming, panning, resizing and pruning. A semantic
zoom that shows the keywords and its frequency used to
reach each document in a search engine has been
implemented, and it is shown once the display is close
enough to a selected node.
Other interesting feature is the prune tool, which
shows just the subtree laying out under a selected node.
This tool can be considered a filtering tool, as it reduces
the complexity of the visualisation, allowing the user to
focus his/her attention to a subtree.

identify pages that are far away from the root node, issue
that can suggest a reconstruction of the link structure.
Likewise several misplaced old pages were easily
identified, as well as many broken links.

Figure 4. Radial Tree of www.infovis.net
Figure 3. On the left, the semantic zoom
showing the keywords used to reach a
document and its frequency. On the right, and
image of a pruned tree.
A search box is also placed at the toolbox. This
utility allows the user to search a specific document by
introducing its URL. The tool is incremental in that it
highlights all the matching documents as writing the
letters of its URL
The core of the versatility of the system lies in the
fact that it enables to match web mining metrics, like
pages served, indegree or queries in a given time, with
visual variables (in Bertin’s sense [21]) like colour, size,
shape or transparency, among others.
This way, by interactively working with the
selection menus, one can build 2-tuples “metric - visual
variable” that can be applied to the visual metaphor
changing it accordingly.
This can be done with the right menu that contains
an interactive table where the user can decide how to
create the mapping. This table has been created to asses
usability by logging and analysing the interaction of the
users with it.
The display lays on the remaining area, and is fully
dedicated to the representation of the visual metaphor, in
this case a Radial Tree.
An animation embedded in Prefuse has been used in
order to help the user to preserve the mental map of the
user [22].

4. Results
Preliminary tests have been applied to a mediumsized website with around a thousand nodes and an
average of ten thousand of visits per day.
The Radial Tree reveals the existence of four clearly
differentiated sections in the web and allowed us to

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

On the other hand, visualising hubs and authorities
mapping the in and outdegree values to visual attributes
such as size and color, combined with the visualisation
of the number of hits per page reveals some
inconsistencies that also suggest a reconstruction of the
link architecture to make some of the non visited pages
more accessible.

Figure 5. Number of served pages (hits) mapped
as size of the nodes

5. Future work
Although the visualisation of the structure has been
successful to generate an abstract representation of the
website, it is still not as accurate as it should be. The
Breath-First-Search algorithm to generate the spanning
tree of the radial tree must be enhanced.
Our approach relies on the use of a weighted edges
based on the frequency of use of the links. The expected
result must be a similar representation of the structure of
the site, but displaying more significant edges.
More metrics have to be collected and more visual
attributes implemented before addressing a usability test
with real users.

Moreover, more visual metaphors among the ones
pre-selected like Treemaps and a Landscape metaphor
will be added to the system, in order to evaluate which
one is more suitable to represent web mining data and to
study the impact of using several metaphors
simultaneously to understand the behaviour of the users
and the growth of the website.
Clustering techniques based on content analysis will
also help to reduce the complexity of visualising very
large websites.

[6]

Conclusions

[9]

We have presented a prototype of an exploratory
tool to analyse web mining data. Our main concern is to
provide to the end user a set of tools that allows him/her
to customise the visualisation.
Such tools will lead us to understand the preferred
ways to visualise web mining data for future
improvements on the system, and to evaluate the
usability of the implemented visual metaphors.
Although preliminary tests have shown the potential
of the prototype, it still has to be further enhanced in
order to conduct intensive usability tests with it.
The radial tree appears to be a good visual metaphor
to visualise web mining data, but it has to be embedded
in an interaction system capable of showing on demand
information that breaks the basic definition of the
metaphor.
In order to show the consistency of such a system an
evaluation of the interaction of real end users must be
performed so that the assumptions regarding the
suitability of the interaction tools and the preselected
visual metaphors can be refuted.

Acknowledgements
This work is partially supported by the Grant
TIN2006-15536-C02-01 of the Ministry of Education
and Science of Spain, by SPOC&STE, an Altran
company, and by the City Council of Zaragoza.

References
[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]

Kosala and Blockeel, Web Mining Research: A Survey,
SIGKDD: SIGKDD Explorations: Newsletter of the
Special Interest Group (SIG) on Knowledge Discovery &
Data Mining, ACM, vol. 2, 2000.
K. Andrews, Evaluating information visualisations, in
BELIV '06: Proceedings of the 2006 AVI Workshop on
BEyond Time and Errors, 2006, pp. 1-5.
R. Cooley, The use of web structure and content to
identify subjectively interesting web usage patterns,
ACM Trans. Inter. Tech., vol. 3, pp. 93-116, 2003.
A. H. Youssefi, D. J. Duke and M. J. Zaki, Visual web
mining, in WWW Alt. '04: Proceedings of the 13th
International World Wide Web Conference on Alternate
Track Papers \& Posters, 2004, pp. 394-395.
S. G. Eick, Visualizing online activity, Communication
ACM, vol. 44, pp. 45-50, 2001.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[7]

[8]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]
[18]

[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]

E. H. Chi, P. Pirolli and J. Pitkow, The scent of a site: A
system for analyzing and predicting information scent,
usage, and usability of a web site, in CHI '00:
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 2000, pp. 161-168.
J. Chen, L. Sun, Za, O. R. and R. Goebel, Visualizing
and discovering web navigational patterns, in WebDB
'04: Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on
the Web and Databases, 2004, pp. 13-18.
T. A. Keahey and S. G. Eick, Visual path analysis, in
INFOVIS '02: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization (InfoVis'02), 2002, pp. 165.
C. Oosthuizen, J. Wesson and C. Cilliers, Visual web
mining of organizational web sites, in IV '06:
Proceedings of the Conference on Information
Visualization, 2006, pp. 395-401.
J. Fürnkranz, Web Structure Mining Exploiting the
Graph
Structure
of the
World-Wide
Web,
Österreichische Gesellschaft Für Artificial Intelligence
(ÖGAI), vol. 21, pp. 17-26, 2002.
J. Lamping, R. Rao and P. Pirolli, A Focus+Context
technique based on hyperbolic geometry for visualizing
large hierarchies, in Proc. ACM Conf. Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI, 1995, pp. 401-408.
T. Munzner and P. Burchard, Visualizing the structure of
the world wide web in 3D hyperbolic space, in VRML
'95: Proceedings of the First Symposium on Virtual
Reality Modeling Language, 1995, pp. 33-38.
I. Herman, G. Melancon and M. S. Marshall, Graph
visualization and navigation in information visualization:
A survey, Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 6, pp. 24-43, 2000.
B. Johnson and B. Shneiderman, Treemaps: a spacefilling approach to the visualization of hierarchical
information structures, Proc. of the 2nd International
IEEE Visualization Conference (San Diego, Oct. 1991).
S. Hong and T. Murtagh, Visualisation of large and
complex networks using PolyPlane, in Graph Drawing,
New York, 2004, 2004, pp. pp. 471-481.
J. Srivastava, R. Cooley, M. Deshpande and P. Tan, Web
usage mining: discovery and applications of usage
patterns from Web data, SIGKDD Explor. Newsl., vol. 1,
pp. 12-23, 2000.
U. Brandes, M. Eiglsperger, M. Kaufmann, J. Kaufmann
and P. Kaufmann, The GraphMl File Format, 29-Sep2004.
J. Heer, S. K. Card and J. A. Landay, Prefuse: A toolkit
for interactive information visualization, in CHI '05:
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 2005, pp. 421-430
C. Walshaw, A multilevel algorithm for force-directed
graph drawing, in Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Graph Drawing,
{GD}, 2000, pp. 171-182.
P. D. Eades, Drawing free trees, Bulletin of the Institute
for Combinatorics and its Applications, vol. 5, pp. 10-36,
1992.
Jacques Bertin, Sémiologie Graphique. Editions de
l'Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences, 1999,
Ka-Ping Yee, D. Fisher, R. Dhamija and M. Hearst,
Animated exploration of dynamic graphs with radial
layout, in 2001, pp. 43-50.

