On Visualization of Cocitation Networks
Tsung Teng Chen, Liang Chi Hsieh
Graduate Institute of Information Management
National Taipei University
{timchen.ntpu@msa.hinet.net, viirya@gmail.com}
Abstract
The visualization of a cocitation network is a useful
technique for information scientists. The technique will
help to illustrate the intellectual structure of a given
knowledge domain. We hope our results will improve on
current tools with regard to user interface interactivity and
scale better for larger data sets. We developed a tool, with
the visualizing cocitation network in mind, by using an
open-sourced toolkit for interactive information
visualization to address some of these inadequacies. This
tool exhibits cocitation graphs with latent visual cues and
allows direct interaction with the visualized graphs. We
demonstrated the visualized effects of this tool and
complemented the results with its domain content analysis
in a case study.

1. Introduction
The visualization of cocitation network is an important
technique for information scientists to illustrate the
intellectual structure of a knowledge domain. A cocitation
network is usually visualized by drawing an undirected arc
between two articles that are cocited by other papers. Two
papers are cocited when a third paper cites them both.
Cocitation analysis was pioneered by Small [1] and applied
by researchers in information science to construct the
intellectual structure of a discipline in the early eighties
[2]. Cocitation analysis relates bibliographic data based on
cocitation strengths. The Author Cocitation Analysis
(ACA) is used in presenting the intellectual structures of a
knowledge domain. Authors who have made influential
contributions to a given discipline constitute the unit of
analysis in ACA. An author represents a reference to the
concept for which the author is recognized by their works.
Cocitation analysis thus infers a relationship between key
concepts, which is represented by the extent of joint
citations of authors making seminal contributions in any
given field of knowledge. The ACA method usually starts
with identifying groups of authors who are frequently

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

cocited; they are grouped together based on their
cocitations. Author cocitation network has been used in
visually depicting the intellectual structure of the computer
graphics field [3]. A visualization system, which is based
on author cocitation analysis and visualization mapping
algorithms, was developed to produce interactive author
maps to facilitate the task of author searching in real time
[4]. It is generally agreed that visualization can facilitate
the understanding of the structures of a collection of
documents that are related to each other by links, such as
cocitations in formal publications. A cocitation network is
usually represented by a proximity matrix as in the form of
Figure 1, whereas the value in the cells represents the
cocitation count between papers. The cocitation network in
Figure 1 is typically visualized by depicting papers as
nodes and cocitation relationships as edges of a graph as
shown in Figure 2.
Paper #
1
2
3
4

1
389
326
161

2
389
326
161

3
326
326

4
161
161
161

161

Figure 1. A typical proximity matrix of a cocitation
network

Figure 2. The cocitation network is drawn based
on the proximity data in Figure 1

2. Related Works
AuthorLink [4], which is a Web-based author
searching system, accepts a single author’s name as input
and provides a list of 24 authors who are most often
cocited with the designated author as output. The
AuthorLink system shows how these additional authors are
related to each others in an author cocitation map based on
their cocitation counts. The system is capable of producing
interactive cocitation maps in real time from a non-trivial
database which holds about 1.26 million records. Users can
take advantage of the interactive interface to refine queries
and retrieve cocited documents through point-and-click
operation of the author’s name. The mapping procedure of
the system takes the cocitation matrix as input and
generates a self-organizing map (SOM) [5] or a Pathfinder
network (PFNET) [6] map as output. The PFNET
algorithm regards authors as nodes and cocitation
relationships as links; it assumes a graph in which all nodes
are fully connected by weighted links. The weights are
represented by the cocitation counts for each pair of
authors. Plain authors’ names were simultaneously
displayed as icons on the graphical display for immediate
viewing in the PFNET configuration. Each author is
represented by a dot in a SOM, in which similar data points
(authors) are gradually moved closer to each other to form
clusters. Author clusters and neighborhoods are
represented by geographical regions and their proximities.
Digitometric tools [7] for Open Archives
Environments were developed that apply and extend the
Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting
(OAI-PMH) as a means of building user services for the
scholarly literature. Digitometric services can be used to
retrieve a cocitation map using a particular publication as
the launch point for navigating the cocitation space. The
size, accuracy and cocitation threshold of the map could be
defined by setting different variables. As shown in the
paper, a cocitation map is embedded within the
Digitometric user interface. The nodes on the map
represent individual publications. By hovering with the
mouse pointer over a node, the user can generate details of
the paper, such as title, author, and abstract in the
information box. The arcs between the nodes represent a
cocitation relationship. The cocitation network layout
algorithm wasn’t specifically discussed in this paper.
CitesSpace II [8] and its predecessor is a Java
application for analyzing and visualizing cocitation
networks. PFNET scaling is the default option for network
pruning in this system. In order to facilitate the user to
discern the “emerging trends and transient patterns in
scientific literature”, it allows multiple networks from
different time periods to merge into one. An author is
symbolized by a citation tree ring whose size is
proportional to the number of citations his works has
received. The cocitation graph becomes somewhat difficult
to grasp when there were five hundred some nodes

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

displayed by the system in the case studies presented by
the author.
Pajek [9] was applied to visualize the cocitation matrix
using the build-in spring-based algorithm [10] by
Leydesdorff and Vaughan [11]. For the purpose of
visualization on document cocitation, an algorithm for
computing spatial coordinates for the minimum spanning
tree based on document co-citation counts and on
document citation correlations was described [12].
CircleView [13] is a citation network browser that uses
circles around circles as its visualization method to show a
focus paper and two forward levels of its citation network.
The CiteWiz [14] system is a tool for bibliographic
visualization of the chronology and influences in citation
networks. It is primarily an article-focused visualization
system that emphasizes the visualization of articles and
their interrelationships. Circle view and CiteWiz is
essentially a visualization interface of digital library to
facilitate the searching of papers and their references. Both
systems have no cocitation visualization facilities.

3. Visualization of Large Cocitation Network
3.1. The Visualization Platform
The visualization systems we reviewed thus far do not
scale well for large cocitation networks. Pajek is capable of
displaying large networks but it lacks the zoom and pan
operations that allow viewing a graph at different
granularities. We used prefuse [15], a software framework
for creating dynamic visualization of both structured and
unstructured data, to develop a prototyping system to
visualize large cocitation networks. The seven tasks of
visualized information exploration proposed by
Shneiderman [16] are supported by this tool except history
keeping. The user interface of the system is shown in
Figure 3.

Figure 3. The KM cocitation graph in the early
state of the N-body simulation

3.2. Visualization of the Knowledge Management
Cocitation Network
We drew the citation data from the online citation
database CiteSeer [17]. Our citation data collection
procedure leverages the CiteSeer citation index by using
key phrases to query the index and retrieve all matching
documents from it. The documents retrieved by the query
are then used as the initial seed set to retrieve papers that
are citing or are cited by literatures in the initial seed set
[18]. The full citation graph is built by linking all articles
retrieved, which includes many more documents than the
traditional citation expansion schemes that only search
references found in the initial set of papers retrieved by a
query. The resulted citation graph was built from the
literatures and citation information retrieved by querying
the term “Knowledge Management” (KM) from CiteSeer
during March, 2006. The complete citation graph contains
599,692 document nodes and 1,701,081 citation arcs. In
order to keep the highly cocited papers and literatures to a
more manageable size, we kept papers that were cocited
over 150 times. There are 31 literatures in the complete
citation graph that were cocited more than 150 times. The
resulted KM cocitation graph contains 6,905 arcs and
3,212 nodes, which includes these 31 highly cocited nodes
and nodes that were citing them. The cocitation network is
initially depicted in Figure 3.
The position of nodes and clusters composed by them
in the display pane are based on the equilibrium of three
interacting forces – the spring force, the drag force, and Nbody force. The N-body force is a force that exerts in an Nbody simulation [19] and simulates massive particles under
the influence of physical forces, usually gravity and
sometimes magnetic or electric forces. The N-body
simulation is running continuously that makes clusters
distance from each other, which is analogous of the
formation of cosmic structure under the influence of
gravitational force. The spring force is the force exerted by
a compressed or stretched spring upon any object which is
attached to it. A citation arc is equivalent to a connecting
spring in our case. The simulated spring force is utilized to
draw an aesthetic graph [20], i.e., a graph without edgecrossing. The drag force implements a viscosity force to
help stabilize nodes in the N-body or spring force
simulation. Applying the anti-gravitational force in our
simulation, the entangled cocitation graph is drifted apart
gradually and broken into two sub graphs as shown in
Figure 4. One of the sub graphs has five clusters, and the
other one consists of eight clusters. We zoomed in the
eight-clustered group and generated a 3X times enlarged
image of the graph using the build in output function of
this tool. The image is shown in Figure 5. We further
zoomed in one of the clusters in this group to examine the
nodes positioned closed to the center, which are two papers
cocited 314 times (Figure 6)! One would speculate that the
two disjoined groups of clusters represent distinct research

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

fields in KM studies. We examined the literatures
underlying these two groups and this confirmed our
speculation that they represent two distinct specialties in
KM/AI arena. The group with eight clusters is the machine
learning and data mining camp. The smaller group
represents the logic program and problem solving camp.
We summarized the literatures assumed by the central
nodes of the eight-clustered group in Table 1. The cluster
number 2 in Table 1 is depicted in Figure 6. As we can
easily see from Figure 6, there is a strong connection,
signified by many interconnecting nodes, between cluster
number 1 and 2. The strong connection is due to the close
ties between the studies of machine learning and data
mining. For example, the machine learning program C4.5
is an inductive method that finds generalized rules by
identifying patterns in data. One branch of the data mining
studies is concentrated on issues of efficient rules mining
from large and heterogeneous data sources. C4.5 appears to
be the transitional works that bridge or transcend from the
area of machine learning to data mining. That the
interconnecting nodes exist between two closely related
fields is understandable. However, connecting nodes
between unrelated fields or fields with low relevance may
represent a new synergetic study.

Figure 4. Two sub graphs emerged from the KM
cocitation graph through the N-body simulation

4. Observations and Discussion
The visualization of cocitation network is an important
technique to illustrate the intellectual structure of a
research field. The cocitation visualization systems, in our
opinion, have yet to take the full advantages of recently
developed graphical interfaces which have enabled users to
directly interact with visualized information. The
conventional cocitation visualization practice only keeps
these cocited articles and practically overlooks the
potentially voluminous literatures that are citing these

articles. Taking the KM cocitation case in section 3 as an
example, only these thirty one highly cocited articles and
the cocitation relationships among these articles would
have been displayed by the conventional practices. The
visualization of the bigger picture of cocitation data may
reveal latent information that may have been lost due to the
conventional cocitation data pruning process. The
interconnecting nodes between clusters, which are shown
clearly by our system, would have not been displayed by
the conventional cocitation visualization methods. The
meaning of these newly discerned connecting nodes to the
study of intellectual structure is yet to be defined.
Information visualization systems aim to augment human
cognition by leveraging human visual capabilities to make
sense of abstract information [21]. Visualized information
should be self-evident and appeal to our intuition rather
than relying on subjective interpretation.

5. Conclusions
The exiting cocitation visualization systems, to our
knowledge, do not scale well for larger datasets. The
displaying pane of these systems is clogged easily by
displaying several hundred nodes. We presented a novel
cocitation visualization system which is capable of
visualizing larger datasets in the range of tens of thousands
of data items. The elevated processing power of this
system has made possible the visualization of core
cocitation nodes as well as nodes that are citing them. The
initial result of the cocitation visualization complemented
by domain content analysis is encouraging. We are able to
visualize citation information that is usually suppressed by
the traditional cocitation pruning process. The implication
and utilization of these augmented visual effects merit
further study.

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]
[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

6. References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

H. Small, "Co-citation in the Scientific Literature: A New
Measure of the Relationship between Two Documents,"
Journal of the American Society for Information Science,
vol. 24, pp. 265-269, 1973.
H. D. White, Griffith, B.C., "Author Cocitation: A
Literature Measure of Intellectual Structure," Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, vol. 32, pp.
163-171, 1981.
C. Chen, Paul, R.J.:, "Visualizing a Knowledge Domain's
Intellectual Structure," Computer, vol. 34, pp. 65-71, 2001.
X. Lin, H. D. White, and J. Buzydlowski, "Real-time
Author Co-citation Mapping for Online Searching,"
Information Processing and Management, vol. 39, pp. 689706, 2003.
T. Kohonen, Self-organizing maps, 3rd ed. Berlin; New
York: Springer, 2001.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

"Pathfinder associative networks: studies in knowledge
organization," R. W. Schvaneveldt, Ed.: Ablex Publishing
Corp., 1990, p. 315.
T. Brody, S. Kampa, S. Harnad, L. Carr, and S. Hitchcock,
"Digitometric Services for Open Archives Environments,"
in Research and Advanced Technology for Digital
Libraries. vol. Volume 2769/2004 Heidelberg: Springer,
2003, pp. 207-220.
C. Chen, "CiteSpace II: Detecting and visualizing emerging
trends and transient patterns in scientific literature," in
Journal of the American Society for Information Science &
Technology. vol. 57: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2006, pp.
359-377.
V. Batagelj and A. Mrvar, "Pajek Analysis and
Visualization of Large Networks," in Graph Drawing : 9th
International Symposium. vol. 2265/2002: Springer, 2003,
p. 477.
T. Kamada and S. Kawai, "An algorithm for drawing
general undirected graphs," Information Processing Letters,
vol. 31, pp. 7-15, 1989.
L. Leydesdorff and L. Vaughan, "Co-occurrence matrices
and their applications in information science: Extending
ACA to the Web environment," Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, vol. 57,
pp. 1616-1628, 2006.
S. Noel, C. H. Chu, and V. Raghavan, "Visualization of
Document Co-citation Counts," in Proceedings of the
Information Visualisation, Sixth International Conference
on (IV'02), 2002, pp. 691-696.
P. Bergstrom and J. E. Whitehead, "CircleView: Scalable
Visualization and Navigation of Citation Networks," in
Proceedings of the 2006 Symposium on Interactive Visual
Information Collections and Activity (IVICA 2006),
College Station, Texas, 2006.
N. Elmqvist and P. Tsigas, "CiteWiz: A Tool for the
Visualization of Scientific Citation Networks," Department
of Computing Science, Chalmers University of Technology
2004.
J. Heer, S. K. Card, and J. A. Landay, "prefuse: a Toolkit
for Interactive Information Visualization," in Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems, Portland, Oregon, USA, 2005, pp. 421-430.
B. Shneiderman, "The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type
Taxonomy for Information Visualizations," in Proceedings
of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages, 1996,
p. 336.
K. D. Bollacker, S. Lawrence, and C. L. Giles, "CiteSeer:
an Autonomous Web Agent for Automatic Retrieval and
Identification of Interesting Publications," in Proceedings
of the second international conference on Autonomous
agents Minneapolis, Minnesota, United States: ACM Press,
1998.
T. T. Chen and L. Q. Xie, "Identifying Critical Focuses in
Research Domains," in Proceedings of the Information
Visualisation, Ninth International Conference on (IV'05),
London, 2005, pp. 135-142.
E. Bertschinger, "Simulations of Structure Formation in the
Universe," Annual Review of Astronomy and
Astrophysics, vol. 36, pp. 599-654, 1998.

[20] I. Herman, G. Melancon, and M. S. Marshall, "Graph
visualization and navigation in information visualization: A
survey," Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 6, pp. 24-43, 2000.
[21] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, Readings
in information visualization: using vision to think. San
Francisco, Calif.: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1999.

Figure 5. One of the group (group one) in Figure 4 has eight clusters connected to each other

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 6. A closer look of one of the cluster in Figure 5 which is centered on node number 15 and 16
Table 1. The articles assumed by the central nodes in eight clusters
C#
1

CC
#
161

2

314

3

206

4

175

5

203

6

Node
#
9
10
27
59
15
16
2
3

Title

699
700
229
230

C4.5: Programs for machine learning
Induction of decision trees
Classification and regression trees
UCI repository of machine learning databases
Mining association rules between sets of items in large databases
Fast algorithms for mining association rules
A dynamic index structure for spatial searching
The R* - tree: an efficient and robust access method for points and
rectangles
Chord: a scalable P2P lookup service for internet applications
A scalable content-addressable network
Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment
The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web search engine

176

41
42

Genetic algorithms in search, optimization & machine learning
Adaptation in natural and artificial systems

7

153

8

187

18
19
66
12
13

The Lorel query language for semistructured data
Querying semi-structured data
A query language and optimization techniques for unstructured data
Concurrency control and recovery in database systems
Transaction processing: concepts and techniques

Descriptive *
name
Machine
Learning
Association
Rules Mining
Efficient
Index for
Spatial Data
P2P Lookup
Solutions
Web Link
Structure
Analysis
Genetic
Algorithms
Applications
SemiStructured
Data Query
Concurrency
Control

* C# stands for cluster number; CC# stands for cocitation frequencies of nodes listed in next column; Node # is a unique
article number in the graph; Descriptive name is a qualified descriptive name of the cluster given by the authors.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

