Real-Time Data and Analysis of the Use of Office Space
John Counsell, Dr Marie-Cecile Puybaraud
University of the West of England, Bristol, Johnson Controls
{John.Counsell@uwe.ac.uk, Marie.C.Puybaraud@jci.com}
Abstract
Ambient Intelligent Systems have been proposed for their
potential to track collaborative activities in the
workplace, capture them, and in real time respond to
them. The longer term goal is to develop embedded
technologies that provide intelligent feedback in
predictable office environments but also address the
unpredictable working environments of nomadic
knowledge workers and of remote workers engaged in
virtual collaboration with those physically present. Some
of these systems are relatively close to market and others
are less immediately applicable. This paper suggests that
a heterogeneous mix of such systems is likely to be
necessary for some time to come. A prototype real time
location system for mapping the real-time location of
workers in offices has been developed by Johnson
Controls. During tests it has been found to positively
assist in gathering information for better management of
space and support of collaborative activity. This has
proved to justify the costs.

1: Introduction
Because of increased mobility in their day-to-day work,
collaborative workers today interact in a wide variety of
working environments, yet there is no basis yet for a
fully effective working environment which responds to
demands and needs in a proactive manner. Through the
Facilities Innovation Research Programme (FI) Johnson
Controls and their research partners launched an
investigation into such ‘smart space management’[1].
Within this initiative the ‘Visible’ project has the overall
goal of mapping and utilising users’ behaviour,
(particularly while collaborating), to monitor, record and
store contextual knowledge in order to automatically
provide a working environment adapted to the needs of
each user or group of users. This paper examines the
scope for that first stage of mapping user behaviour, in
order to understand better how space affords or disables
collaborative knowledge work, and how that
environment can be optimised. Some of the systems to
enable this mapping proved to be relatively close to
market and others were less immediately applicable. It is

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

suggested that a heterogeneous mix of such systems is
likely to be necessary for some time to come. A
prototype real time location system for workers has been
developed and has being tested at Johnson Control’s UK
HQ to determine the extent to which it assists in the
better management of space and in support of
collaborative activity. It has now started to be rolled out
into several more locations, starting with Johnson
Control’s Milwaukee offices.
“The concept of Ambient Intelligence (AmI) provides a
vision of the Information Society where the emphasis is
on greater user-friendliness, more efficient services
support, user-empowerment including respect for
privacy, and support for human interactions. People are
surrounded by intelligent intuitive interfaces that are
embedded in all kinds of objects and an environment that
is capable of recognising and responding to the presence
of different individuals in a seamless, unobtrusive and
often invisible way”[2]. For this it is held that there will
need to be substantial integration of three converging
technologies: (1) Personal Digital Assistants (Palm or
Windows CE); (2) Wearables / objects and people
(includes RFID); and (3) microelectronic controlled
equipment. “Most of these systems are currently standalone. Integrating these devices in an
integrated
communication environment using existing or easy-toinstall networks (e.g. powerlined, wireless systems) will
allow major enhancements to existing and the creation of
completely new applications and services”[3].
Furthermore it has been suggested that employees need
different types of ambient intelligence applications than
citizens in general, because work organisation, business
process redesign, change management, motivation,
reward systems, etc. are involved [4]. “The discipline of
work design faces a fundamental dilemma: Increased
productivity involves specialisation, standardisation and
an increased degree of routine, i.e. a reduction of
complexity. On the other hand, the innovative ability of
knowledge-intensive enterprises and the competence
development of knowledge workers require an increased
complexity of tasks. It is necessary to consider the
complete working system (competence, staff, work,
technology, organisation)”[5]. More research is needed
into the inter-relations between knowledge workers and

their organisations with regard to the constraints and
affordances of their working environments. This paper
examines the scope for currently equipping the working
environment with sensors that ‘perceive users’,
suggesting this is a prerequisite before such research
leading to forms of context based communication can
become effective.

2: Longer Term Research Goals
Ambient Intelligence is the now increasingly widely used
term that embraces: ubiquitous computing; pervasive
computing; ‘smart’ technologies; and the convergence of
devices, communications and networks. It is in use by the
EC and most major mobile phone companies. Its
development is in theory based on continuous user
evaluation and feedback, not waiting to discover
customer demand, and so based on forward gazing
scenarios and ‘living labs’. The WWRF ‘book of visions’
in 2001 [3] stated that “In the mobility and locationrelated category sensory input will play a major role in
providing the information. Sensor technologies are
embedded in the mobile equipment and networks and
services will sense who the user is, where he is, what he
is doing, what the environmental conditions are, etc. The
environment itself will also be equipped with sensors that
perceive users and communicate with their devices.”
However it is not clear that much has changed since
1999, when it was stated that “Understanding human
activity is held to be one of the most difficult open
problems in the area of automated video surveillance”[6].
In studying mobility in the workplace Kakihara and
Sørensen stated that “a workplace is a particular subject
area of CSCW [Computer Supported Cooperative Work]
in general and the study on mobility in particular, since
increasing mobilities in various dimensions have further
mobilised people’s collaborative work and sharing
knowledge in workplaces…We then could argue that
contextuality plays a critical role in constituting human
interaction just as spatiality and temporality do. Contexts
in which people reside continuously frame their
interaction with others, including people’s cultural
backgrounds, particular situations or moods, degrees of
mutual recognition, and so on”[7]. They went on to
identify the relevance of and to categorise location as: ‘in
space – where? in time - when? and particularly in
context: in what way; towards which actor(s); in what
circumstances?’[8]. Hornecker defines CSCW embodied
facilitation as follows: “tangible interaction systems
provide procedural as well as physical and spatial
structure, which shapes the ways we act. It can induce
collaboration, foster it or make us refrain from it. Thus,
tangible interaction systems embody styles, methods and
means of facilitation”[9]. Bradley argues that “a coherent
evaluation and feedback system should be an integral

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

part of any workplace change program…Without such a
learning loop, we will fail to convince business leaders of
how changes in corporate workplaces contribute to
business success”[10].

3: Other Needs for Better Observation
Static, physically co-located organisations are
insufficiently understood, yet ‘Corporate Real Estate
2010’ forecast that the biggest challenge for the FM
industry is the transformation of the business
environment towards ‘networked enterprises’, one
dispersed but connected working environment, where
IT/ICT support and communication are essential [11].
Workplaces are a major cost burden for organisations and
organisations therefore require a better understanding of
how this space is used by employees. On average 60% of
workstations are unused during normal working hours,
(for example it has been estimated that there are 48
million sq. m of unused or underused space in the UK
against a possible 561m sq. m across the EU15). The
average cost of each workstation is around €15,000/yr
[12]. Heerwagen et al argue that there is a central conflict
in designing collaborative working environments (CWE):
“how to design effectively to provide a balance between
the need to interact and the need to work effectively by
oneself. The body of literature shows that features and
attributes of space can be manipulated to increase
awareness, interaction and collaboration. However, doing
so frequently has negative impacts on individual work as
a result of increases in noise distractions and
interruptions to on-going work”[13]. This paper argues
that space and facilities can either constrain or support
collaborative work and that, while there is not enough
research to be able to accurately predict the impact of
changes to the workplace, changes must still be made. As
Marmot states “because investment in the workplace is
relatively long term, with buildings typically lasting
thirty years or more and fit outs typically ten years,
future trends must be anticipated within the limits of
current knowledge”[14]. There is a need for more
research into: how people use their workspaces; which
uses are more effective for interaction / team and
knowledge work; which uses can be enhanced through
digital means; when people have just-in-time or ad-hoc
working needs and whether these can be automatically
detected to trigger a system response.

4: RTLS in the ‘Visible’ Project Research
In Facilities Management the state of the art for research
into space usage and employee behaviour is at best to
observe and retrospectively analyse playback from
CCTV cameras, undertake work-studies or audit space

use as largely a clipboard and observation process.
Gilbreth, who over 100 years ago first commenced the
process of ‘time-study’ observer based analysis and
notation of activity in the workplace, is still being cited
today [15]. Such observer based notation methods
continue to be developed [16]. The process of
'Experience and Application Research' defined by
ISTAG [17] uses the concept of the 'Living Lab'. The
‘Living Lab’ has been defined as a user-centric research
methodology for sensing, prototyping, validating and
refining complex situations in multiple and evolving real
life contexts. Such field trials have been shown to
provide contradictory results to those from focus group
research, leading to more valid results about the
attractiveness of new applications from more fully
engaged users.
In offices there are already various systems: Asset
Management; Building Management Systems (BMS);
Access Control (video, security, etc.); that could in
principle act together as ad-hoc ‘living labs’, and thus
better support and partially react to staff needs. However
these are not sufficiently integrated for information
gathering, analysis, or for automating interventional
changes in response to detected user need. Even
sophisticated BMS are not able to detect and therefore
automatically respond to actual occupancy levels, yet
user surveys reveal that worker productivity and
contentedness are inter-related with their environmental
conditions [18]. Although technically these systems
could be used for observation, in practice they remain
static and unable to self-interact with the user to meet
changing individual and group needs within CWE’s. This
static state is an impediment to enhancement of
collaborative interaction via ambient intelligence. While
ISTAG 2004 generally defines 'Field Trials' as quasirealistic, the FI team has sought to apply these
technologies in mobile trials within real working
environments, initially to automate and speed up the
previous clipboard observational process, and in the
future to apply cognition, ethnographic and psychology
based user-centric research into: interaction technologies
for collaborative interaction in an ambient intelligence
context; appropriate design processes; methods for
usability testing; and test and validate prototypes. It is
argued that current observational sensor tools need to be
robustly relocatable, since sensor costs are still high, and
there are issues of privacy to address, that are eased if the
installation is usually temporary.

determine a user’s actual location with sufficient
precision to explore user mobility, context and
interaction. Hence these systems need to comprise a
Real Time Location System (RTLS) that for specific
tasks will require being in advance of the state of the art
in positional accuracy. Mobile phone or GPS location
tracking is not accurate enough or effective indoors.

6: The Current Facilities Innovation RTLS

Image 1 Highlighted Desk status (occupied, vacant, hot
desk, etc.) Images copyright to Johnson Controls 2007. No
unauthorised reproduction permitted.

Following research and development the FI team has
newly installed a showcase building using RFID (Radio
Frequency ID) tags worn as security passes by personnel
to form an RTLS. This system has been developed to be
visually unobtrusive in highly polished corporate
settings. The tags have antenna and batteries (hence high
cost) and broadcast their position once a minute (battery
life is approximately 2 years depending on frequency of
broadcasts). These broadcasts are received by specialist
(potentially battery operated) wi-fi based readers
(collated back to a wireless access point) that can be
adjusted to receive only within a limited globe of space,
and can overlap. Hence close up readers can be adjusted

5: Real Time Location Systems Generally
Many aspects of Ambient Intelligence are state of the art,
not requiring radical technological innovation to support
simple identification and tracking or cover
industrialisation and socialisation. The challenge is to

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Image 2 Reader Zones of different diameters on desks,
casual meeting areas, and in meeting rooms etc. Images
copyright to Johnson Controls 2007. No unauthorised
reproduction permitted.

to receive within a zone of a few centimetres close to a
desk or appliance, while other over-lapping readers are
adjusted to detect the complete zone or room. The skill is
in configuring the arrangement and sensitivity of the
readers. The tests have shown that approximately 0.7m
accuracy is achieved. In conjunction with effective
mapping of furniture and facilities this level of accuracy
allows e.g. the frequency of use of space to be monitored,
occupancy rates to be assessed, and void space to be
identified. Collaborative contacts between workers can
be inferred, but not precisely known. It needs further
enhancement to fully support an AMI environment.
The currently implemented Space Management Tool in
the context of the Facilities Innovation Real-timelocation-system delivers a host of tangible benefits
including:
• Increased Accuracy: it records activities using
RF technology to assess location with real-time user
information to capture mobile workers to within
centimeters;
• Redeployability / Reconfigurability: due to the
costs of devices currently the system has been
designed to be fully redeployable. A snapshot can
be taken of a to-be-changed environment prior to
that change, and the outcome re-measured at
selected times following implementation of the
changes;
• Scalability: hundreds of mobile workers and
users wearing smart cards can be tracked
simultaneously, helping ensure that location services
can be applied to an entire working environment;
• Transparency: it is the only solution to integrate
location tracking with industry standard FM
software such as Archibus. A single networked
interface point suffices to exchange data with the
FM system;
• Flexibility: it offers an integrated system which
allows accurate monitoring of mobile workers
and/or devices equipped with RFID Smart Cards. It
helps FM to appropriately manage the space,
instantly knowing which space is vacant or in-use;
• Integrated into Business Systems: It is fully
integrated into broader business systems, and a
complete bespoke Space Management Tool is in use
with state-of-the-art technologies and graphical user
interface;
• Integration: It can deliver asset tracking,
inventory management, location-based security
together with other new business applications that
can be easily integrated to the solution (e.g. links to
Finance or HR systems via ORACLE or SAP).
Around these facilities Johnson Controls have now
written a comprehensive real-time analytical and
reporting system. The status of each tag is polled every 5
seconds and the results written into a database. The

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

database generates live web page reports on demand
analysing the data. The first few weeks of analysis
already reveal interesting and unexpected results. Staff in
America start work consistently at about 7am. The
analysis is already revealing where staff prefer to hot
desk and where they do not. For example in one office, 4
desks, costing perhaps more than £10,000 to provide,
have not been used at all.

7: Future Development
The FI team have also explored the use of digital means
to record and capture synchronised real-time sensor,
video and audio data for observation. The current major
disadvantage of such approaches is the enormously time
consuming retrospective analysis of the results, that
reduces the number of experiments that can be run. The
Valhalla IST project led by UWE, Bristol [19] showed
that calibrating real-time video against objects in a
previously mapped space made it possible to associate
and later search and retrieve a video ‘shot’ from
automatically added metadata about objects in the field
of view. Similarly inferred collaborative activity
recorded in real-time from RFID tagging could be used
to identify and to retrieve specific video shots for
observational analysis, and so enhance and speed an
otherwise conventional analytical observational process,
to determine the accuracy of the inferences. Fully
automated observation may emerge from a combination
of RFID and other wireless technologies to capture out of
sight or obscured activity in conjunction with automated
real-time analysis of video - face tracking technologies
are already in use, and gait or posture analysis is
emerging, although clothing creates difficulties by
changing the expected human profile. While these are
issues that need to be addressed and overcome, solutions
such as the use of infrared technologies have also been
investigated that are not so readily obscured by clothing,
and that may serve to better preserve the privacy of those
observed. Consideration has been given to the real issues
of awareness of surveillance and how to gain informed
consent. On the one hand reality TV tends to indicate that
users get used to being ‘surveilled’ after an initial period,
so maybe the observer does not alter the experiment as
much as might be expected. On the other hand privacy of
location is not guaranteed in any UK privacy-related
legislation [20].

8: Conclusion
Within the limits of current technologies it would appear
that practical ambient collaborative workplace
environments are still some way from achievement.
There is a need for much more research, for example to

enable distinctions to be made between the various needs
and modes of work of different workers as individuals
and in collaboration. There is a need for better data more
effectively using new technologies for automated
observation and detection. If actions are able to be
recorded adequately there still remains the issue of how
to recognise adequate or effective performance, followed
by how to enhance performance by identifying and
removing constraints and positively facilitating the
actors. When an automated system emerges to detect sets
of actions and compare them to an optimal standard, it
would appear to follow that that system should both
appropriately enhance the environment and provide
persuasive feedback to encourage operation at that level
of performance. The showcases to date are in the offices
of professionals dedicated to efficient facilities
management. Careful presentation of the issues has
convinced them of the benefits. Therefore the showcase
implementations of RTLS implemented by Johnson
Controls have already proved of value in identifying
poorly used space, and have motivated staff to positively
accept beneficial changes in their workplace.

Acknowledgements
Dr. KJ Kristensen, Dr. C Aguilera, for discussion via
various bid writing exercises.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]

www.facilitiesinnovation.co.uk
From ftp.cordis.lu/pub/ist/docs/istagscenarios2010.pdf
WWRF Book of visions (2001) www.wireless-worldresearch.org
[4] Kristensen, KJ. in discussion 2005.
[5] Nejdl, W, Wolpers, M. (2004) ‘European E-Learning:
Important Research Issues and Application Scenarios’
ED-Media 2004, Lugano, Switzerland.
[6] Collins, RT Lipton, AJ Kanade, T (1999) ‘A System for
Video Surveillance and Monitoring’ esil.univ-mrs.fr
[7] Kakihara, M. Sørensen, C. (2001) ‘Mobility
Reconsidered: Topological Aspects of Interaction’ IRIS
24, Ulvik, Norway, Bergen Uni.
[8] Kakihara, M. and C. Sørensen (2002). “Mobility: An
Extended Perspective.” 35th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii, USA.
[9] Hornecker, E (2005) A Design Theme for Tangible
Interaction: Embodied Facilitation Proceedings of the
9th European Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, September 18-22, Paris, France.
Springer
[10] Bradley, SJ (2001) ‘What’s Working? Briefing And
Evaluating Workplace Performance Improvement’
Occupier.org
[11] Review of Corporate Real
Estate 2010 report
www.nreionline.com

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

[12] The Flexible Working Survey, sponsored by Johnson
Controls, undertaken through the FI programme.
www.mosaic-network.org
[13] Heerwagen, JH. Kampschroer, K. Powell, KM, Loftness,
V. (2004) ‘Collaborative knowledge work environments’
in Building Research & Information Issue: Volume 32:6
Routledge
[14] Marmot,A. (2003) ‘Future Proofing: Key trends
influencing
the
future
of
the
workplace’
www.occupier.org
[15] Reeves, TC. Duncan, W. Ginter, PM. (2001) ‘Motion
Study in Management and the Arts: A Historical
Example’ Journal of Management Inquiry 10: 137-149.
[16] Computer-aided Time Study Work Sampling Industrial
Engineering and simplification methods www.c-four.com
and e.g. http://www.worksimp.com/
[17] ISTAG Report on Experience and Application Research
“Involving Users in the Development of Ambient
Intelligence” http://www.cordis.lu/ist/istag.htm
[18] Zagreus, L. Huizenga, C. Arens, A. Lehrer, D. (2004)
‘Listening to the occupants: a Web-based indoor
environmental quality survey’ Indoor Air 2004; 14
(Suppl 8): 65–74
[19] The Valhalla Project EC - IST-2000-28541.
http://environment.uwe.ac.uk/valhalla
[20] From ‘Visualization and multimedia: Wireless GIS and
Location Based Services’ conference March 2004 ESRC
Transdisciplinary Research Seminars Programme.
Coordinated by University College London’s Centre for
Advanced Spatial Analysis.

