The development of an Online TV system’s architecture
Diogo Barreira, Mário Rui Gomes, Mauro Figueiredo
Instituto Superior Técnico, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade do Algarve
{dlsb@mega.ist.utl.pt, mario.gomes@tagus.ist.utl.pt, mfiguei@ualg.pt}

Abstract
This paper describes the development of an online
TV system’s architecture. First similar platforms are
analysed. A Human Machine Interface is proposed. The
RTSP protocol, necessary to supply video broadcasting
services in real time is also described.
Keywords: Online, TV, CMS, Platforms, HCI.

1. Introduction
This paper describes a working environment for the
establishment of an Online TV system, including the
analysis of similar systems and platforms in order to
develop the required system. A methodology to create
Human Computer Interfaces, HCI, begins by a task
analysis and low fidelity prototypes and ends with a
working interface is also described.
The rest of the paper is organised in the following
manner. Section 2 describes the task analysis. A
comparative analysis of online TV systems was done. In
section 3 a comparative analysis of system platforms, in
order to select those that better serve the requisites of the
system. In section 4, the HCI of the system with a good
usability is described. Section 5 describes the protocol
RTSP (“Real Time Streaming Protocol”) that supports
the live TV service, the main system’s requirement.

most important factors in order to guarantee its
success.
• Which platforms to be used in the system
development.
In table 1 there is a small summary of that analysis,
where one can see which are the services supplied by
each of the TV systems analysed.
Table 2 presents a general overview of the design of
each of them (where 1 means a very bad general
overview and 6 a very good one), the number of violated
heuristics were taken into account as well as the overall
aspect of the website, meaning, the good colour contrast
and the fact that it is pleasing to the sight, the size and
style of font being adapted to the background, the
coherent alignment of information and the fact that it is
user friendly, among all other small aspects that make an
aesthetic site.
Table 2 also shows the number of violated Nielsen’s
heuristics by each of the systems and finally in the last
column there are the platforms used by each of the
systems.
Table 1. On-line TV systems services.
Provided Services
Analysed
Systems

Live
TV

News
Archive

Debate Forums

TV Beja
TV Net

2. Comparative analysis of online TV
systems
This section describes an analysis of six existing TV
systems which were chosen by several criteria: the
supported TV services (news archive, live broadcasting,
etc), the HCI usability and the country origin.
It was chosen 2 Portuguese, 2 Spanish and 2 NorthAmericans systems in order to analyse what is done in
this field in Europe and also in the USA.
This analysis focused in three main aspects:
• Which services were provided and which
should be provided in order to make the site
more complete, which also helped us to
understand which are the main services in the
system development.
• An analysis of the system’s interface, including
the evaluation using the Nielsen’s Heuristics
[1], since the interface of a system is one of the

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

CRTVG
Barcelona
TV
KCEN-TV
WSVN-TV

3. Platforms
This section describes the various available options
for the several levels of architecture to develop, as well
as the reasons for choosing one platform.

3.1. Video format
In an online TV system, the size of a video is a
point that deserves special attention since by minimizing
the size of a video, without harnessing its quality, we

also minimize the time that the user has to wait until the
video is available for him to visualize it in his browser.
Table 2. Design evaluation.
Analysed
Systems
TV Beja

Interface
Design
Violated
(1 a 6)
Heuristics
4
1ª e 4ª

TV Net

5

--

CRTVG
Barcelona
TV
KCENTV
WSVMTV

3
4

3ª
3ª e 6ª

2

3ª e 7ª

4

3ª

Platforms
Used
Technologies
PHP,
MYSQL,
Joomla
PHP,
MYSQL,
Joomla
ASP.NET, Joomla
PHP,
MYSQL,
Joomla
PHP,
MYSQL,
Joomla
PHP,
MYSQL,
Joomla

Hence, the most common formats and the ones that
guarantee high quality images were compared in tables 3
and 4; including the most recent ones which can only be
visualised using flash (.FLV).
Conversions were performed according to the same
quality parameters (bitrate, framerate, among others),
specially to state which of the formats allow minimizing
the size without harnessing the quality of the image.
Table 3. WMV to AVI, MPEG and FLV
conversion.
WMV
5
10
20
50

AVI
10.8
19.2
38.2
94.1

MPEG
9.0
16.8
33.4
79.1

Figure 1. videos formats that are more used in
the web, (source Screen Digest).
Another relevant factor in this choice is the fact that
WMV is a Microsoft owned technology. Information
with this format can only be correctly visualised in
platforms that have windows media player, an
application that comes with windows by default. For
MacOS and Linux there are plugins but they are not
installed by default in the system, being this a task for
the user to perform.
To visualise FLV files it is also necessary to have a
small Macromedia plugin, which is installed in most of
the computers (figure 2).

FLV
7.1
14.4
30.2
72.9

Table 4. FLV to WMV, AVI and MPEG
conversion.
FLV
WMV
AVI
MPEG
5
4.2
6.8
5.9
10
8.7
13.2
12.2
20
17.9
31.4
28.7
50
40.3
81.6
73.6
The WMV format has only one advantage over
FLV since it is a bit more compact. Nevertheless, the
WMV is less used than FLV (figure 1).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

Figure 2. Percentage of computers with the
mentioned installed platforms (source – Adobe).
Finally, and to conclude the analysis, nowadays
almost every systems of video streaming available in the
internet use Flash technology (figure 3).

•

Allows URL’s re-writing in order to make them
more understandable for the users.
• Has a garbage system, similar to windows
recycling
which
allows
the
website
administrators to recover the contents that are
no longer available on the website.
• Allows that the contents are automatically
added or removed from the system at a certain
time, which, for these types of systems that are
daily modified is a very important functionality.
In this way, an online TV system can be
implemented recurring to PHP technologies for the
design of front end, Joomla as a content manager,
MYSQL for the managing of data bases and FLV as an
extension of the videos present in the system.

4. A methodology for HCI development
Figure 3. File formats in On-line TV sites.
Therefore, one can conclude from this analysis that
even though it is possible to use WMV and FLV, the one
that presents more advantages for the developing of such
a system is FLV, presenting as strong arguments the
following features:
• Compact size, optimizing the download time;
• Plugin installed in most computers that access
Internet.
• Used nowadays by almost all the online video
broadcasters.

3.2. Content management system
In regards to the content management system to use,
Joomla system arises as a valid option. Developed in
PHP and of easy interaction with MySQL, all
OpenSource platforms, it enables important functions for
an online TV system’s development. For instance:
• Allows the use of Templates.
• Allows the reutilisation of contents inside the
same web, which is an important factor in a
system where the same content (for instance
news) can be on more than one menu.
• Allows user profiles, i.e., new user profiles with
different features can be created through an
administration interface.
• Has a photo gallery, i.e., a storage to manage
and present images which is a very important
functionality bearing in mind that in the system
that we want to develop we wish to have an
image per news.
• Has a document manager, that allows the
edition and creation of new versions of the
document offline, which is an important feature
taking into consideration that the system to
develop will have a text for each news, and that
allows more liberty in the edition of those texts.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

For the design of a good interface the first step is to
identify the functional requirements. It is important to
establish what the user wants from the system and which
should be the main supported functionalities.
A survey was done in order to provide answers to
the 11 questions of the tasks analysis which synthesise
what needs to be known about the target public of the
application. The eleven questions are the following:
1. Who is going to use the system?
2. What tasks are actually performed by similar
systems?
3. What are the desired tasks in the system to
develop?
4. How do we learn the tasks to be performed?
5. Where are those tasks performed?
6. What is the connection between users and
information?
7. What others instruments are the user provided
with to execute the same service?
8. How do the users communicate amongst each
other?
9. What is the frequency of task’s execution?
10. What is the time restrictions imposed?
11. What happens if something goes wrong?
The following step in the design of an interface is
the definition of a conceptual model for the system,
which is composed by:
1. a definition, i.e., a high level description of how
a system is organized and how it works,
2. the objects that compose it, as well as the
actions available to use those objects,
3. the connection between concepts.
In the end, a low fidelity prototype should be
performed constituted by non functional pictures of the
system that allow to test, through usage scenarios, the
interface with the use, before the system is effectively
implemented, allowing to correct still in a preimplementation phase, the mistakes that would happen if
this system’s development phase was to be ignored.
The pictures of the low fidelity HCI are presented in
figures 4 to 8.

Figure 4. First Navigation Menu.

Figure 5. Second Navigation Menu.

Figure 7. Navigation Menu after choosing the
subjects of interest.

Figure 8. Navigation Menu where the video is
presented.

5. Broadcast architecture
This topic is focused on the IP broadcast
technology, which is vital for the implementation of the
live TV service. In this topic there is a summary of the
performed investigation in regards to this matter,
focusing on the RTSP protocol which is responsible for
the IP video broadcast that will be described.

5.1 Simple diagram
Figure 6. Third Navigation Menu.
Based on the survey, three task were defined, a hard
one, an easy one and an intermediated one. The hard task
is “access culture news from May”. To perform this task
the user should click in Archive, in the upper navigation
bar. After that the menu presented in the second image
will come up and the user will choose the date he
pretends (May) and then the menu presented in the third
image will come up. Afterwards, the user is invited to
select the themes he is most interested in. Finally, the
news is presented in a scheme just like the one shown in
the last picture (figure 8).

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

The broadcast architecture adds a new layer to the
traditional Web platforms, in which a client sends a
request to a web server and this one responds. In a video
transaction the web server enroots the client’s original
request to a media server, which, after some operations,
sends the video back to the client’s video reader.
Figure 9 describes the existing interactions between
the several layers, as well as the functionality attributed
to each one of them.

Figure 9. Diagram of layer’s interaction.
Figure 12. RTSP Protocol example.

5.2 Differences between HTTP and RTSP
Figure 10 displays the necessary layers to perform a
HTTP transaction, as well as the necessary layers to
perform a RTSP – “Real Time Streaming Protocol”.
Transaction.
WebPage
Video Streaming

Browser

Visualization

HTTP

Interactivity

RTSP

TCP

Transport

RTP/UDP

routing

IP

Physical
Connection

network

Media Player

IP

Physical
Connection

Figure 10. Differences between HTTP and RTSP.

5.3 RTSP Protocol
Figure 11 presents a description of the RTSP’s
functioning. As it was already mentioned above, the
RTSP protocol uses meta files as pointers to the files that
are afterwards transferred directly by RTP (“Real Time
Protocol”) between media server and the client’s video
reader. RTSP comes up as a way of adding the usual
commands associated to a video (“play”, “pause”,
“stop”,…). Figure 12 illustrates an example of a RTSP
usage.

Figure 11. RTSP’s functioning.

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

This is a typical example of the usage of RTSP.
Initially the user sends a http get (data needed to initiate
all the transactions by http), to which the web server
responds. Then all commands executed by the client are
sent to media server, where is store the file that is
pointed by the meta file, through RTSP protocol. The
video is transported by RTP between media server and
the user’s video reader, at the same time that it is
presented in the screen.

5.4 Existing broadcast architectures
The three existing architectures belong to real
media, Microsoft and Apple, being the correspondent
extensions to each one of them in table 5.
Table 5. Existing broadcast architectures.
Architecture

Meta file

Vídeo File

Real Media
Windows
Media
QuickTime

.rpm, .ram
.asx, .wax,
.wvx
.mov, .sdp

.rm
.asf, .wmv
.mov, .qt, .qti

In regards to Apple´s Quicktime architecture two
main applications arise:
• Darwin Streaming Server that works in
Windows, Linux and MacOS and which
documentation
may
be
consulted
in
http://developer.apple.com/opensource/server/st
reaming/index.html. This architecture is both a
good streaming server and a OpenSource.
• Quicktime broadcaster, is a very easy to use
application to produce a live broadcast event but
only works in MacOS. The application is not
free. The documentation may be consulted in
http://www.apple.com/quicktime/broadcaster/.

6. Conclusion

7. References

In this paper the main steps to develop an online TV
system were presented. The initial work was only of
research throughout various similar websites to the one
that we intend to develop. The most important, for a
deeper analysis, were chosen including interface quality,
what are the provided services and the ones that should
be, and in which platforms does the system’s functioning
rely on. Several platforms for the implementation of the
required system were analyzed and a decision was made.
All these options are detailed in this paper.
After that, a decisive aspect for the success of the
web system was analysed, more precisely the HCI,
pointing the main aspects to take into account in its
development..
Finally, the paper focused of the IP broadcasting
technology, since it’s a vital technology to implement the
online TV system, researching about which protocols are
used and what are the available architectures.

[1] Jakob Nielsen - Designing Web Usability: The Practice
of Simplicity.
[2] Henning Schulzrinne – Internet Media-on-Demand: The
Real-Time Streaming Protocol. In Real Media Conference,
San Francisco, C.A. March 4, 1997
[3] Adobe Dynamic Media Group - A Streaming Media
Primer
[4] Maureen Chesire, Alec Wolman, Geoffrey M.Voelker,
and Henry M.Levy –
Measurement and Analysis of a
Streaming - Media Workload. In Proceedings of the 3rd
USENIX Symposium on Internet Technologies and Systems
(USITS), San Francisco, CA, March 2001. (Best paper).
[5] S. Mangiaracina, P.G. Marchetti - WWW Interface Design,
Driven by Heuristic Evaluation. In Proc. 8th Delos Workshop
on User Interfaces in Digital Libraries, Stockolm, 18-21 Oct.
1998
[6] Miriam Walker, Leila Takayama, and James A. Landay High-Fidelity or Low-Fidelity, Paper or Computer? Choosing
Attributes When Testing Web Prototypes. In Proceedings of
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 46th Annual
Meeting, pages 661–665, 2002.
[7] Matjaz Juric, Sohail Salehi, Hagen Graf - Building
WebSites with Joomla
[8] Arash Amel, Dan Cryan - User-generated online video:
Competitive review and market Outlook, In ScreenDiges

11th International Conference Information Visualization (IV'07)
0-7695-2900-3/07 $20.00 © 2007

