Situation Awareness Tool for Global Argus
Jae Choi
Georgetown University

Sang-joon Lee
Viznox, Inc

ABSTRACT
We present a visualization tool to enhance situation awareness for
Global Argus, a system that tracks and detects indications and
warnings of biological events in near real time. Because Global
Argus generates massive amounts of data daily, its analysts often
struggle to interpret the information. To overcome this problem,
we have developed the Global Argus Situation Awareness Tool
(GASAT) using the InteleView/World Wind geographical
information system. This tool allows users to visualize current and
past events in a particular region, and thus to understand how
events evolve over time. Combined with the other tools that we
are developing, GASAT will contribute to enhanced situation
awareness in the tracking and detection of biological events.

Sarah Gigitashvilli
Georgetown University

James Wilson
Georgetown University

most powerful tactical indication and warning global operations
center in the world by several orders of magnitude. It is estimated
that the team is functioning at over 200 times the reporting output
of the World Health Organization and 20 times the geographic
coverage.
Global Argus provides text-based reporting and triages it through
a Warning, Watch, Advisory scale to provide its users with the
most relevant and timely information – a critical step when
handling such a high volume of data. Users access this data
through a secure web portal, Watchboard. Reporting requirements
are generated by the user community and relayed to the Global
Argus team for incorporation into standard operating procedures.

CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: I.3.3 [Computer
Graphics]: Picture/Image Generation - Viewing Algorithms; I.3.6
[Computer Graphics]: Methodology and Techniques - Interaction
Techniques.
Additional Keywords: visualization, situation awareness,
biosurveillance, biological events, visual analytics
1

INTRODUCTION

The occurrence of biological events with a potential impact on
homeland security is increasing, and current disease surveillance
systems in the United States have been unable to detect these
events in a timely fashion. The clear and present danger to the
United States spans infectious diseases in humans, animals, and
plants.
Global Argus is an operational capability that detects and tracks
indications and warnings of biological events occurring in every
country recognized by the U.S., in order to alert U.S. responders
weeks to months in advance of an imminent bioevent that the
national response community has not yet recognized.
One of the most important purposes of this operational system is
to promote situation awareness – that is, to help decision makers
understand what is going on so they can figure out what to do [1].
In this work, we developed a visualization tool that takes
advantage of human perceptive and cognitive facilities to support
the decision making process.
2

GLOBAL ARGUS ANALYTICAL WORKFLOW

The Global Argus team consists of analysts who monitor
indications and warnings in specific geographic regions. The
analysts are supervised by senior analysts who specialize in these
regions, with a chief analyst supervising the entire analytical
process. Figure 1 shows Global Argus’s analytical workflow. The
Global Argus team is currently tracking over 2,200 actively
evolving biological events in over 170 countries, making it the
*

e-mail: choi@isis.georgetown.edu
e-mail: sjlee@viznox.com
‡
e-mail::gigitashvili@isis.georgetown.edu
§
e-mail:wilson@isis.georgetown.edu
†

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

Figure 1. Global Argus Analytical Workflow

3

THE GLOBAL ARGUS SITUATION AWARENESS TOOL (GASAT)

We have developed a situation awareness tool that visualizes
Watchboard output data, namely, human/animal staging data at
the province level and biological/trigger events at the country
level. The tool was built on top of InteleView (InteleSense
Technologies Inc, Milpitas, CA, http://www.intelesense.net), a
fast, interactive, 3D world visualizer that combines advanced GIS
abilities and access to real-time live data from around the world
with an intuitive interface that allows the user to easily navigate
multiple diverse data sets and display data in meaningful ways.
InteleView customized NASA World Wind
(http://worldwind.arc.nasa.gov), a free, open-source virtual globe
developed by NASA.
3.1
Overview
GASAT has been integrated into InteleView/World Wind as a
plug-in, and it communicates with the Watchboard server via web
services. Each user can customize how many days of data to view
at once, and the Watchboard output data is then downloaded from
the server.
Each piece of Watchboard output data is categorized as animalrelated data, human-related data, a country-based trigger event, or
country-based biological event. GASAT displays current
information for country-level reports and both current and past
information for province-level reports, visualizing each category
separately with different boundary colors. Figure 2 shows
screenshots of GASAT, using a similar visual schema as
VisAware [2]. In these screenshots, the white boundary links to

213

human-related events, the blue boundary to animal-related events,
the purple boundary to biological events, and the turquoise
boundary to trigger events.

RSS feeds with their geographical information by adding RSS
feed web addresses.
GASAT can also selectively visualize diseases. Because Global
Argus is tracking over 100 diseases, displaying all events would
distract users. To prevent this problem, a user can choose diseases
of interests and GASAT will display information that is related to
the selected diseases.
Users can also adapt the display based on the zoom level. When a
user zooms out from the province level to look at the country
level, they may no longer wish to see the province-level details.
By turning on this adaptive display feature, a user will see only
country-level information or high-stage global events. The
province-level details can be restored by zooming in to a local
area.
4

FUTURE WORKS AND CONCLUSION

GASAT has been used by Global Argus analysts for several
months now, and so far, it appears to be a good tool for
visualizing the bulk of reports that they compile daily. It has
helped them see what is going on in one area of the world in
relation to another area.
To test these initial impressions, we will perform a quantitative
and qualitative assessment of GASAT. We also have plans to add
more data features, such as official reports from various
organizations and publication data related to specific geographical
locations. We are committed to developing more novel and useful
tools to accomplish our broader goal of situation awareness. goal.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is funded in most part by award W81XWH-04-1-0857
from the Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research
Center (TATRC) and Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA).
The content of this manuscript does not necessarily reflect the
position or policy of the U.S. Government.

Figure 2. Two screenshots of GASAT. The top one shows the
global view and the bottom one shows the regional view.

The human and animal event categories are divided into multiple
subsections, with each representing a province and pointing to the
corresponding geographical area. Each subsection is also divided
into multiple cells (there are six in Figure 2), with each
representing a certain period of time. When a user specifies a
week as a unit for a cell, the inner-most cell represents the output
data generated in the last seven days, and the outer-most cell
represents output data that is five to six weeks old. When a cell is
occupied, it means events took place in the region during the
specified period of time. The color of the cell represents the
staging information. Users can view detailed information about a
specific event by moving the mouse cursor over the cell.
GASAT is an interactive tool, so when a user manipulates the
globe, it visualizes information based on geographical location
and viewing parameters. To help users better understand events,
we used filled polygons to identify the regions linked to recent
events and country-level reports, and we used outlined polygons
to identify older events, which are also given greater transparency.
3.2
Additional features
GASAT can also display RSS (Real Simple Syndicate) items.
RSS items are now broadly used to announce official reports in
many international organizations such as the United Nations or
the World Health Organization. GASAT can easily display these

214

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

E.C. Adam. Fighter cockpits of the future. Proceedings of 12th
DASC, the 1993 IEEE/AIAA Digital Avionics Systems Conference,
318-323.
Y. Livnat, J. Agutter, S. Moon and S. Foresti. Visual Correlation for
Situational Awareness. Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE Symposium on
Information Visualization, pp 13, October 2005.

