Design Considerations for Collaborative Visual Analytics
Jeffrey Heer, Maneesh Agrawala
University of California, Berkeley
ABSTRACT
Information visualization leverages the human visual system to
support the process of sensemaking, in which information is
collected, organized, and analyzed to generate knowledge and
inform action. Though most research to date assumes a single-user
focus on perceptual and cognitive processes, in practice,
sensemaking is often a social process involving parallelization of
effort, discussion, and consensus building. This suggests that to
fully support sensemaking, interactive visualization should also
support social interaction. However, the most appropriate
collaboration mechanisms for supporting this interaction are not
immediately clear. In this article, we present design considerations
for asynchronous collaboration in visual analysis environments,
highlighting issues of work parallelization, communication, and
social organization. These considerations provide a guide for the
design and evaluation of collaborative visualization systems.
CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.5.2. User Interfaces,
H.5.3 Group and Organization Interfaces
Additional Keywords: visualization, analysis, collaboration,
design, computer-supported cooperative work
1

INTRODUCTION

Information visualization technologies leverage the human visual
system to support analysis and communication of large amounts
of information. However, visual analysis and decision making
often involve not only perceptual and cognitive processes, but
social processes. People may disagree on how to interpret data
and contribute contextual knowledge that deepens understanding.
As participants build consensus or make decisions they learn from
their peers. Furthermore, some data sets are so large that thorough
exploration by a single person is unlikely. Such scenarios arise in
business intelligence [36], intelligence analysis [37, 47], and
public data consumption [18]. In this spirit, a recent report [47]
names the design of collaborative visualization tools as a grand
challenge for visualization research.
While existing visualization research has explored techniques
for collocated collaboration (e.g., large displays and shared
workspaces) and synchronous distance work (e.g., real-time
networked displays), little research attention has been paid to
asynchronous collaboration around visualizations [48]. By
partitioning work across both time and space, asynchronous
collaboration offers greater scalability for group-oriented analysis.
There is evidence that, due in part to a greater division of labor,
asynchronous decision making can result in higher-quality
outcomes²broader discussions, more complete reports, and
longer solutions²than face-to-face collaboration [1].
One challenge to achieving such benefits is determining the
appropriate design decisions and technical mechanisms to enable
E-Mail: jheer@cs.berkeley.edu, maneesh@cs.berkeley.edu
Address: Soda Hall, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720-1776
IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

Data Management
Contribute Data
Clean Data
Categorize Data
Moderate Data

Raw
Data

Visualization
Select Data Sources
Apply Visual Encoding
Author Software

Data
Tables

Data
Transformations

Visual
Structures

Visual
Mappings

Visual Analytics
Observations
Hypotheses
Evidence (+/-)
Summarize
Report / Presentation

Views

View
Transformations

Figure 1. The Information Visualization Reference Model.
Source data is mapped into data tables which are visually encoded
and presented in interactive views [9, 28]. Collaboration may
occur at the level of data management, visualization, or analysis.

and catalyze social data analysis around visual media. Previously,
we began exploring this space by building and evaluating
sense.us, a system for asynchronous collaborative visualization
[29]. Our observations of usage have provided numerous
examples of group sensemaking in action: cycles of observation,
question, and hypothesis; social navigation to interesting or
controversial data; and identification of problematic or incorrect
data values. We wish to better support these observed behaviors
by grounding our design decisions in both theoretical and
practical knowledge of group interaction. Furthermore, additional
systems have recently been introduced to support collaborative
analysis around both statistical and geographic data (see Figure
2); each supports simple text comments and view sharing through
bookmarking. A theoretically-grounded design framework can be
applied to contrast these existing offerings and guide the future
research and development of social visual analysis systems.
Creating effective mediated collaboration environments raises a
number of design questions. How should collaboration be
structured, and what shared artifacts can be used to coordinate
contributions? What are the most effective communication
mechanisms? Based upon our experiences to date and a survey of
research in analytics, social psychology, sociology, organizational
studies, and computer-supported cooperative work, we identify a
set of design considerations to inform the development of
asynchronous collaborative information visualization systems. We
have grouped our design considerations into seven topical areas:
Division and allocation of work; Common ground and awareness;
Reference and deixis; Incentives and engagement; Identity, trust,
and reputation; Group dynamics; and Consensus and decision
making. In each of these areas, we discuss the underlying
accomplishments that enable effective collaboration, and suggest
specific mechanisms by which they could be achieved.
As a thorough treatment of these subjects would warrant
multiple volumes, we attempt only to identify key issues to guide
work in collaborative visualization. After discussing each topical
area in turn, we conclude by summarizing the various design
considerations presented and suggesting avenues for future
research and development in collaborative visual analytics.

171

Figure 2. Asynchronous Collaborative Visualization Systems. Clockwise from top-left, Spotfire Decision Site Posters [43], Wikimapia [50],
Swivel [46], Sense.us [29], and Many Eyes [33]. These systems support varied levels of sharing, discussion, and annotation of visualized data.

2

DIVISION AND ALLOCATION OF WORK

A fundamental aspect of successful collaboration is an effective
division of labor among participants. This involves both the
segmentation of effort into proper units of work and the allocation
of individuals to tasks in a manner that best matches their skills
and disposition. Primary concerns are how to split work among
multiple participants and meaningfully aggregate the results.
Benkler [2] describes the role of modularity, granularity, and
cost of integration in the peer production of information goods,
drawing on examples such as online discussions, open source
software, and Wikipedia. Modularity refers to how work is
segmented into atomic units, parallelizing work into independent
tasks. The granularity of a module is a measure of the cost or
effort involved in performing the task. The optimal granularity of
modules is closely tied to the incentives for performing the work.
For example, in online scenarios where the incentives tend to be
small and non-monetary, a small granularity is needed to facilitate
work, encouraging people to participate in part due to the ease of
contributing. A variety of granularities enables different classes of
contribution to emerge.
7KHWKLUGDVSHFWRI%HQNOHU¶VPRGHOLVWKHcost of integration:
what effort is required to usefully synthesize the contributions of

172

each individual module? Collaborative work will only be effective
if the cost of integration is low enough to warrant the overhead of
modularization while enforcing adequate quality control. There
are a number of mutually inclusive approaches to handling
integration: automation (automatically integrating work through
technological means), peer production (casting integration as an
additional collaborative task given to trusted participants), social
norms (using social pressures to reduce vandalistic behavior), and
hierarchical control (exercising explicit moderation).
Questions for collaborative visualization include how to
facilitate the modularization of work. The first step is determining
the modules of work and their granularity. Existing frameworks
for aiding this task include structural models of visualization
design and sensemaking processes. Once modules have been
identified, one can then attempt designs which reduce the cost
structure for these tasks. Another important concern is the
proscription of particular task types or roles²what aspects should
be formally inscribed in the system and what should be left open
to negotiation and definition by work groups themselves?
2.1
THE INFORMATION VISUALIZATION REFERENCE MODEL
One model for identifying modules of contribution is the
information visualization reference model [9, 28], a general

pattern for describing visualization applications (Figure 1). The
model decomposes the visualization process into data acquisition
and representation, visual encoding of data, and display and
interaction. Each phase of this model provides an entry point for
collaborative activity. Contributions involving data include
uploading data sets, cleaning or reformatting data, moderating
contributed data (e.g., to safeguard copyright or privacy
concerns), and affixing metadata (e.g., providing keyword tags).
Additional contributions of varying granularity lie in the
application of visual encodings. Examples include matching data
sets with existing visualization components, editing visual
mappings to form more effective visualizations, and authoring
visualization software components. Both Many Eyes [33] and
Swivel [46] enable contribution of data sets and visual mappings.
The primary focus of this paper, however, is at the level of
interaction, where we consider how collaborative visual analysis
and exploration can effectively be conducted.
2.2
THE SENSEMAKING MODEL
To better understand analytic contributions, we consult the
sensemaking model [9, 39], which grounds the use of information
visualization in a theory of how people search for, organize, and
create new knowledge from source information. Social issues
accrue at each phase of the model: how do people communicate,
KRZGRWKH\MXGJHRWKHUV¶FRQWULEXWLRQVKRZDUHJURXSVIRUPHG
and what motivates contributions? Each of these issues is
addressed in subsequent sections. As indicated by the numerous
interconnections in Figure 3, the sensemaking process has a much
higher degree of coupling than the information visualization
reference model, carrying implications for the granularity and
integration of contributions.
Intelligence analysis provides examples of both cooperative and
competitive models of work [47]. In cooperative scenarios,
modules may be of fine granularity and pooled such that
collaborators can immediately benefit from the work of others.
Examples include identifying relevant information sources,
connections between sources, and positing hypotheses. Such work
may involve tightly coupled collaboration, requiring awareness
and communication among participants. In competitive scenarios,
modules are larger and work is not integrated until a later stage of
sensemaking, such as detailed, evidence-backed hypotheses or
recommended actions. While lacking the benefits of resource
pooling, this approach encourages individual assessment and can
reduce groupthink bias. Accordingly, it may benefit collaborative
visualization systems to support both fine-grained and coarsegrained work parallelization.

If adopting a competitive model, the main concern is with
integrating the end results of the sensemaking process. How can
analytic conclusions or suggested actions be presented, compared,
and evaluated? This gives rise to a consensus and decision making
problem of its own, an issue discussed later. If cooperative models
are used, either across all collaborators or within teams, we should
consider social issues affecting each phase of sensemaking.
2.2.1
INFORMATION FORAGING
The first such phase is information foraging [36]. Given the
underlying metaphor of foraging for food, an activity often
performed by social packs of animals, social information foraging
[35] seems a natural extension. This argues for collaborators to
pool findings, such as discovery of relevant information, and to
support notification updates and information retrieval. Challenges
include formalizing contributions, such as identifying trends or
outliers of interest and positing explanatory hypotheses, and
providing retrieval mechanisms by which others can access them.
Additional possibilities lie in analyzing and displaying activity
traces to facilitate social navigation [20], metaphorically similar to
the scent trails left by ants foraging for food. In this form, general
usage itself can be treated as an implicit module of work, a
possibility discussed further in section 3.2.
2.2.2
INFORMATION SCHEMATIZATION
The next phases of sensemaking concern the construction and
population of information schemata. This could be conducted in a
general form by enabling discussion amongst collaborators. One
challenge is to synthesize the results of discussion into more
accessible forms, such as summaries of arguments and evidence.
The cost structure of these tasks could be further reduced, and the
integration of contributions facilitated by, providing additional
shared artifacts or external representations [53] for structuring
group work. For example, the analytic sandbox of [51] provides a
visual environment for spatially organizing hypotheses and
positive and negative evidence, while [3] describes a system for
collaborative use of analytic evidence matrices.
2.2.3
PROBLEM-SOLVING, DECISION-MAKING, AND ACTION
The final phases of sensemaking involve problem-solving and
action. This may or may not take place within the collaborative
analysis environment. Findings gained from analysis may serve as
input to collaboration in other media, suggesting the need to both
facilitate external access to the contents of the visual analysis
environment and extracting content for use in other systems. If
problem-solving and decision making are conducted within the
system, aforementioned issues regarding communication,
discussion, and consensus must be addressed.
3

Figure 3. The Sensemaking Cycle. The diagram depicts the
various phases and loops of the sensemaking process, annotated
with common tasks. The image is taken from Card et al [9].

COMMON GROUND AND AWARENESS

Inspired by linguistics, social psychologists have investigated
fundamental prerequisites for successful communication. Clark
and Brennan describe the concept of common ground [15], the
shared understanding between conversational participants
enabling communication. Through shared experience and
discussion, people constantly monitor their mutual understanding.
For example, facial expressions, body language, and backchannel
XWWHUDQFHVVXFKDV³XK-KXK´DQG³KPP"´SURYLGHgrounding cues
RI D SDUWLFLSDQW¶V FXUUHQW OHYHO RI XQGHUVWDQGLQJ %RWK SRVLWLYH
evidence of convergence of understanding and negative evidence
of misunderstanding are used to establish common ground.
Interestingly, an imperfect shared understanding is often
sufficient. The principle of least collaborative effort states that
conversational participants will exert just enough effort to achieve

173

successful communication [13]. Collaborative effort may be
applied during both a planning stage, in which a participant
formulates their next utterance, and an acceptance stage, in which
a participant ascertains if partners have understood the utterance.
This principle serves as an evaluation guide for collaboration
mechanisms based on their effect upon the cost structure of
interaction. For example, multiple studies have shown that the
media of communication affects the cost structure of collaborative
effort [4,21]: views of a shared visual environment minimize the
need to verbally confirm actions that can be assessed visually.
However, media effects such as latency can hamper the efficiency
benefits of such cues [21].
At both general and detailed levels, grounding theory provides
a useful guide for design decisions. When collaborating around
visualizations, participants must be able to see the same visual
HQYLURQPHQW LQ RUGHU WR JURXQG HDFK RWKHUV¶ DFWLRQV DQG
comments, suggesting the need for mechanisms for bookmarking
or sharing specific states of the visualization. This includes both
sharing within the visualization environment itself and across
other media. For example, the results of visual analysis might
effectively be shared embedded in an external web page, where
common ground is better established within a dedicated, familiar
readership. At minimum, the ability to easily pass around pointers
(e.g., URLs) to specific views is indispensable. This entails that
collaborative visualizations be able to explicitly represent and
export their internal state space [29,48].
3.1
DISCUSSION MODELS
Given the ability to access a shared viewpoint, one must still
determine the forms of discussion and annotation around that
view. For example, one could use visualization bookmarks within
a standard discussion forum, interspersing links to desired views
within the text. This form of independent discussion is
unidirectional, linking from text to the visualization. Independent,
unthreaded comments are used by both Decision Site Posters [43]
and Many Eyes [33]. Another approach is embedded discussion,
placing conversational markers directly within the visualization,
such as comments over annotated geographic regions in
Wikimapia [50]. This approach provides unidirectional links that
point from the visualization to text.
Grounding might be further facilitated by more deeply tying
independent discussion to the visualization state space. Doublylinked commentary [29] allows comments to link to specific views
as in independent discussion, while also enabling all such
discussions to be retrieved in situ as visualization views are
visited. Our hypothesis is that directly associating commentary
with specific states of the visualization will facilitate grounding
by disambiguating the context of discussion, while also enabling
serendipitous discovery of relevant discussion during exploration.
Evidence for this hypothesis could take the form of simplified
referential utterances or facilitation of reader comprehension.
3.2
AWARENESS
Another important source of grounding comes from awareness of
others¶ activities, allowing collaborators to gauge what work has
been done and where to allocate effort next [10,19]. Within
asynchronous contexts, participants require awareness of the
timing and content of past actions. This suggests that designs
should include both history and notification mechanisms (e.g.,
[6]) for following actions performed on a given artifact or by
specific individuals or groups. Browseable histories of past action
are one viable mechanism, as are subscription and notification
technologies such as RSS (Really Simple Syndication) and Atom.

174

User activity can also be aggregated and abstracted to provide
additional forms of awareness. Social navigation [20] involves the
use of activity traces to provide additional navigation options,
allowing users to purposefully navigate to past states of high
interest or explore less-YLVLWHG UHJLRQV WKH ³DQWL-social
QDYLJDWLRQ´RI>@). For example, navigation cues may be added
to links to views with low visitation rates or to action items such
as unanswered questions and unassessed hypotheses.
4

REFERENCE AND DEIXIS

A vital aspect of grounding is successfully referring to artifacts,
people, places, or other items. As discussed by both Clark [12]
and Brennan [4], reference can take on many different forms; we
focus on reference in spatial contexts. When collaborating around
visual media, it is common to refer to specific objects, groups, or
regions visible to participants. Such references may be general
HJ ³QRUWK E\ QRUWKZHVW´ definite (e.g., named entities),
detailed HJGHVFULEHGE\DWWULEXWHVVXFKDVWKH³EOXHEDOO´RU
deictic HJ SRLQWLQJ WR DQ REMHFW DQG VD\LQJ ³WKDW RQH´ DOVR
referred to as indexical reference). Once the referent has been
successfully established and grounding has been achieved
between participants, collaboration can move forward.
Clark [12] surveys various forms of spatial indexical reference,
grouping them into the categories of pointing and placing.
Pointing behaviors use some form of vectorial reference to direct
attention to an object, group, or region of interest, such as pointing
DILQJHURUGLUHFWLQJRQH¶VJD]H3ODFLQJEHKDYLRUVLQYROYHPRYLQJ
an object to a region of space that has a shared, conventional
meaning. Examples include placing groceries on a counter to
indicate items for purchase and standing across from the teller to
indicate that you will be the purchaser. In addition to directing
attention, indexical reference allows patterns of speech and text to
change. ParticipantVFDQXVHGHLFWLFWHUPVOLNH³WKDW´DQG³WKHUH´
to invoke indexical referents, simplifying the production of
utterances along the principle of least collaborative effort.
4.1
POINTING
Hill and Hollan [30] further discuss the various roles that deictic
pointing gestures can play, often communicating intents more
FRPSOLFDWHGWKDQVLPSO\³ORRNKHUH´)RUH[DPSOHGLIIHUHQWKDQG
gestures can communicate angle (oriented flat hand), height
KRUL]RQWDO IODW KDQG LQWHUYDOV WKXPE DQG LQGH[ ILQJHU LQ ³&´
shape), groupLQJV ODVVR¶LQJ D UHJLRQ DQG IRUFHV DFFHOHUDWLQJ
fist). They go on to state that successfully supporting deixis is key
to the future of visualization applications.
While other forms of reference are often most easily achieved
through speech or written text, deictic reference in particular
offers important interface design challenges for collaborative
visualization. Our hypothesis is that methods for performing
nuanced pointing behaviors can improve collaboration by
favorably altering its cost structure. Hill and Hollan make this
FODLPH[SOLFLWO\DUJXLQJIRU³JHQHUDOO\DSSOLFDEOHWHFKQLTXHVWKDW
UHDOL]H FRPSOH[ SRLQWLQJ LQWHQWLRQV´ E\ HQJDJLQJ ³SUH-attentive
YLVLRQLQWKHVHUYLFHRIFRJQLWLYHWDVNV´
An additional concern is ambiguity of reference. Clark et al
>@ GHPRQVWUDWH KRZ SHRSOH¶V FRPPRQ JURXQG FDQ DIIHFW
ambiguity resolution. Thus, two people with greater familiarity
might successfully communicate using ambiguous references,
while a third participant remains confused. By providing
interaction techniques for pointing that facilitate unambiguous
references, designers might not only aid human communication,
but allow for machine-readable forms of pointing or annotation,
supporting a navigable index of references. For example, this

could allow users to search for all commentary or visualizations
that reference a particular data item.
Another design consideration is how various forms of reference
may be applied in tandem. For example, one might deictically
refer to a particular object, but formulate a broader selection by
DEVWUDFWLQJ IURP WKH SURSHUWLHV RI WKDW REMHFW HJ ³VHOHFW DOO
LWHPVWKDWDUHEOXHOLNHWKLVRQH´7KHLPSOLFLWLQWHUSOD\EHWZHHQ
gesture and text, often segmented in time and interpreted
subconsciously in synchronous interactions, may need to be more
concretely reified in asynchronous contexts. For example, a text
comment involving multiple deictic terms may need to link those
terms explicitly to visual annotations, as the gestural cues used in
face-to-face communication are not available for disambiguation.
5

INCENTIVES AND ENGAGEMENT

If collaborators are professionals working within a particular
context (e.g., financial analysts or research scientists) there may
be existing incentives, both financial and professional, for
conducting collaborative work. In a public goods scenario,
incentives such as social visibility or sense of contribution may be
the motivating factors. Incorporating incentives into the design
process may increase the quantity and/or quality of contributions,
and could even provide additional motivation in those situations
that already have well established incentive systems.
Benkler [2] posits an incentive structure for collaborative work
consisting of monetary incentives, hedonic incentives, and socialpsychological incentives. Monetary incentives refer to material
compensation such as a salary or cash reward. Hedonic incentives
refer to well-being or engagement experienced intrinsically in the
work. Social-psychological incentives involve perceived benefits
such as increased status or social capital.
5.1
PERSONAL RELEVANCE
A number of observations of social use of visualization have
noted an affinity of visualization users for data which they find
personally relevant [27,48,49]. For example, collaborative visual
analysis of the occupations of American workers [29] often
started by searching for their own profession and those of their
friends and family, similar to how people searched for names in
the popular NameVoyager visualization [49]. The hypothesis is
that by selecting data sets or designing their presentation such that
the data is seen as personally relevant, usage rates will rise due to
increased hedonic incentive. For example, geographic
visualizations can facilitate navigation to personally relevant
locations through typing in specific zip codes or city names.
5.2
SOCIAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL INCENTIVES
In the case of social-psychological incentives, the visibility of
contributions can be manipulated for social effects. Ling et al [32]
found that users contributed more if reminded of the uniqueness
of their contribution or if given specific challenges, but not under
other theoretically-motivated conditions. Cheshire [11] ran a
controlled experiment finding that, even in small doses, positive
social feedback on a contribution greatly increases contributions.
He also found that visibility of high levels of cooperative behavior
across the community increases contributions in the short term,
but has only moderate impact in the long term. These studies
suggest that social-psychological incentives can improve
contribution rates, but that the forms of social visibility applied
have varying returns. One such incentive for visual analysis is to
prominently display new discoveries or successful responses to
open questions. Mechanisms for positive feedback, such as voting
for interesting comments, might also foster more contributions.

5.3
GAME PLAY
Finally, it is worth considering game play as an additional
framework for increasing incentives. In contrast to environments
such as spreadsheets, many visualizations already enjoy game-like
properties, being highly visual, highly interactive, and often
animated. Heer [27] discusses various examples in which playful
activity contributes to analysis, applying insights from an existing
theory of playful behavior [8] that analyzes the competitive,
visceral, and teamwork building aspects of play. For example,
scoring mechanisms could be applied to create competitive socialpsychological incentives. Game design might also be used to
allocate attention, for example, by creating a team-oriented
³scavenger hunt´ DQDO\VLV game focused on a particular subject
matter. Salen and Zimmerman [40] provide a thorough resource
for the further study of game design concepts.
6

IDENTITY, TRUST, AND REPUTATION

Aspects of identity, reputation, and trust all influence the way
people interact with each other. Other things being equal, a
hypothesis suggested by a more trusted or reputable person will
have a higher probability of being accepted as part of the group
consensus [34]. For social sensemaking in a computer-mediated
environment, design challenges accrue around the various markers
of identity and past action that might be transmitted through the
system. For example, Donath [17] describes how even a cue as
VLPSOHDVRQH¶Ve-mail address can lead to a number of inferences
about identity and status.
6.1
IDENTITY PRESENTATION
Many theorists try to understand interpersonal perception via the
signals available for interpretation by others. Goffman [23]
distinguishes between expressions given and expressions given off
to indicate those parts of our presentation of self that are
consciously planned (e.g., the content of our speech) or
unconsciously generated (e.g., a wavering of voice indicating
nervousness), each of which is interpreted to form opinions of a
person. Donath [17] classifies such signals into conventional
signals²low cost signals that are easy to fake (e.g., talking about
going to the gym)²and assessment signals²more reliable
signals that are difficult to fabricate (e.g., having large muscles).
When considering the implications of identity assessment for
designing collaborative visualization systems, it is important to
take into account the context of deployment. If collaborators are
already familiar to each other, there may be little that needs to be
done to support identity and reputation formation, as there are
existing channels through which this can be conducted. It may be
HQRXJK WR VLPSO\ LGHQWLI\ FROODERUDWRUV¶ LQGLYLGXDO FRQWULEXWLRQV
with recognizable names. Many organizations maintain online
personnel directories to aid awareness and collaboration; visual
analysis systems should be able to leverage such existing artifacts.
On the other hand, if collaborators begin as strangers,
mechanisms for self-presentation and reputation formation need to
be included in the system design. Possible mechanisms include
identity markers, such as screen names, demographic profiles,
social networks, and group memberships. Considerations include
the type of personal information germane to the context of visual
analysis; for example, is a playful or professional environment
desired? Attributes such as age, geographic location, interests, and
VNLOOV PLJKW KHOS DVVHVV D FROODERUDWRU¶V EDFNJURXQG NQRZOHGJH
affecting the confidence one places in hypotheses. Of course, this
picture is complicated if such measures are self-reported
conventional signals subject to fabrication. This raises the
challenge of crafting assessment signals of identity and reputation.

175

6.2
REPUTATION FORMATION
Considering how interpersonal assessment develops over time
gives rise to questions of reputation and trust formation. In the
case where participants only interact through the system itself,
PHDQVRIJDXJLQJDXVHU¶VSDVWDFWLRQVRUFRQWULEXWLRQVDUHQHHGHG
to not only aid awareness (cf. §3) but to facilitate reputation
formation. Observations of past actions provide implicit means of
reputation formation, allowing collaborators to make interpersonal judgments grounded in past activity. One challenge for
design is to consider what pieces of information are most
informative for reputation formation.
Some systems instead provide explicit reputation mechanisms,
such as seller ratings in online markets such as eBay [38]. In a
visual analysis environment, collaborators mighWUDWHHDFKRWKHU¶V
contributions according to their interestingness or accuracy. This
may help surface contributions with higher relevance, provide a
reputation metric for contributors, and provide a socialpsychological incentive for high quality contributions.
7

GROUP DYNAMICS

The makeup of collaborative groups is another aspect important to
social sensemaking. Many scenarios, such as business and
research, may involve work groups that are already well
established. In such cases, standard group management and
communication features common to many collaborative
applications may be sufficient. However, when organizing effort
in public goods scenarios, explicit mechanisms for assisting group
formation may aid collaborative visualization efforts.
7.1
GROUP MANAGEMENT
At a basic level, formal group management mechanisms present
useful means for addressing issues of scalability and privacy.
Group management mechanisms can support the coordination of a
work group on a specific task within a larger collaborative
environment, providing notification and awareness features at the
group level. Groups also provide a means of filtering
contributions, improving tractability and reducing information
overload for participants who may not be interested in the
contributions of strangers. Finally, groups provide a means of
limiting contribution visibility, providing one mechanism for
individual privacy within large-scale online scenarios.
7.2
GROUP SIZE
One challenge for group management is the choice of group size.
Larger groups may be able to achieve more through a larger labor
pool, but can incur social and organizational costs. For example,
larger groups are more likely to suffer from the free rider problem
due to diluted accountability [25]. Pirolli [35] describes a
mathematical model of social information foraging that measures
the benefit of including additional collaborators in information
gathering tasks. His analysis finds that beyond certain sizes,
additional foragers provide decreasing benefits, suggesting that an
optimal group size exists, dependent on the parameters of the
foraging task. A useful future experiment would be to apply
3LUROOL¶VIUDPHZRUNWRUHDOYLVXDODQDO\VLVWHDPV
7.3
GROUP DIVERSITY
Another issue facing group formation is the diversity of group
members. In this case diversity can include the distribution of
domain-specific knowledge among potential participants and
other differences such as geographical location, culture, and
gender. Organizational studies [16, 42] find that increased group
diversity can lead to greater coverage of information and

176

improved decision making. However, diversity can also lead to
increased discord and longer decision times.
Various measurements of diversity may be applied to suggest a
set of group members to gain adequate coverage for an analysis
task. Such measurements might come from analyzing differences
EHWZHHQXVHUSURILOHVDQGVWUXFWXUDOIHDWXUHVRISDUWLFLSDQWV¶VRFLDO
networks [7]. Such networks may be explicitly articulated or
inferred from communication patterns, such as the co-occurrence
of commenters across discussion threads. :XHWDO¶V>@VWXG\RI
organizational information flow found that information spreads
efficiently among homophilous group members but not across
community boundaries, further suggesting the value of identifying
structural holes and directing bridging individuals in the social
network towards particular findings.
8

CONSENSUS AND DECISION MAKING

The need to establish group consensus arises in many phases of
the sensemaking cycle. Examples include agreement about the
data to collect, how to organize and interpret data, and making
decisions based upon the data. Consensus may arise through
discussion or may involve the aggregation of individual decisions.
8.1
CONSENSUS AND DISCUSSION
Mohammed [34] combines various contributions in social
psychology and organizational studies to posit a model for
cognitive consensus in group-decision making. This model takes
into account the assumptions, category labels, content domains,
and causal models possessed by each participant, and how they
can evolve through discussion. One tangible recommendation that
comes from this work is to clearly identify the points of dissent,
creating focal points for further discussion and negotiation. From
a design perspective, this suggests the need for communication
mechanisms that allow such items to be labeled and addressed.
Collaborative tagging [24] is one potential candidate.
Scheff [41] notes that consensus requires more than participants
simply sharing a belief; participants must believe that their beliefs
are the same, and achieve realization that others XQGHUVWDQGRQH¶V
position. This implies the need for feedback loops for gauging
mutual understanding. Along these lines, it may be useful to
consider the effects of multiple communication channels on
decision processes. Collaborative visualization environments that
provide messaging, in either synchronous or asynchronous forms,
might provide backchannels for negotiation and non-public
discussion. The integration of instant messaging into the GMail email service provides an example of how different communication
channels can be weaved together in a single system.
The value of different forms of consensus can vary based on the
task at hand. Hastie [26] found that group discussion improved
accuracy when decision tasks had demonstrably correct solutions,
allowing groups to evaluate their output. When task outcomes are
open-ended, consensus through discussion is harder to evaluate. In
a simulated graduate admissions task, Gigone and Hastie [22]
found little value in discussion, as group decisions were wellmatched by simply averaging prior individual decisions.
One design implication that again arises is the use of voting or
ranking systems. Mechanisms for expressing support or disdain
for hypotheses could aid data interpretation and further identify
controversial points. For example, Wikimapia users can vote on
the accuracy of labeled geographic regions and Swivel supports
ratings of interestingness. A game-like variation on this approach
is the creation of prediction markets [45]: individuals can be given
D OLPLWHG DPRXQW RI ³SRLQWV´ RU ³FXUUHQF\´ WKDW WKH\ FDQ XVH WR
vote for hypotheses they find most promising. Hypotheses that are
later validated could reap payback rewards for their supporters.

Design Consideration
Modularity and Granularity
Cost of Integration
Shared Artifacts
Artifact Histories
View Sharing / Bookmarking
Content Export
Discussion
Notification
Action Flags
Social Navigation
Recommendation
Pointing Techniques
Personal Relevance
Social-Psychological Incentives
Game Play
Identity Markers
User Profiles
Activity Histories
Activity Summaries
Group Management
Group Size
Group Diversity
Voting and Ranking
Presentation

Description
Identify appropriately-scoped units of work that form basic analytic contributions.
Synthesize work while attempting to lower integration costs and maintain quality.
Structure collaboration through shared, editable representations.
Provide histories of actions performed on artifacts.
Enable lightweight sharing of views across media with bookmarks.
Support embedding of annotated views in external media (e.g., email, blogs, reports)
Support commentary; consider implications of discussion model on common ground.
Support notification subscriptions for views, artifacts, people, and groups.
Mark needed future actions: unanswered questions, need for evidence, etc.
Make activity patterns visible, determine popular and neglected data regions.
Suggest related views, comments, and data to current points of interest.
Support nuanced pointing through selection techniques and visual effects.
Increase engagement by increasing personal relevance of data sets.
Increase engagement by surfacing individual contributions.
Game design elements can provide incentives and be used to direct effort.
Enable identification of collaborators in a contextually-appropriate manner.
6XSSRUWDZDUHQHVVRIRWKHUV¶EDFNJURXQGVDQGVNLOOV
Personal action histories allow past contributions to be assessed.
Activity indicators or summaries aid reputation and visibility of contributions.
Group creation and management mechanisms address issues of scale and privacy.
Optimal group size determination can improve efficiency of analysis.
Appropriate within-group diversity can result in more complete results.
Quantitative measures can be used for consensus and to lower integration costs.
Support creation and export of presentations for telling analysis stories.

Sections
§2
§2
§2, 3
§3
§3
§3
§3, 8
§3
§3, 8
§2, 3
§3
§4
§5
§5
§2, 5
§6
§6
§3, 6
§3, 5, 6
§7
§2, 7
§2, 7
§2, 6, 8
§3, 4, 8

Table 1. Selected Design Considerations for Collaborative Visual Analytics. The table lists many of the individual design
considerations visited in this article, providing a brief description and noting the relevant sections that discuss the issue in detail.

8.2
INFORMATION DISTRIBUTION AND PRESENTATION
An important dimension of group consensus is the distribution of
information across group members. Both Stasser [44] and Gigone
and Hastie [22] find that groups generally do not successfully pool
information, biasing decision-making in the direction of the initial
information distribution. This may be due to the inertia of
individual decisions made prior to discussion or due to alreadyshared information providing common ground for discussion,
biasing conversation against the unshared information. A potential
benefit of collaborative analysis is better information pooling,
providing a record of findings and opinions that can be surveyed
prior to decision-making and discussion. Improving collective
information foraging may help inform group decision-making by
changing the information distribution.
Common forms of information exchange in group sensemaking
are reports and presentations. Narrative presentation of analysis
³VWRULHV´ is a natural and often effective way to communicate
analytic findings, and has been observed as a primary use of
6SRWILUH¶V 'HFLVLRQ 6LWH 3RVWHUV >@ 7KH FKDOOHQJH WR
collaborative visualization is to provide mechanisms to aid the
creation and distribution of presentations. For example, the
sense.us system [29] allows users to construct and share trails of
related views to create tours spanning multiple visualizations.
This approach could be further improved with support to build
presentations semi-automatically using interaction histories,
export such presentations into external media, and apply
previously discussed pointing techniques. Bookmarking can also
enable recipients of a presentation to backtrack to the original
visualization to conduct more analysis or verification.
9

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

This article presents design considerations for collaborative visual
analytics, attempting to identify accomplishments which facilitate
collaboration and suggest mechanisms for achieving them.
Highlights include a list of collaborative visualization tasks,
techniques to improve shared context and awareness, and

suggestions for increasing engagement and allocating effort.
Many of these considerations are summarized in Table 1. The
overarching goal is to effectively parallelize work, facilitate
mutual understanding, and reduce the costs of collaborative tasks.
Visiting these considerations also provides an agenda for future
research in collaborative visual analytics, surfacing hypotheses in
need of study and suggesting new technical mechanisms:
What is the effect of different discussion models (e.g.,
independent, embedded, doubly-linked) on participation and
the establishment of common ground?
Beyond textual discussion, what external representations will
effectively support collaborative analysis? How do such
artifacts affect grounding and the cost of integration?
How can the synthesis of individual contributions be
improved? Can (semi-)automatic summarization or merging
of separately developed data views (e.g., [5]) be used to form
aggregated contributions?
How should selection and visual emphasis techniques be
designed to provide nuanced pointing behaviors? Can
referenced objects be unambiguously recognized by both
human and machine collaborators?
How can pointing and graphical annotation gracefully handle
dynamic visualizations and changing data sets?
How should social navigation cues be effectively added to
visual analysis tools to unobtrusively improve awareness?
Can automated techniques be used to help allocate effort?
For example, mining past contributions, user profiles, and
inferred social networks may enable systems to direct
collaborators to tasks in need of attention.
How can the fruits of collaborative visual analysis be more
effectively exported, shared and embedded in external media
such as web pages, e-mail, and presentations?
These and other challenges present exciting opportunities for
advancing visual analytics research.

177

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Martin Wattenberg, Fernanda Viégas, Stu Card, Coye
Cheshire, and Andrew Fiore for their insightful comments.
REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]
[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]
[21]
[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]

178

Benbunan-Fich, R., Hiltz, S.R., Turoff, M. (2003). A comparative
content analysis of face-to-face vs. asynchronous group decision making.
Decision Support Systems archive, 34(4), 457-469.
Benkler, Y. (2002). Coase's Penguin, or, Linux and the Nature of the
Firm. Yale Law Journal, 112(369).
Billman, D., Convertino, G., Pirolli, P., Massar, J. P., Shrager, J. (2006).
Collaborative intelligence analysis with CACHE: bias reduction and
information coverage. PARC UIR Tech Report.
Brennan, S.E. (2005). How conversation is shaped by visual and spoken
evidence. In Approaches to studying world-situated language use:
Bridging the language-as-product and language-as-action traditions.
Trueswell and Tanenhaus (eds.), MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 95-129.
Brennan, S.E., Mueller, K., Zelinsky, G., Ramakrishnan, I.V., Warren,
D.S., Kaufman, A. (2006). Toward a Multi-Analyst, Collaborative
Framework for Visual Analytics. Proc. IEEE VAST 2006.
Brush, A.J., Bargeron, D., Grudin, J., Gupta, A. (2002). Notification for
shared annotation of digital documents. Proc. ACM CHI 2002.
Burt, R. S. (2004). Structural holes and good ideas. American Journal of
Sociology, 110(2), 349±399.
Caillois, R. (1961). Man, Play, and Games. Free Press of Glencoe.
Card, S.K., Mackinlay, J.D., Shneiderman, B. (1999). Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision To Think. Morgan-Kaufmann.
Carroll, J., Rosson, M.B., Convertino, G., Ganoe, C.H. (2005).
Awareness and teamwork in computer-supported collaborations.
Interacting with Computers, 18(1):21-46.
Cheshire, C. (2006, under review.) Social Psychological Selective
Incentives and the Emergence of Generalized Information Exchange.
Clark, H. H. (2003). Pointing and placing. In S. Kita (Ed.), Pointing.
Where language, culture, and cognition meet (pp. 243-268). Erlbaum.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a collaborative
process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Clark, H. H., Schreuder, R., & Buttrick, S. (1983). Common ground and
the understanding of demonstrative reference. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior , 22, 245- 258.
Clark, H.H. and Brennan, S.E. (1991). Grounding in Communication. In
Perspectives on socially shared cognition, L. B. Resnick, R. M. Levine,
and S. D. Teasley, eds. American Psychological Association, p. 127±149.
Cummings, J. (2004). Work groups, structural diversity, and knowledge
sharing in a global organization. Management Science, 50(3), 352±364.
Donath, J.S. (1998). Identity and Deception in the Virtual Community. In
M. Smith and P. Kollock (eds.) Communities in Cyberspace. Routledge.
Dorling, D., Barford, A., Newman, A. (2006). Worldmapper: The World
as You've Never Seen It Before. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics. 12(5). Sep/Oct 2006.
Dourish, P., Belotti, V. (1992). Awareness and coordination in shared
workspaces. Proc. ACM CSCW 1992. Toronto, Ontario. p. 107-114.
Dourish, P., Chalmers, M. (1994). Running Out of Space: Models of
Information Navigation. 3URF+XPDQ&RPSXWHU,QWHUDFWLRQ+&,¶.
Gergle, D., Kraut, R.E., Fussell, S.R. (2004). Language efficiency and
visual technology: Minimizing collaborative effort with visual
information. Journal of Language & Social Psychology, 23(4):491-517.
Gigone, D., Hastie, R. (1993). The Common Knowledge Effect:
Information Sharing and Group Judgment. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology. Vol. 65, pp. 959-974.
Goffman, E. (1959). The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Anchor
Books, New York, NY.
Golder, S.A., Huberman, B.A. (2006). The Structure of Collaborative
Tagging Systems. Journal of Information Science 32(2). April 2006.
Hardin, R. (2003). The Free Rider Problem. In E.N. Zalta (Ed.), The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2003 Edition).

[26] Hastie, R. (1986). Experimental Evidence on Group Accuracy. In B.
Grofman & G. Owen (eds.), Decision Research, 2:129-157. JAI Press.
[27] Heer, J. (2006). Socializing Visualization. In CHI 2006 Workshop on
Social Visualization.
[28] Heer, J., Agrawala, M. (2006). Software Design Patterns for Information
Visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics. 12(5). Sep/Oct 2006.
[29] Heer, J., Viégas, F., Wattenberg, M. (2007). Voyagers and Voyeurs:
Supporting Asynchronous Collaborative Information Visualization. Proc.
ACM CHI 2007. San Jose, CA.
[30] Hill, W. C., Hollan, J. D., Wroblewski, D., McCandless, T. (1992). Edit
wear and read wear. Proc. ACM CHI 1992. pp. 3±9.
[31] Hill, W.C., Hollan, J.D. (1991). Deixis and the Future of Visualization
Excellence. Proc. of IEEE Visualization. pp. 314±319.
[32] Ling, K., Beenen, G., Ludford, P., Wang, X., Chang, K., Cosley, D.,
Frankowski, D., Terveen, L., Rashid, A. M., Resnick, P., and Kraut, R.
(2005). Using social psychology to motivate contributions to online
communities. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 10(4).
[33] Many Eyes. (2007). http://many-eyes.com
[34] Mohammed, S. (2001). Toward an Understanding of Cognitive
Consensus in a Group Decision-Making Context. The Journal of Applied
Behavioral Science, Vol. 37, No. 4, (Dec., 2001), pp. 408-425.
[35] Pirolli, P. (2006, in progress). Social Information Foraging. Chapter 18,
Information Foraging.
[36] Pirolli, P., Card, S. K. (1999). Information Foraging. Psychological
Review 106(4): 643-675.
[37] Pirolli, P., Card, S.K. (2005). The sensemaking process and leverage
points for analyst technology as identified through cognitive task
analysis. Proc. of International Conference on Intelligence Analysis.
[38] Resnick, P., Zeckhauser, R., Swanson, J., Lockwood, K. (2006). The
Value of Reputation on eBay: A Controlled Experiment. Experimental
Economics, 9(2):79-101.
[39] Russell, D.M., Stefik, M.J., Pirolli, P., Card, S.K. (1993). The Cost
Structure of Sensemaking. Proc. ACM CHI 1993. Amsterdam, NL.
[40] Salen, K., Zimmerman, E. (2003). Rules of Play: Fundamentals of Game
Design. MIT Press.
[41] Scheff, T.J. (1967). Toward a Sociological Model of Consensus.
American Sociological Review, 32(1). (Feb., 1967), pp. 32-46.
[42] Schultz-Hart, S., Frey, D., Lüthgens, C. & Moscovici, S. (2000). Biased
Information Search in Group Decision Making. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 78(4), 655-669.
[43] Spotfire (2006). http://spotfire.com/products/decisionsite_posters.cfm
[44] Stasser, G., Titus, W. (1985). Pooling of unshared information in group
decision making: Biased information sampling during discussion.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 67-78.
[45] Surowiecki, J. (2004). The Wisdom of Crowds. Random House.
[46] Swivel. (2007). http://www.swivel.com
[47] Thomas, J.J. and Cook, K.A., eds. (2005). Illuminating the Path: The
Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. IEEE Press.
[48] Viégas, F.B. and Wattenberg, M. (2006). Communication-Minded
Visualization: A Call to Action. IBM Systems Journal. 45(4).
[49] Wattenberg, M., Kriss, J. (2006). Designing for Social Data Analysis.
IEEE Trans. on Visualization and Computer Graphics. 12(4): 549±557.
[50] Wikimapia. (2007). http://wikimapia.org
[51] Wright, W., Schroh, D., Proulx, P., Skaburskis, A., Cort, B. (2006). The
sandbox for analysis: concepts and evaluation. Proc. ACM CHI 2006.
[52] Wu, F., Huberman, B.A., Adamic, L.A., Tyler, J.R. (2004). Information
flow in social groups. Physica A: Statistical and Theoretical Physics,
337(1±2), 327.
[53] Zhang, J., Norman, D.A. (1994). Representations in Distributed
Cognitive Tasks. Cognitive Science, 18(1):87-122.

