Keynote Address
InfoVis as Seen by the World Out There: 2007 in Review
Stephen Few
Perceptual Edge and the University of California, Berkeley

Abstract

Bio

How we as insiders see and understand InfoVis is quite different from how it is seen by most people in the world out
there. Most people get only glimpses of what we do, and
those glimpses rarely tell the story clearly. Think about
the view of InfoVis that has been created in 2007 through
marketing, blogs, and articles. This view is peppered with
misperception. In this presentation, I’ll take you on a tour
of InfoVis’ exposure in 2007: the highlights and the failures
that have shaped the world’s perception of our beloved and
important work. The world needs what we do, but this
need remains largely unsatisfied.

Stephen Few is not your typical InfoVis professional. After
getting an undergraduate degree in Communication Studies,
he went on to get an advanced degree in Religious Studies
rather than Computer Science or any of the other disciplines that are usually associated with InfoVis. This might
account for the religious fervor that he brings to his work.
Few has spent the last 25 years immersed in the world of
business, helping people through teaching, writing, journalism, and consulting to make better use of their data.
As such, he brings a critical eye and practical concerns to
InfoVis, constantly asking the questions: “Does it really
work and does it really matter?”
Few is the author of two books: Show Me the Numbers:
Designing Tables and Graphs to Enlighten, which is used
as a textbook in several InfoVis courses, and Information
Dashboard Design: The Effective Visual Communication
of Data. He is currently working on his third book, entitled Now You See It: Simple Graphing Techniques for
Exploring and Analyzing Quantitative Data. Today, as
Principal of the consultancy Perceptual Edge, he spends
most of his time helping business people with the basics:
simple and practical visual skills for understanding and
presenting quantitative information. He writes the monthly
Visual Business Intelligence Newsletter, blogs frequently
and stridently, and teaches in the MBA program at the
University of California, Berkeley.



