TextPlorer: An application supporting text analysis
Chi-Chun Pan∗

Anuj R. Jaiswal†

Junyan Luo‡

Anthony Robinson§

The Pennsylvania State University

A BSTRACT
TexPlorer is an integrated system for exploring and analyzing large
amounts of text documents. The data processing modules of TexPlorer consist of named entity extraction, entity relation extraction,
hierarchical clustering, and text summarization tools. Using a timeline tool, tree-view, table-view, and concept maps, TexPlorer provides an analytical interface for exploring a set of text documents
from different perspectives and allows users to explore vast amount
of text documents efficiently.

document clustering. More information about CLUTO can be
found at http://glaros.dtc.umn.edu/gkhome/views/cluto.
5. SIMILE Timeline is a DHTML-based AJAXy widget for visualizing time-based events developed as part of the SIMILE
project at MIT. More information about the SIMILE Timeline
can be found at http://simile.mit.edu/timeline/.
6. WordNET is large lexical database of English developed
at Princeton University. We use WordNET to perform semantic expansions of keywords within our document filtering tools. More information on WordNET can be found at
http://wordnet.princeton.edu/.

Keywords: Text, Visualization, named-entity extraction, entityrelation extraction, VAST contest
Index Terms: H.4.2 [INFORMATION SYSTEMS APPLICATIONS]: Types of Systems—Decision support;
1 I NTRODUCTION
We designed TexPlorer to support the development of an overview
of a large set of text documents as drill-down to items of interest. TexPlorer consist a backend data processing module and a
frontend data visualization module. The data processing module
of TexPlorer consist of named entity extraction, entity relation extraction, hierarchical clustering, and text summarization tools. Processed data then can be visualized using the TexPlorer web portal
and ConceptVISTA, an ontology visualization tool.
TexPlorer uses the following tools to process and visualize the
VAST 2007 contest dataset:
1. FactXtractor[1] is a named entity and entity relationship extractor developed by the North-East Visualization and Analytics Center at the Pennsylvania State University. FactXtractor
processes text documents using GATE and indentifies entity
relations with both syntactical and semantic analysis.
2. ConceptVISTA is an ontology creation and visualization tool developed by researchers at the GeoVISTA
Center at the Pennsylvania University.
We use ConceptVISTA to visualize concept maps extracted by FactXtractor. More information about ConceptVISTA can be found at
http://www.geovista.psu.edu/ConceptVISTA/.
3. MEAD[2] is a public domain portable multi-document summarization system original developed at the University of
Michigan. We use MEAD to create summaries for text
documents and document clusters. More information about
MEAD can be found http://tangra.si.umich.edu/clair/mead/.
4. CLUTO is a family of computationally efficient and highquality data clustering and cluster analysis programs developed by the Digital Technology Center (DTC) at the University of Minnesota. We use CLUTO to compute content-based
∗ e-mail:

julianpan@psu.edu

† e-mail:arj135@psu.edu
‡ e-mail:jluo@psu.edu
§ e-mail:acr181@psu.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

2

DATA P ROCESSING

Since we were working on the RAW dataset, our first step involved
preprocessing the data. First, we used FactXtractor to perform
name entity and entity relationship extraction. This process allows
us to identify people, locations, organizations, date/time entities,
and the relationship among them in the dataset. The results were
stored into a database for easy retrieving. Second, we applied document filtering with semantic hyponym expansion on all text documents (including news text, support documents, and blogs) where
we input a set of keywords related to our problem and expanded
them using the WordNET dictionary. The keywords we used including terror, police, police, bomb, drug, chemical, weapon, arson, and activist. Then we performed content-based hierarchical
clustering using Cluto on the filtered text documents. Finally, we
used MEAD to produce a short summary for each clusters in the
hierarchical clustering tree.
3

V ISUALIZATION

AND

U SER I NTERACTION

Processed data can be visualized with different components in TexPlorer. The main interface of TexPlorer is a web portal shown in
Figure 1. The top panel is a timeline tool where events are arranged
in chronological order. Each event is represent with three keywords
picked with the TF-IDF algorithm[3]. On clicking the event icons
on the timeline tool, an automatically generated summary of that
document is shown in a pop-up window.
The bottom left panel is a tree-view of the hierarchical clustering.
Each number represents a cluster of documents that contain similar
keywords. The parent clusters contain child clusters with similar
contents.
The bottom right panel is a table-view for important people, locations, and organizations. By default, each table shows five entities within a selected cluster ordered by importance. The default
importance is defined by counting the appearance of each entity.
However, users can override the importance by clicking the “+”
and “-” links next to the entities. On clicking a “+” link, the corresponding entity is marked as “very important” and highlighted with
red. On the other hand, on clicking a “-” link, the corresponding entity is marked as “unimportant” and removed from the table-view.
By moving the mouse over a document name, users can get a brief
preview of the document. By clicking on a document name, the
document will be shown with all types of entities highlighted and
color coded.

205

Figure 1: The web interface of TexPlorer: the top panel is a timeline
tool where events are arranged in chronological order, the bottom
left panel is a tree-view of the hierarchical clustering, and the bottom right panel is a table-view for important people, locations, and
organizations.

Figure 2: Map visualization showing the 10 most relevant/important
locations for cluster 25.

Visualization components on the web interface are coordinated.
For example, on clicking an event on the timeline tool, the tableview will be replaced with the corresponding document with color
coding for entity types. On clicking a document on the table-view,
the timeline tool will be centered to the date when the document is
dated. In both cases, the leaf cluster that contain the corresponding
document will be highlighted and selected in the tree-view.
In addition to the web interface, TexPlorer can export processed
data to external applications. For the location entities in the tableview, clicking the “show map” opens a map display utility where
all the important locations in this cluster are plotted. For the people
and organization entities, users can then view a concept map for a
selected cluster in the ConceptVISTA (Figure 3). Concept maps in
ConceptVISTA are based on the Ontology Web Language (OWL)
which has significant advantages over traditional data representations such as tables since greater semantics are captured. In addition, we believe the underlying reasoning that could be performed
by using concept maps in OWL have immense potential for finding information. One of the next steps in our research is to develop
tools that allow this potential to be demonstrated and assessed.
4

C ONCLUSION

TexPlorer was designed to support analysis of relatively large sets
of text document. The emphasis is on supporting a full range of
overview, filter, and drill-down to details. We integrate some exist-

206

Figure 3: Visualization of concept maps with ConceptVISTA

ing text processing tools with creative visualizations allowing users
to explore vast amount of text documents. We have used TexPlorer
in analysis of the VAST 2007 contest dataset and identified multiple
potentially interesting clusters of documents and within them sets
of individuals, organizations, events, and places. TexPlorer is one
component of a larger research effort to develop a comprehensive
suite of visual analytics methods and tools that can support identification of patterns and relationships in heterogeneous sets of information. The next step in our research will be to develop strategies
for integrating TexPlorer with a range of geo/information visualization, computational analysis, and knowledge management tools
within an analytical workspace that supports a range of analytical
tasks.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was performed with support from the National Visualization and Analytics Center (NVAC), a U.S. Department of Homeland
Security Program, under the auspices of the Northeast Regional Visualization and Analytics Center (NEVAC). NVAC is operated by
the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL), a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science laboratory. We would also like to
thank Dr. Prasenjit Mitra, Dr. Alan M. MacEachren, and Dr. Ian
Turton for their insightful feedback and comments.
R EFERENCES
[1] C.-C. Pan and P. Mitra. Femarepviz: Automatic extraction and geotemporal visualization of fema national situation updates. In IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007, 2007.
[2] D. Radev, T. Allison, S. Blair-Goldensohn, J. Blitzer, A. C
¸ elebi,
S. Dimitrov, E. Drabek, A. Hakim, W. Lam, D. Liu, J. Otterbacher,
H. Qi, H. Saggion, S. Teufel, M. Topper, A. Winkel, and Z. Zhang.
MEAD - a platform for multidocument multilingual text summarization. In LREC 2004, Lisbon, Portugal, May 2004.
[3] G. Salton and C. Buckley. Term weighting approaches in automatic text
retrieval. Technical report, Ithaca, NY, USA, 1987.

