VAST 2007 Contest
Data Analysis Using NdCore and REGGAE
Lynn Schwendiman, Jonathan McLean, Jonathan Larson
ATS Intelligent Discovery

ABSTRACT
ATS Intelligent Discovery analyzed the VAST 2007 contest data
set using two of its proprietary applications, NdCore and
REGGAE (Relationship Generating Graph Analysis Engine). The
paper describes these tools and how they were used to discover
the contest's scenarios of wildlife law enforcement, endangered
species issues, and ecoterrorism.
CR Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.5.2 [Information
Interfaces and Presentation]: User Interfaces–Graphical user
interfaces; I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and
Techniques–Interaction techniques
Additional Keywords: visualization, visual analytics, text
analysis, data discovery
1

INTRODUCTION

NdCore and REGGAE (Relationship Generating Graph Analysis
Engine) are two proprietary data analysis and discovery
applications developed by ATS. NdCore is our current production
analytical tool. REGGAE is a prototype of our patent-pending
next generation data analytics engine, currently under
development.
1.1
NdCore
NdCore is a powerful tool for integrating and analyzing large
volumes of data from disparate sources. NdCore ingests both
structured and unstructured data from relational databases and a
variety of file formats, including plain text, MSWord, PDF, and
XML, in any combination, into a single repository for analysis.
NdCore’s text analysis generates two- and three-word concepts
based on the frequency, usage, and relative proximity of words
within the ingested documents. The NdCore Concept Builder
guides the user in defining a multi-term search phrase based on
the frequency of word combination occurrences. Concept Builder
uses actual document text to suggest the most common word
combinations. It can also suggest alternate terms (words used in a
similar context, stems, inflections, sound-alikes) to include in the
search. By suggesting words as the search phrase is created,
Concept Builder helps the user make intelligent decisions about
which words and combinations will help find documents of
interest. The web-based user interface allows the user to quickly
ATS Intelligent Discovery
3505 NW Anderson Hill Road, Suite 200
Silverdale, WA 98383
lynn.schwendiman@atsid.com
jonathan.mclean@atsid.com
jonathan.larson@atsid.com

browse through the selected documents and to find other
documents similar to them.
1.2
REGGAE
REGGAE, a prototype currently under development, provides the
associative search capabilities of a graph database and the tabular
capabilities of an RDBMS while also incorporating the
multidimensional analysis seen in a multidimensional database.
REGGAE is specifically tailored for entity relationship
generation and analytics. It utilizes a novel, two-tiered contextbased graph architecture. One tier, the data layer, is populated
with entity nodes. The second tier, the context layer, is populated
with context nodes that represent links or relationships between
entities. Duplicate entities are never inserted into the database.
Instead, new relationships are generated in the context layer
between the existing entities and new entities as new data is
imported.
REGGAE is built on current commercial relational databases
and easily integrates with existing data stores. REGGAE also
includes integrated text searching and clustering capabilities for
document analysis.
2

ANALYSIS APPROACH

NdCore and REGGAE were each used independently to analyze
the VAST data set, NdCore for the raw text alone, REGGAE for
both raw text and the preprocessed extracted entities.
2.1
Using NdCore to Analyze Raw Text
We began by importing the VAST contest document set into
NdCore and performing a text analysis, which parsed the
document text, built concepts, and identified related words, stems,
and sound-alike words.
The general analysis approach was to use NdCore's Concept
Builder to suggest combinations of search terms, perform the
search, and read the returned documents, noting people,
organizations, locations, activities, and events to use in
subsequent iterative searches. Once a document of interest was
identified, NdCore's "find similar documents" feature was
extremely helpful in discovering additional relevant documents.
For example, starting with the search terms "endangered
species", Concept Builder suggested a third term, "CITES", to
complete the concept. The search returned five documents, two of
which concerned the Assan Circus and its wildlife smuggling
activities. "Find similar" performed on the Assan documents
turned up a third relevant document. Thus we were able to discern
the likely involvement of the Assan Circus in the contest scenario
after examining just six documents.

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

245

3

Figure 1: NdCore's similar document comparison

2.2
Using REGGAE to Analyze Structured Data
REGGAE is geared primarily toward analysis of discrete,
structured data but also includes an integrated text searching
capability, so both the VAST entity extraction data and the raw
text were imported and processed.
For the analysis in REGGAE, we used two kinds of queries:
keyword searches on document text and single cell queries on the
structured data. Single cell queries return nodes which are placed
on a chart in the structured data viewer. Keyword searches return
a set of documents to the document viewer. Documents of interest
can be selected and exported to the structured data viewer where
they appear as nodes on a chart.
Any node on the chart can be expanded to reveal all of its
associated structured data and the connections among them. In the
case of the VAST data, expansion of a document node reveals its
extracted entities and expansion of an extracted entity node
reveals its associated documents. The full text associated with a
document node can be accessed directly from the chart.
The general analysis approach for REGGAE was to run a
query, either keyword or single cell, place returned nodes of
interest on a chart, and start expanding nodes (generally
documents, people, and organizations). When the chart became
crowded, we constrained it to exclude nodes that had fewer than
two connections. The people and organizations remaining on the
chart were candidates for further investigation. We also used
REGGAE's "Find Similar" feature to suggest new searches and to
guide further expansion of the chart. Once an entity of interest
was identified, similar entities could be found based on their
common connections.

Figure 2: REGGAE chart with two expanded document nodes

246

STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS

3.1
NdCore
NdCore allows analysts to easily load their data for analysis. Once
loaded, it provides a discovery workflow that guides an analyst’s
search through textual data. NdCore also provides a powerful
query expansion utility that allows analysts to search on topics to
detect misspellings and alternative term usages. Once a document
of interest has been located, NdCore also provides excellent
facilities for locating other documents of interest and managing
the analyst’s workflow. Summarizations of each document are
provided as well as tracking data that shows the analyst which
documents have already been reviewed.
Currently, NdCore needs more visual analytics development.
While the analytics capabilities of it are very powerful, viewing
and collecting the results of an analysis proved to be a challenge.
3.2
REGGAE
REGGAE’s greatest strengths lie in its unique engine architecture
and analytic algorithms. It has powerful similarity searching
capabilities that were leveraged on the entity extracted data. It
also has an integrated environment that is useful for browsing
connections across all of the structured data.
Currently, REGGAE is still in its prototype stage and thus lacks
a polished user interaction. While it performs powerful data
mining queries, it lacks a solid analyst workflow.
4

CONCLUSIONS

NdCore and REGGAE were used successfully to uncover the
VAST contest scenarios. NdCore’s powerful text analysis
capabilities are complemented by REGGAE and its visual
analytics. REGGAE is in the early stages of development but has
the potential of becoming a powerful analytics tool.
REFERENCES
[1]

Scofield, M., Future Trends in Data Management, A lecture to the
Medical Librarian Group of Southern California and Arizona
Convention., Feb 2005.

