NewsLab: Exploratory Broadcast News Video Analysis
Mohammad Ghoniem∗

Dongning Luo†

Jing Yang‡

William Ribarsky§

UNC Charlotte

UNC Charlotte

UNC Charlotte

UNC Charlotte

A BSTRACT
In this paper, we introduce NewsLab, an exploratory visualization
approach for the analysis of large scale broadcast news video collections containing many thousands of news stories over extended
periods of time. A river metaphor is used to depict the thematic
changes of the news over time. An interactive lens metaphor allows
the playback of fine-grained video segments selected through the
river overview. Multi-resolution navigation is supported via a hierarchical time structure as well as a hierarchical theme structure.
Themes can be explored hierarchically according to their thematic
structure, or in an unstructured fashion using various ranking criteria. A rich set of interactions such as filtering, drill-down/roll-up
navigation, history animation, and keyword based search are also
provided. Our case studies show how this set of tools can be used
to find emerging topics in the news, compare different broadcasters,
or mine the news for topics of interest.
Keywords: Large data exploration, broadcast video analysis, time
filtering, clustering, animation, comparative analysis.
Index Terms: H.5.1 [Multimedia Information Systems]: Broadcast news video collections—Comparative Analysis
1

I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, many countries in the world gained access to
advanced communication technology such as telecommunication
satellites and broadband internet. Since then, an ever increasing
number of information channels has been made available to the
public at large, and is also of interest to political and media analysts, business, and government. This overwhelming new surge
of information begs for proper exploration and analysis tools, in
order to provide useful insights and support decision making. In
a globalized world, broadcast news constitutes a first-hand, realtime information window on global threats such as communicable
disease outbreaks and spread, official discourse, and governmental propaganda related to local or global crises. On a national or
international level, such tools can also be used to assess the full
range of opinions with regards to events of interest such as national
elections, regional or international trade activity, and myriad other
events. At present, comprehensive exploratory visualization tools
for large broadcast news video collections do not exist, and an investigator is forced to focus on a small subset of what is available,
simply because there is neither time nor capability to organize and
explore the whole broadcast news space.
Following the principles of the Visual Analytics Mantra [10] –
a variation of the oft-cited Information Visualization Mantra [13]
adapted to visual analytics, we argue that the following requirements need to be met in order to support effective visual exploration
and analysis of large broadcast video collections:
∗ e-mail:

mghoniem@uncc.edu

† e-mail:dluo2@uncc.edu
‡ e-mail:jyang13@uncc.edu
§ e-mail:ribarsky@uncc.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

• provide a preprocessing/analysis mechanism of the entire
news dataset to help cope with massive data;
• provide a visual overview of all important news stories; it is
highly desirable to depict how the semantic contents change
over time because the news is time-sensitive.
• provide a mechanism to zoom, filter out common sense, uninteresting, knowledge from the news collection, and retain the
news stories of potential interest to the user for further interactive analysis and exploration;
• provide support for the management, recall, and exchange of
findings, e.g. news stories for repeated usage, sharing, or collaborative analysis.
Towards these goals, we developed NewsLab, an approach built
on the close coupling of state-of-the-art analysis tools and interactive visualization techniques. The resulting new capability permits
the analysis of thousands of hours of news video from many channels over extended periods of time, altogether comprising multiple
terabytes of multimedia information. In this paper, we will focus on
the visualization and interaction aspects of our approach. Details of
the underlying analysis technique can be found in [11]. The rest of
the paper is organized as follows: in section 3, we set the stage by
describing the dataset used in this work and the main requirements
a news analysis system needs to support. In section 4, we describe
the main components of NewsLab (NewsRiver and LensRiver) and
how they relate to each other. In section 5, we describe the interactive exploration capabilities shipped with these views. Then, in
section 6, we present two use cases showing NewsLab at work.
2 R ELATED WORK
As part of NIST TRECVID research, several tools have focused on
the display of search queries results [6] and storyboarding [3]. Most
provide visual summaries such as collage-based interfaces. Several
other commercial or research systems exist, but few of them could
fulfill the need for interactive exploration of large broadcast news
video collections with the focus on thematic changes over time.
Several papers have previously studied thematic evolution over
time. The ThemeRiver [7] visualization uses a river metaphor to visualize changes in trends and patterns in a collection of topics over
time. Each topic contributes a stream to the overall information
river. Each stream is materialized by a 2D colored stripe, whose
height varies according to a measure of strength of the corresponding topic, while the time line flows horizontally from left to right.
This visualization is used along with user annotations, to correlate
evolution patterns with known events. The work presented here is
based on the same metaphor but significantly extends it by considering denser sets of themes over long periods of times so that hierarchical structures, concept networks, and other techniques are important. It also integrates tightly with analyses, particularly applied
to video, which require handling and display of multiple streams of
information.
The NameVoyager [15] wizard uses a similar approach to visualize the evolution of given names since 1880. It uses two colors
to encode gender and provides additional information about each
name on the fly, such as the name’s rank at any point in time. It also
supports gender- and query-based filtering, such that the user can

123

display data relative to either or both genders, and perform name
lookups. In both ThemeRiver and NameVoyager, the streams comprised in the river are stacked on top of each other. In Themeriver,
cubic interpolators are used to produce the stream shapes, whereas
linear interpolators are used in NameVoyager. Our system supports
both types of interpolation.
TagLines [4] examines the evolution of tagged content over time
such as in Flickr images. The font size of labels reflects the importance of the corresponding tag. This system uses a river metaphor
to display the most prominent tags in rows; each tag traverses the
screen from right to left and eventually disappears as time goes by.
TagLines also features a waterfall visualization where tags are also
displayed in rows. As time passes, new tags replace older ones in
the top-most ranking. Persistent tags over several consecutive days
keep their position on the screen in order to preserve the user’s mental map. Neither metaphors provide a global overview of all tags
over time.
Our LensRiver approach is inspired by the DragMag image magnifier [14], where a base image is shown with lines connecting regions of this image to magnified images of these regions. In our
approach, we use rubber lines to connect a region of interest (in
theme and time) in the river view to a lens that plays back a representative video of that region.
3

P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

AND

R EQUIREMENTS

We are interested in exploratory analysis of broadcast video news
channels from around the world. In this section, we will describe
the data used in this work and the user requirements for an analysis
approach such as NewsLab.
3.1

Data Preprocessing

We use news reports collected over the past months from several
broadcast channels, including dedicated 24/7 news channels, from
the USA and Asia. The data collected includes video/audio content as well as closed caption text when available. The data are
then automatically analyzed and segmented into stories. Each story
is assigned a weight, between 0 and 1, proportional to its interestingness. More information concerning the segmentation process
and measures of interestingness can be found in [11]. In this initial work, we assume that closed captioning information is available. However, even without closed captions, degraded scenarios
can be worked out using content extraction capabilities from the
video stream, similar to the feature extraction presented in [16]. In
fact, the story segmentation is good enough that in the future we
expect to be able to identify story content without closed captions.
NewsLab takes in the analyses from the aforementioned data
sources (video + audio + captions + segmentation data) and combines them into interactive visualizations, supporting an end-to-end
exploration from high level abstract overviews down to specific
video segments with interesting content. To this end, we record
all non-trivial keywords and maintain a full history of occurrence
timestamps for each. Thus the visual analysis goes well beyond
the interestingness criterion above, and it becomes possible to tell
when and how often topics or keywords have appeared in the news.
It is also possible to look at distribution patterns and correlation
between topics over time (See section 4 for further details).
3.2

User Requirements

We take investigative reporters as our prototypical users since they
are representative of many different investigators. The availability
of a large repository of broadcast news videos offers a broad scope
of tasks for this type of user to perform. These range from the general and exploratory to the specific and focused. The tasks include
overall awareness of topics discussed in the news and hot topic detection, comparing and contrasting what is being discussed locally
and nationally, study of differing opinions on events from different

124

news sources, and searching for news on well-identified topics of
interest. The overwhelming amount of data does not allow any investigator, or even team of investigators, to watch all news reports
in order to get the desired insight for a decision-making process.
Therefore, visual analytics tools are required to take up the challenging mission of helping the user explore this multitude of stories
until a small subset of highly relevant stories, or segments of stories, are identified for further scrutiny. As the user sees temporal
and structural patterns in the data, his attention will often evolve
gradually towards a more focused investigative task. After evidence
is gathered and evaluated, an argument can be shaped and presented
for decision making purposes.
We present two main scenarios that encompass the above tasks.
Despite the formal distinction between these two scenarios, it must
be understood that an exploratory investigation usually iterates
through a continuum of views from overview to detail and back.
3.2.1 News Monitoring
In absence of a specific focus, the investigator can be interested in
the following categories of questions:
• Situation awareness: What is being discussed in the news?
What are the most prominent topics?
• Temporal trends, or topic dynamics: Which topics are emerging and can they be associated with events in the world or in
the community? Which are fading away?
• Structural patterns: Which topics are related to each other?
These questions can bear on a collection of news broadcasts for
a more or less extended period of time.
3.2.2 Detailed News Analysis
Another set of tasks is more relevant to query-driven investigation
including the following categories of questions:
• Evidence gathering: What do the media report concerning
such and such event, person, location, time?
• Standpoints assessment: What are the different standpoints
worldwide concerning such crisis, event, or threat?
4 N EWS L AB D ESCRIPTION
In order to support the aforementioned requirements, we developed
NewsLab with two main visualization components. The first is a
NewsRiver overview (top half of figures 1 and 2) showing the ebb
and flow of ordered themes and associated keywords over any time
scale while supporting zoom-in to reveal further thematic details
for any time period, as well as interactive display of keyframes
exctracted on the fly from the videos. The second component is
LensRiver (figure 3) which is built on a hierarchical theme organization permitting drill-down and roll-up on any set of themes and
sub-themes. At any time, the user can place a lens in any point in a
theme stream to reveal the most representative video at that point in
time. These two components complement each other to do exploration, discovery, and detailed analysis. The NewsRiver overview
provides context while being especially good at showing emerging
or disappearing themes at any level, where events that motivate the
news are likely to occur, and what are the overall trends in news
reporting for a given time period (which can be quite different from
channel to channel). Typically an investigator would first use NewsRiver and then concentrate on a certain set of themes for a certain
time range using LensRiver. At this point he would place lenses at
precise points in themes and time, running multiple video streams
for detailed content analysis and comparison. Both visualization
components are necessary for a complete and efficient investigation
of news, as shown in the case studies.

Figure 1: NewsLab: top 30 topics on CNN from 8/1 to 8/24/06

4.1 NewsRiver Multi-Scale Overview
The underlying automated analysis provides many thousands of stories, located in time, with keywords and themes. One can use all
this to effectively visualize the daily flow of the top or most interesting stories [11]. But this doesn’t scale up to exploratory capabilities for many thousands of stories and hundreds of themes over
extended periods of time.
To provide scalability and follow topic changes over time, we developed a ThemeRiverTM -like [7] overview visualization, extended
with new interactive capability and hierarchical, multi-scale structure, as in the top-half of figure 1. This visualization maps the news
to a river where each topic occupies a stream flowing from left to
right as time elapses. In figure 1, we use the word count as a measure of thematic strength (encoded by the height of the associated
streams). Topic strength variations for a collection of topics can
be visualized in a discrete mode as a stacked histograms plot, or
in a smoothed mode by interpolating the histograms into a stack of
smoothed curves. Since continuity plays a key role in the user’s
ability to follow curves, NewsLab provides a smoothed NewsRiver
visualization using cubic interpolation, besides stacked histogram
plots. To avoid misleading the user, we compute cubic interpolators that don’t overshoot nor undershoot around actual data points.
Like major map services in the geographic arena, we provide
multi-scale views of news information. On the X-axis, we compute
a time hierarchy on the video segments identified during the automated video preprocessing, so that the data can be aggregated and
explored at various levels of granularity over time. For instance,
depending on the size of the dataset the user may wish to aggregate
the data by hour (see figure 2), day (see figure 1), week, month,
year or any multiple or divider of these scales. While aggregation
is straight forward for additive numerical attributes such as word
count, more careful thought is required with regard to the semantic of aggregation in relation to categorical data and non additive
numerical attributes such as interestingness.
To help the user identify temporal patterns, the time dimension
(the X-axis) is materialized by a background filled with two-color
stripes over which the NewsRiver is laid. The width of each stripe
represents a user-controlled time period such as a day (as in figure 1), an hour etc. As the granularity of data aggregation and the
observation time window vary, the user may adjust the granularity
of the time scale or allow the system to adjust it automatically.
The NewsRiver provides a good overview of the selected topics
as they inflate or fade away. The user can also appreciate the overall

Figure 2: Closed captions are unavailable between 2 AM and 5 AM.

shape of the river at a glance and locate theme shifts (figure 1).
4.1.1 A Linear Ranking-Based Theme Organization
NewsRiver adopts an unstructured approach to news topics. This
is achieved by ranking each topic according to a strength measure
such as word count; the corresponding streams in the NewsRiver
are then stacked accordingly. In figure 1, the top 30 topics/streams
are ranked according to their decreasing word count from top to
bottom. Depending on the selected strength measure, various sets
of streams will find their way up in the river lending themselves
more easily to the user’s attention and interaction.
Since there is no natural order for news topics, NewsLab supports several alternate orders applicable to all subscribing views.
Via the table component displayed in the control panel on the right
handside in figure 1, the visible streams can be sorted against any
column: alphabetically, or according to the word count (the column
containing the colored histograms in the table), or according to any
other statistical measure.
4.1.2 Color Assignment
The use of color can be very challenging with large sets of categorical data as the human eye can only distinguish a limited number
of colors (about eight colors [8]), notwithstanding color interactions due to adjacency of data items. Figure 1 displays the top 30
non trivial keywords occurring on CNN in a 24-day period out of
a rough total of 40,000 words. With such a large number of categories, color repetition is inevitable. Taking advantage of the ColorBrewer online tool [2], NewsLab integrates 8 categorical color
schemas of 7 colors each. The user can decide to cycle through all
56 available colors or repeat one color schema across all topics.
4.1.3 Topic Animation
Thanks to the fine-grained history maintained for each keyword,
NewsLab supports time brushing either directly by rubber-banding
on the NewsRiver or interactively via the rangeslider controlling
the observation time window in the “Time control” panel (figure 2).
The observation time window is fully controllable by the user. It
can be resized and dragged from one extremity to the other of the total timespan in a mobile mode, or be used in a growing mode where
its start time is locked and its end time increases until it reaches its
maximum extent. As the user modifies the observation window, he
can follow the topics as they flow across the screen and see their
strength increase or decrease. New topics will emerge, others will

125

vanish completely, and some topics will surge provisionally before
falling back into a flatter trend. A row of control buttons allows the
user to animate this process automatically in a step by step or continuous fashion while he focuses on tracking the thematic changes.
4.1.4

NewsRings Complementary View

The bottom half of figure 1 displays a ring visualization of the news
topics. Time flows clockwise starting from the North position. Each
ring represents a news topic whose color is identical to its color in
the NewsRiver. The topics are laid out in the same sequence as in
the NewsRiver from the periphery towards the center. Currently,
the ring breadth does not encode any information. Hence, we give
the user the choice to give each ring an equal breadth as in figure 2,
or to normalize the breadth so that all rings have the same area as in
figure 1. Both choices prove to be biased: an equal breadth makes
the peripheral rings stand out and leaves the inner ones with little
screen real-estate, while the normalized area setting combined with
the centrality of user focus puts much emphasis on the inner rings.
Like the NewsRiver, the NewsRings materialize time as a twocolor series of wedges in the background. This is particularly useful to see emerging topics/keywords as they occur for the first time
(see figure 5(a)). The background pattern is also effective at finding correlated keywords as they start and end synchronously (figure 5(c)). Figure 2 displays the top 30 topics in the first week of
August 2006 on CNN aggregated hourly. On the NewsRings view,
one can see very clearly that closed caption text is unavailable every
day, roughly between 2 AM and 5 AM. Thus temporal patterns can
be exhibited using this view and this is made more legible thanks
to the background pattern. Similar observations can be made on
the related NewsRiver. As a side note, one may also spot Larry
King’s night program pattern displayed in red (see the spots circled
in black on figure 2). This demonstrates how prominent patterns
arise naturally from the unstructured data analysis.
4.2

LensRiver: context + detail approach

Like NewsRiver, LensRiver (figure 3) uses a river metaphor to display thematic changes over time. While NewsRiver considers all
keywords occurring in the closed captions, LensRiver considers
the most important keywords listed by the automated preprocessing phase. These keywords are organized hierarchically, allowing
the user to explore the cluster hierarchy at the desired level of detail, with direct access to the most relevant video segments for any
given topic and time, as we shall describe shortly.
4.2.1

4.2.2

Multi-Resolution Navigation

In LensRiver, users can interactively change the levels of detail of
the displayed clusters or perform semantic zoom by dynamically
drilling-down or rolling up between consecutive levels of detail in
the topic hierarchy. In figure 3(a), this is illustrated by the fact that
topics such as “Cuba” and “Florida” appear in the same cluster.
With a finer level of detail as in figure 3(b), they are split into two
adjacent streams. Likewise, the large cluster at the bottom of the
river (figure 3(a)) corresponds to international events and breaks
down into two separate sub-streams, concerning the Cuban president’s health problems and the war in Lebanon. These clusters
arise naturally from the unstructured analysis in NewsRiver.
4.2.3

Video Playback in LensRiver

Direct access to the video data is provided through media lenses
laid out above and beneath the topic river. These lenses correspond
to small media player windows and are used to play on demand
interesting video segments. This approach is motivated by the generally elongated shape of the river, allowing the placement of detail
windows above and beneath the river to make full use of the screen
(see figure 3).
Each lens is linked to a lightweight handle by a rubber line. The
user can drag a lens handle and hover on the river streams. As
soon as the hovering is paused, a tooltip pops up and shows the
topics related to the underlying stream. If the user is interested in a
given theme and point in time, he can drop the lens handle at that
location. The news story with the highest interestingness related to
the selected topic and time is played back in the lens. The lens is
labeled at the top left corner using the corresponding topics. One
can also watch the same news story in a bigger window, with timealigned closed captions by double-clicking the lens.
Users can interactively set the number of lenses around the river.
By default, eight lenses are placed around the LensRiver for the user
to watch and compare several stories concurrently. When multiple
news stories are playing, all but the one opened most recently are
muted, in order to follow the user’s focus. The lenses come with all
standard media control buttons such as play, pause and mute.

A Hierarchical Theme Organization and Coloring

LensRiver provides a clustering algorithm that builds a hierarchy over all keywords taken into consideration based on their cooccurrences in the news stories. The algorithm builds a distance
matrix capturing the correlations between keywords [1, 9] and uses
the minimal spanning tree algorithm for agglomerative hierarchical clustering. Strongly correlated topics are grouped into the same
clusters or sub-clusters, while loosely related or unrelated topics
are set apart in different clusters. Then an anti-chain, or set partition of clusters in the tree, is selected according to a user-controlled
level-of-detail threshold and region of focus using a structure based
brushing approach [5]. Each selected cluster is visualized as a
stream whose strength amounts to the sum of the interestingness
of all news stories containing any of the topics within the cluster.
The interestingness measure is used rather than a simple count of
matching news stories to emphasize the most interesting themes.
In the LensRiver, closely related themes are placed close to each
other following a linear depth-first traversal of the topic cluster tree.
Consequently, clusters with common ascendants, i.e., closely related thematic clusters, are close to each other in the river. However,
at cluster boundaries, it is not guaranteed that clusters having the
same parent will be closer to each other than adjacent clusters with

126

different parents in this linear order. To avoid confusion, LensRiver
enforces a loose stacking strategy by inserting a gap between distinct streams whose breadth is proportional to the structural distance in the cluster hierarchy. In this approach, a hierarchical color
schema [5] is used to display the topic cluster hierarchy.

5

I NTERACTIVE E XPLORATION

NewsLab components come with a variety of interaction techniques
to support the exploration of a feature rich data repository like
broadcast news videos. The interaction capabilities concern various navigation capabilities such as semantic zoom, context+details
visualization, topic reordering and animation, as described previously, as well as various filtering options.
Given that a large number of stories and topics are discussed in
the news (50,000 keywords per month on CNN), and since not every
story is interesting to everyone nor can every story be studied in
detail, a visual exploratory tool needs to support filtering techniques
such as dynamic queries [12].
5.1

Interestingness-Based Filtering

As mentioned earlier, the video analysis automatically segments
each video document into coherent stories with a measure of interestingness assigned to each. We allow the user to filter out footage
falling beneath a certain level of interestingness. In LensRiver (figure 3(b)), uninteresting stream segments are dimmed out so that the
user can focus on the remaining data items for further investigation.

(a) Low level-of-detail

(b) High level-of-detail + interestingness filtering

(c) Filtering on “Jonbenet Ramsey”

Figure 3: LensRiver with various levels of detail and filtering options

5.2

Lexical Filtering

In order to bridge the gap between the system’s appreciation of what
may be deemed interesting and what the user actually thinks is interesting, NewsRiver supports query driven exploration. The user
can enter one or several keywords he wants to include or exclude
from the display and have the display adapt accordingly. Any requirement that can be captured by a regular expression can serve
as an input to such a query. A more user-friendly GUI will eventually be provided to express such queries. Figure 4 shows a user
query bearing on avian flu during August 2007 in African countries
such as Egypt. One can see a direct correlation between keywords
like “Egypt” (in pink), “flu” (in beige), “bird” (top red stream), and
“virus” (in dark green). The keywords can be fed in manually by
the user as in this example, or seeded by the user and completed by
the system via multi-dimensional analysis of keywords. Intuitive
input and fast response are essential for these exploratory forays.
LensRiver also allows the user to filter the river using preselected
keywords, retaining all streams related to that keyword. In figure 3(c), the LensRiver clusters were filtered using the query “Jonbenet Ramsey”.
Figure 4: User query related to the spread of avian flu in Africa

5.3

Time Filtering

NewsRiver supports time filtering in two different ways. Firstly,
the user can rubber-band on the NewsRiver and set a user-defined
observation window. This can also be achieved through a range
slider as discussed previously. Secondly, the user can filter topics
occurring or not in a certain time period. The time period can be
defined in an absolute manner or via a recurring pattern, e.g. topics
discussed in morning editions, say from 6 AM to 8 AM, as this is
when the American news broadcasters catch up with international
events happening on the same day.
5.4

Statistical Filtering

Likewise, most keywords present in the news stories are frequent
words in the spoken language. Only a small portion of them can be
discarded as part of a stopwords preprocessing mechanism. The remaining majority will then have to be examined in their context. For
instance, the word “test” may occur often in the spoken language.
But it gains a significant momentum in certain contexts such as the
nuclear test in Korea, or the paternity test of a disputed wealthy
baby heir. Likewise, names like “John” are very common. But the
surge in the corresponding stream in figure 5(a) in conjunction with
the name “Karr” does refer to a prominent piece of news that was
discussed for a full week on all national news media. (The event
was John Karr’s confession to the JonBenet Ramsey murder, which
was later discounted. JonBenet and Ramsey were ranked close to
John and Karr in the theme stream.) Likewise, the word “security”
is omnipresent in the news, but from August 10 to August 15 this

topic has registered a noticeable surge (figure 5(a)). Thus, in that
period, it shifted from the ever-present topics crowd to the few hot
topics.
The question then becomes: how can we effectively separate frequent topics or words from topics or words that are part of an important piece of news? We observe empirically and it makes sense that
hot topics always have a fairly large surge that lasts for a more or
less long period above their overall average level. Such information
on the distribution profile could be captured by the standard deviation of the word count for any given topic. However, since standard
deviation has the same order of magnitude as data samples, it cannot
be used to compare populations with different scales. We therefore
use a more suitable measure of dispersion of population distributions around their mean value, which is the coefficient of variation
Cv = σµ , where σ is the standard deviation of the population and µ is
the mean value. This indicator expresses the dispersion in percentage and makes it possible to compare topics with different levels of
activity. It must however be emphasized that this indicator becomes
irrelevant for populations with low mean-values.
Hot topics are not the only items of interest; one can apply dynamic filtering or comparative analysis to bring out other themes of
interest. NewsLab supports dynamic query-based filtering on coefficient of variation figures as well as word count figures. Other
statistics can be computed and used for filtering in a similar fashion in an attempt to filter out uninteresting topics. Our preliminary

127

(a) CNN

(b) FoxNews

(c) MSNBC

Figure 5: Top 30 non-trivial words in the news in August 2006; comparative analysis of 3 major broadcasters

observations lead us to believe that keywords with significant word
count aggregated daily and having a coefficient of variation less
than about 40% (see the dashed line in figure 6(b)) are common
words that can be filtered out, while those showing a dispersion
exceeding roughly 300% are often uninteresting and coincide with
topics in commercials. Since the smoothing effect of aggregation
is stronger at higher levels of aggregation, these percentages are
function of the scale. Further computational experience need to
be gained to fully understand the interaction between all statistical
indicators we might apply. However, this holds the promise of permitting the setting of default values for filters to initially cull likely
uninteresting topics (with easy override by the user).
6

C ASE S TUDIES

6.1

Comparative Analysis of Broadcasters

We used NewsLab for a retrospective study of the news from August 1 to August 24, 2006, and carried out a comparative analysis between different broadcasters in that period, namely CNN,
FoxNews and MSNBC. For any one broadcaster, one month worth
of information amounts to an average of 50,000 unique words, barring all trivial stopwords of the English language. In the following,
we will explain how NewsLab allowed us to find the most prominent stories in that period. We will point out visual patterns that
characterize prominent news, how emerging themes can be discovered, and discuss the way interactive exploration helps separate secondary important topics from noise.
6.1.1

Overview of the Most Frequent Topics

Initially, NewsLab ranks the words according to their count
throughout the observation period. This is based on the assumption that prominent news topics are repeated a lot. Then the user is
presented with a NewsRiver view of the top N words. By default,
NewsRiver shows the top 30 words count-wise, giving the user the
ability to change the number of visible words to possibly include
all words present in the dataset.
In figures 5(a) and 5(b), one can see that the war in Lebanon
was the main story in the news. In the first two weeks of August,
this story took up about 50% of the bandwidth dedicated to the top
30 topics on all channels. Starting from August 16, the bandwidth
taken by this story reduced drastically, which reflects visually as
a big drop in the width of the river in figures 5(a) and 5(b). Indeed, a cease fire agreement was reached between the belligerents
on the 14th . The news broadcasters then shifted their attention permanently to other themes. Interestingly, this pattern can be seen on
CNN and FoxNews, but does not appear on MSNBC. We account
for that by a difference in style between broadcasters. While CNN
and FoxNews focused greatly on the war, MSNBC provided a more
balanced coverage of other news topics in that period (figure 5(c)).

128

Indeed, within the top 30 words, one can identify four important
stories on MSNBC (the war, the murder of Jonbenet Ramsey, the
race of Joe Lieberman for the senate, and a security plot), while in
comparison the two other channels show the first two stories only.
This analysis also demonstrates that NewsRiver clearly shows the
highly dynamic nature of the news streams, how themes can emerge
and subside, and that quantitative comparisons can be made. Likely
events can be indicated by the dynamic patterns, too, and analysis
of the keywords give strong clues to what the events are.
It is worth noting that a dedicated 24/7 news channel is comparable to a constant bandwidth pipeline. In order to allocate air time
to new stories, broadcasters have to cut down the time allocated to
older stories. With this analogy in mind, the user is compelled by
the sudden bandwidth drop that appears on August 10 on CNN and
FoxNews. This phenomenon coincides with an inflation of the “security” stream, visible on CNN. Cross-checking with MSNBC, one
finds another inflating stream in the same period: “plot”.
6.1.2

Interactive Exploratory Analysis

In order to learn more about this “security plot”, one needs to dig
further down in the word list, beyond the top 30 words. Looking
at the top 140 words (figure 6(a)), the NewsRiver starts looking
like a Napoleon pastry. Nevertheless, the user can still identify major events by their visual signature. In fact, when a major event
occurs, several streams in the NewsRiver will surge at the same
time. This results in a strong ascending line pattern that the human
observer picks up immediately. Hovering on the surging streams
of the ascending pattern, the user finds words like “British”, “airport”, “qaeda”, “terror”, “oil”, “liquid”, “London”, “Heathrow”,
“United”, “States” etc. (This event refers to a major security plot
uncovered by the British police against airplanes involving the use
of gel and oily liquids.) Some of these topics are omnipresent in
the news (like “Unites States”), while others occurred only in that
specific time frame. Their surging pattern of activity that starts and
ends synchronously brings them together. This contributes to the
formation of a salient visual pattern visible in the NewsRiver despite the unstructured manner in which topics are approached; it
also indicates that the stories are probably related. Other important
stories can now be spotted such as “Castro” and “Cuba” referring
to the recent health problems of Fidel Castro (figure 6(a)).
Furthermore, statistical dispersion measures can be used to reorder and filter the NewsRiver so as to separate noise from interesting stories. Figure 6(b) shows a NewsRiver displaying the top
1,100 words on CNN. The river was reordered so that words with
higher dispersion values appear on the bottom. From left to right
(see the outlined regions), the user hovers on the following stories
at the bottom of the NewsRiver: On August 1–2: Fidel Castro’s
health situation; on Aug. 5–7: Floyd Landis the winner of the tour
de France as well as a sub-story of the war in Lebanon involving

(a) Top 140 topics ranked by count

(b) Top 1,100 topics ranked by dispersion

(c) Top 1,100 topics ranked+filtered by dispersion

Figure 6: NewsRiver representation of topics on CNN in August 2006; topics are ranked and/or filtered based on various criteria

to be a good simulation of such situations where complementary
sources are used to build a full picture.

(a) No emerging topics in the top 30 on MSNBC

(b) The Korean nuclear test appears in the top 30 topics on CNN
Figure 7: The top 30 topics from 09/01/2006 to 11/20/2006

the city of Haifa; on Aug. 7–9: Joe Lieberman the senator of Connecticut runs for the senate without the Democrats; on Aug. 10–15:
Airport security terror plot; on Aug. 16–22: John Karr’s arrest in
Bangkok in relation with the Jonbenet Ramsey case; on Aug. 23–
24: Gaza, Pakistan and Bin Laden. Figure 6(c) shows the same
information after filtering words whose dispersion is smaller than
40% (see the dashed line across figure6(b)). In the future, the color
sequence will be preserved before and after the filtering.
Common words appear at the top of the NewsRiver with small
dispersions. They can be considered as omnipresent noise that occur at the same levels of intensity with little variation over time.
In this category, the user finds words like “reporter” and “people”
(see figure 6(b)), which are high frequency words, as well as common but less frequent words such as “live”, “fact”, “news”, “CNN”
among other trivial words. It is then up to the user to filter out or
retain words having certain dispersion and/or count levels using dynamic queries, or to search for specific words using lexical filtering.
6.2

Study of the Elections

In this case study, we examine the news from September 1 to
November 20, 2006. We use data from CNN and MSNBC in order to grasp the most important topics as they emerge over an 80
day period.
6.2.1

Comparative vs. Complementary Analysis

The overview of the top 30 topics discussed on MSNBC show a flat
themescape with no breaking news, as can be seen in figure 7(a).
In contrast, among the top 30 topics discussed on CNN in the same
period, the crisis related to the Korean nuclear tests stands out and
is materialized in the peak visible on October 9. However, the CNN
dataset is missing the first seven days of November (figure 7(b)) due
to a hardware failure at that time. While a full comparative analysis
may not be possible for this period, the channels can be used in a
complementary way. Situations where an investigative reporter is
faced with incomplete data are frequent. The case at hand seems

6.2.2 Interactive Exploratory Analysis
On MSNBC, looking at the top 624 words over a period of 80 days,
sorted and filtered to dispersion, the user can find several emerging stories while hovering on the bottom of the NewsRiver (as in
the previous case study): Sept. 4–11, the anniversary of the 9/11
attacks; this story contains the words “9”, “11”, “Osama”, “bin”,
“Laden”, “Pakistan”, and “Taliban”. From Sept. 30 to Oct. 6, the
page scandal of congressman Mark Foley; this story contains words
such as “Foley”, “Hastert”, “speaker”, “House”, “page”, and “scandal”. From Oct. 3 to Oct. 20 roughly, the North Korean nuclear
test, as it is being announced, carried out and condemned. On Oct.
11, a small plane crashes against a building in New York and revives the 9/11 story. On Oct. 27, Jim Webb won the democratic
nomination for the 2006 Virginia Senate race. On Nov. 8, Donald
Rumsfeld gave his resignation after the Democrats won the Senate.
Not all these stories related directly to the election, but all had
an impact on the election (or in the case of Rumsfeld were caused
by the election). The stories show impacts, in the days leading up
to the election, on voter state-of-mind and statements or actions of
candidates. They show a much more complete picture of relevant
happenings than a mere query on “election” would provide.
The user needs to dig further down the words list to find more
stories or make sense of existing ones. The top 788 frequent words
on CNN reveal that the fatal injury of Steve Irwin (aka ‘Crocodile
Hunter’) is aired on Sept. 4. In the top 1840 topics on CNN, on
Sept. 15 and 16, CNN reports the controversy arising from Pope
Benedict XVI’s speech about Islam. On Oct. 2 and 3, the word
“amish” emerges, casting a new light on a previously mentioned
word “school”. Put together these words refer to the deadly shooting occurring at an Amish school. On Nov. 8, topics such as Pelosi
and Gates appear. On Nov. 15, General Abizaid is heard concerning
Senator McCain’s plan to increase U.S. troops in Iraq.
Using LensRiver (figure 8), the user can find other stories related
to Donald Rumsfeld over the weeks preceding his resignation. One
finds him in the 9/11 commemorations, then in a series of controversies, concerning the conduct of the Iraqi war, and the publication of
a photo where he is seen shaking hands with Saddam in the 1980’s.
7 D ISCUSSION
In the previous sections, we presented a NewsRiver visualization
of dense streaming news topics, scaling up to several hundreds
or thousands of topics at the same time. We showed that the exploratory NewsLab interface permits timely, effective access to the
most relevant stories in the vast underlying video data base. Under the assumption that prominent news topics are likely to appear
among the most frequent words, we rank all topics according to
their overall word count. But with this ranking only, common words
tend to clutter the top positions and obscure interesting topics. The
latter, besides being frequent, are distributed over time in such a
way that their count will surge upon the occurrence of prominent

129

and waning themes described above. Automatic identification of
relevant news stories related to these events could reveal the nature
of the events. The strikingly different news reporting of different
news outlets indicates that automated comparative analysis could be
carried out between different news sources (national versus international, local versus national, etc.). Mechanisms to quickly compile
different opinions on the same story could be developed.
In addition to this work, we plan to thoroughly integrate the visual interfaces of NewsLab, so that, in particular, interaction in one
part will be directly linked to interaction in another part. We will
also carry out evaluations both with specialists such as investigative
reporters or media analysts and with more general users (to measure
exploratory capabilities, for example).

Figure 8: LensRiver, filtered on the dimension “Donald Rumsfeld”

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was sponsored by the National Visualization and Analytics Center (NVACTM ) under the auspices of the Southeast Regional
Visualization and Analytics Center. NVAC is a U.S. Department
of Homeland Security Program led by Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory. We would like to thank Hangzai Luo for useful discussions and providing the data.
R EFERENCES

news stories. We therefore introduce an overall measure of dispersion, namely the coefficient of variation, that helps rank the most
frequent topics according to their respective dispersion, thus separating common words (with low dispersion) from words related
to prominent news stories (with higher dispersion). This approach
also identifies common words (e.g., airport or school) which become prominent for a time, since their dispersion characteristics
change. As described in the aforementioned case studies, this simple unstructured approach to streaming news data is successful at
finding prominent stories in the news without prior knowledge of
the news content, which makes it quite valuable as an exploratory
tool. It also constitutes a useful initial ground for comparison between different broadcasters.
A word of caution is however necessary. Since the initial ranking of words is count-based, the longer the period of observation
the slower significant topics will emerge from a count-based ranking as common words tend to find their way up in the ranking.
Using an overall ranking may therefore be more suitable for relatively short periods. Having to do with longer periods, the user may
need to dig far down in the topic list before secondary news stories
will emerge. This pleads strongly in favor of using rolling/moving
statistics (e.g. rolling average/standard deviation) instead of their
all-encompassing counterparts.
The interactive filtering capabilities augment our approach in a
very useful manner, since the user is allowed to filter out uninteresting content in various ways: statistically, lexically, and based on
interestingness. Time and topic aggregation are also helpful at reducing otherwise intimidating volumes of information into a more
manageable overview.
8

C ONCLUSION

AND

F UTURE W ORK

With NewsLab, we have presented an interactive capability to explore many thousands of news stories over extended periods of
time, comprising multiple terabytes of video data, and to discover emerging themes and relations. Investigators can get a quick
overview of what is happening in the news at any given time, how
stories evolve, merge, and subside, and how they are reported. Subtle comparisons, not possible without this mode of depiction, can
be made.
Case study analyses provide evidence for how extended automated analyses can be developed and integrated into NewsLab.
This will be the direction of future work. For example, it should
be possible to do automated event analysis based on the emerging

130

[1] M. Ankerst, S. Berchtold, and D. Keim. Similarity clustering of dimensions for an enhanced visualization of multidimensional data. In
Proc. of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, pages 52–
60. IEEE Computer Society, 1998.
[2] C. Brewer. http://www.colorbrewer.org/, accessed March 2007.
[3] M. Christel and R. Conescu. Addressing the challenge of visual information access from digital image and video libraries. In Proc. of the
5th ACM/IEEE-CS J.C.D.L., pages 69–78. ACM Press, 2005.
[4] M. Dubinko, R. Kumar, J. Magnani, J. Novak, P. Raghavan, and
A. Tomkins. Visualizing tags over time. In Proceedings of the 15th
international conference on WWW, pages 193–202. ACM Press, 2006.
[5] Y.-H. Fua, M. Ward, and E. Rundensteiner. Navigating hierarchies
with structure-based brushes. In Proc. of IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, pages 58–64. IEEE Comp. Soc., 1999.
[6] A. Girgensohn, J. Adcock, M. Cooper, and L. Wilcox. Interactive
search in large video collections. In CHI’05 extended abstracts on
Human factors in comp. systems, pages 1395–1398. ACM Press, 2005.
[7] S. Havre, E. Hetzler, P. Whitney, and L. Nowell. Themeriver: Visualizing thematic changes in large document collections. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 8(1):9–20, 2002.
[8] C. Healey. Choosing effective colours for data visualization. In Proc.
of the 7th conference on Visualization, pages 263–270. IEEE Computer Society Press, 1996.
[9] R. Johnson and D. Wichern, editors. Applied multivariate statistical
analysis. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 1988.
[10] D. Keim, F. Mansmann, J. Schneidewind, and H. Ziegler. Challenges
in visual data analysis. In Proc. of the conference on Information
Visualization, pages 9–16. IEEE Computer Society, 2006.
[11] H. Luo, J. Fan, J. Yang, W. Ribarsky, , and S. Satoh. Exploring largescale video news via interactive visualization. In Proc. of IEEE Symposium on V.A.S.T., pages 75–82. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2006.
[12] B. Schneiderman. Dynamic queries for visual information seeking.
IEEE Softw., 11(6):70–77, 1994.
[13] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for
information visualizations. In Proc. of the IEEE VL, page 336. IEEE
Computer Society, 1996.
[14] C. Ware and M. Lewis. The dragmag image magnifier. In CHI’95:
Conference companion on Human factors in comp. systems, pages
407–408. ACM Press, 1995.
[15] M. Wattenberg. Baby names, visualization, and social data analysis.
In Proc. of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization, pages
1–7. IEEE Computer Society, 2005.
[16] J. Yang, J. Fan, D. Hubball, Y. Gao, H. Luo, W. Ribarsky, and
M. Ward. Semantic image browser: Bridging information visualization with automated intelligent image analysis. In IEEE Symposium
on V.A.S.T., pages 191–198. IEEE Comp. Soc. Press, 2006.

