C-GROUP: A Visual Analytic Tool for
Pairwise Analysis of Dynamic Group Membership
Hyunmo Kang *
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

Lise Getoor †

ABSTRACT
C-GROUP is a tool for analyzing dynamic group membership
in social networks over time. Unlike most network visualization
tools, which show the group structure within an entire network, or
the group membership for a single actor, C-GROUP allows users
to focus their analysis on a pair of individuals of interest. And
unlike most dynamic social network visualization tools, which
focus on the addition and deletion of nodes (actors) and edges
(relationships) over time, C-GROUP focuses on changing group
memberships over time. C-GROUP provides users with a flexible
interface for defining (and redefining) groups interactively, and
allows users to view the changing group memberships for the pair
over time. This helps to highlight the similarities and differences
between the individuals and their evolving group memberships.
C-GROUP allows users to dynamically select the time granularity
of the temporal evolution and supports two novel visual
representations of the evolving group memberships. This
flexibility gives users alternate views that are appropriate for
different network sizes and provides users with different insights
into the grouping behavior.
1

INTRODUCTION

There is a growing interest in tools that allow users to navigate,
understand, manipulate and analyze the huge influx of complex,
heterogeneous data with which today’s data analyst is faced. The
best of these tools combine powerful visualizations with useful
analytic tools that are suited to the task at hand. Often by focusing
on a specific analytic task, the visualization can be designed in a
way that focuses attention of the relevant information, and
supports the appropriate task-specific navigation and manipulation
primitives. In this paper, we describe C-GROUP, a visual analytic
tool for pairwise analysis of dynamic group membership over
time. The tool supports the analysis of affiliation networks.
Affiliation networks are a commonly occurring form of social
network in which there are two types of entities, actors and events,
and a single relationship, a participates relationship, which relates
actors to events. These two-mode social networks are sometimes
viewed as bipartite graphs, although we will propose an alternate
visualization that we believe is well-suited to pairwise analysis.
Examples of affiliations networks include: bibliographic networks
describing authors and their publications, with coauthor
representing the participation relationship; communications
networks describing people and the communication event (email,
phone call or meeting), with the action of communication among
people representing the participation relationship; and
organization networks, describing people and their memberships
in different organizations, with membership representing the
participation relationship.
2

Lisa Singh ‡

University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742

CONTRIBUTION

One novelty of C-GROUP is its focus on the relationships and
group memberships in which a pair of actors participates. This is
*

kang@cs.umd.edu, †getoor@cs.umd.edu, ‡singh@cs.georgetown.edu

IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology 2007
October 30 - November 1, Sacramento, CA, USA
978-1-4244-1659-2/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20052

in contrast to the majority of social network visualization tools
which either show the whole network (but allow filtering and
selection so that users can, through a series of operations, reach a
desired subgraph), or show an ego-centric view of the network,
centered around a single individual. Our choice to focus on an
actor pair was motivated by our earlier work on D-DUPE[1], a
visual analytic tool for entity resolution in social network data.
While the pairwise view of C-GROUP was inspired by D-DUPE,
because of the richness and complexity of dynamic group analysis,
significant new developments and changes were required in the
design of C-GROUP. One of the more straightforward changes was
in the support for the choice of the focal pair; we allow users
flexibility in how they search for the focal pair, either by direct
search, similarity search, or a combination. A second more
fundamental design development was in the definition of groups;
while this is often straightforward for networks describing a single
entity type, in the context of an affiliation network, especially a
dynamic affiliation network, there is a great deal more flexibility
in how groups may be defined. C-GROUP supports several options
for defining groups which we have found useful.
In terms of visualization, the major contribution of C-GROUP is
its dynamic context window, which shows the evolution of group
membership for the focal pair over time. Most tools which support
the visualization of changes in social networks over time are
designed for the task of understanding the entire network, and are
focused on the additions and deletions of nodes and edges in a
single-mode social network. C-GROUP, on the other hand, is
concerned with the evolution in relationships and group
membership over time for the focal pair. This leads to two novel
visualizations, one which highlights the change in the shared
actors with which the focal pair participates, and another which
highlights the group movements. In both cases, C-GROUP provides
an appropriate and stable layout, and uses animation in a way that
truly brings attention to relevant portions of the changing network.
3

OVERVIEW OF C-GROUP

Figure 1(a) shows the overall C-GROUP interface, which is
composed of three coordinated windows: the focal pair viewer,
the dynamic group context viewer, and the data detail viewer. The
focal pair viewer (on the left) allows users to navigate the
affiliation network and select focal pairs of interest. Users can
select a pair in the focal pair viewer, and then the group context
viewer (on the upper right corner) provides two visualizations of
the group membership context between the focal actors: the fixed
entity layout and dynamic group layout. Figure 1 shows a
dynamic group layout which represents the co-authorship relation
between the two focal authors, ”Allison Druin” and ”Ben
Bederson”, two professors at the University of Maryland. By
placing the shared groups in between them and non- shared
groups on the sides, users can easily get an overview of their
shared and non-shared groups. Users can resize, sort, filter, and
brush the nodes and edges in the viewer to gain a better
understanding of the relationship between the focal authors. The
authors displayed in the viewer can be grouped either by an
author’s attributes or by a publication’s attributes using
the ”Group By” menu in the tool bar. In addition, the changes of
authors’ group membership over time can be explored using the
time range slider located in the toolbar.

211

(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1. (a) Overview of C-GROUP (b)-(d) The evolution of author groups in the dynamic group layout view

Finally the data detail viewer (in the lower right corner) shows
all the attribute values of actors and events displayed in the group
context viewer. The data detail viewer is tightly-coupled with the
group context viewer so that users can easily choose actors or
groups in the network layout and observe the corresponding
attribute values of any node or group.
4

EXAMPLE ANALYSIS ON PUBLICATION NETWORK

One of the most compelling features of C-GROUP is display of
group membership dynamics via animation. We briefly describe
the analysis of the group memberships for Drs. Druin and
Bederson, the two authors selected above. Because they are also
married, the evolution of their shared publication record is
interesting to analyze. Figure 1(b)-(d) shows the network for Drs.
Druin and Bederson grouped by the event attribute publication
topic. We attempt to convey the animation using a series of
figures taken at different times. Figure 1(b)-(d) show the focal
pair after they arrived at University of Maryland. The
visualization highlights a change in the network structure. While
Dr. Druin’s areas of publications are similar to her previous
publications areas, Dr. Bederson has expanded his publication
areas; therefore, the shared area has more topics in it. Also, as
time progresses, all the topics begin to enter the shared area and
the size of the groups also grows. The evolution of topics on
which each of the authors publishes is highlighted by animation

212

during actual analysis using C-GROUP. An alternative layout, not
shown here, keeps the groups fixed, and animates only the edges
linking the focal pairs to groups.
5

CONCLUSION

C-GROUP allows users to visually explore dynamic affiliation
networks. It allows users to select a focal pair and explore their
shared relationships. Users have flexibility in defining groups
based on attributes of either the actors or events in the network.
Users can choose from a number of different views that highlight
different aspects of the group evolution: the views can highlight
the actors in the groups or the groups; the views can hold certain
elements static, or animate them; the views allow users flexible
control over the time granularity of the visualization; and the
views support the selection of a static snapshot of a time-slice, or
users can play an animation which shows the evolution of the
dynamic group context. While the design of task-specific visual
analytic tools for heterogeneous dynamic social networks is
challenging, C-GROUP is a step toward more task-specific visual
analysis.
REFERENCES
[1]

M. Bilgic, L. Licamele, L. Getoor, and B. Shneiderman. D-Dupe: An
interactive tool for entity resolution in social networks. In Visual
Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), Baltimore, October 2006.

