Multivariate Glyphs for Multi-Object Clusters
Eleanor Boyle Chlan∗

Penny Rheingans†

Johns Hopkins University

University of Maryland,

Whiting School of Engineering

Baltimore County

A BSTRACT
Aggregating items can simplify the display of huge quantities of
data values at the cost of losing information about the attribute values of the individual items. We propose a distribution glyph, in both
two- and three-dimensional forms, which specifically addresses the
concept of how the aggregated data is distributed over the possible
range of values. It is capable of displaying distribution, variability
and extent information for up to four attributes at a time of multivariate, clustered data. User studies validate the concept, showing
that both glyphs are just as good as raw data and the 3D glyph is
better for answering some questions.
CR Categories: H.5.2 [Information Interfaces and Presentation]:
User Interfaces—Evaluation/methodology; I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and Techniques—Interaction Techniques;
Keywords: information visualization, multivariate visualization,
distribution, aggregated data
1

I NTRODUCTION

Glyphs usually represent individual, multivariate items. For example, in the context of census data, we could imagine a glyph representing an individual, where the shape implied the type of paid
employment, the color implied an age range, and size was associated salary. Supplementation with additional features would encode
addition attributes of the data, but it still only reflects the one individual. It would not tell us the average salary for a group or range
of ages of those working in a particular type of job. Also, with large
quantities of data it is probable to have more data items than can be
reasonably comprehended by the average viewer. Besides, the more
items to be displayed, the greater the likelihood that significant subsets will be occluded. With large quantities of data, it is common
to aggregate items to make the data more cognitively manageable.
Clustering [8] is a popular method. However, an unfortunate side
effect of showing aggregated data as a single entity is the loss of the
underlying values associated with the individual data items. Simply displaying a glyph at the centroid of the clustered data fails to
show the extent and variability of the clustered data items. Average
data values are useful but not sufficient. A group composed only of
teenagers and senior citizens may be indistinguishable from a group
composed only of middle aged people. Therefore, we also wish to
get a sense of whether the data is scattered across a wide range or
focused on a narrow range of some attribute, if the distribution is
uniform or skewed, and what the actual extent of the data is. Our
goal is to facilitate aggregation by designing a compact glyph providing as much information as raw data.
Inspired by Tukey Box plots [14], we seek to restore some of the
lost information of clustered data by displaying summary and distribution information about the cluster’s contents. We have developed
∗ e-mail:

chlan@apl.jhu.edu
† e-mail:rheingan@csee.umbc.edu

IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2005
October 23-25, Minneapolis, MN, USA
0-7803-9464-X/05/$20.00 ©2005 IEEE.

a distribution glyph which shows mean, standard deviation, and extent, and also implies distribution of the data in the cluster. Two
user studies show that the distribution glyph is just as good as the
raw data in terms of correctness and preference. The 3D version
of the glyph was shown to be superior to raw data for answering
questions about average values and distribution.

2

R ELATED W ORK

There is a rich body of research on the topic of using glyphs to display information. Colin Ware’s book [16] gives basic background
on standard glyphs, where the emphasis is on finding useful methods to encode additional information into symbols.
Histograms and scatter-plots are examples of very simple glyphs,
which are useful for showing smaller amounts of data with few attributes [3]. There are numerous glyph types which represent individual data items [2, 5, 9, 10, 12].
There has been less research on methods to show composite data.
Hendley et al. have developed a scheme called Narcissus [7] which
casts a translucent isosurface around the cluster, visually converting
the cluster into a simpler item. This does not solve the cognitive
management problem for huge data sets since the individual glyphs
are still displayed. In a similar vein, Sprenger et al. [13] cast an
isosurface around the clusters created with a hierarchical, agglomerative partitioning algorithm called H-BLOB. Fua, et al. [6] use
a variation of parallel coordinates to display aggregated, clustered
data. Tukey box plots [14] show extent and a limited sense of variability for two-dimensional data. See the example in Figure 1. They
display a box representing the second and third quartile of the data
with the median marked. The box is supplemented with lines that
show the extent of the first and fourth quartiles. Outliers may be
shown as well. The size of the box is visually compared to the
overall range of the data to obtain an impression of the distribution
of the data.

Figure 1: Tukey Box Plot Example

Other than Tukey box plots, which illustrate 2-dimensional data,
glyphs do not show extent and variability for an attribute of interest. The glyphs discussed here represent a good cross-section of
the kinds of multivariate glyphs available. Typical problems range
from being overly abstract to being difficult to compare attributes
across objects. In addition, none of these can handle aggregated
data and nor show variability and extent of the data.

141

Figure 2: Test Images with Age, Education and Salary Mapped to X, Y and Color (a) Data Only - Shown as Dots (b) Combined Image with
All Shells (c) Extent Shell

3

A PPROACH

Since we want to imply the range of all the data values in the set
without explicitly drawing them, we need to show the extent and
distribution of the data. The distribution glyph has been inspired
by Tukey box plots and is explicitly designed to show the average,
standard deviation, and distribution of three attributes of the data
set.
3.1

Two Dimensional Distribution Glyph

The two dimensional (2D) distribution glyph consists of three
nested shells. The innermost or ”average” shell is an ellipse with
the size of the axes of the ellipse tied to the standard deviation of
the data attributes mapped to the X and Y axes. It is centered on the
average value of each of the two attributes. The middle or ”variability” shell is an ellipse with the size of the axes tied to twice the
standard deviation of the attributes mapped to the X and Y axes.
The outer or ”distribution” shell is an ellipse with the size of the
axes tied to the minimum and maximum values of the attributes
mapped to the X and Y axes.
A simulated test data set is shown in Figure 2(a). The full glyph
corresponding to this data is shown in (b), while just the distribution
shell is shown in (c). Note that the distribution shell corresponds to
the limits of the data in both X and Y, in this case to the positions of
the outliers, which are about halfway up the Y axis, near 0 and near
978 in X. Since the shell is elliptical, it is normal for points to occur
outside the ”corners” of the ellipse. The shell is not trying to show
the exact area covered by the data, but is trying to imply its extent.
In the middle variability shell, we see the data is reasonably tightly
distributed in the X direction but much more broadly distributed in
the Y direction. Note that the variability shell has been clipped by
the distribution shell. This supports the notion that the distribution
shell implies the limits of where data will be found. Finally, we see
that the inner or average shell shows that the average is about 365 in
X and about 283 in Y. The standard deviation is about 90 in X and
about 170 in Y. The average in X and Y is clearly offset from the
center of the distribution ellipse, implying skew or an asymmetric
bell curve.
A third attribute is mapped to color. Since we are not able to
use physical size to imply average, variability, and distribution, as
we do for the attributes mapped to X and Y, we map the color with
different methods for each shell. The inner shell still represents the
average, the middle shell still implies variability, and the outer shell
still implies the distribution or extent by giving us an idea of where
the data points actually lie in the color spectrum.
For the inner average shell, the attribute associated with color is
averaged over all the data points. The average is then interpreted
using the HSV color model. For the average shell in Figure 2(b),
the data points range in color from 423 to 477.

142

Variability is implied in the middle variability shell through color
saturation. The shell is colored by interpreting the attribute of each
data item associated with color in terms of HSV. The essentially
cylindrical HSV colors are converted to rectangular coordinates and
averaged. This method of averaging the color tends to desaturate
the shell color when it is generated by widely varying values. If the
data points all have very similar values, the shell color will tend to
be highly saturated. Looking at the test data in Figure 2(c), we see
that the color of the variability shell is essentially white, implying a
broad distribution of color values in the data set.
The outer distribution shell implies different concentrations of
data values in different regions of the data set. The shell is colored
by taking a weighted average of the colors of the data points located
in wedge shaped windows around the ellipse. The user specifies the
size in degrees of the wedge originating from the center of the ellipse. The color calculation finds all of the data points in the wedge
and weights each point inversely by its distance from a target point,
which is centered in the wedge on the edge of the ellipse. Points
closer to the edge contribute more to the color than points near the
center or significantly outside the edge. The calculated color is assigned to the target point on the edge of the ellipse. The average
value colors the point at the center of the ellipse. The color between the center and the edge is automatically interpolated. Sectors
of the ellipse with few points are more transparent than sectors with
more points. The distribution shell is shown at full opacity when the
number of points in the sector exceeds half of the number of points
possible if they are distributed perfectly uniformly. The number of
points in the window is divided by this threshold to get a density
value that controls the transparency of the color.
For the distribution shell in Figure 2(c), the wedge is +/- two degrees. Transparency starts to occur when the number of points in
the window falls below five. The average of this data for attribute
is between 370 and 423. The upper half is dominated by values
in the 639 to 693 range yet has sub-concentrations on the 531 to
585 range. The lower left is dominated by data with low (yellow)
values of the attribute, again with some sub-concentrations around
423. The lower right is transparent, indicating few or no points in
that region. This implies most of the data is in the left half and there
are some outliers to the extreme right. The broad value distribution implied by the middle variability shell is substantiated by the
distribution shell which clearly shows color from yellow through
magenta. In looking at (a) we can see there are also orange valued points which are too few to contribute to the coloring of the
distribution shell.
Figure 3 shows the relationship of several nodes in a hierarchically clustered set of census data [15]. In Figure 4, we see a series of
examples of the two-dimensional distribution glyph using this data.
The data in question has been clustered using the standard algorithm K-means. The K-means algorithm was applied repeatedly to
the results to impose a hierarchy on the data set. All the figures have

Figure 3: Relationship of Nodes in Clustered Census Data

the education level mapped to the x-axis, the marital status mapped
to the Y-axis, and age mapped to color. Similarly, marital status
starts at zero to represent three categories of ”Married” and continues through separated, divorced and widowed to never married.
The node in Figure 4(a) is Node A from Figure 3. You can see that,
while the data in this part of the tree is broadly distributed, most is
located in a smaller region centered in the lower right quadrant with
some outliers. The white color of the variability shell shows a wide
distribution of age. The average age is in the 35 to 41 range. Node
B in Figure 4(b) is the child of the node in (a). The range of education and marital status is similar to the parent node but the age is a
little more narrowly distributed, the variability shell having a bluer
cast than the variability shell of the glyph in (a). The average age is
also noticeably higher. Nodes D and E are shown in Figure 4(c) and
(d). Node E seems to have the highest average age of all the nodes
in this section of the tree. Although it has a smaller range of education and marital status, there are fewer outliers. As you descend
though the hierarchy, the nodes reflect smaller and smaller ranges
of the associated attributes. This is reflected by smaller sizes in X
and Y and more saturated color in the variability shell. In Nodes D
and F (Figure 4(c) and (e)), we see the node has become sufficiently
cohesive in age that we can no longer distinguish the variability and
average shells from each other. At the highest level in Node A, the
distribution shell is almost white, telling us clearly that age is not
big factor in the high level clustering of this data. For comparison,
the Node A is redrawn in Figure 5(a) with the color attribute now
mapped to hours worked per week. Clearly, the hours worked per
week is a major factor in the clustering. Figure 5(b), shows the
corresponding raw data, illustrating a common problem that occurs
when representing a high dimensional set in a reduced number of
dimensions. There are more than 3000 points in (a) but hundreds
of points end up as collocated in (b) since each attribute has only a
limited number of possible values.
3.2

Three Dimensional Distribution Glyph

A three-dimensional (3D) version of the glyph allows an additional
attribute to be summarized for the data set and more appropriately
fits into existing visualizations in 3D. The three dimensional Distribution Glyph is implemented like the two dimensional version
except that a third attribute is mapped to the Z axis. The ellipses
become ellipsoids. The size of the average shell represents standard
deviation, the size of the variability shell represents twice the standard deviation, and the size of the distribution shell represents the
minimum and maximum values. However, simply adding a dimension to the 2D model is not adequate. When properly shaded and
lighted, all the viewer would see would be the distribution shell. It’s

Figure 4: Related Nodes in Clustered Census Data with Education,
Marital Status,and Age Mapped to X, Y, and Color (a) Node A (b)
Node B (c) Node D (d) Node E (e) Node F

143

Figure 5: Census Data Example Node A Colored by Hours worked
Per Week (a) 2D Glyph (b) Raw data

important to be able see the inner and middle shells with the colors
accurately rendered. Some viewers may also find it more difficult
to accurately perceive the shapes and relationships in a static 3D
image.
In order to see all three ellipsoids, the distribution shell is shown
as a solid with every other row of triangles omitted. The variability
shell is also shown as a solid, but with every other sector of longitude omitted. The overlay of the variability and distribution shells
creates a basket weave though which the average shell can be seen.
This methods allows all three shells to be seen without the misleading color changes that would occur if the variability and distribution
shells were sufficiently transparent to allow the average shell to be
seen [11]. Showing the density of points via transparency is omitted.
Like the 2D model, the color of the average shell represents the
average value of the fourth attribute which is then mapped to color.
The color of the variability shell represents the average of the colors
after the attribute values are converted to color values. The color of
the distribution shell is calculated by taking the weighted average
of the color of all the points in a three dimensional wedge centered
on a point on the surface of the ellipsoid.
A simulated test data set is shown in Figure 6(a). The average
shell corresponding to this data is shown in (b). Note the average
color is 394 to 453.
The variability shell is shown with the average shell in Figure 6(c). The color of the variability shell is essentially white, implying a broad distribution of color values in the data set. This is
substantiated by the raw data which clearly shows colors from yellow through magenta. In looking at the raw data in Figure 6(a), we
can see there are also orange valued points which are too few to
contribute to the coloring of the distribution shell.
The distribution shell is shown in Figure 6(d) and the complete
glyph is shown in (e). The imposition of the distribution shell over
the variability shell creates the basket weave effect noted above but
still allows the average shell to be seen. To make it easier to see the
real extent of the data in 3D, the 3D glyph has been supplemented
with the convex hull of the points in the dataset. The hull is calcu-

144

Figure 6: Test Image with Age, Education, Hours Worked and Salary
Mapped to X, Y, Z and Color (a) Raw Data (b) Average Shell (c)
Average and Variability Shells (d) Distribution Shell (e) Complete
Glyph

Figure 7: Test Image with Age, Education, Hours Worked and Salary
Mapped to X, Y, Z and Color - Convex Hull

lated using the freeware Qhull [1]. Figure 7 shows the convex hull
corresponding to Figure 6(d).
Previous research has shown that 3D can be more powerful and
more easily understood than 2D when supplemented with rotation [4], so the image can be viewed from multiple positions. To
that end, the 3D distribution glyph can be rotated in two directions
using the arrow keys on the keyboard. In addition, shells can be
shown individually. Therefore, the variability shell is no longer
clipped by the distribution shell.
Examples of the three dimensional glyph are shown in Figures 8
and 9. The node in Figure 8(a) shows the root node of the data
set in Figure 3. Age is shown in color and it is obvious from the
color of the inner shell that the average age of the entire set is between 36 and 43. The white color of the middle shell indicates that
the ages are fairly broadly distributed. The upper parts of the outer
shell show concentrated regions of ages 23 to 56. Education level is
shown along the red X axis where higher values indicate more education. The data set includes people with no education as well as all
levels of education. The average education is higher than the midpoint. Education is relatively narrowly distributed. The ages of the
people in the Node A are similar to the root but Node A represents a
subset with a higher educational level. The education level of Node
B is similar to Node A, however Node B clearly has a smaller range
of ages, as shown by the more cyan color of the middle shell and
the lack of yellows in the outer shell. The average age of this group
is in the 50 to 56 range, but the presence of purple and tiny amounts
of magenta in the outer shell indicate that the group includes elderly
people. The average age of Node C is higher than Node B and is
in the 56 to 63 years range. The more saturated color of the middle shell means the age distribution is narrower than in the parent.
Marital status is shown along the white Z axis. Married is zero and
never married is six with various categories of single in between.
Marital status is broadly distributed with the average closer to married than to never married, offsetting the middle shell from the outer
shell. This trend continues in the nodes in Figure 9. The average
age of Node E is in the 63 to 70 range. The distribution of ages is
quite narrow as indicated by the highly saturated color of the middle shell. The blue Y axis shows occupation categories. Clearly
Node E has a broader range of occupation than its sibling, Node
D. Node F clearly has a narrower, more highly educated group of
people than its sibling in Node G.
Both versions of the glyph execute in linear time with respect

Figure 8: Related Nodes in Clustered Census Data - 3D Glyph Showing Age, Education, Occupation and Marital Status Mapped to Color,
X, Y and Z (a) Root (b) Node A (c) Node B (d) Node C

to the size of the data set. The color calculation for the outer or
distribution shell is quadratic.

145

Table 1: 2D Accuracy Results Showing Mean Percentage Correct By Question for Ten Subjects Using T-test Paired Two Sample with alpha=.05

Questions
1) What is the average value of the X-attribute?
2) What is the range of the Y-attribute?
3) What is the range of the color attribute?
For each remaining question, if color was salary, X was age and Y was education level:
4) Is salary narrowly distributed?
5) Is age narrowly distributed?
6) Is education level narrowly distributed?
7) Is salary uniformly distributed across age and education level?
8) Is there a correlation between salary and age?
9) Is this distribution skewed or lopsided in age and education level?
10) Roughly, how many poor, well educated people, middle aged people are in this set?

4

U SER S TUDIES

Our intention with the Distribution Glyph was to create a userfriendly glyph that made it feasible for information to be extracted
from the aggregated data without resorting to the underlying data.
To test this, we conducted a user study for each version of the distribution glyph, comparing the distribution glyph with the raw data.
The primary hypothesis was that the Distribution Glyph was just
as useful as raw data for answering basic statistical questions on
the data. Timing, correctness and user-preference were measured.
These are fully factorial, within-subject experiments.
4.1

Experimental Design

Ten subjects participated in the 2D study and 16 subject participated
in the 3D study. Most were students, ranging in age from 18 to
30, and were pre-screened to have a minimum level of computer
skills. All had normal or corrected-to-normal acuity and normal
color vision. None had previously participated in a user study for
this project. No subject participated in both studies.
The experiment started with subject training. The subject was
shown a series of slides which explained the two visualizations.
The raw data is displayed as dots. For the distribution glyph, each
shell was explained and shown with examples. Samples are shown
in Figure 2(b) and Figure 6(d). The subjects were allowed as much
time as they wanted to review the training material and ask questions. In the 3D study, subjects were given the opportunity to practice the rotation and image manipulation options and to answer
some sample questions as part of the training. For both studies,
the user task was to answer the questions about the images. See
Table 1 and Table 2 for the specific questions.
In the timed portion of the 2D study, a subject was shown a set
of four representations of the same type and answered the same
ten questions for each one. Then the subject was shown the same
four data sets rendered in the other visualization and again the subject answered the same ten questions about each one. For the 3D
study, there were two representations in each set and twelve questions. Subjects were encouraged to take as much time as needed
to answer the questions before moving on, but were not permitted
to make direct comparisons or go back. Half the subjects viewed
the visualizations in one order and half in the other order. After the
timed portion, the subjects answered a brief questionnaire. Subjects
took anywhere from 30 minutes to 75 minutes to complete the studies, including the training time. Subjects were not informed of the
accuracy of their responses.
4.2

2D Results

Correct answers to the statistical questions on each data set were
counted and compared by question across the two visualization

146

Mean Glyphs
.73
.65
.10

Mean Dots
.63
.68
.43

t-value
0.68
-0.23
-2.03

p-value
0.55
0.84
0.14

.83
.88
.80
.58
.83
.93
.75

.88
.93
.83
.68
.93
.70
.63

-0.77
-0.58
-0.17
-0.56
-1.10
3.00
0.78

0.50
0.60
0.87
0.61
0.35
0.06
0.49

types. A standard paired t-test with two tails was used. Table 1
shows the mean number of correct answers for all subjects on each
question for each visualization type. It also shows the t-value calculated by the test and gives the probability that the means would
be the same by random chance. The standard cutoff is .05. By
that standard, none of the glyph means are significantly different
from the corresponding dots (raw data) mean. Question 9 comes
very close to meeting that standard (p=0.06). This question asks
the subject to estimate if there is skew in the distribution.
4.3

2D Discussion

Even based on a few subjects, it is easy to see that this glyph requires a substantial investment in experience. It is complex enough
that training and practice is necessary to use it successfully. In fact,
there is a clear decrease in the time needed to process the distribution glyph as subjects progress through the set. Analysis also
shows that the interaction of the subjects with the data sets over
time infers an advantage to the glyphs over the dots. Interestingly
enough subjects with no or minimal experience in code development showed no clear disadvantage in terms of training times to
review the visualizations or in correctness. Also, experience playing computer games, even in 3D, seemed to impart a minimal advantage to reviewing the dots visualizations but none to reviewing
the glyphs. Although no statistically significant preferences were
identified overall, some of the more experienced subjects preferred
the distribution glyph and thought it was better for answering the
questions. Although statistically significant differences could not
be found, the order in which subjects viewed the visualizations
seemed to influence the study. It is interesting to note that all the
subjects, who viewed the glyphs first, answered more questions correctly about both sets of visualizations than did the subjects who
viewed the dots first. This means that people learn something with
the glyphs that they do not learn with the raw data. Overall, there
was equal preference for the two types, however all subjects preferred the type they viewed first. The two sets of visualizations
averaged similarly as easy or hard to understand, but subjects viewing the dots first found them easier to understand. Overall, subjects
preferred the glyphs, preferred the training for the glyphs and felt
they were more useful and easier for answering questions. Again,
subject preference seemed to be tied to which set of visualizations
the subject viewed first.
4.4

3D Results

As with the 2D study, correct answers to the statistical questions
on each data set were counted and compared by question across the
two visualization types. A standard paired t-test with two tails was
used. Table 2 shows the mean number of correct answers for all
subjects on each question for each visualization type. It also shows

Table 2: 3D Accuracy Results Showing Mean Percentage Correct By Question for Sixteen Subjects Using T-test Paired Two Sample for Means
with alpha=.05 if Color is Salary Per Week, X is Age in Months, Y is Education Level and Z is Hours Worked in a Four Month Test Period

Questions
1) What is the average value of salary?
2) What is the minimum and maximum hours worked?
3) What is the minimum and maximum of salary?
4) The distribution of salary is Narrow In-between Broad?
5) The distribution of age is Narrow In-between Broad
6) The distribution of education level is Narrow In-between Broad
7) Is salary uniformly distributed across hours worked?
8) Is salary uniformly distributed across age and education level?
9) Is there a correlation between salary and age?
10) Is this distribution skewed or lopsided in education level?
11) Is this distribution skewed or lopsided in salary?
12) Roughly, how many poor, well educated older people,
working very long hours are in this set?

the t-value and p-value calculated by the test. The p-value gives the
probability that the means would be the same by random chance. A
cutoff of .05 was used. Subjects gave significantly more accurate
responses on question one (p = 0.03), asking for the average of an
attribute, when reviewing the glyphs. We suspect that the ability
to examine the shells individually influenced this result. Subjects
also gave significantly more accurate responses for question seven
(p = 0.04), which asked subjects to compare the distribution of one
attribute against another. Question nine is a harder questions asking
about correlation between attributes. The mean number correct using glyphs is noticeably better than the mean correct using the raw
data even though it is not statistically significant (p = 0.06 ). Unfortunately, subjects did significantly better on question three using
the dots (p = 0.00). The effect is primarily from people who viewed
the dots first. This question asked the range of the color attribute.
The order in which subjects viewed the visualizations seemed
to influence the study. Subject viewing the dots firsts did statistically significantly better on question three, and subjects viewing
the glyphs first did statistically significantly better on question one,
as noted above. These order effects are also statistically significant.
4.5

3D Discussion

Subject found both types equally easy to use to answer questions,
but as a group they all thought the second set they saw was easier.
This result is the reverse of what was observed on the 2D study,
but is probably just a learning curve effect. The dots were easier to understand, as expected, especially for subjects viewing the
glyphs first. Subjects viewing the dots first tended to think both
types equally easy to understand. A learning curve is also seen in
overall subject preference to like the second type that they viewed
more and think it more useful. This was not statistically significant.
In spite of this, subjects thought both visualization types equally
easy to use to answer questions and were equally comfortable with
them. Subject also thought the glyphs more useful and better for
answering harder questions. As the questions become more difficult, the 3D glyphs rise to the challenge better than the raw data
does.
We noted four subjects for whom language was potentially an
issue. It had a noticeable but not statistically significant effect on
times required to complete the study. These four subjects had a
statistically significant lower correctness on question 3 for the distribution glyphs and a statistically significant higher correctness on
question 9 for the raw data. Prior programming experience and
prior 3D experience had an impact on a few questions but no effect
across the entire study. Gender on the other hand seemed to play no
role in correctness.

Mean Glyphs
0.76
0.47
0.24
0.71
0.71
0.68
0.71
0.47
0.71
0.62
0.44

Mean Dots
0.50
0.50
0.59
0.71
0.68
0.79
0.41
0.44
0.88
0.79
0.29

t-value
-2.32
0.24
3.52
0.00
-0.24
1.00
-2.15
-0.23
1.98
1.64
-1.15

p-value
0.03
0.81
0.00
1.00
0.81
0.33
0.04
0.82
0.06
0.11
0.26

0.71

0.79

0.83

0.41

Question two asked for the range of the Z attribute. For question
two the probability is very high that the answers to both the glyphs
and raw data images came from the same population. In contrast,
both the 2D and 3D versions of the glyph had problems with the
questions asking range of the color attribute. We believe that the
method of calculating the color of the distribution shell by averaging the data occurring in a wedge accounts for this. If a portion of
the range is represented by only a few points then the method tends
to hide that color.
Just as in the 2D study, this study showed that the 3D distribution glyph requires a substantial investment in experience. It is
complex enough that training and practice is necessary to use it
successfully. In fact, there is a clear decrease in the time needed
to process the distribution glyph as subjects progress from the first
visualization in the pair to the second. Analysis also shows that
over time the glyphs accrue an advantage over the dots. Interestingly enough, gender, programming experience, and 3D gaming
experience seemed to have no clear impact on times required to
complete the study. On the other hand, language did seem to impact the times for reviewing the glyphs. All subjects took longer to
review first glyph visualization than the second. However the four
subjects identified as having potential English language issues took
significantly longer to process the first glyph visualization.
5

C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

This tool is aimed towards technically oriented investigators who
are willing to invest some time into learning to use a more powerful tool. Some subjects were more accurate with the dots and some
were more accurate with the distribution glyph but overall subjects
gave more correct answers with the glyphs. It also gave better results on certain types of questions.
This work shows that it is reasonable to aggregate data and still
retain a sense of how the data is distributed. We have developed
two and three dimensional versions of a glyph that show extent, average, variability, and distribution for up to four attributes. It is appropriate to use it for summarizing data sets or to display clusters of
data items in extremely large clustered sets. This represents an important step in the visualization of large data sets because it allows
the number of physical items to be reduced while minimizing the
accompanying information loss. When combined with other visualization tools, the distribution glyph can simplify the display of
very large, multivariate data sets by reducing the number of glyphs
displayed, while still retaining useful information about the underlying data. This is further supported by the user studies which show
that the glyphs are just as good as raw data for answering statistical

147

would allow more comparison across the data sets.
6

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work supported in part by the Department of Defense
(CADIP), the National Science Foundation (0121288) and the
AT&T Foundation.
R EFERENCES
[1] C. B. Barber, D. P. Dobkin, and H. T. Huddanpaa. The quickhull algorithm for convex hulls. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software,
22(4):469–483, December 1996.
[2] Mei C. Chuah and Stephen G. Eick. Information rich glyphs for software management. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, pages
2–7, July–August 1998.
[3] William S. Cleveland. Visualizing Data. Hobart Press, Summit, NJ,
1993.
[4] Andy Cockburn and Bruce McKenzie. 3d or not 3d? evaluating the
effect of the third dimension in a document management system. In
Proceedings of CHI’01, pages 434–441, New York, NY, May 2001.
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.
[5] David Ebert, James Kukla, Christopher Shaw, Amen Zwa, Ian Soboroff, and D. Aaron Roberts. Automatic shape interpolation for glyphbased information visualization. IEEE Visualization, October 1997.
[6] Ying-Huey Fua, Matthew O. Ward, and Elke A. Rundensteiner. Hierarchical parallel coordinates for exploration of large datasets. In Proceedings of the conference on Visualization ’99, pages 43–50. IEEE
Computer Society Press, 1999.
[7] R. J. Hendley, N. S. Drew, A. M. Wood, and R. Beale. Narcissus: Visualizing information. In Nahum D. Gershon and Steve Eick, editors,
Proceedings Symposium on Information Visualization, pages 90–96.
IEEE Computer Society Press, 1995.
[8] A. K. Jain, M. N. Murty, and P. J. Flynn. Data clustering: A review.
ACM Computing Surveys, 31(3):264–323, 1999.
[9] Eser Kandogan. Visualizing multi-dimensional clusters, trends, and
outliers using star coordinates. In Proceedings of KDD-2001, San
Francisco, 2001.
[10] Martin Kraus and Thomas Ertl. Interactive data exploration with customized glyphs. In Proceedings of WSCG’01, pages 20–23, 2001.
[11] Penny Rheingans. Opacity-modulating triangular textures for irregular
surfaces. In Proceedings of IEEE Visualization ’96, pages 219–225.
IEEE Computer Society Press, October 1996.
[12] Randall M. Rohrer, John L. Sibert, and David S. Ebert. A shapebased visual interface for text retrieval. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, pages 2–8, September/October 1999.
[13] T. C. Sprenger, R. Brunella, and M. H. Gross. H-blob: A hierarchical
visual clustering method using implicit surfaces. In Proceedings Symposium on Information Visualization, pages 61–68. IEEE Computer
Society Press, October 2000.
[14] John W. Tukey. Exploratory Data Analysis. Series in Behavioral Science: Quantitative Methods. Addison-Wesley, 1977. page 39.
[15] University of California, Irvine. UCI Machine Learning Repository,
1999.
[16] Colin Ware. Information Visualization Perception for Design. Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, CA, 2000.

Figure 9: Related Nodes in Clustered Census Data - 3D Glyph Showing Age, Education, Occupation and Marital Status Mapped to Color,
X, Y and Z (a) Node D (b) Node E (c) Node F (d) Node G

questions. It further shows that for some questions it is even better.
A user study comparing the glyphs to data represented by centroids should provide further insight into the usefulness of the
glyphs. A feature to display multiple, related nodes in a data set

148

