A method to index and retrieve images to improve reasoning during the design
process
Sabrina Kacher, Jean-Claude Bignon, Gilles Halin, Pascal Humbert.
CRAI (Research Centre in Architecture and Engineering)
Architecture school of Nancy
2, rue Bastien Lepage – B.P. 435 54001 Nancy CEDEX, France.
{kacher@crai.archi.fr, bignon@crai.archi.fr, halin@crai.archi.fr, humbert@crai.archi.fr}

Abstract
2.The method
During their activity, designers use various kind of
heterogeneous information presented in the data list of
the design program. To solve their design problem they
use “references”. If by reference some writers mean
every representation of a reality having an active role in
the design process, in our case we have limited the
reference definition to the physical parts of a building,
the so-called “built work”. To present these references
to the designer we choose Images as a media support to
transmit the relevant information. More precisely we
have chosen photographic images to illustrate these
references because an image illustrates the graphic part
of an architectural concept. For this, in this paper we
present a method to organise these references to make
them more easily accessible to the designer. This
method, once incorporated into a retrieval engine, aims
to assist the designer in his creation work.

1.Introduction
Photographic images are widely used as an
information support in the design field because they can
transmit a large amount of information in a minimum of
time. This information will help the designer to solve his
design problem. It also illustrates several elements in
different ways and the designer tends to put at the same
level of cognition the object and the image of the object.
An image is used during the design process in two
ways. The first one concerns the problem formulation
(the image allows the user to express his design question
and enables him to advance in his problem formulation).
The second one concerns the problem's solution (images
illustrate several potential solutions to the design
problem). These operations can be done thanks to mental
images that the designer creates in his mind.
In this paper we tackle the particular question of
identifying which principles to follow in order to better
construct an image database [1] that will help the
designer during the design process. We will also present
a concrete application of the proposed method to a
particular field : the wooden construction domain.

In this article we present an indexation method
adapted to a semantic description of images. Our
proposition is not to suggest help to designers who want
to index their own image database. But the objective of
this method is to provide indexation principles that will
be used in an information resource centre to offer an
information service to designers. To construct the
database we suggest following these principles:

2.1. Identifying the context of the work
The first principle aims to define the sub-domain of
the architecture field to be described [2]. This definition
of the context will direct all the work. Moreover all
domains possess various sub-domains. For example in
architecture we have to define a method of describing
construction, design, social, urban ways etc. To succeed
with this method as much as possible we have to define
the domain where we are working in.

2.2. Structuring the domain
The second principle of the method concerns the
definition of the hierarchy of the identified sub-domain.
Nowadays the most widespread kind of existing
vocabularies to describe a domain in words is the
“thesaurus” [3]. These thesauruses possess deep structure
or hierarchy (example : the Art and Architecture
Thesaurus1 possesses about 30 hierarchical levels).
Several researches [4] aimed to reduce the deep
hierarchy of thesauruses because the extent of these
hierarchies meant that it took a very long time to find the
suitable term to describe an element illustrated by an
image and that it led to a wrong description [3,5]. In this
method we suggested using a proposition made by
Eleanor Rosch [6] to classify the natural categories in the
cognitive psychology domain. She suggested classifying
all the objects of the real world on only three hierarchical

1

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/vocabularies/aat/

levels. She explained that the categorisation could be
done properly starting from the intermediate level. This
level includes the name of the prototype of all the current
objects of the domain to be categorised.

ambiguity resulting from the multi-interpretation of the
image (polysemy), we defined four families in the
wooden architecture domain to describe architectural
built works illustrated by images (Figure N°1):

2.3. Quantifying the visual importance of an
element

x The architectural realisation family;
Includes the name of the built category to which the
architectural element illustrated belongs (school,
single-family dwelling, etc).

The third principle of the method aims to define a
way to quantify the importance of every architectural
element illustrated by images. To describe an image in a
better way we decided to organise the terms used to
describe images. In this method we focus only on the
description of what is visually describable in images. We
propose a classification or an organisation of the terms
used for image indexation. This classification depends on
the visual significance of the illustration.

x The built-works family;
Indicates every physical part of an architectural
realisation which has a particular function (post,
beam, window, etc).
x The material family;
Contains every wood material and its by-products
(species, glued-laminated, etc).

2.4. Identifying a specific research process
This last principle of the method concerns the
identification of a relevant way to access images during a
search process. To make the problem formulation and
solution easier for the designer we defined a search mode
adapted to the designer’s state. Nowadays, the common
access to images proposed by existing systems is the
search mode using text to express a need. But in the
architectural design process the needs are fuzzy and the
words used to express these needs are not precise.
For this we proposed a particular kind of search
mode, which is the search mode using images. This kind
of search mode uses images to access other images. We
consider that this search mode is more adapted to the
designer need during design activity. Then, the designer
will only use images to formulate and express his need.
We consider that this search mode is more suitable to the
state of need which is imprecise and fuzzy especially in
the earlier phases of the design process (figure N°4).

x The products family;
Includes any component aimed at protecting and
decorating
wooden
elements
(fungicide,
impregnation, etc).

3.Application to a concrete example
To validate the relevance of the proposed method, we
applied the enumerated principles to a particular subdomain of architecture, which is architecture built in
wood.. For this, photographic images that we work with
illustrated buildings or parts of these buildings belonging
to the wooden construction domain.

3.1. A specific application of our method
According to the principles enumerated above, their
application to the wooden domain will be as follows ;

3.1.1 First principle : identifying the context of
the work: At first, we defined a domain and a
vocabulary for image indexing. Defining a vocabulary is
a result of the analysis of images to index [3]. In order to
meet efficiently the user’s expectations and reduce the

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure N°1 : identifying the context of the work
3.1.2 Second principle : structuring the
domain : The vocabulary created has to allow the
formalisation of the more or less homogeneous languagepractices of the professionals in the domain [3]. This
point is important because these professional have the
same scientific and technical basic knowledge. To better
represent the described domain, we structured each
family of image describers, following the E. Rosch [6]
categorisation which structures real world objects on
three hierarchical levels. The categorisation is carried out
from the intermediate level called “current level”. The
definition of each level is made following rules (Figure
N°2) of generalisation and specialisation [6,7]. The three
levels are as follows [8,9,10,11]:

x The functional mechanism;
Corresponds to the way that the architectural element
is used to fulfil its characteristic role. Eg: Cladding Æ
Shingle cladding

1) The Current Level (CL)
It represents the level from where the language is
structured. This level is also called a basic level because
it contains the most important concepts in the language
of the domain we want to describe and therefore, the one
we learn in the first place. This level corresponds to the
designer’s problem when the problem is of a general
nature. It contains the name of “prototype” or of the most
representative member of elements that have characters
in common. It includes the name of physical elements
illustrated in the images eg : post, beam, window, door,
etc.

x The number;
Corresponds to the multiplicity or to the uniqueness
of a single architectural element.
Eg: Post Æ Colonnade.
x The orientation;
Corresponds to the direction of the element with
regard to the horizontal / vertical or intermediate axes.
Eg: Sun-breaker Æ Horizontal louvers

2) The Superior Level (SL)
It corresponds to the fuzzy demand of the user and
guides him during his search through a more precise and
more specific level. This level represents a more general
level than the current level. Terms belonging to this level
allow the identification of the shared attributes of the
architectural concepts belonging to the current level. For
example, a post is a vertical structure element, and a wall
is also a vertical structure element. The shared attributes
for both these elements are “structure” and “vertical”. So
the superior category will include these attributes and
will be called “ vertical structure system” category.

x The full-empty device;
Corresponds to the extent to which the architectural
element has been opened up with the aim of letting in
daylight or not.
Eg: Partition Æ Honeycomb wall.

A1
Punctual

A3
B3
StructureStructure

B1
Area

A2
Length

A4
B4
Vertical Vertical

B2
Surface

3) The Inferior Level (IL)
The terms belonging to this level allow a more
concrete identification of the architectural concepts
illustrated in the images than those of the previous levels.
This concrete expression corresponds to the user’s
demand, during his search for precise architectural
solutions to his design problems. Terms belonging to this
level are used for indexing images and contain only one
degree of extra specificity, compared to those of the
current level. This specificity is obtained by the research
into the characteristics such as :

Post
CL

Intersection = generalisation

Wall

SL

CL

Extension = specification
CL

SL

CL

Figure N°2 : structuring the domain
3.1.3. Third principle : quantifying the visual
importance of an element : Describing a built-work

x The shape;
Corresponds to the "outline" of an object. This
characteristic has two levels. i) the shape of the
architectural element itself eg : Post Æ Circular post and
ii) the unit used eg : indoor flooring Æ panels.

x The constructive mechanism;
Corresponds to the way the architectural element is
arranged, according to predetermined rules of
construction. Eg : WallÆ Half-timbered wall

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

element illustrated by an image with a vocabulary term is
not enough. An element can be visually more important
in one photographic image than in another one. This
variability of importance is related to the shape of the
element and also depends on the angle from which the
view is shot (Figure N°3). We organised terms used to
index each image according to its visual importance.
This importance must be quantified to be controlled. We
therefore identified visual properties that will enable us
to evaluate and quantify this significance [11].

Figure N°3 : quantifying the visual importance of
an element
We defined five image properties (Figure N°4) [12]:
x 1) Occupied area:
This property means that the representation of the
element is in a prominent position if it occupies a larger
visual area than other elements which surround it.

x 2) Archetype likeness:
This property indicates that if the representation of the
element keeps the structural and spatial properties of the
real objects so allowing the viewer to identify the
element appearing in the image, the element will be
easier to recognise [11].

facilitate the task of classifying the terms. The objective
of this part is to enable the system to propose semiautomatically a value that will be associated to a rank for
every term used for the indexation [3].
Sets of experiments have been carried out to validate
the vocabulary definition, the vocabulary structure and
the way to validate the visual importance of the
illustrated architectural concepts.

3.1.4. Fourth principle : identifying a specific
research process : To assist the designer during his
search process, we proposed a particular way to access
images [11]. This access mode is based on a visual
formulation of the designer’s need. The user will only
manipulate images during his search. Images will be
presented in the form of a mosaic organisation, and the
user will select, reject, or not give an opinion on every
image that he visualises. The selection is obviously
oriented by the design problem. For example if he
searches for windows, all the images which illustrate a
window will be selected by the user, and the others will
be rejected or without an opinion. The objective of this
kind of selection enables the user to concentrate only on
his design task (Figure N°4).

x 3) Contrast with the background:
By this property we mean that the element will be in a
conspicuous position if its representation contrasts
strongly with the rest of the image (colour, light, ...).
x 4) Focus:
This property shows that if the element occupies the
centre of the image (diagonal junction), the element
should be more obvious than the rest of the elements
illustrated.

The user
can select,
reject or
not give an
opinion

x 5) Completeness:
Every illustration of a real element shows only a part
of it. This graphic-property depends on whether the
illustration of the object represents the semantic features
or not [11]. This allows a viewer to identify the
represented element.
All these graphic properties do not possess the same
impact. Their impact depends on the kind of architectural
element which is illustrated in images. Thus, we group
all the architectural elements named in the thesaurus
according to the Ching [13] classification (planar
elements, linear elements and punctual elements). This
classification is oriented toward an organisation of
architectural elements according to their geometric
features. To evaluate the real importance of each graphic
property related to the geometric type of the element
illustrated we carried out an experiment. This experiment
has allowed us to propose calculation rules that will

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Figure N°4 : identifying a specific research process.

4.The search engine
To validate the proposed method, an interactive and
progressive research system [11,12] by image has been
developed by the MAP-CRAI2.

2
"MAP-CRAI" Architecture and landscape Modeling - Research
Center in Architecture and Engineering, Architecture School of Nancy.

This research system is based on the “search kit”
technology which has been developed by Apple for the
MacOsX.10.33 operating system. Search Kit is a library
adapted to retrieve textual documents. In our case this
technology is integrated into an application dialoguing
with the 4D4 software to manage the image database.
Every image on the database must be described by a text
that will be accessible and usable for the engine
SearchKit technology. We have then to define a specific
vocabulary which aims to describe in a suitable way all
the image database. The defined vocabulary will be
inserted into the system developed by the MAP-CRAI in
order to better meet the user's needs. A method of
relevance feedback is used to propose new images for the
user’s queries. The indexing document is represented by
a weighted vector of thesaurus terms. A vectorial
matching model is then used between the query and the
indexing document. The results of this matching will be
given as an ordered list of images representing the user's
needs.

words. Then the cognitive process takes place in three
steps.
x The first stage
This step concerns the state just before visualisation
of the images. In this part, the designer possesses more
or less vague notions and creates mental images
according to the state of progress in the problem solution
process. The images which come to mind are fuzzy, so
he queries the system.

x The second stage
At the beginning of the research, the system presents
a mosaic of images, which have been selected randomly
or thematically. The user selects or rejects the images
which are presented to him (Figure N°3), according to
his judgement on their relevance. The system analyses
these choices, and presents to the user a new sample of
images which corresponds better to the user's needs.

5.The use of our method
When all these principles have been completed,
indexers can use our method to construct the reference
image database. They have to apply :
 The selection of an image to index.
 The visualisation of the selected image and the
identification of the elements to be described.
 The use of the built thesaurus and the selection of
terms which are the most suitable for describing the
element identified in the image and taken only from
the inferior level.
 The association of the selected terms with the image.
 The analysis of the classification proposed by the
system. For each selected element, its representation
will be compared to the results obtained from an
experiment [9] which aims to validate the visual
property which has been identified in the third
principle of the method. According to the results
obtained though this experiment, the system
proposes rates to weight the indexed terms semiautomatically.
 The validation or the refusal of the rates proposed by
the system during the indexation process.
 The registration of the indexation operation.

6.The user of our system
The efficiency of our method is based on a cognitive
exchange process between the mental images of the
designer and the real photographic images retrieved by
the system. When the designer has a design problem he
will use the system proposed. At the beginning he has to
identify his design problem. He has not to define it in

3

www.apple.com
4 www.4d.com

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

x The third stage
The last part of the cognitive process happens after
the first visualisation of the images proposed by the
system. In this part, the user shows this new sample of
images and makes a permutation by replacing the
elements comprising his own mental images with those
visualised in the real images [5,13]. It operates a
deformation and an adaptation of his mental images, and
generates new images. This stage should allow the user
to reformulate the problem, or to start a new problem
which has not appeared before, or even to solve the
design problem.
At this stage of the work a final experiment was
carried out to validate the relevance of the whole
method. We conclude that the designer progresses
efficiently when he searches for relevant solutions to his
design problem by adding the visualised architectural
work as they are presented or by modifying them,
depending on his design problem. These results are
possible thanks to the analyses of the sketches produced
by the designer during this experiment.

Conclusion
In this paper we presented an indexation method
which aims to construct a photographic image database
that will play the role of a reference tool for the designer
during his design activity. This method consists of
defining the vocabulary adapted to both the depiction of
the domain and the description of images. The defined
vocabulary, when associated with images, must be
organised according to five visual properties. Finally, we
proposed a particular way to access images without
introducing text. All these principles have been applied
to architecture built in wood and have been associated to
a specific search engine to better answer the user’s

expectations evaluated through a final experiment. The
user’s reaction was positive. Future work concern the
application of these principles to other technical domains
belonging to the architecture field. Another kind of
navigation using semantic networks is also being studied.

References
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

Heylighen. A, thesis : in case of architectural design,
critique and praise of case-based design in architecture,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, may 2000
Cabré M-T, Terminology: Theory, Methods and
Applications, ed Juan C. Sager, Amsterdam, Netherlands,
1999.
Dauzats M, Le thésaurus de l'image : étude des langages
documentaires pour l'audiovisuel, Paris, 1994.
Tanaka J. Taylor M., Object Categories and Expertise; Is
the Basic Level in the Eye of the Beholder, Cognitive
Psychology, Volume 23, Issue 3, Elsevier ed, 457-482,
1991.
Joly M, Introduction à l'analyse de l'image, Nathan
Université, 1993, Paris.
Rosch E.. Natural Categories, Cognitive Psychology 4,
issue3, Elsevier ed, 1973.
Reed, S-K, COGNITION theory and application, 6th ed,
Thomson Learning, 2004.
Hudon M.. Le thesaurus, conception, elaboration,
gestion., Asted edition, Ottawa, Canada, 1994
Aitchison J and Gilbrichrist A, Thesaurus construction: a
practical manual, Second Edition, London, 1987.
Noy F-N and Mc Guinness D. Ontology Development
101: A Guide to Creating Your First Ontology, technical
report, Stanford Knowledge systems laboratory and
stanford medical Informatics, Stanford, USA, 2001.
Kacher S., Bignon J-C, Halin G., A method to index
images in the wooden architecture domain, Terms
hierarchy and weight given to terms, DDSS 2004, 7th
International Conference on Design & Decision Support
Systems in Architecture and Urban Planning 2 - 5 July,
Netherlands, 2004.
Bignon J-C., Halin G., Nakapan W, Building Product
Information Search by Images. Proceedings of the 5th
DDSS : International Conference in Design and
Decision Support Systems in Architecture, Nijkerk, The
Netherlands, p. 47-61, 2000.
Ching F-D-K, Architecture : form, space and order,
New-York:Van Nostrand Reinhold, New york, USA,
1996.
Denis M., On figurative components of mental
representations, In F. Klix, J. Hoffmann, &E. van der
Meer (Eds.), cognitive research in psychology,
Amsterdam, 1982.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

