Time-tunnel: Visual Analysis Tool for Time-series Numerical Data
     
and Its Extension toward Parallel Coordinates
Hirokazu Notsu1, Yoshihiro Okada1,2 , Mina Akaishi3
and Koichi Niijima1
1

Graduate School of Information Science and Electrical Engineering, Kyushu University
6-1 Kasuga-koen, Kasuga, Fukuoka, 816-8580 JAPAN
{h-notsu, okada, niijima}@i.kyushu-u.ac.jp
2
Intelligent Cooperation and Control, PRESTO, JST
3
RCAST, University of Tokyo
4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8 04, JAPAN
mina@ai.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract

Time-tunnel proposed by Akaishi et al. is a
multidimensional data analysis tool. Time-tunnel
visualizes any number of time series numerical data
records as individual charts each of which is displayed
on an individual rectangular plane called data-wing in a
3D virtual space. Through direct manipulations on a
computer screen, the user easily puts more than two
data-wings overlapped together to compare their charts
in order to recognize the similarity or the difference
among those data records. Simultaneously a radar chart
among those data at any time point is displayed to
recognize the similarity and the correlation among them.
Since only one chart is displayed on one data-wing,
so if there is a number of data records, the user has to
prepare accordingly a huge number of data-wings and
practically it becomes impossible to manipulate them.
To deal with this problem, the authors enhanced the
functionality of Time-tunnel to enable it to display more
than two charts on each data-wing. In other word, the
authors made each data-wing have the functionality of
the Parallel Coordinates. This paper proposes the
usefulness of this enhancement of Time-tunnel by
showing data analysis examples.
Keywords--- Visualization tool, Analysis tool, Multicharts tool, Parallel Coordinates, IntelligentBox

1. Introduction
Recently computer has become a common tool for
performing many kinds of works, jobs, businesses and
researches. As a result, a huge number of data records
are generated and stored. It is necessary to analyze such
data for many kinds of works, jobs, businesses and
researches, for example, stock quotations for economists,
multi-dimensional data analysis for scientists, and

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

company achievement analysis for company managers.
We need a tool that helps us to analyze such a huge
number of data records effectively, e.g., visually and
interactively.
As one of the visual and interactive analysis tool for
multi-dimensional and multi-attribute data, Akaishi et al.
proposed Time-tunnel [1]. Time-tunnel visualizes any
number of time-series numerical data records as
individual charts in a virtual 3D space. Each chart is
displayed on a rectangular plane called data-wing. The
user easily puts more than two different data-wings
overlapped together to compare their data represented as
charts in order to recognize the similarity or the
difference among them. Simultaneously a radar chart
among those data at any time point is displayed in the
same 3D space to recognize the similarity and the
correlation among them. However, in Time-tunnel, only
one chart is displayed on one data-wing. So if there is a
huge number of time-series numerical data records, the
user has to prepare accordingly such a huge number of
data-wings and practically it becomes impossible to
interactively manage them. To deal with this problem,
we enhanced the functionality of Time-tunnel to enable it
to display the Parallel Coordinates [2] on each data-wing.
Due to this functionality enhancement, the user can
visually analyze a huge number of time-series numerical
data records through interactive manipulations on a
computer screen. Furthermore, it becomes available for
the visual analysis of multi-dimensional data, i.e.,
database records with a huge number of attributes by
preparing multiple data-wings, dividing multi-attribute
data into several sets by attributes, and displaying each
set of data as Parallel Coordinates on each data-wing.
In this paper, we describe the usefulness of extended
Time-tunnel, i.e., Parallel Coordinates version of Timetunnel, for the visual analysis of not only a huge number
of time-series numerical data records but also multidimensional, multi-attribute data.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
First of all, Section 2 describes related work and points
out the difference of our tool from theirs. Next, we
explain essential mechanism of IntelligentBox [3] in
Section 3 because IntelligentBox is a constructive visual
software development system for 3D graphics
applications and Time-tunnel is developed as one of its
applications. Section 4 describes the details of Timetunnel and its Parallel Coordinates version. Section 5
presents data analysis examples using Time-tunnel.
Finally we conclude the paper in Section 6.

2. Related work
As a very popular visualization tool of numerical data,
Excel, spread sheet of Microsoft Corp., provides
functionality to create various types of chart graphs.
Among them includes 3D bar charts. The problem is that
it does not support more than 4-dimensional data. For
the visualization of multidimensional data, Inselberg and
Dimsdale introduced Parallel Coordinates [2], which
visualizes multiple data records as multiple poly-lines on
the same 2D plane at the same time. After their proposal
of Parallel Coordinates, many modified versions having
a variety of additional features were proposed [4, 5, 6, 7,
8]. Our Parallel Coordinates version of Time-tunnel tool
visualizes multiple charts like Parallel Coordinates on
one individual rectangular plane called data-wings.
Time-tunnel originally provides multiple data-wings in a
virtual 3D space so that if the user has a huge amount of
data records, he/she can analyze them by the use of
multiple data-wings interactively.
Another popular data analysis method is based on
star chart or radar chart. Other similar tools are Star
Glyphs of XmdvTool [ ] and Stardinates Tool [10].
Stardinates Tool has combined features of Parallel
Coordinates and Glyphs [ ]. Originally our Time-tunnel
tool combined feature of Parallel Coordinates and star
chart (radar chart) visualization tool as is described in the
paper [1].

3. Essential mechanisms of IntelligentBox
IntelligentBox is an extension of the 2D synthetic media
system IntelligentPad [11], to 3D graphics applications.
IntelligentBox provides various software components
called boxes. Each box has unique functionality and a
3D visible shape, and box consists of two objects, a
model and a display object. A model holds state values
of the box, which are stored in variables called slots. A
display object defines how the box appears on a
computer screen and also defines how the box reacts to
user operations. Through direct manipulations on box,
its associated slot value changes. Furthermore, its visual
image changes simultaneous with the slot value change.
In this way, a box reacts to the user's manipulations
according to its functionality.
IntelligentBox also provides a dynamic data linkage
mechanism called slot-connection. By this mechanism,
it is possible to construct composite objects by

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Fig. 1. Standard messages between boxes.
combining already existing boxes through direct
manipulations on a computer screen.
As shown in
Figure 1, each box has multiple slots. One of its slots can
be connected to some one of the slots of other box. This
connection is called slot-connection. Slot-connection is
carried out by three standard messages when there is a
parent-child relationship between two boxes. By these
three messages, slot values of the two boxes are
exchanged and their functionalities are combined.

4. Time-tunnel and Its Parallel Coordinates
Version
In this section, we describe system configuration of the
original Time-tunnel, its components and how it works
for the analysis of multiple time-series numerical data. In
addition, several problems of the original Time-tunnel
are pointed out. Then we introduce Parallel Coordinates
version of Time-tunnel to deal with these problems.

4.1. System configuration of Time-tunnel
Figure 2 shows the component structure of Time-tunnel
and Figure 3 shows a screen snapshot of actual Timetunnel. Time-tunnel consists of three main types of
boxes, i.e., data-wing, time-plane and time-bar.
(1) Data-wing is a box that has a shape like a sheet.
Data-wing displays one time-series numerical data
record as a chart on its sheet. For the visualization
of multidimensional data, the user can use multiple
data-wings as he/she wants. Each data-wing is
connected to time-bar by its hinge. The hinge is
also a box that has a rotation functionality called
RotationBox. Therefore, by rotation operations on
data-wings, the user can put multiple charts
overlapped together to compare them as later shown
in Figure 5. Time-series numerical data of each
data-wing is sent to time-bar through RotationBox.
(2) Time-plane is a box that also has a shape like a
sheet.
Time-plane is connected to time-bar
vertically to data-wings. Usually three time-planes
are necessary as shown in Figure 3. Two timeplanes are used to specify a time region, i.e., a begin
time point and an end time point. Correlation points
between any two adjacent charts are displayed
inside the time region. The remaining time-plane is

used for displaying a radar chart. Its position data is
sent to time-bar to specify a time of data among
charts to be displayed as a radar chart. Actually
time-plane is connected to time-bar through
ExpandBox. Time-plane moves along time-bar by
the user manipulations. So, ExpandBox is used as
the parent box of each time-plane.
(3) Time-bar is a box that has a thin, long cylindrical
shape. Time-bar works as a time pivot of datawings. It collects multiple time-series numerical
data from each data-wing and displays a radar chart
on one of time-planes. It also displays correlation
data between any two adjacent data-wings as
scattered points in the time region specified by the
two remaining time-planes.
Parent-child relationships among data-wings, timeplanes and time-bar are as shown in Figure 2.
RotationBox works as the hinge and the parent of datawing, and time-bar is the parent of each RotationBox.
ExpandBox becomes the parent of time-plane, and it
works for positioning the time-plane.

Fig. 2. System components of Time-tunnel.

4.2. Problems of original Time-tunnel
When visualizing a large number of time-series
numerical data records, the user has to prepare exactly
the same number of data-wings. For example, when
there are three time-series numerical data records, three
data-wings are used as shown in Figure 3. In this case,
each chart data is regarded as one multi-dimensional data
record, i.e., one database record with multi-attributes. In
addition, as shown in Figure 4, the user can manipulate
data-wings to put them overlapped together. This works
as Parallel Coordinates. However, when the user wants
to visualize a huge number of database records, he/she
has to prepare exactly the same number of data-wings
and practically it is impossible to manipulate them. To
deal with this problem, we extended the functionality of
data-wing as explained in the following subsection.

4.3. Parallel Coordinates Version of Time-tunnel
Figure 5 shows Parallel Coordinates version of Timetunnel. We extended data-wing to enable it to display

Fig. 4. Parallel Coordinates functionality of Timetunnel.

Fig. 3. Snapshot of actual Time-tunnel.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Fig. 5. Parallel Coordinates version of Time-tunnel.
more than two time-series numerical data records, i.e.,
multiple database records as multiple charts, in it like
Parallel Coordinates. Even if there are a huge number of
database records to be visualized, the user can divide
them into several groups and assign each group to one of
the multiple data-wings of one Time-tunnel.
For
example, as shown in Figure 5, database records are
divided into three groups. In addition, it is possible to
display multiple Parallel Coordinates on different views
by using already existing software component called
CameraBox provided by IntelligentBox. In Figure 5, an
upper left, upper right and lower left view are treated as
three individual Parallel Coordinates of center Timetunnel. In this way, the user can visualize a huge number
of database records using Parallel Coordinates version of
Time-tunnel.
The user can select one record that he/she wants to
analyze in each data-wing. As soon as a record is
selected its corresponding chart is highlighted. Since the
user can rotate and put any data-wings overlapped
together, he/she can compare his/her selected records by
looking at highlighted charts. Furthermore, the radar
chart for the selected records can also be displayed
similarly to original Time-tunnel.
When database records have too many attributes, it
is impossible to visualize them in one rectangular area as
one Parallel Coordinates due to the width size limitation
of a display screen. Using multiple Time-tunnels the
user can divide attributes into several groups and assign
each group to one of the multiple Time-tunnels. In this
way, the user can visualize database records with a huge
number of attributes using multiple Time-tunnels.

5. Data Analysis Examples
In this section, we introduce some data analysis
examples to show the usefulness of new version of Timetunnel. In these examples, we consider that the user treat
company information including many data with various
types of attributes, i.e., recruitment data, achievement
data and other elementary data of companies.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Fig. 6. Company achievement data.

Fig. 7. Record separation using multiple data-wings.

Fig. 8. Attribute separation using multiple Timetunnels.

5.1. Data analysis using multiple data-wings
Figure 6 shows database records about three kinds of
Japanese companies, i.e., finance companies, industry
companies, and food stuff companies, using one data-

wing of one Time-tunnel. These database records have
mainly three types of attributes, i.e., recruitment
information, achievement information and other
elementary information. Since Time-tunnel has multiple
data-wings and displays multiple Parallel Coordinates
using those data-wings, it is easy to separate database
records shown on one data-wing and to visualize each of
them on each of the multiple data-wings. Figure 7 shows
a database record separation example. Database records
of Figure 6 are divided into three groups based on their
company kind and each group is visualized using
different data-wing of one Time-tunnel.

Fig. . One company assigned to one Time-tunnel.

5.2. Data analysis using multiple Time-tunnels
Since Time-tunnel is realized as one composite
component of IntelligentBox, the user can use more than
two Time-tunnels simultaneously. Even if database
records have too many numbers of attributes, the user
can visualize them using multiple Time-tunnels by
separating the attributes into some attribute groups and
displaying each group using the individual Time-tunnel.
Figure 8 shows the visualization of two attribute groups,
i.e., achievement information and other elementary
information, of the database records of Figure 6 using

Fig. 10. Visualization of database records of one
company using various graphs.

Fig. 11. Data analysis using a radar chart of Time-tunnel.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

two Time-tunnels.
Furthermore the user can use multiple Time-tunnels
in various combinations. Figure
shows one of the
examples. There are four Time-tunnels in this example.
One is the same Time-tunnel as that of Figure 7 and its
one data-wing is connected to three other Time-tunnels.
That data-wing displays database records of finance
companies and each of those three Time-tunnels displays
each database record of the three finance companies.
Figure 10 shows one Time-tunnel which has three
different types of data-wings, one shows Parallel
Coordinates, another shows one time-series numerical
data as a line chart, and the remaining one shows another
time-series numerical data. In this way, the user can
analyze database records of one company in detail.

5.3. Data analysis using radar chart
Figure 11 shows six screen snapshots of Time-tunnel. Each
of the three lower snapshots indicates a radar chart at
different attribute point. Their view directions are the same
as time-bar, that is, perpendicularly to data-wings. Each of
the three upper snapshots corresponds to respective lower
snapshot. Their difference is the view direction only. Each
of the upper snapshots indicates a different attribute
position of time-plane, and then corresponding lower
snapshots shows the respective radar chart. As previously
explained, time-plane for the radar chart can be moved
along time-bar interactively by the user manipulations. So
the user can look at the similarity or the relationship among
multiple database records at the different attribute by
changing the position of time-plane.

6. Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed Parallel Coordinates version
of Time-tunnel to deal with several problems of original
Time-tunnel. In original Time-tunnel, only one chart is
displayed on one data-wing, so if there are a huge
number of time-series numerical data records, the user
has to prepare exactly the same huge number of datawings and in this case, practically it becomes impossible
to interactively manage them. To deal with this problem,
we enhanced the functionality of Time-tunnel to enable it
to display multiple charts like Parallel Coordinates on
each data-wing. Due to this functionality enhancement,
the user can visually analyze a huge number of timeseries numerical data records through interactive
manipulations on a computer screen. Furthermore, it
becomes available for the visual analysis of multidimensional data, i.e., database records with a huge
number of attributes by preparing multiple data-wings,
dividing multi-attribute data into several groups based on
attribute types, and displaying each group of data by
Parallel Coordinates on each data-wing. In this paper,
we described the usefulness of extended Time-tunnel, i.e.,
Parallel Coordinates version of Time-tunnel, by showing
actual data analysis examples.
For Parallel Coordinates, many efficient interfaces
have already proposed. So we will develop user

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

interfaces of Time-tunnel that allow the user to visually
analyze a huge number of database records more
effectively.
Furthermore we have to evaluate the
usefulness of Time-tunnel by consulting many users who
can exploit it for their analysis of real multiple numerical
data or multidimensional data. These are our future works.

References
[1] M. Akaishi and Y. Okada, “Time-tunnel: Visual
Analysis Tool for Time-series Numerical Data and
Its Aspects as Multimedia Presentation Tool,” Proc.
8th International Conference on Information
Visualization (IV04), IEEE CS Press, pp. 456-461,
2004.
[2] A. Inselberg and B. Dimsdale, “Parallel
Coordinates:
A
Tool
for
Visualizing
Multidimensional
Geometry,”
Proc.
IEEE
Visualization 1 0, IEEE CS Press, pp. 361-378,
1 0.
[3] Y. Okada, and Y. Tanaka, “IntelligentBox: A
Constructive Visual Software Development System
for Interactive 3D Graphic Applications,” Proc. of
Computer Animation ' 5, IEEE CS Press, pp.114125, 1 5.
[4] Y.-H. Fua, M.O. Ward and E.A. Rundensteiner,
“Hierarchical Parallel Coordinates for Exploration
of arge Datasets,” Proc. IEEE Visualization ’ ,
IEEE CS Press, pp. 43-50, 1
.
[5] H. Siirtola, “Direct Manipulation of Parallel
Cordinates,” Proc. Information Visualization IV’00,
IEEE CS Press, pp. 373-378, 2000.
[6] G. Falkman, “Information visualization in clinical
Odontology: multidimensional analysis and
interactive data exploration”, Artificial Intelligence
in Medicine, Vol. 22, No. 2, pp. 133-158, 2001.
[7] H. Hauser, F. edermann and H. Doleisch,
“Angular Brushing of Extended Parallel
Coordinates,” Proc. IEEE InfoVis 2002, IEEE CS
Press, pp. 127-130, 2002.
[8] M. Graham and J. Kennedy, “Using Curves to
Enhance Parallel Coordinate Visualizations,” Proc.
Information Visualization IV’03, IEEE CS Press,
pp. 10-16, 2003.
[ ] http://davis.wpi.edu/~xmdv/news.html
[10] M. anzenberger and S. Miksch, “The Stardinates –
Visualizing Highly Structured Data,” Proc. of
Information Visualization IV’03, IEEE CS Press,
pp. 47-52, 2003.
[11] Y. Tanaka, “Meme Media and a World Wide Meme
Pool,” Proc. of ACM Multimedia ’ 6, pp. 175-186,
1 6.

