Attributed Graph Visualization of Collaborative Workspaces
Mao Lin Huang, Quang Vinh Nguyen and Tom Hintz
Faculty of Information Technology
University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
{maolin, quvnguye, hintz}@it.uts.edu.au

Abstract
Collaborative
workspaces
are
becoming
increasingly commonplace, particularly in large,
distributed organizations where virtual teams formed
in order to jointly carry out collaborative project work.
Typical collaborative workspaces often have a large
number of objects and relations as well as their
associated
domain-specific
attributes.
The
visualization of these domain-specific attributes is the
challenge of this research. This paper presents a new
approach for visualizing the attributes of objects and
relations in collaborative workspaces. This new
visualization provides not only a structural view of the
collaborative workspaces but also a graphical view of
a variety of domain-specific attributes associated with
collaborative objects and relations. This paper also
describes a framework for the attributed visualization
of collaborative workspaces.
Keywords: attributed graph visualization, information
visualization, graph visualization, collaborative
workspaces.1

1. Introduction
1.1. Attributed visualization
Traditional graph visualization techniques [2]
concern only the viewing of abstract data and the
relations among data items. They use a graph model to
present the data items and the relations among them,
and then display them as a node-link diagram on the
screen, in which nodes are represented as small
rectangles or circles and edges are represented by
connected links. These drawings aim to provide a
simplified and readable visual metaphor for easy
This work was supported by an internal research grant from the
University of Technology, Sydney.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

understanding of the relational structure existing in the
relational databases.
However, real world data is much more complex
than can be presented as simple node-link diagrams in
the traditional 2D or 3D graph visualization. For
example, in the drawing of a web graph, an edge is
used to represent a hyperlink and it does not represent
the type of communication protocol such as http, ftp,
email, telnet, etc or even the access frequency
associated with the hyperlink. As a result, these
traditional visualizations are seldom adequate for real
domains where the data objects and their relations
usually have many associated domain-specific
attributes.
With the growth of information visualization in real
domains, the visualization of domain-specific attributes
of data items has also attracted research interest. The
typical applications using attributed visualizations are
network data visualization [3], bibliographic citations
visualization [10], Web transactions visualization [5],
and multiple data attributes visualization described in
SageBrush and SageBook [13], and other.
General frameworks and models for attributed
visualization can also be found in [9], [7], and [8].
Mackinlay [9] described a framework that can
automatically design effective graphic presentation for
a wide variety of inputs. However, it does not use a
graph metaphor. Huang [7] presented another model
for graph visualization of attributed data. In short, this
model splits the generation of a graph drawing and a
physical picture into two mappings, respectively
geometrical mapping and graphical mapping. Huang
and Lai [8] recapped this idea and described it in a
more formal way.

1.2. Collaborative workspaces
Shared or collaborative workspaces provide
computer-based virtual environments supporting
collaboration among organizational members. In these

environments, the organizational members can share
documents or artifacts; communicate through
discussion forums, text chats and audio/video
conferences; and define and enact work processes. The
use of shared workspace systems is increasingly
becoming part of current work practice, especially in
large and distributed organizations where virtual teams
form in order to jointly carry out collaborative project
work. LiveNet [6] is one of such collaborative
workspace systems developed in 1999. This system
provides the flexibility to customize workspaces by
adding roles and artifacts, assigning permissions,
adding actions and so on because the LiveNet system is
based on a meta-model that is stored as a relational
database.
Although these shared workspaces show their real
potential in supporting collaboration among
organization members, there is still relatively little
research into their visualization. Most of existing
shared workspace systems used traditional text-based
interfaces to display the information. Those textoriented interfaces are often incomprehensible to the
users which cost extra cognitive overhead in
understanding the underlying structures, interrelations
as well as the attributes associated with objects and
relations.
Biuk-Aghai [1] presented a system to visualize the
structural and behavior of aspects of virtual
collaboration environments. This technique employed
the force-directed animated visualization algorithm to
show the relational structures, and it used node
coloring to indicate the workspace’s density. However,
this technique does not present the logical relations
among the collaborative items, and the attributes
associated with collaborative elements and relations.
Furthermore, this technique is unable to visualize very
large and complex collaboration environments due to
limitations of the layout algorithm. Nguyen and Huang
[12] also described a new technique for visualizing
multiple relational structures in shared workspaces.
However, the authors did not consider the visualization
of domain-specific attributes in their implementation.
This paper presents a new attributed visualization
that provides not only a structural view of the
collaborative workspaces but also a graphical view of a
variety of domain-specific attributes associated with
collaborative objects/relations. Section 2 introduces a
framework of the attributed visualization. Section 3
describes the technical details of the attributed
visualization of LiveNet collaborative workspaces. The
final section concludes the paper.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

2. The Framework
Visualization

of

Attributed

This section describes a framework for visualizing
attributed information in collaborative workspaces. The
visual system is developed using Java 2 Enterprise
Edition (J2EE) [14] platform and is made of several
components. Although theoretically this technique can
work on any type of collaborative workspace, we have
only implemented our visualization in the LiveNet
workspace [6] to demonstrate the effectiveness of our
technique. The scope of this paper concentrates only on
the discussion of the attributed visual interface
component and its associations from the shared
workspaces. Figure 1 shows all components and tiers of
the visual user interface.
• Attributed visual interface: is a navigational
visual interface that automatically display an entire
workspace of a particular user. This interface
provides not only a visual environment where the
user can view, navigate and manipulate
collaborative objects and their relations, but also a
view of domain-specific attributes associated with
objects and relations in the workspace.
• Structural property: is a set of nodes and edges
which represents the relational structure of the
entire collaborative workspace. Formally, it can be
defined as a graph G = (N, E) which consists of a
finite set of N nodes and a finite set of E edges. A
node represents a collaborative element and an edge
represents a relation between two objects.
• Attribute property: is a set of domain-specific
attributes or properties that are associated with
collaborative objects and relations. There are two
types of graphical properties we use: node
properties and edge properties that are used to
represent the domain-specific attributes of
collaborative objects and relationships among
objects in collaborative workspaces. The graphic
properties of the nodes and edges are dynamically
retrieved and updated from the server-side to clientside and vice versa. The detail description of nodes
and edges graphical properties and domain-specific
attributes are discussed in section 3.
• Final visualization: is the final representation of
the collaboration workspaces. This includes the
representation of collaborative elements, relational
structure and all domain-specific attributes that are
associated objects and relations. The system first

produces a geometrical layout of the entire
collaborative workspaces using a graph drawing
algorithm (see Figure 2). The EncCon’s layout
algorithm [11] has been applied in our
implementation to layout the relational structure of
the workspaces. This algorithm was chosen to use
in the prototype because of its advantages in

efficient utilization of display space, computational
speed, and reasonable aesthetic niceness. The
system next applies the graphical properties, such
as shape, size, color, brightness, edge thickness,
etc, to nodes and edges for representing domainspecific attributes (see Figure 3).

)LJXUH  7KH IUDPHZRUN RI DWWULEXWH YLVXDOL]DWLRQ

)LJXUH  $ VFUHHQ RI WKH RULJLQDO JUDSK
YLVXDOL]DWLRQ RI D FROODERUDWLYH ZRUNVSDFH

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

)LJXUH  $ VFUHHQ RI DQ DWWULEXWHG YLVXDOL]DWLRQ
RI WKH VDPH ZRUNVSDFH DV VKRZQ LQ )LJXUH 

3. Attributed visualization of collaborative
workspaces.
Several graphical techniques are employed in the
visual component to satisfy the following requirements:
• Provide an effective visual representation of
domain-specific
attributes
associated
with
collaborative objects, in terms of easy to identify
types and values of the attributes.
• Provide an effective visual representation of
domain-specific
attributes
associated
with
collaborative relations, in terms of easy to identify
the types and values of the attributes.

• Node-color represents the category of collaborative
objects. There are two major categories of objects
in LiveNet workspaces. Category 1 includes all
activities, sub-activities and artifacts and Category
2 includes member groups in the workspaces. The
colors for category 1 and category 2 are
respectively yellow and blue (see Figure 4).
• Node-brightness represents the degree importance
or the weight of an object. In our implementation, a
node with darker color is more important than one
with brighter color. Specifically, the weight of an
object is defined as below:
o

• Provide a concurrent display of multiple relations
with associated attributes in the same visualization.

o

• Provide an effective interactive visual interface
from which users can visually view, navigate and
manipulate the collaborative objects and their
relations.

o

We next describe the detail of the graphical mapping
between the original graph drawing and the final
attributed visualization of collaborative workspace. We
first define a set of graphical properties that we used to
present the domain-specific attributes, and then discuss
the procedure of mapping graphical properties to
domain-specific attributes in the collaborative
workspace so the user can easily identify these
attributes in the graph visualization.

3.1. Graphical mapping for node attributes
In our visualization, a collaboration object with its
domain-specific attributes is represented as a rectangle
or a specific icon with associated rich graphic
properties. We use a set of graphical properties, such as
node-size, node-color, node-brightness and node-shape
to present different attributes, such as leveling,
category, importance, etc, that are associated with the
collaborative objects.
The graphical mapping between the Node Attributes
and the Final Visualization is given by:
• Node-size represents the hierarchical level of a
particular node in a collaborative workspace. In our
visualization, the size of a node is smaller in a
deeper level than those in a higher level (see
Figures 4, 5, and 6).

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

If a node presents a group of roles, then the
weight is calculated based on the number of
members of the group.
If a node presents an activity or a sub-activity,
then the weight is calculated based on the
number of participants involved in the activity
or sub-activity.
If a node presents an artifact, the weight is
calculated based on the property of the artifact
corresponding to each type of artifact. In
short, if the artifact is a forum or a chat-room,
the weight is calculated based on the scale, i.e.
number of messages received by the forum or
the chat-room; or if the artifact is an
uploading file, a view folder or a text message,
the weight is calculated based on the size of
the file, folder or message, etc.

Figure 4 shows an example of the overview of a
particular workspace in which the important degree
of each collaborative object is presented graphically
on each node. Figure 5 is another example of a
focused view of a particular workspace. In short,
this figure shows clearly that the activity “Slembek
Thesis” has several sub-activities and four artifacts.
Within these artifacts, the artifact “Thesis
Structure” has highest weight and the artifact
“Thesis Awareness” has lowest weight.
• Node-icon and node-shape represents the types of
collaborative objects. The use of node-icon might
slightly reduce the clarity of node-color and nodebrightness in comparison with other styles. This
approach, however, improves significantly the
perception of types when a user analyses the types
of collaborative objects in the workspace (see
Figure 6). In our system, the user can easily switch
the display between the iconic mode and the
rectangular mode. In the rectangular mode, an

artifact is drawn as rounded-rectangle while an
activity or a sub-activity is drawn as a normal
rectangle. This simple node-shape style aims to
quickly identify the difference between two types of
objects (see Figure 5).
• Node-highlight indicates the focused node.

YLVXDOL]DWLRQ ZKHQ D VXEVHFWLRQ LV HQODUJHG
GXULQJ WKH QDYLJDWLRQ

3.2. Graphical mapping for edge attributes
A relationship between two collaboration objects is
represented as an edge. In our visualization, each
relationship is represented as a straight-line edge with
graphical properties in order to indicate the domainspecific attributes associated with the relationship. We
use some graphical properties, such as edge-color and
edge- thickness to present domain-specific attributes,
such as type, connectivity, etc, that are associated with
the relationships.
The graphical mapping between the Edge Attributes
and the Final Visualization is presented as following:
• Edge-color is used to represent the types of a
relationship. There are four types of relationships
that can be visualized in the LiveNet system. The
colors we used to map each type of relationships to
the graphical display are defined as:
o

)LJXUH  $ VFUHHQ RI WKH DWWULEXWHG YLVXDOL]DWLRQ
RI D ODUJH ZRUNVSDFH

o

o

o

)LJXUH  $ VFUHHQ RI D GHWDLO ORRN RI WKH
FROODERUDWLYH ZRUNVSDFH E\ XVLQJ RXU DWWULEXWHG

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

Gray color represents the categorizing
relationship that stands for the nature
ordering/grouping of the collaborative objects
in the relational database. We use this color to
help users identify groups, subgroup,
activities, sub-activities and parent-child
relationships, etc in the LiveNet workspaces.
Sandy-brown color represents the accessing
relationship that is the relationship between a
document (artifact) and an activity. That
means that a group of people who participate
in this activity have the authority to read/write
this particular document.
Blue color represents the participating
relationship that is the relationship between an
activity and a role (person), who has the
responsibility to participate this activity in the
collaborative process.
Green color represents the sharing
relationship that is the relationship between
two objects that are sharing the same common
properties, i.e. artifact’s sharing. The sharing
relationship is inherited when an artifact is
copied and sent to another activity.

In order to reduce the complexity of the
visualization, we allowed only two types of
relations that can be displayed actively on the
screen with the active-state, while other types of
relations are displayed inactively with the inactive-

state, see Figure 7. Edges in the active-state are
drawn with real colors while edges at the inactivestate are deemphasized using lighter or semitransparent colors. The user can interactively switch
the display of particular types of relations from one
state to another via the option menu. Figure 6 shows
an example of the display in which the categorizing
and accessing relations are at the active-state and
the participating and sharing relations are at the
inactive-state. Figure 7 shows a reversed display
where the participating and sharing relations are
switched to the active-state and the categorizing
and accessing relations are turned to the inactivestate.
• Edge thickness is used to represent the connectivity
strength between two objects. The strength of
connection between two collaborative objects is
defined as:
o

o

o

o

Connectivity between a top level group object
to a lower level group or from a group to a
subgroup is measured by access frequency
which indicates how often the user accesses to
a particular group or subgroup.
Connectivity between a top level activity
object to a lower level activity or from an
activity to a sub-activity is measured by access
frequency which indicates how often the user
accesses to a particular activity or sub-activity.
Connectivity between an activity and a group
is measured by access frequency which
indicates how often the members of this group
participate (or involve in) the activity.
Connectivity between an artifact and another
artifact is measured by weight of sharing
which indicates how much information is
shared between two artifacts.

Figure 6 and figure 7 show example views of edge
thickness property used in the visualization of
collaborative workspace. The categorizing and
accessing relations are in the active-state of display in
Figure 6 while the participating and sharing relations
are in the active-sate of display at Figure 7. Figure 8 is
an example of a detail look when the activity “case
study” object is focused. This figure also shows four
groups that are involved in participating in this activity.
We can also see from the figure that the connectivity
strength between this activity and each group decreases
respectively from “impact table editor”, “step
convenor”, “group supervisor”, and “group member”.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

)LJXUH  $ VFUHHQ RI WKH DWWULEXWHG YLVXDOL]DWLRQ
ZKHUH REMHFWV DUH UHSUHVHQWHG DV LFRQV
FRUUHVSRQGLQJ WR WKHLU W\SHV DQG WKH
FDWHJRUL]LQJ DQG DFFHVVLQJ UHODWLRQV DUH
GLVSOD\HG LQ WKH DFWLYHVWDWH

)LJXUH  $ VFUHHQ RI WKH VDPH YLVXDOL]DWLRQ DV
VKRZQ LQ )LJXUH  ZKHUH WKH SDUWLFLSDWLQJ DQG
VKDULQJ UHODWLRQV DUH VZLWFKHG LQWR WKH DFWLYH
VWDWH RI GLVSOD\

[2] G. Di. Battista, P. Eades, R. Tamassia and I. Tollis,
Drawing Graphs: Algorithms for the Visualization of
Graphs, Prentice Hall, USA, 1999, pp. 397.
[3] R.A. Becker, S.G. Eick, and A.R. Wilks, “Visualizing
Network Data”, IEEE Transaction on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 1(1), 1995, pp.16-28.
[4] P. Eades, W. Lai, and X. Mendonca, “A Visualizer for Email Traffic”, in Proc. Pacific Graphics’94 / CADDM’94,
China, 1994, pp. 64-67.
[5] M.C. Hao, D. Cotting, U. Dayal, V, Machiraju and P.
Garg, “Visualizing Multi-Attribute Web Transactions Using
A Freeze Technique”, in Proc. Visualization and Data
Analysis, California, USA, 2003.
[6] I. Hawryszkiewycz, “Workspace Networks for
Knowledge Sharing”, in Proc. Fifth Australian World Wide
Web Conference (AusWeb99), Australia, 1999, pp. 219-227.

)LJXUH  $ VFUHHQ RI D GHWDLO ORRN IURP WKH
DWWULEXWHG YLVXDOL]DWLRQ VKRZLQJ WKH JURXSV
LQYROYHG LQ SDUWLFLSDWLQJ DQ DFWLYLW\

4. Conclusion
We have presented a new approach for visualizing
domain-specific attributes of objects and relations in
collaborative workspaces. The visual interface uses a
set of rich graphical elements to present these
attributes. The new visualization provides users with
not only a clear structural view of the workspace where
a particular user is working, but also a view of some
important attributes associated with the collaborative
objects and relations in the same visualization. This is
very useful for those who want to learn more about
objects/relations before they start to manipulate these
data items through the visual interface. As a result,
through the use of rich graphical elements a user can
easily identify the important features of a collaborative
object or relation, such as type, hierarchical depth,
important degree and the connectivity strength, in the
visualization. In addition, this paper also describes a
new framework for the attributed visualization of
collaborative workspaces.

5. References
[1] R.P. Biuk-Aghai, “Visualizing Structural and Behavioral
Aspects of Virtual Collaboration”, in Proc. 10th IEEE
International Workshops on Enabling Technologies:
Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, USA, 2001, pp.
279-284.

Proceedings of the Computer Graphics, Imaging and Vision: New Trends (CGIV’05)
0-7695-2392-7/05 $20.00 © 2005 IEEE

[7] M.L. Huang, “Information Visualization of Attributed
Relational Data”, in Proc. Australian Symposium on
Information Visualization, Australian Computer Society,
Sydney, Australia, December 2001, pp. 143-149.
[8] X. Huang and W. Lai, “A Novel Framework for Graph
Visualization”, in Proc. the International Conference on
Internet Computing, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 2004, pp.
905-912.
[9] J. Mackinlay, “Automating the Design of Graphical
Presentation of Relational Information”, ACM Transactions
on Graphics, 5(2), 1986, pp. 110-141.
[10] D. Modjeska, V. Tzerpos, P. Faloutsos, and M.
Faloutsos, “BIVTECI: A Bibliographic Visualization Tool”,
in Proc. CASCON ’96 CD-ROM, Toronto, Canada, 1996.
[11] Q.V. Nguyen, M. L. Huang, "EncCon: An Approach to
Constructing Interactive Visualization of Large Hierarchical
Data", to appear at Information Visualization Journal,
Palgrave, 4(1), 2005, pp.1-21.
[12] Q.V. Nguyen, M. L. Huang, "A Combined Visualization
of Multiple Relational Structures in Shared Collaborative
Workspaces", in Proc. the 6th International Symposium on
Multimedia Software Engineering, IEEE, Miami, Florida,
USA, 2004, pp. 388-395.
[13] S.F. Roth, M.C. Chuah, S. Kerpedjiev, J. Kolojejchick
and P. Lucas, “Towards an Information Visualization
Workspace: Combining Multiple Means of Expression”,
Human-Computer Interaction Journal, 2(1&2), 1997, pp.
131-185.
[14] Java 2 Platform, Enterprise Edition (J2EE), Sun
Microsystems, http://java.sun.com/j2ee/index.jsp (accessed
28/02/2005).

