2011 Eighth International Conference Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Visual Resonance
Fine Art and 3D Stereo Pictoriality

Ina Conradi Chavez

Yoon Wai Cheong Davier

School of Art Design and Media
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
e-mail: inaconradi@ntu.edu.sg.

School of Art Design and Media
Nanyang Technological University
Singapore
e-mail: reivad@gmail.com

same time, the production of images that go further and
further in recreating the effects of lived experience reveals
how widespread is the public’s willingness to succumb to
phantoms, dreams, simulacra 1 , where the body vaporizes
into pure visuality and effortlessly travels in space and time.
Nowhere can this conflict between the popular craving for
visual thrills and the condemnation of such desires be better
observed then in responses to stereographic artsphotography and moving image” [2]. Prof. Anne McCauley
illustrates popular beliefs that 3D stereo invention in
particular, carried ‘apocalyptic predictions of the end of
creativity’ for the traditional fine arts. However, both
practices can benefit from each other, as will be illustrated in
this paper. In the pictures bellow, the unique animated art
forms derived from traditional image making methodologies
are dimensionally composed in virtual space with a
heightened sense of emotion and immersion through new
element of 3D stereo depth (Fig.1 and Fig.2).

Abstract—The paper will present art practice based research
as perceptual, cognitive and interactive digital imaging, with
focus on 3D stereo animated painting and virtual
environments. An opportunity afforded to artist by the current
research environment at the Nanyang Technological
University, the School of Art, Design and Media, is providing
the flexible venues for collaboration among the academia
faculty from art and media and engineering school, along with
collaboration from the local industries. The enthusiasm for
painting and the magic of stereo are at the core of the write up.
Keywords-stereo; Stereo 3D (S3D); painting; experimental;
animation; fine art

I.

INTRODUCTION

To what extent did the recent surge in 3D stereo media
inspire the desire to alter the viewer’s experience of the
painted surface? It was left to the advancements in visual
effects and image manipulation to influence artists to
definitely break with easel painting and to account finally
and determinedly for emergent binocular vision of the 20th
century abstraction [1]. The influence of cinema alone with
the surprise and marvel at the magical trick of 3D stereo
illusion is addictive as the spectator wants to immerse
oneself in the ‘optical fantasies.’ Paradoxically, when used in
arts, 3D stereo technology holds complains [2]. The
inevitable threat of danger continues in crossing the
boundaries between popular media and traditional painting
media. Consequentially the 21st century painting practice
continues dancing in circles with technology, while the
physical materiality of the still, flat canvas, and the magic of
projected animated visuals ‘are chasing each other’s tail’[3].
Professor, Anne McCauley said in her essay on “Realism
and its detractors,” “The undeniable commercial success of
stereoscopic views was met by charges that the stereo images
appealed to the young and ignorant, enticed the masses with
the objects beyond their means, undermined the taste for the
ideal, and encouraged idleness. The contemplation of
images, particularly those that seem to dissolve their mode of
creation into the transparency of nature when it is confronted
directly, has always been fraught with danger: the danger of
confounding the icon with its unknowable referent, the
danger of desiring things of the world, the danger of being
fooled into thinking that the illusory is real. And yet, at the

978-0-7695-4484-7/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2011.30

Figure 1.
In any artwork ‘pictorial depth must always be made explict,
weight and volume, light and dark must be clearly present for illusion to
work’.[4] Simple paintrely composition laws are coupled with 3D stereo in
animated to experinece sun in Le phénomène Atmosphérique, 2011

1

25

More than real, hyper-reality, reflection of reality

the viewer, the core benefits behind stereoscopic 3D
technology is that it offers unique and superior immersion,
more visual beauty, and it is an effective tool to help depict
interesting stories in site specific sites. Resulting art works
are at the same time pushing the expressive capabilities of
existing 3D tools, demonstrating alternative aesthetics for 3D
stereo
The paper will present brief history of stereo and
production on experimental 3D stereo animated film titled Le
phénomène Atmosphérique, 2011 produced (Fig.2).

In computer graphics, recent improvements in speed,
resolution, and economy made interactive stereo an
important capability for a long time. True 3D is rapidly
becoming essential part of computer graphics, visualization,
virtual-reality systems, and computer gaming. While
enthusiasts have been excited about this technology for
decades at least, it is only within the last few years that
inevitable commercial success with Stereo 3D (S3D)
technologies is becoming apparent. Many recent S3D
projects have been full-CG movies; Shrek 4D, Monster vs.
Aliens, etc. Because of these successes, many associate S3D
with animated or live feature movies only, however the
recent advancements in S3D live action have enabled other
kinds of production, and can be implemented in broader aims
towards more experimental fields in art, interactive design
and science practices of today [5].

II.

THREE-DIMENSIONAL PERCEPTION

A. Brief Historical Overview of Stereo
In 1584, Leonardo Da Vinci wrote, "A painting, though
conducted with the greatest art, and finished to the last
perfection, both with regard to its contours, its lights, its
shadows, and its colors, can never show a relief equal to that
of the natural objects unless these be viewed at a distance
and with a single eye" [7] . The fifteenth century artist
provided an example of the difference between monocular
(one –eye) and binocular (two-eyed) vision. An object in a
painting will cover all of the space behind it. Yet in reality,
we can see past a small object, since what is hidden from the
left eye is visible to the right eye and vice versa.

Figure 2. Example of Anaglyph 3D stereo projection that immortilizes
painterly gesture by carving convinsing space for modern pictorial drama.
Still image captured from Le phénomène Atmosphérique, 2011

The concretization of objects in three-dimensional space
is not necessary for digital painting or animated image to
become immensely popular, because the imagination is
usually sufficient for the recreation of the impression of
depth unaided. However, 3D stereo images posses an
intrinsic richness. The films fascinate us because they create
an impression of depth and presence that no other type of
representation (painting, drawing, 2D digital print or
traditional cinematographic sequences) has ever equaled.
These new experiences are allowing us to continue our
pursuit of the age-old, and unrealizable, utopian dream of
creating an identical facsimile of physical life, the ancient
fantasy of obtaining integral and dematerialized image [6].
Present day techniques for producing computer –
generated 3D images have impelled a new interest in the
field. Extensive experiments have been made in simulation
of different aspects of reality (such as flight, architecture or
medial operations) and 3D Stereo has been widely used in
computer games and advertising.
In addition using stereo depth as part of the art and
design process, gives fine artists the opportunity to develop
entirely original creative experiences. For both the artist and

Figure 3. Stereograms and retinal images-illusion of depth
A stereogram is formed by two projections on the same plane of an object in
space, the projections being produced from the optical centers of the two eyes
(left-hand figure). Observing the two 2D images superimposed results in the
illusion of three-dimensionality by virtue of the fact that object depth is
encoded as right/left position difference, -objects at different distances from
the eyes project images in the two eyes that differ in their horizontal positions.
In principle, both eyes receive the same information whether this comes from
the object itself or from the stereogram leaving aside any deviations made by
the rays as the pass through the optics of the eye, two retinal images are also
projections, but on different surfaces (right-hand figure) [8].

In 1832 Stereopsis 2 or "depth sense" was formally
discovered by Sir Charles Wheatstone, a British Scientist. He
invented the stereoscope, a device to view stereoscopic
imagery, or two- dimensional counterparts and their
differences resulting from the eyes different positions in the
head. The stereoscopic images developed by Wheatstone
were pairs of drawings representing two projections of the
figure on a single frontal plane as they would be seen by two
eyes. The ability to see relief resulted from comparison of
2

Stereopsis -from stereo- meaning "solid" or "three-dimensional", and
opsis meaning view or sight

26

and technological resources in the field of stereo. Direct
access to the professional 3D stereo pipeline would enhance
the experience for screenings and one of kind art
installations. Exploring various output methods to give
correct image to the correct eye, as well as perfecting the
final format for different 3D systems usually revolves around
few basic types of filters [13].
Here, summarized, these systems are:
1) Anaglyph - Anaglyph employs a pair of
complementary color filters for each eye, the most common
being red and cyan. The red filter will only allow red to pass
through, while the cyan filter allows the transmission of
blue & green. The viewable image is treated in a way that
the left stream contains only red channel and the right
stream contains green and blue channels. Anaglyph is
flexible and can be viewed through practically any medium
that can display the spectrum of colors relatively accurately,
from print to television. However, it suffers from poor color
fidelity (Fig. 5).
2) Polarized - In typical polarized system, 2 projectors
are used to play the movie, one for the left and one for the
right eye. Both projections are aligned perfectly so that both
images overlap. A polarizing glass is then placed in front of
each projector, one angled to allow horizontal light through,
and the other vertical light. Corresponding passive eye
glasses have one horizontal polarized lens and one vertically
polarized lens, each side being able to allow light of that
particular polarized type through the eye. Polarized systems
are the basis of modern movie projection set ups. In
addition, compared to anaglyph; color fidelity is not affected
by polarized lenses. Light efficiency however is reduced as
an active stereo projection reduces light by about 50
percent, so highly reflective silver screens are needed.
3) RealD system- Circular Polarization is based on
polarized stereo, the RealD projection system is used by
most of today's 3D theatres and one of the major reasons
that brought about a 3D renaissance. A single projector
plays at double rate, alternating between the left and right
frame. A mechanized polarized lens in front of the projector
switches between clockwise and anticlockwise polarization
every other frame. Plus, in contrast with vertically polarized
lenzes, where the image is lost if the head is tilted, circular
polarization allows for a certain degree of head tilting.

the two retinal images, and from the small differences in
position of the same points in two images, such as
‘horizontal disparities’ 3 (the relative positions of near and
close object), ‘orientational disparities’ (the effects of
perspective that modify the orientation of plunging lines),
and ‘vertical disparities’[9] (Fig. 3 and Fig. 4).

Figure 4. To view stereo image without the use of the instrument, two
images (here of the spiral) have to be ‘fused.’ An effective method to
achieve this is to place two images very close to the eyes and then
gradually moved them away. There comes the point when an image of the
spiral is in the center, either alone or accompanied by spirals to the left and
the right. At this point, the observer should try to retain the image of the
central spiral for as long as possible and wait for it to become threedimensional [11].

Professor Vibeke Sorensen says, “Computers are capable
of creating models of our ocular apparatus—virtual eyes, in
effect—that behave remarkably similarly to our real eyes and
are able to replicate the complicated function of binocular
vision. Each parameter used in these computer models can
be explored on an individual basis, helping us to understand
better, how the two eyes work together to create the effects
of stereoscopy. For example, for the effective display of
stereoscopic motion pictures, homologous images (meaning
corresponding pairs of left- and right-eye images) must be
perfectly aligned vertically and shown precisely at the same
instant in time; otherwise the illusion of depth breaks down
and the viewing experience becomes confusing and
uncomfortable. An advantage of the digital computer is that
it can quickly and accurately calculate these types of
requirements and eliminate many of the problems and
limitations that are so often encountered in this and their
forms of stereoscopic imaging” [12]
As shown, interest in stereo painting, immersive art
installation and environmental aesthetic experiences can be
traced through nearly all epochs of art history. Through the
later part of the 20th century, 3D stereo was generally
referred to as a variety of presentation methods including
immersive virtual realities of CAVE environments,
interactive virtual realities and projection installations, wide
screen cinema, holography and stereoscopic IMAX cinema
movies.
B. 3D Stereo Filters and 3D Stereo Systems
Continuing challenge is to be able to keep up with
commercial, proprietary software and latest developments
3

Figure 5. Still frame captured from Le phénomène Atmosphérique, 2011.
Anaglyph composite viewed with passive Red/Cyan Glasses.

Also known as retinal disparity and as binocular disparity.

27

The justification for any new and worthwhile
development in painting must be founded in extending
‘working space’ into virtual space that will be integrating
Stereo3D animation and projection, motion and sound.

4) Active Shutter Glasses - Technically, these are liquid
crystal shutters (LCS), they blind the left and right eye insync with a display that shows the left and the right image
alternately. XPand 3D Cineam also uses 3D shutter glasses.
Recently, with built-in electronics to support the latest pure
120 Hz LCD displays, active /passive polarized projection
using a single 3D stereo projector is available [14].
5) Dolby 3D uses a projector with an alternate color
wheel placed in the 2D projector. This color wheel contains
one more set of red, green, and blue filters in addition to the
red, green, and blue filters found on a typical color wheel.
The additional set of three filters are able to produce the
same color gamut as the original three filters but transmit
light at different wavelengths. Glasses with complementary
dichroic filters in the lenses are worn which filter out either
one or the other set of three light wavelengths. In this way,
one projector can display the left and right stereoscopic
images simultaneously. This method of stereoscopic
projection is called wavelength multiplex visualization. The
dichroic filters in the Dolby 3D glasses are more expensive
and fragile than the glasses technology used in circular
polarization systems like RealD Cinema and are not
considered disposable. However, an important benefit of
Dolby 3D as compared to RealD is that no special silver
screen is needed for it to work [15].
Understanding 3D projection systems and ensuring
image quality is the key factor in 3D perception.
III.

Figure 6. Image captured from Le Phénomène Atmosphérique, 2011
The power of light and dark in Precipitation is forming droplets via
collision with other raindrops, and thus ice crystals are forming a cloud.
The paradox of introduced 3D stereo depth results in the ‘freedom of
materiality’, making even more obvious that what we are depicting are
nothing but ‘small parts of an expanding whole’ [16].

THE NEW WORKING SPACE

The main motivation behind the featured artwork is to
break away from two-dimensional easel painting and move
towards a ‘freedom of materiality’ that Kandinsky 4 was
seeking. and which would allow the painting to expand
beyond the physical boundaries, and by contrast, expose a
lack of ‘pictorial expansiveness’ in contemporary paintings
[16] (Fig. 6 and Fig.7).
Figure 7. 3D Stereo Working Space The notion that we 'see' the
precipitation droplets sometimes on the screen surface and sometimes
floating in front of it, leaves the space and voids in between them, with an
ambiguous but strangely compelling set of intangible stereo
coordinates.Stereo Still image captured from Le Phénomène
Atmosphérique, 2011

To quote Frank Stella from his book, Working Space,
“Painting today stands in an awkward position in relation to
its own past. It needs to create for itself new kind of
pictoriality, one that is just as potent as pictoriality that
begun to develop in Italy during Renaissance. The challenge
for painting is not the problem of perspective, -either linear
or atmospheric; nor is the problem of flatness that would
make this space so different. Rather it appears to be
something in the intention, in the acceptance of given
configuration, in the attitude toward covering a given 2D
surface that held the painting back, that actually kept it from
creating a surface that was capable of making figuration look
real and free”[17].

IV.

LE PHENOMENE ATMOSPHERIQUE

Le Phénomène Atmosphérique, is a 3D stereo animated
film inspired after the works of Olafur Eliasson and his onsite constructions of nature, as well as the Light and Space
Movement associated with figures such as Robert Irwin and
James Turrell and their works in Southern California during
1960 and 1970s.
In his essay, Robert Irwin talks about painting creating a
physical space which would be occupied with a ‘perceptual
kind of energy’. He asks a simple artistic question: "How do
I paint a painting that does not begin and end at an edge but
rather starts to take in and become involved with the space of

4

Wassily Wassilyevich Kandinsky , late 19th and early 20th century
Russian Painter and art theorist

28

the environment around it?"[18]. Irwin was trying to create a
painting that would simply dissolve into its environment; and
while some artists used the light to enhance the presence of
painted image, Irwin was concerned with light itself as an
integral part of painterly aesthetic. Light and paint, become
equal elements in his art palette.
Le Phénomène Atmosphérique is not a homage to these
works, rather it is an attempt to continue to elaborate on
possible role of heightened spatial displacement and how we
experience depth, space and color.

(a)

A. About the Film- Workflow
The film uses Next Limit Technologies Real Flow
software that creates a unique fluids and physical body
dynamics for realistic water simulations in visual effects.
The scenes were composited in 3D stereo to create general
feel of weather formations such as clouds, participation, rain
and windstorm.
To highlight the distinctive beauty and unpredictability
when water and light work together, various caustics were
generated. Almost every shot in this film has been derived
directly or indirectly from a caustic image sequence (Fig. 8).
Figure 9.
(a) First, using the caustics generated, a Maya rendered
displacement map is applied to the geometry shader and animated,
producing these surreal landscapes. Then, the same map is applied to the
incandescence node of the material to produce a glowing effect depending
on the height displaced. With certain caustics generated, the contours
formed with the displacement map can appear rough and sharp. (b) The
caustic map is then smoothed out using After Effects and imported back
into scene. Next, Depth of Field is applied to the render to produce a calm,
soothing image. The normal mesh generation method in RealFlow required
a mesh to be generated after a particle simulation has been carried out.
RealWave in RealFlow allows simulations to be carried out on geometric
planes which also contributed to less flicker.

Caustics are a visual effect seen when light is reflected
off a specular or reflective surface, or focused through a
refractive surface, so that it indirectly illuminates other
surfaces with focused light patterns. In 3D graphics, caustics
are rendered as a type of global illumination, often using
Photon Mapping or Bi-directional Raytracing techniques
[19].

(a)

(b)
(a)

Figure 8.
Caustics: (a) In RealFlow, a water drop is simulated and
particles are generated. (b) In Maya, a light is created beneath the water
surface. This light emits photons to be used to render a Caustics Ray.

(b)

Figure 10. Prism: It was impossible to mimic the effect of white light
separated into different colors when shone through a prism using rendering
software, so the effect needed improvisation (a) First, seven lights were
arranged in a row, each light shining a different colour; Red, Orange,
Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo and Violet. They all shine through a geometric
plane with a material with a refractive index of 1.5 and a water bump map.
The lights are all projected onto a plane with a white material. (b) The
result: a rainbow effect is seen at the fringe of the white light as the colours
blend when overlapping to produce white light. Although not physically
accurate, it mimics the look of real white light going through a prism.

It was found that mesh generated by RealFlow particles
is unstable and causes the caustics to flicker. RealWave was
used instead to diffuse flutter in animation (Fig 9 a & b).

29

(aa)

Thee Interaxial Sep
eperation & Zeero Parallax settings
s
are
key in getting the desired
d
stereo effect. Settingg the right
values is crucial ass it could either result inn a good
stereosccopy with connvincing spatiaal depth, or one
o that is
painful to watch.
Inteeraxial Separattion determinees the distance between 2
cameraas, in real worldd scale, it woulld be set to a vaalue of 6.06.5 cm
m, or (2.4”-2.66”). This is to
t simulate thhe average
distance between thee human eyess. The value has to be
generatted via trial annd error by usinng the anaglypph preview
window
w and/or as in this
t project, thee preview was done using
3D 1200Hz LCD technnology with acttive shutter glaasses where
the com
mposition of the left and right eye im
mages were
presentted on alternatinng frames. Eacch eye still is seeeing a full
60Hz signal
s
that is equivalent
e
to the
t refresh ratte on LCD
monitors. From tests it is apparent that
t Interaxial Separation
value iss inversely prooportional to thhe apparent sizee of the 3D
object. A large value would make the
t object appeear smaller
and neaar while a smalller value woulld make the objject appear
larger and
a far (Fig.13 & Fig 14).

(b)

Figure 11. (a) Duuplicating a displaaced mesh aroundd an axis, a circuular
F
p
pattern
is achieved.. (b) The colorful image
i
is produced..

(aa)

(b)

Figure 12. Eaxmpple of Particle Ex
F
xperiments were coonducted to find out
h particles in Maaya might work wiith the caustic mapps generated in earllier
how
sequences: (a) Thee particles were em
mitted through thee use of the existting
c
caustic
maps. Moree particles were em
mitted on lighter portions
p
of the imaage
(bb) The same methhod was applied with
w the caustic map
m generated in the
e
earlier
“prism” test.

B Stereo Cam
B.
mera Set Up[13]]
In order to create a stereoscopic imagee using compuuter
g
graphics—or
anny other techn
nique for that matter—two flat
f
s
sub-images
muust be made graphically,
g
onne for each eyye.
T
These
two sub -images are of
o the same subbject, but vary to
s
small
degree inn their perspecctive. As a result, 3D imagges,
w
whether
stereooscopic, anaglyph, line sccreen, lenticullar,
h
holographic
or virtual, becom
me plural imagges or groups of
im
mages. As alreeady stated, by
y looking at these separate suubim
mages with a stereo
s
viewer or
o some other tyype of separatiion
d
device,
each eyye sees its own perspective vieewpoint [10].
The basic stereoscopic rig
r consists off three camerras,
S
Stereo
Camera Left, Stereo Camera
C
Right & Stereo Cameera
C
Center
(Figure 13). These are connected too one another via
v
e
expressions
whhile the primarry controls aree located on the
t
C
Center
Camera..
The first steep after creatin
ng the camera was
w to positionn it
f the desiredd composition, and while dooing so to scrrub
for
thhrough the tim
meline in ordeer to view the entire sequence.
T
This
assisted positioning
p
off the camera correctly
c
for the
t
d
duration
of the animation. Aftter locking in thhe position of the
t
c
camera
and seelecting a foca
al length, the cameras’ sterreo
s
specific
settinggs are adjusted. The task would be to set the
t
S
Stereo
type to the
t off-axis settting, as it does not suffer froom
v
vertical
misaliignment that is seen in the traditionnal
c
converged
methhod.

Figure 133. Example of Mayya stereoscopic caamera rig and Decrreasing Stereo
Interaxiaal Seperation & Zeero Parallax settinggs in Stereo Camerra Parameters
Attribuute Editor. A largee value of Interaxiaal Seperation woulld make the
object appear smaller and near,
n
while a smalller value would maake the object
appear larger andd far.

Thee Zero Parallaax determines the
t point in deepth where
both im
mages convergee. In stereo terrms, an object in point of
the 0 parallax
p
from the camera will
w have 0 deepth, while
anythinng between thee camera and the Zero Paraallax point
will haave positive deepth (appear to
t pop out froom screen)
while anything
a
behinnd this point will
w have negaative depth
(appearr to recede behhind screen). A visual representation of
the Zerro Parallax pllane and a saafe volume coone can be
generatted in the contrrols to assist in the setting (Figgure 15).
Thee optimal pointt judging from the stereo testss is to have
the zero parallax at an
a average of the distance between the
furthestt object and thhe nearest objecct to screen ass well as to
keep thhe objects withiin the safe voluume cone shapee.

30

Figure 14. Example of Zero Paralax plane & Covergence distance Example
of Zero Paralax plane dividing positive depth (appear to pop out from
screen) while anything behind this point will have negative depth (appear to
recede behind screen) [20].

(a)

(b)
Figure 16. Still image captured from Le Phénomène Atmosphérique, 2011
(a) Anaglyph preview: The 3D volume illusion is only serving as an
armature to support image’s crumbling materiality. Relaying on 3D stereo
alone to create new perceptual experience is not enough.
(b) Energy of created 3D volume and mass has to be accompanied with the
proper handling of stereo composition, color, light, and rhythm. They are the
only anchors for the lightweight atmosphere of shallow moving surface .

(a)

V.

CONCLUSION

When one hears of 3D stereoscopic animation, they often
think of the latest blockbuster feature film. However,
although stereoscopic animation can be applied to films and
video, it can be used to revivify a 2D pictorial space,
animating it just as well as an animator does a character in a
feature film. And although it does not fit the traditional form
of stereoscopic 3D animation, art painting methods
combined with 3D stereoscopic effects can intrigue and
excite, a viewer just as much as a 3D feature film.
Contemplating 3D stereo as an additional tool for
contemporary artistic production brings the biggest
challenge, being able to view it independently from major
cinema venues while delivering the same quality of output in
color and 3D depth illusions.

(b)
Figure 15. (a) Rain: 3D Composite (b) Anaglyph Preview is not used in
stereo preiew for the film; instead preview was done using 3D 120Hz LCD
technology.

31

[8]

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Institute for Media Innovation, IMI, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore, Seed Grant Stereo
Pictorial Spaces IMI Triple I System (Interaction, Immersion
& Innovation), PI Ina Conradi (Asst Prof), ADM NTU Co-PI
Dr. Xiao Wei SUN, (Assoc Prof), EEE/Division of
Microelectronics, NTU 1.12. 2010–30.11.2011
Academic Research Fund (AcRF) Tier 1 Singapore
Ministry of Education (MOE), Project Title: 3D Stereo
Animated Pictorial Space: Towards New Aesthetics in
Contemporary Painting, RG 55/10 (M52090031), PI Ina
Conradi (Asst Prof), ADM NTU. Co-PI Dr. Xiao Wei SUN,
(Assoc Prof), EEE/Division of Microelectronics, NTU, 1.3.
2011 - 28. 12 .2014

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

F. Stella, "Picasso: Stella on Barnett Newman," in Working space, ed:
Harvard Univ Pr, 1986, p. 84.
A. McCauley, "Realism and its detractors," in Paris in 3D: From
Stereoscopy to Virtual Reality 1850-2000. vol. 1st Ed. edition, F. R.
C. T. K. Timby, Ed., ed Musee Carnavalet, Museum of the History of
Paris: Booth-Clibborn; , 2000, pp. 17.
F. Stella, "Picasso: Stella on Pollock," in Working space, ed: Harvard
Univ Pr, 1986, p. 84.
F. Stella, "Picasso: Stella on Cubism " in Working space, ed: Harvard
Univ Pr, 1986, p. 92.
Autodesk®, "Stereoscopic Filmmaking Whitepaper: The Business
and Technology of Stereoscopic Filmmaking," 2008.
F. R. C. T. K. Timby, "Paris and 3-D Photography," in Paris in 3D:
From Stereoscopy to Virtual Reality 1850-2000. vol. 1st Ed. edition,
ed Musee Carnavalet, Museum of the History of Paris: BoothClibborn; , 2000, pp. 13-14.
L. d. Vinci, A Treatise on Painting (Great Minds Series): Prometheus
Books; First Edition edition, 2002.

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

[19]
[20]

32

J. Ninio, "Stereogram and retinal images from Three-dimensional
perception " in Paris in 3D: From Stereoscopy to Virtual Reality
1850-2000 vol. 1st Ed. edition, S. a. r. images, Ed., ed. Musee
Carnavalet, Museum of the History of Paris: Booth-Clibborn; , 2000,
pp. Figure 2, page 18.
J. Ninio, "Three-dimensional perception," in Paris in 3D: From
Stereoscopy to Virtual Reality 1850-2000. vol. 1st Ed. edition, F. R.
C. T. K. Timby, Ed., ed Musee Carnavalet, Museum of the History of
Paris: Booth-Clibborn; , 2000, pp. 17-18.
F. R. C. T. K. Timby, "Paris and 3-D Photography," in Paris in 3D:
From Stereoscopy to Virtual Reality 1850-2000. vol. 1st Ed. edition,
ed Musee Carnavalet, Museum of the History of Paris: BoothClibborn; , 2000, p. 13.
J. Ninio, "Seeing in three dimensions," in Three-dimensional
perception:Paris in 3D: From Stereoscopy to Virtual Reality 18502000 vol. 1st Ed. edition, F. 3, Ed., ed. Musee Carnavalet, Museum of
the History of Paris: Booth-Clibborn; , 2000, p. 18.
V. Sorensen, "Conmputer Stereographics: the Coalescence of Virtual
Space and Artistic Exopression," Leonardo, vol. Vol 32, No.1, p. 42,
1999.
T. C. Quan, " Digital Imaging: Anatomy of 3rd dimension, Project
ID: ADM09037," in NTU URECA 2009-10, I. Conradi, Ed., ed.
Singapore: URECA NTU, 2010.
B. Mendiburu, 3D movie making: stereoscopic digital cinema from
script to screen: Focal Press, 2009.
Wikipedia. Available: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dolby_3D
F. Stella, Working space: Harvard Univ Pr, 1986.
F. Stella, "Picasso: on Kandinsky," in Working space, ed: Harvard
Univ Pr, 1986, p. 89.
L. Weschler, Seeing is forgetting the name of the thing one sees
expanded edition, Over thirty years of conversations with Robert
Irwin Getty Foundation, University of California Press.
3D
render.com
Available:
http://www.3drender.com/glossary/caustics.htm
Y. Y. X. Ivan, "Chryscholla," in Experimental Animation and
Stereo Pattern, E. o. Z. P. P. Convergence, Ed., ed. ADM, NTU,
2011.

