2011 Eighth International Conference Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Exploratory visualization of Saturn, its rings and moons with SDvision
Daniel Pomar`ede, Edgar Fajardo Hernandez, Andr´e Brahic, S´ebastien Charnoz,
C´ecile Ferrari, Bruno Thooris
Institut de recherche sur les Lois Fondamentales de l’Univers
CEA Saclay, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France
pomarede@cea.fr

Abstract

ESA Huygens probe that descended into the atmosphere of
Titan, Saturn’s largest moon. A vast complement of scientific instruments were embarked onto Cassini including
imagers, spectrometers, and radar mappers. Of particular
interest is the CIRS Cassini Composite Infrared Spectrometer developed at CEA/Saclay and JPL and used to study
the Saturn rings in terms of thermal properties, see e.g. [2].
One of the primary objective of the mission is to determine the three-dimensional structure and dynamic behavior of the rings. The original goals were met in 2008 in
terms of observations. A two-years extension was then proposed, the Cassini Equinox Mission, followed by another
six years extension, the Cassini Equinox Mission, that will
extend data-taking up to 2017.

Since its insertion into orbit in 2004, the CassiniHuygens spacecraft has completed an extensive study of
Saturn, its rings, and its moons. The wealth of highresolution images and data that it has sent back calls for
the development of dedicated interactive, immersive, multipurpose analysis and visualization tools. Alongside with
observations, numerical simulations also provide new insights into the fundamental processes at stake in the formation of planetary systems. The SDvision graphical interface, developped in the context of IDL Object Graphics and intended primarily for the visualization of complex
and massive astrophysical plasma simulations, has been
extended to provide an interactive visualization of both numerical simulations and observations of Saturn, its rings,
and its moons. The various functionalities offered by this
tool in terms of exploration and navigation through these
complex data are illustrated and discussed.

3 The SDvision Graphical Interface
The SDvision visualization interface [3, 4] is developed
in the IDL data analysis framework [5]. Its primary objective is to provide means to interactively visualize the threedimensional numerical simulations produced as part of the
COAST Computational Astrophysics Project [6, 7]. The
code relies on the use of IDL Object Graphics, a collection
of pre-defined object classes, each of which is designed to
encapsulate a particular visual representation and supports
OpenGL-based hardware accelerated graphics, as well as
pure software rendering. Among the different classes of
simulations available for access and visual display through
this tool are the PRD “Planetary Rings Dynamics” simulations and the BUL “Burlish-Stoer” simulations, see below. The very need to visualize these simulations and contextualize them in a realistic fashion has led to the development of an additional module allowing for the threedimensional display of the data obtained by the Cassini
Mission. Though other tools are relevant to the visualization of astronomical observational data, such as CELESTIA [8], Google Sky [9], or other Virtual Observatories,
the use of the SDvision software is a natural candidate as
it provides access to both the in-house simulations and observations altogether. A snapshot of the SDvision widget

1 Introduction
The planetary system of Saturn, its rings and its satellites is a fantastic playground where physicists are testing
their theories against observations. Given the complexity of the physical processes discovered in this system,
whether they relate to the stucturation of the rings or the
shapes of the moons for instance, their study greatly benefits from interactive, three-dimensional visualization.
The Cassini-Huygens Mission is providing beautiful,
high-resolution images of the moons and of the complex
system of rings. The visualization of these images using accelerated graphics techniques allows in-depth exploration of this many-body system. Another interesting
benefit is the visualization of numerical simulations of the
planetary rings dynamics, that is contextualized using these
very same observations.

2 The Cassini-Huygens Mission
The Cassini-Huygens spacecraft was launched in 1997
and entered its orbit around Saturn in 2004 [1]. The spacecraft has two elements, the NASA Cassini orbiter and the
978-0-7695-4484-7/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2011.25

170

Figure 1: The SDvision interface used here to visualize the Iapetus Moon. The equatorial ridge discovered by the Cassini
Mission is clearly visible. In this dramatic view, the moon is voluntarily magnified and approached to Saturn. A number of
controls are available to play with the light sources, add other moons, and act on their orbit parameters.
for realistic shadow effects, a custom OpenGL Shader has
been developed using the GLSL OpenGL Shading Language [10, 11]. In the IDL environment, graphics objects
may invoke GLSL fragment and vertex shaders described
in external plain text files. This shader takes into account
the following effects : 1) shadow cast by the rings on Saturn, taking into account the radial-dependent ring transparency (see explanations below). 2) shadow cast by Saturn on itself, including the possibilities to smooth the terminator to mimick atmospheric absorption, and an optional
faint illumination of the dark face to account for backlighting by the rings in their illuminated sections. 3) shadow
cast by Saturn on the rings, with the possibility to retain a
faint lighting of the ring to mimick lighting by the illumi-

used to display a Cassini image map of the Iapetus Moon
is shown in Figure 1. Model transforms (rotation, translation, scaling) are obtained through mouse action at the
scene level, allowing exploratory visualization as examplified in Figure 2, where the same moon is considered from
different viewpoints. SDvision can be used to produce
high-resolution snapshot images up to 8192x8192 pixels
and videos, including steroscopic movies for standard dual
display system or autostereoscopic screens relying on eight
parallel points of view.

4 The Saturn GLSL Shader
One important missing feature in IDL Object Graphics
is the computation of shadow effetcs. In order to account

171

Figure 2: The Iapetus Moon seen from different viewpoints. From top to bottom and left to right, we perform an incremental 60 degree rotation around the polar axis, keeping the observer in the equatorial plane, to explore the various striking
features of the surface, such as the high contrast between its dark face and its bright face, giant craters, and a prominent
ridge running halfway around the equator.
172

Figure 3: Three-dimensional visualization of Titan. This composite, uncomplete mosaic image of the satellite provided by
the Cassini Mission is mapped onto a spheroid, showing some fine details of its surface.
polygon where the planet asphericity is taken into account.
This is illustrated in different contexts in Figures 1, 3, 4
and 5. These maps of Saturn allow to visualize some interesting features such as the North pole hexagonal wave
pattern, as can be seen in Figure 4.

nated segments of the ring. Illustrations of results obtained
using this shader are shown in Figures 1, 3, 4 and 5.
This shader also applies to any combination related to
the displayed moons, such as the shadow cast by a moon on
the rings, on Saturn, and on any other moons. The shader
is based on a pure geometrical computation using the position of the light source mimicking the Sun and the surface
of the rings and planets. The shader was tested on several
nVidia video cards, including a Quadro Fermi 6000 on a
powerful HP graphics cluster and a Quadro FX 880M on a
laptop. Typical framerates of 0.01 fps are obtained, allowing for seamless exploratory visualization of the planetary
system.

6 Visualization of the rings
The high-resolution image of the rings used in this paper is obtained from CICLOPS, Cassini Imaging Central
Laboratory for Operations [14]. This site provides a 5250
pixels-wide mosaic map scanning the full radial extent of
the rings. This image is mapped onto a disk polygon. The
local, radial-dependent transparency of the rings is taken
into account using the optical depth that has been reconstructed using data from the Voyager 2 Mission [15].

5 Visualization of Saturn

7 Visualization of the moons

Texture maps of the Saturn surface are either retrieved
from Bj¨orn Jonsson’s homepage [12] of from the JHT’s
Planetary Pixel Emporium [13]. These maps, reconstructed from Voyager and Cassini data, are mapped onto a

The mosaic maps of the satellites, obtained from CICLOPS, are mapped onto spheroidal polygons. An example is shown in Figures 1 and 2 with the Iapetus moon. The

173

Figure 4: Three-dimensional visualization of a BUL simulation. Four massive bodies are displayed in the outer regions of
the rings as blue spheres, while 7546 test particles are shown as white ones.
global 5760x2880 map was created using images taken
during Cassini flybys, with Voyager images filling in the
gaps in Cassini’s coverage. Another example using a reconstructed mosaic map of Titan is presented in Figure 3.

field is also contributing.
As these simulations are relatively light in term of memory consumption, it is possible to load a full temporal sequence and launch an animation, the framerate of which
can be tuned at will. Interactive spatial navigation is
granted during such animation streams.

8 Visualization of BUL simulations
The BUL code relies on the orbital integration technique to compute the motion of bodies orbiting around a
massive central planet [16]. It takes into account detailed
physics, including radiative effects, collisions, aspherical
central body, impact detection.
To visualize such simulations, massive bodies and test
particles are displayed as Gouraud-shaded orbs of different
properties (size, colors), together with the central planet.
An example of the visualization of such a simulation is
presented in Figure 4. In this example, in order to include
some elements of context, the particles are displayed together with Saturn and its rings as described above. A star

9 Visualization of PRD simulations
The PRD code is used to perform a sheared-box local
simulation of planetary rings, including collisions and selfgravitation, which allows one to explore the behaviour of
particles spin and vertical structure [17].
These simulations are visualized using threedimensional Gouraud-shaded orbs. Contextualization is
achieved optionally by locating this box on the rings. and
visualize it at its exact scale. However given the modest
size of the simulated box, typically 100 meter, compared
with the scale of the giant planetary system, it is also pos-

174

trophysical plasma simulations with SDvision”, Proceedings of the IGPP/DAPNIA International Conference on Numerical Modeling of Space Plasma Flows
ASTRONUM2007, Paris, France, 11-15 June 2007,
ed. N.V. Pogorelov, E. Audit, and G.P. Zank, Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, vol.
386, 2008, p. 327.

sible to magnify it at will, as illustrated in Figure 5 and 6.
Exploratory spatial and temporal visualization are also
enabled, allowing to combine the usual model transformations (rotation, translation, scaling) with time evolution.

10 Conclusions and perspectives
While its initial objective of providing an interactive visualization of planetary rings simulations is fulfilled, the
SDvision tool now also provides a three-dimensional, exploratory visualization of the high-resolution images of the
Cassini-Huygens Mission. The combination of both features may be employed to produce appealing snapshots or
movies targeted at public communication, including production of media for stereoscopic display systems, with
the intend to illustrate what are the benefits of numerical
simulations to further our understanding of planetary rings
dynamics.
Possible improvements could be achieved in the description of the moons, replacing the spheroid models by
more realistic shapes for those satellites that exhibit complex topologies like Phoebe’s pitted surface, the walnutshaped Pan, or the saucer-shaped Atlas.
For what regards the Saturn GLSL Shader, its functionalities could be extended to the visualization of the simulations, to account for lighting effects and shadows within
the simulated regions of the rings.
Finally, going beyond its present functionalities, SDvision could be used as a complete Saturn system simulator
or could even be extended to play as a Solar system simulator, including realistic orbits and positions versus time
for all planets, their satellites, and their rings.

[5] http://www.ittvis.com/idl/
[6] E. Audit, D. Pomar`ede, R. Teyssier, and B. Thooris,
“Numerical Simulations of Astrophysical Plasmas:
status and perspectives of the Saclay/DAPNIA software project”, Proceedings of the 1st IGPP-CalSpace
International Conference on Numerical Modeling
of Space Plasma Flows ASTRONUM2006, Palm
Springs, California, USA, 26-30 March 2006, ed.
N.V. Pogorelov and G.P. Zank, Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, vol. 359, 2006,
p. 9.
[7] http://irfu.cea.fr/Projets/COAST/
[8] http://www.shatters.net/celestia/
[9] http://www.google.com/sky/
[10] http://www.opengl.org/documentation/glsl/
[11] R.J. Rost, “OpenGL Shading Language”, Ed.
Addison-Wesley, ISBN:0-321-33489-2
[12] http://www.mmedia.is/˜bjj/

References
[1] http://www.nasa.gov/mission pages/cassini/main/

[13] http://planetpixelemporium.com/planets.html

[2] C. Leyrat, L.J. Spilker, N. Altobelli, and S. Pilorz, “Cassini CIRS: Preliminary Results on Saturn’s
Rings”, Planetary and Space Science, vol. 56, 2008,
p. 117.

[14] http://ciclops.org
[15] A.L. Lane, et al., “Photopolarimetry from Voyager 2:
Preliminary results on Saturn, Titan, and the rings”
Science, vol. 215, 1982, p. 537.

[3] D. Pomar`ede, E. Audit, A.S. Brun, V. Gautard, F.
Masset, R. Teyssier, and B. Thooris, “Visualization
of astrophysical simulations using IDL Object Graphics”, Proceedings of the Computer Graphics Imaging and Visualization 2007 Conference, CGIV07,
Bangkok, Thailand, August 14-17, 2007, ed. E.
Banissi, M. Sarfraz, and N. Dejdumrong, IEEE Computer Society, ISBN 0-7695-2928-3, pp. 471-480.

[16] A. Brahic, “Numerical Simulation of a System of
Coliding Bodies in a Gravitational Field”, J. Comp.
Phys., vol. 22, 1976, p. 171.
[17] S. Charnoz, C. Leyrat, C. Ferrari, D. Dubrueil, and
A. Brahic, “Particle’s spins in Saturn’s rings : coupling dynamical and thermal models”, American Astronomical Society, DPS meeting #35, #20.01; Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, vol. 35,
2003, p. 950.

[4] D. Pomar`ede, Y. Fidaali, E. Audit, A.S. Brun, F. Masset, and R. Teyssier, “Interactive visualization of as-

175

Figure 5: Three-dimensional rendering of a PRD “Planetary Ring Dynamics” simulation. The 100 meter-wide simulated
box is magnified x10000 to facilitate visualization.

Figure 6: Three-dimensional rendering of a PRD simulation. Close-up view of simulated region. The particles are displayed
as Gouraud-shaded orbs subject to lighting from various sources.

176

