2011 Eighth International Conference Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

Development of Migratory Birds Population Monitoring System using Digital
Single Reflex Camera
W.K. Poon, C.J. Wong, K. Abdullah, E. S. Lim, C. K. Teo
School of Physics,
Universiti Sains Malaysia,
11800, Penang, Malaysia.
waikitpoon@gmail.com, wongcj@usm.my, khirudd@usm.my

compute the bird’s population at multiple locations in
order to provide real-time migratory birds population.

Abstract
Traditionally, biologists trace migratory birds by using
their naked eye and binocular for counting. The counters
will feel tired and easily lost their concentration after
waiting and counting the migratory birds for a
long period of time. Other than that, when there is a large
number of migratory birds fly together, it is very difficult
to count them. In this case, the accuracy of the ground
count is unreliable. In order to increase the accuracy, we
developed a monitoring system for counting migratory
birds. Since Digital Single Lens Reflex (DSLR)
camera price become more and more affordable, we
proposed to use DSLR as a remote sensor to capture
images. The images were processed based on the image
processing technique to obtain the amount of migratory
birds in the image. This software was tested in Kenting
National Park during autumn migratory season 2010.
The computed populations were compared with the
manually counted numbers. The results produce a high
degree of accuracy as indicated by the high coefficient of
determination (R2) of 0.979. The results show that it can
be effective improved the accuracy of ground count.

1.

Figure 1: Asian Migratory Birds Flyways [19]
Since long time ago, human already started the
ground count method to count the amount of migratory
birds. However, this method involved a larger number of
observers and manpower [11][12]. Furthermore, the
accuracy of the result is questionable when they counting
for a long period of time. In order to overcome this
shortcoming, radars were introduced in bird migration
studies. [13][14][15][16] Nevertheless, due to the
relatively long wavelength electromagnetic waves used,
it is difficult to concentrate the radiated energy into well
defined beams. The backscatter from the ground
produces disturbing echoes [17]. This will cause the
difficulty to identify the source of the radar echoes.

Introduction

Migratory birds are one of the dominant sources
of bird flu virus which has caused severe deaths in
humans and poultry [1][2][3]. A systematic literature
search was performed to identify specific pathogens
known to associate with wild and migratory birds
[4][5][6][7][8][9]. Each autumn, approximately 55
migratory species or about five million birds travelled
along the East Asian-Australasian Flyways (Figure 1)
and passed through 22 countries. They become longdistance reservoirs for a wide range of micro organisms
that can be transmissible to humans [2]. Therefore the
population of migratory birds has become a major
concern in many countries during their migration
process. It is important to have an effective technique to
978-0-7695-4484-7/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2011.16

Most recently, Willem and his team introduced the
potential of webcams for bird detection and monitoring
[18]. They set up a demonstration set to study the
visibility of a bird on a webcam video. Their study was
carried out by using stereo pair imaging technique in
indoor experiment. However, problems arise when it
comes to the actual study during migratory birds’
seasons. Migratory raptors are flying approximately 12km away from the monitoring sites. Therefore, the
ability of the webcams to focus onto the tiny objects is
136

He has to capture the raptor image once he spots a flock
of raptor.

questionable. Besides that, the image captured by the
webcams under the sunlight will be easily overexposed
and will cause damage to the sensor. In order to cover
the migratory birds pathways, hundreds of webcams
have to be employed to monitor as they are flying from
all direction.
After a long study, a fully automatic imaging
migratory bird monitoring system is still unable to
achieve based on the technology now. Simple and high
precision methods are not available to resolve them. In
this paper, we proposed the development of a migratory
birds monitoring system by using DSLR camera.

2.

Methodology

2.1

Equipment Setup

There are some prerequisites that must be noted.
First, the captured image must not be overexposed. If the
images are overexposed, the details of the raptor will not
be clearly visible. In order to resolve this problem, the
setting of the camera can be setup as aperture priority.
With aperture priority, the camera will help us to
determine the shutter speed capture the optimal quality.
So that, the image captured would not be overexposed as
well as underexposed. Second, the response of the auto
focus of the camera must be fast. It will help to resolve
the blur and unclear image. If the image is blurred, the
pixel value of the raptor will be distorted. This will cause
problem during the data analysis.

2.3 Image Processing Based on C sharp

The whole system includes a DSLR Nikon D90,
Nikkor 80-400 mm lens and a computer system. The
DSLR camera and the lens are used to acquire image of
the migratory birds during autumn migratory seasons in
Kenting National Parks. With focal length ranging from
80-400 mm, it manages to cover migratory raptors flying
pathway from a wide range of distance. Since the raptors
are flying in all direction, therefore a fully automatic
counting system is not practical. Once an observer
discovers the migratory raptors, he needs to point his
camera and capture the image of migratory raptors. After
a whole day observation, the image will be downloaded
into the computer. The computer system will process the
images and produce the result. The workflow of the
monitoring system is shown in Figure 2.
Setting up
Camera

Capture Image

Input Image

Output result
and comparing
accuracy

Image
Processing

We have developed the software using
Microsoft C sharp 2005 express edition. The graphic
user interface of the developed software is shown in
Figure 3. In this software, the information of the image
will be displayed. The input image will be sorted
according to the date after the processing. This is to ease
the user to analyse the raptor images.

Figure 3: Graphic user interface of the developed
software

Figure 2: The workflow of monitoring system.

On this basis, the image will be processed
according to the flow chart
r shown in Figure 4. Each
image captured by DSLR is a colour image with
combination of Red, Green and Blue (RGB).
Transforming to gray level image will reduce the
processing time. In this study, we transformed the RGB
image to gray image by averaging the pixel values of the
R,G,B components

2.2 Image Capturing Technique
In this study, we proposed a camera to be used as
our counting system. We have developed a bird
monitoring system by integrating a remote sensing tool
and image processing software to calculate the amount of
raptor passing through a particular area. However,
camera cannot be set and fixed in one direction to
capture the images. This is because of the uncertainty in
the flying direction of the migratory raptor.
We couldn’t predict where and when they will turn up.
So we need to involve man power to capture still images
of the raptors. During the observations, the researcher
must be alert with the appearance of the migratory raptor.

After transforming to gray image, a filter has to
be applied to get rid of some image component vector.
An optimal threshold has to be applied to convert the
gray image to binary. So that, the image will be only
consisted of black and white shades. This is to contrast
and highlight the background and targeted objects. When
a pixel value of the image is smaller than the threshold
value, it belongs to targeted image and converted to

137

black colour. Whereas, the pixel value belongs to
background, it will be converted to white colour. The
optimal threshold value is obtained based on greyscale
histogram segmentation.
After the binary processing, the image pixels will
only be left with black and white pixels. The software
will identify black pixels to be selected for processing. In
this stage, pixels will be checked and grouped
accordingly. This process is based on 4-pixel
connectivity. It will group neighbouring pixel which
touches one of the edges of the reference pixel. By
grouping up the interested pixels, it will form a region of
interest (ROI). After that, these ROIs will be labelled by
using rectangle vector. One rectangle is used identify one
raptor. The quantities of the raptors will be determined
the total number of rectangles formed.

(a) Gray Image

Input Color Image

Gray Image
Transforming

Binary Image
Processing

(b) Magnification of the square box in (a)

Identifying Pixel

4 Connectivity Checks
Grouping

Region of
Interest(Birds) Filtering

Displaying Value

Figure 4: The workflow of the image processing
technique use in this study.

(c) RGB value of the raptor in (b) in Gray Scale

3. Data Analysis and Results

Figure 4: Image Transformed to Gray Scale and the RGB
value of a raptor in the Image.

In this study, we carried out observations during the
autumn migratory season (15 September 2010 – 10
October 2010) in Kenting National Park, Taiwan. Each
image was processed according to the proposed image
processing technique. Jpeg image file type was used in
this image processing analysis. The size of each image
was about 4288 x 2848 pixels. We captured colour image
and transformed to grey scale as shown in Figure 4(a). A
raptor image was segmented by a small square box. It
was magnified to display the edge of the raptor (Figure
4(b)). The image digital numbers of this raptor is shown
in Figure 4(c).

A threshold value was set based on the grey scale
histogram segmentation. It was used as a filter to get rid
of the background image component. Since the RGB
values of the raptors are smaller than the threshold value,
it will be converted to 0 or Black. Whereas, the image
background pixel value is higher than the threshold value,
it will be converted to 1 or White. Figure 5(a) shows the
image of Figure 4(a) converted to binary image. The
same segmented image of Figure 4(b) was magnified to
display the shape of the raptor (Figure 5(b)). It was
clearly to distinguish the raptor and the background. The
digital number of the raptor is shown in Figure 5(c).
138

The interested pixels were group with their
neighbouring pixels to form the ROI. Rectangle vectors
formed to group the raptor pixels. Figure 6(a) displays
the final image of the Figure 5(a) after processing. The
small square in the image was magnified to display the
ROIs labelled by rectangle vectors (Figure 6(b)).

(a) Rectangular drew on the Binary Image

(a) Binary Image

(b) Display of the formation of rectangular of ROI
in close up.
Figure 6: Region of Identified in the image and magnify
for the display of the rectangular
The accuracy of this bird monitoring study using
DSLR can be validated through correlation with the
manually counted number of raptors in an image. The
results are shown in Figure 7.

(b) Magnification of Square box in (a)

(c) RGB values of the Binary Image
Figure 5: Binary Image and the RGB values of the raptor
in the Image.

Figure 7: Results of the scatter plot and the multiple
correlate coefficients

139

Senne DA, Wang R, Slemons RD, Holmes EC,
Taubenberger JK: The evolutionary genetics and
emergence of avian influenza viruses in wild birds. PLoS
Pathog, 4(5):e1000076, 2008
[7] Normile, D. Avian influenza. Evidence points to migratory
birds in H5N1 spread. Science 311, 1225, 2006.
[8] Wang, G.; Zhan, D.; Li, L.; Lei, F.; Liu, B.; Liu, D.; Xiao,
H.; Feng, Y.; Li, J.; Yang, B.; Yin, Z.; Song, X.; Zhu, X.;
Cong, Y.; Pu, J.; Wang, J.; Liu, J.; Gao, G. F.; Zhu, Q.,
H5N1 avian influenza re-emergence of Lake Qinghai:
phylogenetic and antigenic analyses of the newly isolated
viruses and roles of migratory birds in virus circulation. J
Gen Virol, 89, (3), 697-702, 2008
[9] Kilpatrick, A. M.; Chmura, A. A.; Gibbons, D. W.;
Fleischer, R. C.; Marra, P. P.; Daszak, P., Predicting the
global spread of H5N1 avian influenza. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 103, (51), 19368-19373. 2006
[10] Melville, D.S. & Shortridge, K.F. 2006. Migratory
waterbirds and avian influenza in the East AsianAustralasian Flyway with particular reference to the 20032004 H5N1 outbreak. Waterbirds around the world. Eds.
G.C. Boere, C.A. Galbraith & D.A. Stroud. The Stationery
Office, Edinburgh, UK. pp. 432-438, 2006.
[11] Kirk K. Bates, - Monitoring Raptors During Autumn
Migration in Southwestern and Southcentral Idaho: Bureau
of Land Management Challenge Cost Share Program, 1999
[12] Robert DeCandido, Deborah Allen and Keith L. Bildstein,
- Spring migration of Oriental Honey-buzzards Pernis
ptilorhyncus and other raptors at Tanjung Tuan, Malaysia,
2000–2001, Forktail 22, 156-160, 2004.
[13] Lack, D. & Varley, G.C. Detection of birds by radar.
Nature 156:446, 1945
[14] Sidney A. Gauthreaux, J. a. J. W. L. "Monitoring bird
migration with a fixed-beam radar and a thermal-imaging
camera." Journal of Field Ornithology 77(3): 319-328,
2006
[15] Hans Van Gasteren, I. H. W. B., Emiel Van Loon & Judy
Shamoun- Baranes. "Extracting bird migration
information from C-band Doppler weather radars." British
Ornithologists’ Union(150): 674–686, 2008.
[16] Heiko Schamlojohann, F. L. E. B., Thomas Steuri &
Bruno Bruderer. "Quantification of bird migration by
radar – a detection probability problem." British
Ornithologists’ Union(150): 342–355, 2008.
[17] Bruderer, B., The Radar Window to Bird Migration.
Heidelberg: Springer, In Berthold, P., Gwinner, E. &
Sonnenschein, E. (eds) Avian Migration 347–358, 2003
[18] Verstraeten, W. W.; Vermeulen, B.; Stuckens, J.;
Lhermitte, S.; Van der Zande, D.; Van Ranst, M.; Coppin,
P., Webcams for Bird Detection and Monitoring: A
Demonstration Study. Sensors 10, (4), 3480-3503, 2010.
[19] U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,- Map of Asian migratory
bird
flyways.
Available
from:
http://alaska.fws.gov/media/avian_influenza/akflyway2.gif 2008.

The correlation coefficient (R2) produced by the
computed results using image processing was 0.979.
Based on this R2, the correlation is significant.

4. Discussion and Conclusion
This study has shown that by using image processing
technique coupled with the DSLR, this monitoring
system can be used to quantify the population of the
migratory raptors at the particular time. This technique
uses a relatively inexpensive instrument and easy to
operate. However, there are some limitations in the
system. The quality of raptors image captured must be
adequate to be processed. The raptors images should be
neither overexposed nor underexposed, so that the
raptors and the background can be identified. In addition,
our image processing software is unable to identify
blurred image. Since the RGB value of the image is
distorted, the software is unable to detect the raptors.
Therefore during the image acquisition, the exposure and
the autofocus must be noted. Furthermore, overlapping
of two or more raptors will cause problem during data
analysis. Nevertheless, the probability of overlapping is
low. Air pollution level (PM10) in the observation area
has to be taken into consideration. The air pollution level
in the observation place must be low. So that, the
captured images show good contrast between raptors and
background. In a nutshell, this system provides an
alternative way to overcome the inaccuracy of counting
migratory raptors.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported by Universiti Sains
Malaysia under Research University (RU) grant
PFIZIK/1001/814078. The authors wish to thank Prof
Chen-Jeih Pan from National Central University, Taiwan
for all the services rendered and for his contributions.
References
[1] World Health Organization, Dec 2005 - Avian influenza
frequently asked questions. Available:
http://www.who.int/csr/disease/avian_influenza/avian_faqs
/en/
[2] World Health Organization, Apr 2011 - Avian influenza
("bird flu"). Available:
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/avian_influenza
/en/
[3] World Health Organization, Apr 2011 - Cumulative
Number of Confirmed Human Cases of Avian Influenza
A/(H5N1) Reported to WHO. Available:
http://www.who.int/csr/disease/avian_influenza/country/ca
ses_table_2011_04_21/en/index.html
[4] Sotirios Tsiodras, T. K., Iosif Kelesidis,; Ulf Bauchinger,
M. E. F., Human infections associated with wild birds.
Journal of Infection, 56, 83-98, 2008.
[5] Boyce, W. M.; Sandrock, C.; Kreuder-Johnson, C.; Kelly,
T.; Cardona, C., Avian influenza viruses in wild birds: A
moving target. Comparative Immunology, Microbiology
and Infectious Diseases, 32, (4), 275-286, 2009.
[6] Dugan VG, Chen R, Spiro DJ, Sengamalay N, Zaborsky J,
Ghedin E, Nolting J, Swayne DE, Runstadler JA, Happ GM,

140

