2011 Eighth International Conference Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

An Educational Game for Learning Calculus

Taweechai Nuntawisuttiwong

Natasha Dejdumrong

Department of Computer Engineering
King Mongkut’s university of Technology Thonburi
Bangkok, Thailand
E-mail: taweechai.wee@gmail.com

Department of Computer Engineering
King Mongkut’s university of Technology Thonburi
Bangkok, Thailand
E-mail: natasha@cpe.kmutt.ac.th
This thinking process consists of

Abstract- This research is to develop an educational game
integrated with fundamental calculus concepts. The purpose of
this work focuses on the learning and practicing in a
fundamental engineering course: Calculus 1. Players can enjoy
playing with our game and gain knowledge about calculus.
This game can help the students understanding more about
calculus notions and hopefully improve their mathematical
skills. This game can be used as a good supplementary
resource for the university students in learning calculus.




The number of players can be two or more players.
Interactions are possible actions of players involved
with the others.
 Strategies are actions of players who are under
interaction rules.
 Rationalization is a basic idea of players with
reasonable decisions.
 Outcome is the probability of strategies for each
player.
 Payoff or Utility Function for each of the
possibilities for the results shows benefits from the
evaluation in terms of calculated number. For
example, the profit amount or the level of
satisfaction, which can be shown in terms of logical
values such as true/false or good/bad. Payoff values
are used to evaluate the model in order to find
appropriate features for each element of the game
and used in decision to choose strategy.
1) Game Structure – Role Playing Game(RPG) is a
game in which players assume the role of characters.
Actions taken in the game can succeed or fail according to a
formal system of rules and guidelines. Game master (GM) is
the guidelines who control rules and non – player character
(NPC) including all speakers who player face. Highlight of
this game is the story. Player can play this game by
following the game story, collect items and coins, sell and
buy weapons.
2) Dataset: The data are stored in ActionScript3.0 class
files. Since we only have a small amount of data, there is no
need of using a database which is complicated to write and
retrieve the values. In each file, names, types, levels and
statue of monsters are collected in the dataset. To retrieve
these values, we call the function of their corresponding
class files.
3) Puzzle Games: focus on logical and conceptual
challenges. Some games enhance time pressure or other
action elements. The types of puzzles to be solved can
assess various problem solving skills including logic,
strategy, pattern recognition, sequence solving, and word
completion. In this work, we applied puzzle game theories
with calculus content to build puzzle games related to
calculus notions.

Keywords--- Educational Games, Artificial Intelligence

I.

INTRODUCTION

Computer games are the things that almost people are
interested in because it can make the players fun and relaxed
in their free time. There are various kinds of games such as
Role Playing (RPG), Shooting, Action, Adventure, Puzzle
and Arcade games. All of them can be categorized into either
online or offline games. Different games may have their
different purposes, but one reason remains the same, that is
to make players feel pleasurable while they are playing.
Some genres of games can practice the players in systematic
thinking such as puzzle games and matching card games.
This requires observation and solving problems skills.
Furthermore, a number of particular games can also help
players to gain knowledge in some academic courses.
Calculus is one of the most basic, and also the most
important subject in engineering fields. Ones have found that
calculus can be applied to several crucial subjects such as
physics, mechanics, electronics, computer graphics and other
subjects related to engineering field. However, calculus is
not easy to learn or understand. Thus, this work was initiated
and created to help students to learn and gain more
knowledge about calculus 1 learning.
II.

LITERATURE REVIEWS

A. Game Theories
Game theory is a subject provided with the strategies of
players to fight with each other and players will gain the
highest benefits. The thinking process is created in forms of
game models in order to describe the acts in game world,
especially the acts that relate to human behaviors or social
activities in terms of economics, marketing, business trade,
war and negotiation.

978-0-7695-4484-7/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2011.34

33

not only suitable for players who like monster or adventure
story but also people who love to see beautiful scenes and
solve problems. We create a mini game for people who want
to practice calculus conceptual skills.
1) Attraction: This game is aimed to be an adventure
game. Player will enjoy in story, challenge in many
adventurous places. Players will face with many monsters,
battle to collect coins and practice their skills. Players will
enjoy solving calculus mini-game that could enhance their
knowledge in various disciplines such as logic, conceptual
thinking and understanding about calculus 1.
2) Methodology: Introduction scene introduces our
game story to the players. The purpose of introduction scene
is not only to present our game story line but also create the
atmosphere to make the players feel more fun into the game.
Fig. 1 shows the flow of the game.
a) Main Menu Scene is represented in map, which
contains many locations (houses). Houses can be
categorized into Center, Quest house and Character house.
This is an option that is provided for the players to choose.

B. Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence (AI) is a thought process and
reasoning that make computer or machine to be able to think
like human. AI is widely used in games because it can fulfill
the competition or create enemies who can play against the
player. For AI implementation, there are many functions or
algorithms used to utilize AI into the games. For this reason,
you can design computer game contained with many levels.
If you need to implement AI in easy level, you can perform
the action in random. If you want to implement it in the
harder level, you could select the complex algorithm.
C. Solving Calculus in Mini Game
Mini games are constructed by applying strategies on
how to solve calculus problems, which involves coming up
with a plan of attack; a method or routine that helps player
organizing and solving the problems. The topics in calculus
1 course that is covered in this educational game project are
Limits and Derivatives.
D. ActionScript 3.0
ActionScript is a programming language for the Adobe®
Flash® Player and Adobe® AIR™ run-time environments.
It enables interactivity, data handling, and much more in
Flash, Flex, and AIR contents and applications.
ActionScript is executed by the ActionScript Virtual
Machine (AVM), which is part of Flash Player and AIR.
ActionScript code is typically compiled into Bytecode
format, i.e., a sort of programming language that is written
and understood by computers, by a compiler, such as the
one built into Adobe® Flash® CS3 Professional or Adobe®
Flex™ Builder™, or that is available in the Adobe® Flex™
SDK and the Flex™ Data Services. Bytecode is embedded
in SWF files that are executed by Flash Player and AIR.
In this work, ActionScript 3.0 is used because it offers a
robust programming model that is familiar and easy to the
developers having basic knowledge of object-oriented
programming.

b) Center is a place where the players can choose to
battle with enemies or choose to solve calculus mini game.
Battle scene provides lots of enemies and levels for
challenging player come to battle. Calculus mini game has a
lot of steps and missions related to the definition of
derivative (Limitation) and the application of derivative
(Differential).
c) Quiz house consists of calculus problems such as
Limitation, Deferential and Integral. The game will start
from basic questions to the complex ones.
d) Character house is a place where characters live and
this house is also the monster’s house.

E. Effects of Educational Games
The players who are in love with the monster will not
only enjoy but will gain a lot of knowledge from this RPG
game. In solving calculus mini-game, player can achieve the
knowledge comprehension in calculus contents such as
logical, understanding and conceptual skill. Some missions
in mini-game require calculus problem solving skills, i.e.,
strategy, pattern recognition and sequence solving.
III.

Figure 1. Game Process

IMPLEMENTATION

3) Storyline: The player will play as the main character
that has to defeat cruel monsters. The monsters were normal
animals in the past but they absorbed the wave from a
meteor that crushed into the earth. At First each player will
get 6 monsters to fight with cruel monsters. Player must
complete the missions until he/she faces to “Mewtwo” who
is the boss of all the cruel monsters. However, the way to

A. Game Outline
This game was designed to be a Role Playing Game
(RPG) style. Players can choose a character to play what
they want at the beginning of game and then start playing.
The genre of story is an adventure style by using “monster”
to battle with a boss in the game. Players will confront to a
lot of new generation and fascinating monsters. This game is

34

defeat the boss is not easy and he/she must solve the
problems which are related to calculus. There are 5 levels of
monsters in the missions.
B. Character Design
The main characters of this game are a little boy and girl.
The reason that we use kids as our characters is due to the
fact that;
 A boy or girl represents the students which
impromptu to learn new things.
 The characters are designed to be cute and inspire
the players to play the game again.
 We want to make players feel like younglings when
they play our game.
We created these characters in 2 dimensions with many
actions such as front side, back side, left hand side and right
hand side. Some examples are shown in Fig. 2.

Figure 3. Battle Scene

5) Calculus mini game scene: we designed this in a
simple style because the scene is related to problem solving,
which does not require much graphics.
E. Monster Battle Design
1) Mini–Max algorithm to design monster decision: Our
game uses the mini-max algorithm (Fig. 4) for AI which has
the following procedure;
 Apply the evaluation function at each of the leaf
nodes.
 Back up values for each of the non-leaf nodes until a
value is computed for the root node. At MIN nodes,
the backed-up value is the minimum of the values
associated with its children. At MAX nodes, the
backed up value is the maximum of the values
associated with its children.
 Pick the operator associated with the child node
whose backed-up value determined the value at the
root

Figure 2. Character and Monster Design

C. Monster Design
We design multiple types of monster based on element.
For example, there are bug, poison, fight, fire, electric,
flying, grass and water. We also design evolution of monster
which creates levels to the growth of monster through
battles.

Our tree game:

D. Scene Design
Game scenes are divided into 5 types: introduction
scene, main menu scene, individual house scene, battle
scene and calculus mini game scene.
1) Introduction scene: we created this scene to introduce
our story and inspire the player to continue playing our
game.
2) Main Menu Game scene: Normally, games will use
button to call menu of the game but we decided to use map
and house to represent our menu instead.
3) Each house scene: inside each house we created the
actual place such as center which place to get the missions.
4) Battle scene: we created a beautiful background and
monsters with various effects when players have a battle
with the monsters. It is shown in Figure 3.

Figure 4. Mini-Max tree game






35

State space: [player’s score][enemy’s score].
Initial state: [3][3] (We assume for easy to use and
understand our tree game).
Successor function: if increase status and decrease
hp, another score will -1 and -2 respectively.
Goal state: player wins when enemy’s score is 0 and
loses when player’s score is 0.

For this model, it shows all paths that player will select or
computer will select in each turn. The number that is under
each node is the action score. If score is 1, it represents that
player will win after do the action. If it is -1, it represents that
player will lose after do the action. For the white nodes, they
are nodes that player will do and the next nodes (green
nodes) are result of action that player has already done. For
the other hand, the green nodes are same as white node but
they are the enemy’s turn. When player has done his turn,
enemy or computer will select the action that gets the
minimum point.
2) AI Model is the process or thinking of each Monster
from the beginning to the end in battle. When start,
Monster’s power will be full but after the battle, the power
will decrease. Powers of Monster will decrease fast or
slowly depend on ability of each Monster.

G. Natural Fun
This educational game for learning Calculus applied the
natural fun concept into game to make player has fun. The
simple term of fun should sound a little silly and fun itself. It
helps elevate the theory reach to peak point and another way
it helps to break the theory down into manageable pieces.
Everything that player do entertain themselves can
demonstrate into 3 categories are Physical Fun, Social Fun
and Mental Fun.
1) Physical Fun is our evolutionary past and what
players do for fun or a physical respond between game and
player.
 Introduction: Tells a game story to convince player
feels they are a part of game.
 Main Menu: Makes a decision to player select the
way to playing game.
 Center: Assigns tasks to player which battle with
monster by using their monster to defeat with enemy
and playing a calculus mini game which match balls
respectively after player clear battle scene.
 Quiz house: Makes a decision to player by select the
right answer of calculus questions by catch the
answer from balls which ball is an animation (ball is
moving all the times).
 Character house: Provides monsters’ properties
which help player to decide for choosing monster in
battle.
2) Social Fun: Players organize themselves in groups
and like to watch other players playing a game and they
spend their time talking about game and entertainment.
Players share their idea, knowledge and technique to reach a
goal.
3) Mental Fun is pure abstract reasoning practice that
user can be fun. It can occur from pattern matching or
generation of the game. Sound and art are including in this
fun. In our game, we use colorful pictures for player interest
in our game. Another thing is creating the puzzle that has
many patterns in one level so player can find many ways to
solve puzzles. These are something that player can get the
mental fun in our game.

F. Level Design
There are 5 levels of monsters in the missions. The
higher level of monster will be harder to defeat.
Level 1: Monsters have only one basic attack skill and
status is low.
Level 2: Monsters have two skills: First is basic skill,
another one is either enchanted skill or recovery skill to help
them defeat players easily.
Level 3: Monsters have elemental power to attack
players. They will search for a target that has incompatible
element, which makes the target becomes weaker when fight
against the monsters.
Level 4: Monsters have high status and the skill of the
monsters from level 3.
Level 5: Monsters have very high status especially HP
(hit point).

H. Game Structure
This game structure can be categorized into Meaningless
choice type as illustrated in Fig. 6. The game seems like to
have many different choices to playing; the player can play
the mini game at the Center first or Quiz house first but it is
not matter where player selects to play first because player
will gain the same benefit.

Figure 6. Meaningless Choices
Figure 5. AI Model

36

Figure 8. Introduction Scene

2) Individual house scene: Figure 10 shows the inside of
house scenes. Each house has different elements, described
as bellow;
a) Center: inside Center, there is counter for getting
any mission.
Figure 7. The Flow Channel

b) Quest house: contains calculus games.
c) Character house: contains monsters of the player.
3) Battle scene is scene that the players use monster to
fight with monsters. The mission is to practice monster’s
skill and have fun.
a) Display on screen:
 At start, when the player clicks on monster picture at
blue block (1 – 6), monster will appear on the left
side of the screen with hp gauge-bar on the right side
of screen.
 Effect of the attack will appear on the monster or
when the player clicks attack title.
 Gauge-bar will decrease or increase according to the
type of attack of that monster.
b) button: when click at “battle button”, the button will
disappear and the name of the attack will appear on dark
blue and green buttons.
4) Calculus problem mini game: this scene is provided
calculus problems related Limitation. The game will start
from basic question to the complex ones. The examples of
puzzle are shown in figure 11 and 12.
a) Display on screen:
 Balls on screen will appear randomly when the
player comes to this mini game or the player changes
to a new problem.
 Each ball will disappear when the player is able to
match a right ball respectively.
 Time will be counted continuously when the player
starts to play. Player must match the right answer
before the time is up.
b) Button: when click at “restart button” at rightbottom of the screen, the ball on screen will change to a new
structure randomly.

I.

Game Flow
The game flow has designed to have its difficulty
increase over time so that as the player gains skill, he or she
does not drift into frustration with a game that start and end
at the same degree. This game provides degree of game
from basic level increase to difficult level. When player
cleans up one level, this game will give chance to player
catch their breath between tougher challenges.
IV.

RESULT AND DISCUSSIONS

The purpose of this project is developing computer game
for educational purpose which concerns Calculus 1 subject
and problems. The players satisfy educational game for
learning calculus 1 or not. The working process as bellow:
A. Calculus Contents
Our content is focused on Calculus 1, which is the basic
of calculus and the most important step in learning calculus.
This will help students to have strong background
knowledge. We choose 2 main contents; Definition of
derivative (Limitation) and Application of Derivatives
(Differentials).
1) Definition of derivative (Limitation) is a basic topic
to study calculus 1. We implement in part in calculus mini
game.
2) Application of Derivatives (Differentials) is a
technique used to calculate the change in speed of the
object, considered in time unit.
B. Scene
The several game scenes can divide into 6 scenes there
are introduction scene, main menu scene, individual house
scene, battle scene, calculus problems mini game and
solving calculus mini game scene.
1) Introduction scene is a movie clip and it will display
automatically when the player starts to play. The purpose of
this scene is to introduce the game’s story. The scene will
start from (a) - (d), which comes with the sound effect to
excite the players before the actual game play.

c) Sound: Music will be turned on during game play.
5) Solving calculus mini game: this scene has questions
in topics such as Limitation, which refers to Limit value,
Limit function and one-sided Limit, Deferential and
Integral. The game will start from basic problems to the
complex one.

37

V.

CONCLUSIONS

An educational game for Learning Calculus benefits the
students who want to learn a basic of calculus related to the
definitions of derivatives (Limit), the applications of
derivatives (Differential) and the applications of Integral.
Because studying calculus 1 in the classroom can easily bore
some students. Thus, teachers can apply this project into the
actual course as it will help students when studying the
subject or when they cannot solve calculus mini game. They
will be motivated to try again and again until they get the
correct answers or can pass to the next mission.
Another possibility is that game might change the
attitude of some students who do not like calculus into favor
the subject. The reason that we build RPG game to introduce
our game’s storyline is to pull up players to join in our game
represented by character that player had been selected. The
goal is to motivate the players by choosing character avatars
and make them feel a part of the game. Our game resembles
several RPG games, which the players have to collect coins
to buy desired items. The game also has the trait of NPC
game that guides the players through each mission but lets
the players decide how to play by themselves. In the battle
mission, the player will use monsters to fight with other
monsters in enemy side. If the enemy’s monsters have
stronger level than that of the player, the player can
repeatedly practice the battle skill and use items during the
battle with other monsters. Furthermore, player can go back
to battle with the enemy again as much as he/she can do.
One special thing that discriminate our game from
several other RPG games is to solve calculus problem from
mini games. In the part of mini games, we do not limit the
time. Player can play our calculus mini games again and
again as much as they want, depending upon his/her
performance.
Finally, we can say that our project is finished but some
future development can improve the performance of our
game.

Figure 9. Main Menu game and Calculus Solving Mini Game

Figure 10. Each House Scene

a) display on screen:
 Question on screen will appear respectively starting
from basic of Limits to Definition of Integral.
 When the player clicks on the right answer (ball), the
correct sign will appear while when the player clicks
the wrong one, the wrong sign will appear on the
screen instead.
 When player click on “sign”, the scene will change
to display the guideline of that question.

The balls in the scene will move all the time.
b) Button: when click at “close button” on the rightbottom of the screen, the player will exit the mini game and
go back to the main menu.
c) Sound: music will be turned on during game play.

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
Figure 11. Example of Limit Puzzle

[5]
[6]

[7]

Figure 12. Example of Derivative Puzzle

38

Goldstein, Lay and Schneider, Brief calculus and its applications,
prentice Hall, Inc., 2001.
Adobe Systems Incorporated, Adobe flexTM3 Programming
Actionscript3, Sorenson Media, Inc., 1995-2002.
The
Derivative[online],
Available:http://www.free-ed.net/freeed/math/calculus/calculus01_pauls.asp [2010, September 10].
Softpedia[online],Available:http://www.softpedia.com/get/Internet/W
EB-Design/Flash/Adobe-Flash.shtml[2010, October 10].
Calculus Matching, available: http://www.studystack.com/matching2311 [2010, December 14 ].
Use Games to motivate you calculus students, Robert E. Kowalczyk
and Adam O. HausknechtUniversity of Massachusetts Dartmouth
[online],http://www.faculty.umassd.edu/adam.hausknecht/temath/TE
MATH2/Examples/pub/games/GamesTalkHandoutWeb.pdf[2010,
January 11].
Example of educational game “Interactive Mathematics Activities”
[online]:http://www.cut-the-knot.org/Curriculum/index.shtml
#games[2010, January 24 ].

