2011 Eighth International Conference Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualization

A Novel Practical Approach for Weight Manipulation of Conic Splines

Hadi Mansourifar

Azam Bastanfard

Faculty of Electrical, Computer and IT, Islamic Azad
University, Qazvin Branch
Qazvin, Iran
ha_mansourifar@yahoo.com

IT Research Group, Computer Engineering Faculty,
Islamic Azad University, Karaj Branch, Moazen Blvd.
Karaj, Iran
bastanfard@kiau.ac.ir

accurate position of the origin. Ishida [8] proposed a
displacement function that enables arbitrary and direct
modification of curves. Zheng et al. [7] utilized knot
refinement for shape modification. Juhász [5] presented a
shape modification method based on point and tangent
constraints for plane NURBS curve. Research on the
physics - based approaches was started by Terzopoulos and
Qin [2]. In this method complex shapes can be sculpted by
applying forces. However, heavy background mathematics
is main problem of this method which is against to the
simplicity of NURBS. Other researches in this field are [4,
10]. Despite the exclusive features of Conic Splines for
modeling, middle weight manipulation of quadratic rational
Bézier is a cumbersome work for end users. Furthermore,
interactive design of large curves in artistic patterns is
another challenge for designers. In this paper to overcome
these problems, we propose a novel practical method which
can automate the process of selecting and manipulating the
weights. For this reason, we introduce new types of weight
points for the first time. Our two proposed weight points are
special points of Conic Spline, which divide it into two lines
and a curve. Therefore comparing to previous
weight points [3], the proposed weight points have two
benefits:
• The proposed weight points are located on the
Conic Spline. Therefore the weight points can be
obtained from parametric equation of Conic
Splines.
• The proposed weight points are located on junction
point of a line and a curve. Therefore user selects
the location of weight points by recognizing the
end point of the lines. This property prepares an
easily understood geometric concept for the users.

Abstract— In this paper, we explore a novel and straightforward
solution for manipulating the middle weights of Conic Splines.
Proposed method is based on novel types of weight points which are
introduced here for the first time. Using these weight points, each
Conic Spline is divided into two lines and a curve. Then, weight points
are placed on the junction points of the lines and curve. After setting
the weight points, a practical approach is used for calculating the
middle weight from weight points. Setting such weight points is very
simple, because weight points are located on the Conic Splines and
accurate position of them can easily be recognized by users.

Keywords- Weight Manipulation;Conic Splines ; interactive
design; CAD ; modeling

I.

INTRODUCTION

During the past years, Conic Splines [3] have proven to be a
powerful tool for shape modeling in CAD/CAM areas. In
order to improve the efficiency of weight manipulation and
shape modification of non-uniform rational Bézier
(NURBS), geometric approaches and physics - based
methods have been studied in the research literature. First
considerable research on geometric approaches was done by
Piegl [9]. His proposed method was based on geometric
objects such as points, lines, and geometric distances.
However, knot insertion was main challenge of this method.
Farin [3] proposed concept of “weight points” instead of the
weights for the first time. Weight points are special points
which are placed on the control legs and affect the quadratic
rational Bézier. Nevertheless, the problem of this method
arises when they are utilized in rectangular surfaces. Au and
Yuen [1] proposed a unified approach to modify the shape
of NURBS curves by altering the weights and the location
of the control points simultaneously. However, they
provided no directly geometric interpretation of the
simultaneous modification. Reyes [6] presented a unified
method for modifying NURBS shapes, based on perspective
functional transformation of arbitrary origin. Nevertheless,
the result of modification process depends on choosing
978-0-7695-4484-7/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/CGIV.2011.23

After setting the weight points, the weight of Conic Spline
can be easily obtained, because the weight points are two
points of Conic Spline. Therefore, assigning a proper
amount of t parameter, the middle weight can be calculated
65

easily. Other parts of the paper are organized as follow.
Section II presents some preliminary information on conics.
Section III introduces our proposed weight points. Section
IV presents some important tips about drawing Conic
Splines using the proposed weight points. Section V
discusses the error values in the proposed method and
finally section VI concludes the paper.
II.

Setting variable values of , different types of conic
sections can be produced as follows

0
0

1
1
>1

BASIC DEFINITIONS

A. Notation

Result
line segment
elliptic curve segments
parabolic curve segment
hyperbolic curve segment

The curvatures of P (t) at t= 0 and 1 are
Points and vectors are represented by bold letters
v=

0

and their lengths by the notation

||v||=

1

||

The scalar cross-product of two vectors is

Where θ is the counterclockwise angle from a to b.
′
is non-zero, the signed curvature of a
When
parametric curve P (t) in the plane is
′′

|| ′

||

||

(2.3)

||

One of the elegant properties of rational quadratic Bézier is
shoulder point which labeled as S in Figure 1. The shoulder
point of a rational quadratic Bézier is located on the curve P
(t) at t= 0.5 and in maximum distance from the line P0P2.
Thus substituting t= 0.5 into equation (2.2) yields

a × b= axby – aybx=|| a || || b || sin θ

′

||

S=
(2.1)

+

(2.4)

Then, writing the parametric equation of the straight line
between M and P1 gives

B. Quadratic rational Bézier
S = 1-

+

(2.5)

The standard form for a rational quadratic Bézier is
Where, M is middle point of P0P2.Thus
as follows.
(2.6)

P (t) =
0
1 ,
0
∞
(2.2)
Where P0, P1, P2 are the control points of rational quadratic
Bézier and is weight of P1. Figure 1 shows a rational
quadratic Bézier.

III.

can be calculated

SPLITTING THE CONIC SPLINES

In Conic Sections when
∞ control legs are
reproduced, thus the result shape is consisted of two lines
which connected to each other in middle control point. As
decreases, length of two lines is decreased too, and a
curve segment is appeared between two line segments.
Figure 2 shows two line segments and curve segment of a
Conic Spline when
3. Where, dash lines show two line
segments and solid line denotes the curve segment of Conic
Spline. The main idea of this paper is setting the weight
points on junction points of two line segments and curve
segment. For this reason, the location of weight points
should be found, using the constant value of t parameter,
when weight is changed and vice versa.
Figure1. Rational quadratic Bézier.

66

B. Calculating the weights
As illustrated, the proposed weight points are always located
on Conic splines. Therefore the weight points can be
computed by parametric equation of Conic Splines. Our
experiments show that, the proposed weight points can be
calculated by assigning constant values of t parameter as
follows.
• q1 is generated when t = 0.1 approximately.
• q2 is generated when t = 0.9 approximately.
Now, substituting the t = 0.1 or t = 0.9 in equation (2.2),
gives the position of q1 or q2, respectively, thus the middle
weight can be found easily. Although, this approach can
calculate the middle weight approximately, the error is
ignorable and does not affect the design process. We will
discuss the error values of proposed method in section V.
Comparing to previous types of weight points proposed
weight points have a benefit. Finding the accurate position
of proposed weight points is very simple for the users,
because the proposed weight points are located on junction
points of line segments and the curve segment of Conic
Splines.

Figure2. Splitting the Conic Splines into two line segments and a curve
segment. Dash lines show two line segments and solid line denotes the
curve segment of Conic Spline.

A. Weight points
As illustrated previously, each Conic Spline can be divided
into two different parts: two lines and a curve segment, such
that, the junction points of lines and the curve can easily be
recognized on each Conic Spline. This property of Conic
Splines is a good design tool and can be used for weight
manipulation. For this reason, we use the junction points of
lines and the curve segment as weight points. Figure 3
shows the weight points and their effect on the weight of
Conic Splines. Where, q1 and q2 denote the proposed weight
points, which located on connecting points of line segments
and the curve segment of Conic Splines.

IV.

DRAWING ISSUES

Utilizing proposed weight points, prepares an easily
understood geometric concept for drawing large curves. In
this section we demonstrate some other important points
which can be used in drawing process.
A. Shoulder point
As illustrated, locating the weight points on the Conic
Spline, simplifies the weight manipulation for the users. In
the same manner, shoulder points can be used instead of
middle control points. Because the shoulder points are
located on the Conic Spline and their position can be
recognized easily. After setting the shoulder point, the
middle control point of a Conic Spline can be found as
follows.
(4.1)
Where, S is shoulder point of Conic Spline and M is middle
.
point of the line
B.

Conic Spline subdivision

Figure3. Weight manipulation by displacing the weight points.

In order to add more flexibility to drawing process of Conic
Splines, they can be subdivided at any parameter value in
the range of 0 < t < 1. The simplest choice is at the midpoint

67

or t = 0.5. Our goal is not to determine the control polygons
for result curves of subdivision process. However, we
should define a constant value of t parameter for obtaining
the weight points of two new Conic splines. Our
experiments show that, the proposed weight point of the
first half of subdivided Conic Spline can be obtained from
parametric equation of Conic Splines at t = 0.25
approximately. Now, substituting the t = 0.25 in equation
(2.2), gives the position of q, thus the middle weight can be
found easily. Also, weight point of second half of
subdivided Conic Spline can be obtained at
t = 0.75
approximately. Figure 4 shows the first half of Conic Spline
of figure 2 and its control points and weight point. Where, q
denotes the weight point of Conic Spline.

(A)

(B)

Figure4. First half of subdivided Conic Spline.

As illustrated, subdividing the Conic Splines, prepares more
flexibility for drawing process. For instance, in addition to
middle weight, middle control point of new curves can be
obtained by weight point too, as follows.
=
=

+(

(C)

) Tan (90 – )
(4.2)

Where, the role of weight point is specifying the
V.

angle.

EXPERIMENT

Assigning a constant value of parameter t for weight points,
middle weights are computed approximately. However, the
approximation error does not have significant effect on
weight manipulation and drawing process. In this section,
we discuss the error of weight manipulation with three
examples. Figure 5 shows three Conic Splines and their
control points and weight points. Table I tabulates the
position of control points, weight points, predefined weights
(W) and estimated value of weights ( . The difference of
W and denotes the error values. As shown in Table I, The
error values are very little but, the error value increases as
much as the W increases.

Figure5. Evaluating the error values by three different Conic Splines.

68

Table I. Comparing estimated weights against predefined value of weights.
A
B
C
VI.

P1

P2

P3

q1

q2

W

(600,600)
(420,671)
(739,689)

(1006,108)
(1013,361)
(864,62)

(1101,586)
(1191,708)
(996,417)

(792,367)
(758,496)
(824,258)

(1057,389)
(1096,532)
(911,194)

4
6
10

[8]

J. Ishida, “The general B-spline interpolation method and its
application to the modification of curves and surfaces ” Computer
Aided Design, Vol. 29, No. 11, Nov. 1997, pp. 779-790.
[9] L. Piegl, “Modifying the Shape of Rational B-Splines. Part 1:
Curves,” Computer Aided Design, Vol. 21, No. 8, Oct. 1989, pp.
509-518.
[10] Y.Tin ,J. Hua, H.Qin “Physically based modeling and simulation
with dynamic spherical volumetric simplex splines ” Computer
Aided Design, Vol. 42, No. 2, Feb. 2010, pp. 95-108.

CONCLUSION

In this paper, we proposed new types of weight points
which can simplify the weight manipulation of Conic
Splines. The proposed weight points have two benefits:
•
The proposed weight points are always located
on Conic Splines and can be obtained by setting
a constant value of t parameter.
• Finding accurate position of weight points in
Conic Splines, is very simple for users, because
the weight points are always located on the
points which make a straight line with first or
last control points.
Although, this approach calculates the middle
weights approximately, the error is ignorable and
does not affect the design process. For future work,
we will extend this approach to weight manipulation
of cubic rational Bézier and high degree NURBS.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

3.978
5.934
9.794

C.K. Au and M.M.F. Yuen, “Unified Approach to NURBS Curve
Shape Modification,” Computer Aided Design, Vol.27, No. 2, Jan.
1995, pp. 85-93.
D. Terzopoulos and H. Qin, “Dynamic NURBS with Geometric
Constraints for Interactive Sculpting,” ACM Trans. on Graphics,
Vol. 13, No. 2, Apr. 1994, pp. 103-136.
G. Farin, “From Conics to NURBS: A Tutorial and Survey,”IEEE
CG&A, Vol. 1, No. 5, Sept. 1992, pp. 78-86.
H. Qin, D. Terzopoulos, “D-NURBS: a physics-based framework
for geometric design” IEEE Transaction on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, Vol. 2, No. 1, Mar.1996, pp. 85-96.
I. Juhász, “Weight-based shape modification of NURBS curves ”
Computer Aided Geometric Design, Vol. 16, No. 5, June. 1999,
pp. 377-383.
J. Sánchez-Reyes, “A simple technique for NURBS shape
modification ” Computer graphics and applications, Vol. 17, No.
1, Jan. 1997, pp. 52-59.
J.M. Zheng, K.W. Chan, I. Gibson, “A New Approach for Direct
Manipulation of Free-Form Curve ” Computer Graphics Forum,
Vol. 17, No. 3, Sept. 1998, pp. 327-334.

69

