Case Study
3D Displays

of Internet

Traffic

Kenneth C. Cox and Stephen G. Eick*
AT&T Bell Laboratories

Abstract

network.’ The clutter comes from the long lines connecting distant pairs of nodes that cause overplotting.
(For examples of particularly
complex graph displays
see [SW931 .)

The explosive growth in world-wide cornmunications, especially the Internet, bus highlighted the need
for techniques to visualize network trafic.
The traditional node and link network displays work well for
small datasets but become visually cluttered and uninterpretable for large datasets. A natural 30 metaphor
for displaying world-wide network data is to position
the nodes on IL globe and draw arcs between th,em coding the trafic. This technique has several advantages
of over the traditional 20 displays: it naturally reduces
line crossing clutter, provides an intuitive model for
navigation and indication of time, and retains the geographic context. Coupling these strengths with some
novel interaction techniques involving the globe surface
translucency and arc heights illustrates the usefulness
for this class of displays.

Figure 1: World-wide

1

internet

coding the traffic.

Recently, stimulated by the explosive growth of the
Internet, a large variety of world-wide networking data
has become available for analysis.
Besides the Internet, other sources of world-wide network data include international
telecommunications
traffic, financial flows, trading patterns, and national migration
patterns [Tob87]. The key questions involving this

There are several possible solutions
clutter problem:

thresholding to show only the most important
lines,

and how it varies through time.
At its most basic level the Internet or any network consists of nodes and links. The nodes and links
may represent physical objects such as machines, or
nonphysical objects such as hypertext pages. Statistics, possibly time-varying, may be associated with the
nodes and links. These statistics may be raw measurements, such as the number of accesses of a particular
home page in a particular time-period, the number of
times a hypertext link is accessed, or computed aggregates, such as an average link utilization.
The most common way of visualizing network information is as a diagram with lines drawn between
glyphs representing the nodes; see, for example, Figure 1. The color, thickness, line type or other visual
characteristic may encode the link statistic and the
glyph size or shape may encode the node statistic.
Node and link displays work well for small, sparse networks with few nodes or links, but become cluttered
and jumbled by line crossings for any reasonably-sized

shortening

the lines from the middle, and

using interactive

techniques

l

placing the nodes
ting [EW93],

to minimize

the

overplot-

a using fisheye-motivated, focus-and-context based
techniques to distort
gions [SB94],
l

less important

distant

re-

depending on the task [CasSl], and

o as a graph in 3D [FPF88].
Although

none of these techniques is entirely

satisfac-

tory, the 3D displays for networks are appealing because in 3D the extra &me&on

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

[BEW95].

Other approaches involve the node positioning:

- Rm
60566,

O-8186-7201-3/95$04.00 0 1995 IEEE

to the display

using curves, perhaps spline-based, instead of
straight lines to connect distant nodes [GNV88],

data often relate to the structure of the information

*Correspondence
Contact:
AT&T
Bell Laboratories
lG-351,
1000 East Warrenville
Road, Naperville,
IL
email: eickQresearch.att.com

traffic over a two-hour

period, with the color and thickness of the lines en-

Introduction

may eliminate

many

‘A small sparse network may contain a tens to hundreds
nodes and about the same number of links.

129

of

See Color Plates, page 152.

having the largest statistics, thereby focusing attention on the important nodes. Other glyphs and data
encodings are possible. We have experimented with
cylinders and pyramids, negative scalings where the
glyph descends toward the center of the sphere, and
encoding of two values using the glyph height and position above or below the surface. Our preliminary
results show that the latter technique of information
encoding can be readily understood by viewers.

of the line crossings, and thereby reduce the clutter.
General 3D network displays, however, are often confusing to navigate.
For world-wide networks there is a natural 3D embedding: position the nodes geographically on a globe
and draw lines or arcs between them (see Figure 3).
This results in a pleasing display, looking somewhat
like international airline routes, that retains the spatial information associated with the nodes and also
eliminates the line crossings associated with 2D displays.
The remainder of this paper explores globe-based
network displays in detail. Section 2 describes how we
encode information using glyphs and arcs. Section 3
discusses some techniques for interacting with the display. Finally, Section 4 discusses our results.

2

Internet

2.3

The arcs are the analog of the lines in the traditional 2D node and link displays. They touch the
spherical surface at each end and reach a maximal
radial height in the center. Tying the height of the
arc to the link statistic ensures that the most important arcs corresponding to the largest values of the
statistic are always visible and never obscured by arcs
corresponding to lesser values.
\
In extending the straight lines of the 2D network
displays to the arcs of the 3D display, we have many
choices for the paths that the arcs may take.
A
‘[straight line” on a sphere is a great circle, as is used
in Figure 3. More generally, for any projection of the
sphere to a plane, the straight line between two points
in the plane corresponds to a path for an arc between
the points on the sphere. The polar projection generates the great circle paths. Figure 2 shows arcs drawn
as straight lines using a rectangular coordinate system
(i.e., one in which latitude and longitude are treated
as X and Y coordinates in a Cartesian system) and
as great circle paths, and Figure 4 shows the Internet
data drawn using rectangular paths. We have found
the great circle paths to be both more attractive and
easier for the viewer to interpret, since the arcs are
usually spaced over a larger portion of the globe.

Display

Figure 3 shows one frame from an animation
of Internet traffic between fifty countries over the
NFSNET/ANSnet2
backbone for one two-hour period
during the week of February 1-7, 1993. The dataset
contains the packet counts, by two-hour period, between each pair of countries.3
Each country is represented by a box-shaped glyph
that is both scaled and colored to encode the total
packet count for all links emanating from the country.
The glyphs are positioned at the locations of the countries’ capitals and extend perpendicular to the surface
of the globe. The color-coded arcs between the countries show the inter-country
traffic, with the higher
and redder arcs indicating the larger traffic flows. The
globe is illuminated by a light which is positioned to
indicate the angle of the sun for the frame of the timeseries data that is displayed.

2.1

Arcs

Surface

Drawing a world map on the surface of the sphere
in Figure 3 converts it into a globe, thereby providing
spatial context for the location of each of the nodes.
Our map contains only the continental outlines, avoiding possibly excessive detail that would obscure network information.
The surface of the globe in Figure 3 is an opaque
blue and thus obscures those portions of arcs and
nodes which lie behind and within the sphere. By interactively varying the translucency of the surface the
user may control how much of the display is obscured.
2.2

Nodes

The boxes on the surface of the globe in Figure 3
encode the node statistic by scaling in the radial direct ion. The visual effect is pleasing; the boxes appear to be small towers standing on the sphere, with
the tower height and color of the tower tied to the
statistic. The largest boxes correspond to the nodes
2Thanks to Hans-Werner
Braun at the San Diego Supercomputer Center and the NSFNET partnership
for making the data
available. It is in /pub/scsc/anr/data,
available by anonymous
ftp from ftp. sdsc . edu.
“50*50*84
= 210,000 total counts.

Figure $
Rectangular
tom) paths.

130

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

(top)

and great-circle

(bot-

References

The arcs are scaled to reach a maximum height
above the surface according to the link statistic.
In
our implementation
we scale according to the function:

[BEW95]

Richard A. Becker, Stephen G. Eick, and
Allan R. Wilks. Visualizing network data.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and
Graphics, 1(1):16-28, 1995.

[CasQl]

Stephen M. Casner. A task-analytic
approach to the automated design of graphACM Transactions on
ics presentations.
Graphics, 10(2):111-151, 1991.

[EW93]

Stephen G. Eick and Graham J. Wills. Navigating large networks with hierarchies. In
Visualization
‘93 Conference Proceedings,
pages 204-210, San Jose, California, 25-29
October 1993.

[FPF88]

Kim M. Fairchild, Steven E. Poltrock, and
Three-dimensional
George W. Furnas.
graphic representations of large knowledge
Cognitive Science and Its Applibases.
cations for Human Computer Interaction,
pages 201-233, 1988.

[GNV88]

E. R. Gansner, S. C. North, and K.-P.
Vo. Dag-A program that draws directed
graphs. Software-Practice
and Experience,
17(1):1047-1062, 1988.

[SB94]

Manojit Sarkar and Marc H. Brown. Graphical fisheye views. Communications of the
ACM, 37(12):73-84, December 1994.

[SW931

Michael F. Schwartz and David C. M.
Wood. Discovering shared interests using
Communications
of the
graph analysis.
ACM, 36(8):78-89, 1993.

[Tob87]

Waldo R. Tobler. Experiments in migration
mapping by computer. The American Cartographer, 14(2):155-163, 1987.

R(l C Hsin(zr))
where H is the maximum height, R the globe’s radius,
and x varies between 0 and 1 along the arc’s path.
Thus the arc’s elevation above the surfaces reaches a
maximum H half way between the two endpoints. If
the height H is negative, the arcs will lie within the
sphere, and thus the arc will be obscured unless the
surface is translucent.

3

Interactions

By dynamically manipulating the network display
it is possible to obtain greater insights into the data.
Rotating the sphere (our implementation
uses spaceball like interface) enables a user to see where arcs
terminate that are obscured by the sphere. Animation shows the evolution of time-varying network data,
and allows the user to move back and forth through
the time series. Each figure in this paper is one frame
from a time series.
Besides the usual 3D geometric interactions,
the
sphere lends itself to some novel controls. For example, the globe may be used as a clipping surface to
obscure glyphs or arcs within it. By tieing the calculation of radial heights to controls such as sliders,
the user can cause some of the glyphs and arcs to be
drawn inside the sphere and thus obscured as shown
in Figure 5.
In conjunction with such thresholding, it is convenient to allow the user to interactively vary the opacity of the sphere, thereby partially or wholly reveal
the glyphs and arcs inside the sphere. This can also
be used to show the nodes and arcs on the reverse side
of the sphere that would otherwise be occluded, thus
aiding in navigation (see Figure 6).

4

Discussion

Displaying networks in 3D is a useful mechanism for
solving the display clutter problem with 2D displays.
The difficulty with general 3D network displays is that
they are often confusing, difficult to navigate around,
and cause the user lose a sense of global context. Restricting the display to a sphere captures many of the
advantages of 3D network displays while simultaneously helping the user maintain context.
Users are accustomed to globes, so navigation is
simplified and there is little chance of the user becoming disoriented.
The number of line crossings,
and hence the amount of visual confusion, is also reduced by the three-dimensional embedding and by the
presence of the surface, which acts as a background.
Incorporating user interface controls such as thresholding and translucency can further reduce the visual
complexity of the display, and thereby lead to greater
insights.

131

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

