Case Study

Visualising Cyberspace:
in the Harmony

Information
Visualisation
Internet Browser

Keith Andrews
Institute for Information Processing and Computer Supported New Media (IICM)
Graz University of Technology,
A-8010 Graz, Austria.
kandrews@iicm.tu-graz.ac.at

Abstract

First let me distinguish between hand-crafted and
automatically
generated presentation of information.
Hand-crafted presentation entails careful, prior construction of an information
layout by a designer using appropriate tools.
Such visualisations
are generally designed for very specific applications and are
often quite intricate in nature.
Automatically
generated visualisations are composed on-the-fly by the
underlying system according to a set of pre-supplied
layout rules and components.
A neutral file format
like the emerging Virtual Reality Modeling Language
(VRML) [l] for 3D models, allows the distinction to be
blurred somewhat at least as far as final presentation
is concerned, since both hand-crafted and automatically generated VRML files can be displayed by one
and the same viewer.

The explosive growth of information
systems on the
Internet has clearly demonstrated the need to organise,
filter, and present information
in ways which allow
users to cope with the sheer quantities of information
available.
The scope for visualisation of ‘Gopher and WWW
spaces is restricted by the limitations
of their respective data models. The far richer data model supported
by the Hyper-G Internet information
system is exploited by its Harmony client to provide a number of
tightly-coupled, two- and three-dimensional
visualisation and navigational facilities, which help provide location feedback and alleviate user disorientation.

One issue affecting automatically
generated visualisations is that of dynamic restructuring,
for example
to take into account changes in the database or in response to user queries or filters. In some cases this
may be desirable, but in many cases an inherent advantage of spatial visualisations, that users can incrementally build a mental map of places and locations
and navigate by visual memory, will be lost when the
information space continually changes its form. At the
very least, such changes should be made via smooth
transitions as far as possible so as to take advantage
human visual perception and object constancy [2].

1 Introduction
There has been strong recent interest in the application of visualisation
techniques to network information systems. The explosive growth of information
systems on the Internet has clearly demonstrated the
need to organise, filter, and present information
in a
way which allows users to cope with the sheer quantities of information
available. More traditional
(and
arguably more functional) two-dimensional
visualisations have been pushed into the sidelines as glamorous three-dimensional
visualisations take the limelight.
This paper presents the tightly-coupled,
two
and three-dimensional
visualisations implemented in
the Harmony client for the Hyper-G Internet information management system.

O-8186-7201-3/95$04.00 0 1995 IEEE

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Other issues include the choice of visual representations and navigational metaphors. What kind of visual
representations are best? Two or three-dimensional
icons of books for text documents, framed pictures for
images, radios emitting audio clips, TV sets for video,
etc. Should planar or truly 3D structure maps be used,

97

See Color Plates, pages 147, 148.

(local map). The
north pole, nodes
longitude. Lower
level spheres (like

indoor or outdoor scenes? In 3D visualisations, typical navigational metaphors include walking, flying,
driving, teleportation,
and magic carpets. However,
why not bring the information to the user, rather than
having the user navigate to the information?
Indeed,
the use of user-configurable home spaces, where users
can place and organise frequently accessed information
(or handles to it) might reduce the need for navigation in the first place. Whilst ideas abound and numerous techniques have been implemented, there has
upto now been surprisingly little usability testing of
information visualisation techniques.

2 Related

SemNet 1121 was an exploratory system which represented knowledge bases as directed graphs in 3D.
Labeled rectangles (nodes) were connected by lines or
arcs. The 3D layout has the advantage over 2D layouts that the nodes of an arbitrary graph can be positioned so that no arcs intersect. Several techniques
for positioning nodes were explored: random, multidimensional scaling, heuristics, and manual editing.
Clustering techniques and fisheye views were also implemented.

Work

Serra et al [13] discuss the use of 3D object hierarchies with attached multimedia documents.
Each
component in the 3D object hierarchy (part-of relationships) may be combined into a concept node with
text, image, and video documents. Links may be made
from these text, image, and video documents to other
concept nodes. However, there is no support for arbitrary links from (parts of) the 3D object as such, and
the 3D object hierarchy itself forms the entire extent
of the hyperstructure.

Two-dimensional
visualisations of information strucA good
tures are well covered in the literature.
overview of 2D link maps in hypermedia systems can
be found in [3], fisheye viewing techniques for graphs
are detailed in [4]. Space-filling visualisations of hierarchically structured information using tree maps are
described in [5], feature maps of arbitrary document
spaces are described in [6], and hyperbolic visualisations of large trees in [7], to mention just a few techniques.

Smith and Wilson [14] describe a prototype system
based on HyperCard and Virtus Walkthrough
(a 3D
visualisation system), in the context of an academic’
departmental information system. They enabled users
to interactively explore a 3D model of the department:
when they approached within a certain distance of a
source anchor, it automatically
triggered to display a
corresponding text document.

Perhaps the most well-known work in the area of
three-dimensional
information visualisation is that of
Card et al [2, 81 at Xerox PARC on the Information Visualiser and 3D/Rooms.
They allow users
to interactively explore workspaces modeled as threedimensional rooms. Particular data sets (nodes) are
visualised in rooms of their own, and doors lead from
one room to another in a manner similar to hypermedia links. The Information Visualizer provides threedimensional representations for linear and hierarchically structured information:
the perspective wall [9]
and cone tree [lo] respectively.
Linear information,
such as chronologically ordered information, is pasted
on to a virtual wall from left to right. The wall has
a large front section, and left and right sides which
tail off into the background. Information
can be slid
along the wall to bring it into focus on the front section. The information can also be stretched or shrunk
along the wall. Hierarchical information, such as part
of a file system or a company hierarchy chart, is laid
out as a uniform 3D cone. The tree can be rotated
to bring interesting parts to the front and pruned to
remove non-relevant information.

The File System Navigator
(FSN, or “Fusion”)
written by Joel Tesler and Steve Strasnick at Silicon
Graphics [15] visualises a Unix file system as an information landscape. Directories are represented by
blocks laid out on a plane, their height representing
the cumulative size of the contained files. Smaller
blocks atop the directory blocks represent files in the
directory (their size also mapped to their height).
Users can “fly” over the landscape, taking it in as a
whole, or swoop down to a specific directory. Clicking
on the arc to a subdirectory results in an invisible hand
grabbing you and leading you through space to that
subdirectory. Clicking on a file block brings a virtual
spotlight to bear on that block, double-clicking opens
the file for editing, etc.
The above systems are for the most part proof-ofconcept prototypes for individual visualisation techniques. In Graz, we have integrated several tightly-

VizNet [ll] also uses a cone tree representation for
hierarchical information,
but provides an additional
spherical representation for associative relationships

98

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

current node is located (say) at the
similar to it are strung along lines of
level objects are displayed on lower
peeling away layers of an onion).

coupled information visualisation techniques (including a two-dimensional
graphical structure map generator, a three-dimensional
document browser and a
three-dimensional
information landscape) into a real,
day-to-day information
tool running over the Internet: the Harmony client for the Hyper-G hypermedia
information system [16, 171.

All in all, the richness of the Hyper-G data model
provides plenty of scope upon which to base visualisations: hierarchical structure, (bidirectional)
hyperlinks, and search and retrieval facilities. The Harmony
client for Hyper-G exploits this richness to provide
tightly-coupled
two- and three-dimensional
visualisation and navigational facilities help provide location
feedback and alleviate user disorientation.

Visualisation techniques are being applied to other
Internet information systems such as Gopher [18] and
the World-Wide Web (WWW)
[19]. GopherVR [20]
is an experimental 3D spatial interface to the hierarchically structured information on a Gopher server.
Visualisations of W W W spaces such as Webspace [21],
the Navigational View Builder [22], and Hype&pace
[23] have begun to appear. However, the scope for
visualisation of Gopher and W W W spaces is severely
restricted by the limitations of their respective data
models: Gopher has only hierarchical structures and
W W W has only forward hyperlinks. Hyper-G, on the
other hand, has a much richer data model on which
to base visualisations:
a combination of hierarchical
structure, (bidirectional)
hyperlinks, and fully integrated search and retrieval facilities. The rest of this
paper looks at the information visualisation facilities
as currently implemented in the Harmony client for
Hyper-G .

3 The Hyper-G

Data

4 Dynamic

Maps

The Harmony Session Manager (see Figure 1, top
left) provides navigation through the collection structure, search facilities, and various general functions
such as user identification and language selection. Collections may be opened and closed and clusters or
individual documents activated within the graphical
collection display by double-clicking.
Central to the
design of Harmony is the concept of location feedback.
When a document or collection is visited, its location
within the collection structure is automatically
displayed in the Session Manager’s collection browser (by
opening up the path to it), regardless of whether the
object was reached as the result of a search, by following a hyperlink, or via the local map. This simple technique is a powerful instrument in the fight against becoming Yost in hyperspace” - users can orient themselves with reference to a fixed structural framework.
In the case of search results and the local map, mere
selection of an object initiates location feedback, providing users with a sense of the context of an object,
prior to any decision to view it (see Figure 1).

Model

Information
in Hyper-G may be structured both hierarchically into so-called collections, and by means
of associative hyperlinks. A special kind of,collection
called a cZuster groups logically related or multilingual
versions of documents.
Every document and collection must belong to at least one collection, but may
belong to several. Navigation may be performed down
through the collection hierarchy (the collection “hierarchy” is, strictly speaking, a directed acyclic graph),
access rights assigned on a collection-by-collection
basis, and the scope of searches restricted to particular sets of collections. Collections may span multiple
Hyper-G servers, providing a unified view of distributed resources.

The Harmony Local Map facility provides a kind
of short-range radar, generating on request (dynamically) a map of the hyperlink neighbourhood
of a
chosen document, similar to the local map of Intermedia [3]. However, Harmony’s local map can also
show other relationships, such as collection membership, annotations, inline images, and the textures applied to a 3D model, as can be seen in Figure 2. The
number and type of incoming and outgoing relationships can be interactively
configured in the Options
panel. Single-clicking selects an object and activates
location feedback, displaying the object’s location in
the collection structure. Users can navigate within the
local map by generating a new map around any selected object; objects are accessed by double-clicking.
One practical use of the Local Map is to check whether
a particular inline image is used in multiple text documents before changing or deleting the image.

Links in Hyper-G are stored in a separate link database and are bidirectional
(directed, but may be followed backwards):
both the incoming and outgoing
hyperlinks of a document are always known and available for visualisation. Furthermore, Hyper-G has fully
integrated search facilities including full text search
with relevance scores and some limited support for
similarity measures between documents.

99

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

2D Structure

Figure 1: Location Feedback in Harmony

Figure 2: The Harmony Local Map

100

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Figure 3: Harmony’s VRweb 3D Viewer

5 3D Hyperdocuments

lection hierarchy is mapped out onto a plane, documents within a collection are arranged on top of the
corresponding block; colour and height are currently
used to encode document type and size respectively.
Users can “fly” over the landscape looking for salient
features, like flying over a file system directories with
FSN [15]. A flat overview window (top right) provides a further aid to orientation. Whereas FSN reads
in and lays out the entire directory hierarchy once at
program start-up, Harmony’s Information Landscape
is constructed and laid out incrementally as users open
and close collections and subcollections, access documents, and perform searches.

The Harmony VRweb 3D scene viewer displays model
description files representing arbitrarily complex objects or scenes. The models may either be of the
hand-crafted or of the automatically generated variety, depending upon the application. Both VRML
and SDF, a file format derived from the Wavefront
Advanced Visualizer, are supported. In Figure 3, a
hand-crafted 3D plan of the centre of Graz features
some of the sights of the city; embedded hyperlinks
lead to further information about the various sights.
Users typically explore a model of a scene by moving
themselves (walk, fly, fly to, and heads-up navigation
modes) and view a model of an object by moving the
model (translate, rotate, zoom).

6 3D Structure

Work on the Information Landscape is still at an
early stage. We are currently experimenting with the
use of textured landscapes (as shown in Figure 5), and
will introduce simple 3D icons to replace the basic
blocks currently used. A default set of 3D icons will
represent document type, with colouring used to represent document age and hence giving a rapid visual
impression of where new information is located. The
author of a collection will be able to specify an arbitrary model as its 3D icon: for example a model of
the Eiffel Tower to represent a collection about Paris.
A further innovation will be the superimposition of

Maps

Harmony’s Information Landscape, shown in Figure 4,
is an interactive, three-dimensional visualisation of
the collection structure, tightly coupled to the Session
Manager’s two-dimensional collection browser display
(changes in one are reflected in the other). The col-

101

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Figure 4: The Harmony Information Landscape

Figure 5: Textured Information Landscape

102

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

References

arced cables upon the landscape to represent the link
relationships of a specific document.
Through their
ability to compactly display many thousands of objects, 3D visualisations are perhaps the only effective
means of browsing in and judging the extent of large,
dynamic information spaces.

PI

Gavin Bell, Anthony Parisi, and Mark Pesce. The
Virtual Reality Modeling Language - Version 1.0
Specification. Available at http : //vrml . wired. corn/
vrml.tech/vrmllO-3.html.

PI George G. Robertson, Stuart K. Card, and Jock D.

7 Concluding

Mackinlay. Information Visualization Using 3D Inof the ACM,
teractive Animation. Commtinications
36(4):56-71, April 1993.
[31 Kenneth Utting and Nicole Yankelovich. Context and
Orientation in Hypermedia Networks. A C M !i”ransactions on Information Systems, 7(1):58-84, January
1989.
141 Manojit Sarkar and Marc H. Brown. Graphical Fisheye Views of Graphs. In Proc. CHI’92, pages 83-91,
Monterey, May 1992. ACM.
[51 Brian Johnson and Ben Shneiderman. Tree-Maps: A
Space-Filling Approach to the Visualization of Hierarchical Information Structures. In Proc. IEEE Visualization ‘91, San Diego, CA, pages 284-291, Los
Alamitos, CA, October 1991. IEEE Computer Society Press.
I31Xia Lin. Visualization for the Document Space. In
Proc. IEEE Visualization ‘92, Boston, MA, pages
274-281, Los Alamitos, CA, October 1992. IEEE
Computer Society Press.
[71 John Lamping and Ramana Rao. Laying out and
Visualizing Large Trees Using a Hyperbolic Space. In
Proc. UIST’9.j, Marina de1 Rey, CA, pages 13-14,
New York, November 1994. ACM.
PI Stuart K. Card, George G. Robertson, and Jock D.
Mackinlay. The Information Visualiser, An Information Workspace. In Proc. CHI ‘91: Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 181-188, New York, May
1991. ACM.

Remarks

Following an overview of information
visualisation
techniques and current efforts to visualise Internet information spaces, I have presented in more detail the
visualisation facilities currently available in the Harmony client for Hyper-G. Recent informal usability
evaluations of Harmony (thinking aloud tests to provide design feedback) have shown in particular that
the close coupling of several orthogonal visualisation
and navigational facilities in Harmony helps provide
location feedback and alleviate user disorientation.
In the near future, both hand-crafted and dynamically generated visualisations will start to abound, as
modeling languages like VRML take hold and appropriate software becomes available for a wide variety of
applications.
The announcement of VRML browsers
for Gopher, WWW, and Hyper-G can be expected to
rapidly increase the number of visualisations of these
information spaces.
Further information about Hyper-G and Harmony
and installation details may be retrieved by anonymous ftp from ftp. iicm.tu-graz.ac.
at in directory /pub/Hyper-G
or from the IICM Information
Server under http://info.iicm.tu-graz.ac.at/
or
gopher://info.iicm.tu-graz.ac.at/.

PI Jock

D. Mackinlay, George G. Robertson, and Stuart K. Card. The Perspective Wall: Detail and Context Smoothly Integrated.
In Proc. CHI’SI, New
Orleans, Louisiana, pages 173-179, New York, May
1991. ACM.
George
G. Robertson, Jock D. Mackinlay, and StuPO1
art K. Card. Cone Trees: Animated 3D Visualizations of Hierarchical Information. In Proc. CHI’91,
New Orleans, Louisiana, pages 189-194, New York,
May 1991. ACM.
PI Kim Michael Fairchild, Luis Serra, Ng Hern, Lee Beng
Hai, and Ang Tin Leong. Dynamic FishEye Information Visualizations. In Rae A. Earnshaw, Michael A.
Gigante, and Huw Jones, editors, Virtual Reality Systems, pages 161-177. Academic Press, 1993.
Kim
I121 Michael Fairchild, Steven E. Poltrock, and
George W. Furnas. SemNet: Three-Dimensional Representations of Large Knowledge Bases. In Raymonde

8 Acknowledgements
The financial support of Hyper-G by the Austrian
Ministry of Science, JOANNEUM RESEARCH, and the
European Space Agency is gratefully acknowledged.
Current work on Virtual Information Spaces is partly
financed by the Anniversary Fund of the Austrian National Bank, under project number 5334.
I am indebted to the members of my Harmony
project team for their valuable input, hard work, and
dedication.

103

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

PI

Guindon, editor, Cognitive Science and its Applications for Human-Computer Interaction, pages 201233. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1988.
P31 Luis Serra, Tat-Seng

Chua, and Wei-Shoong Teh.
A Model for Integrating Multimedia Information
Around 3D Graphics Hierarchies. The Visual Computer, 7(5-6):326-343, May/June 1991.

P4

Tim Berners-Lee, Robert Cailliau, Ari Luotonen,
Henrik Frystyk Nielsen, and Arthur Secret. The
World-Wide Web.
Communications of the ACM,
37(8):76-82, August 1994.

Pauline A. Smith and John R. Wilson.
Navigating in Hypertext Through Virtual Environments.
Applied Ergonomics, 24(4):271-278, August 1993.
Butterworth-Heinemann
Ltd.

Mark P. McCahill and Thomas Erickson. Design for
a 3D Spatial User Interface for Internet Gopher. In
Proc. of ED-MEDIA
95, pages 39-44, Graz, Austria,
June 1995. AACE.

1151 Joel Tesler and Steve Strasnick. FSN: The 30 File
System Navigator. Silicon Graphics, Inc., Mountain
View, CA, 1992. Available by anonymous ftp from
sgi . sgi. corn in directory sgi/f sn.

Ed H. Chi.
Webspace Visualization.
Available
at http://wwv.geom.umn.edu/docs/weboogl/,
The
Geometry Center, University of Minnesota.

P61 Keith Andrews, Frank Kappe, and Hermann MauHyper-G: Towards the Next Generation
rer.
of Network Information Technology.
Journal of
Universal
Computer Science, 1(4):206-220, April
Special Issue: Selected Proceedings of
1995.
the Workshop on Distributed
Multimedia
Systems, Graz, Austria,
Nov. 1994. Available at
http://info.iicm.tu-graz.ac.at/Cjucs-root.

Sougata Mukherjea and James D. Foley. Visualizing the World-Wide Web with the Navigational
View Builder.
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 27(6):1075-1087, April 1995. Proc. Third International World-Wide Web Conference, WWW’95,
Darmstadt, Germany.
P31 Andrew Wood, Nick Drew, Russell Beale, and Bob

P71 Keith

Andrews, Frank Kappe, and Hermann Maurer. Serving Information to the Web with Hyper-G.
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 27(6):919926, April 1995. Proc. Third International WorldWide Web Conference, WWW’95, Darmstadt, Germany.

Hendley. HyperSpace: Web Browsing with Visualisation. Available at http: //www . cs . bham, ac . uk/
amw/hyperspace/. Poster/Demo at WWW’95, Darmstadt, Germany.

104

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Mark P. McCahill and Farhad X. Anklesaria. EvoIuComtion of Internet Gopher. Journal of Universal
puter Science, 1(4):235-246, April 1995. Selected Proceedings of the Workshop on Distributed Multimedia Systems, Graz, Austria, Nov. 1994. Available at
http://info.iicm.tu-graz.ac.at/Cjucs-root.

