Towards a Generative Theory of Diagram Design
Klaus Reichenberger and Thomas Kamps
GMD-Institute for Integrated Publication and
Information Systems, Dolivostrasse 15,
D-64293 Darmstadt, Germany
{ reichen, kamps} @darmstadt.gmd.de

Gene Golovchinskv
Department of Industrial Engiheering
University of Toronto
4 Taddle Creek Road
Toronto, Ontario M5S lA4, Canada
golovch@ie.utoronto.ca
2: Scenario

Abstract

In additionto the insight into mechanismsof graphicalpresentationssucha generativetheory promises,we are planning to usetheresultingpresentationengineas a component
of a publicationenvironmentfor electronicpublicationsthat
is being developedat GMD-IPSI. As a concretereference
work application,we usethe Dictionaryof Art which will be
publishedby MacmillanPublishersasa print editionof more
than30 volumes this year. Over 6,000authorsand 50 editors

In this paper we describe the theoretical background for
AVE, an automatic visualization engine for semantic
networks. We have a functional notion of aesthetics and
therefore understand meaningfulness as a central issue for
information visualization. This implies that the diagrams
should communicate the characteristics of the data as
effectively as possible. In this generative theory of diagram
design, we include aspects data characterization, systematic
use of graphical means of expression and the combination of
graphical means of expression. After giving a brief
introduction and an application scenario we discuss these
aspects in detail. Finally, a process model of an automatic
visualization process is sketched and directions for further
research are outlined.

have been involved in its conventional publication process
over a period of about 15 years.

1: Introduction
The work describedin this article addresses
the problemof
communicatingabstract,conceptualinformation through
diagrams.This technique- often calledinformationdesign
- is widely used in publications to convey overview
information. We emphasize the term “conceptual
information”to distinguishthis researcheffort from the field
of scientific visualization,wherequantitativedatadominate
the conceptual, and where the data are often bound to
concretespacessuchas maps,body parts etc. On the other
hand, diagrams are distinguished from the layout of
documentsor user interfacesbecauseapart from labelsall
information is expressedgraphically. Conversely,every
elementof the diagramexpresses
someinformation.
For this comparativelyrigorousbranchof graphicdesign, we developedan incomplete,but generativetheoryand
implementedthis theory in an algorithmthat automatically
generates
graphicalpresentations.The maindifferencebetweenour approachandothers [e.g., Mackinlay 86, Roth &
Hefley 931is thatwe do not choosethetypeof diagramfroma
predefmedset of graphicallanguagesortemplates,butconstruct each diagram from basic components corresponding to

relationsratherthanto objects.This allowsthegenerationof
diagramsof arbitrarytype.

O-8186-7201-3/95$04.000 1995 IEEE

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Given suchan amountof information,we do not considerit sufficient to offer the usersonly searchfacilities on
the string level or predcfinedhypermediaaccessstructures.
Thus, the core of our publicationmodel is a formal representationof the most important conceptsand facts in a
semantic network. Domain specific concepts are, for
exampleart disciplinesthat are linked by thesauralrelations
suchasbroaderterm/narrowerterm.Domain-specificobjects
otherthanfacts(e.g.,persons,locations,dates,etc.) arealso
interrelated.We treat all such interrelationsas representationsof facts[Rosteket al 931.
Starting their searchon this semanticnetwork rather
thanon the dictionaryarticlesallows the usersto searchthe
dictionarynot only for singleconcepts/objects,
but for facts
independent
of any particulartextualexpression.The results
of the searchon the semanticnetwork have to provide as
muchcontextas possiblewhenpresented.This is especially
importantif we want to exploit the connectivityof the object
networkto allow the userto furthernavigatethe searchresult
or use it as a starting point for a new search [Kamps &
Reichenberger
951.The two basicmodalitiesto providethis
context- text and graphics- require either the generation
of naturallanguagetext, or the generationof diagrams,or a
combinationof the two to presentthe searchresults in a
coherentway. In the AVE system, the theoretical background
of which is describedin this article, we restrictedourselves
to diagramsonly.
The Dictionaryof Art dataaremanifold.Therefore,our
system has to make fundamental design decisions for each

presentation:Before details typical for graph layout algorithms (e.g.,minimizationof edgecrossingsor symmetry),

11

can be treated,the algorithm hasto decidewhethertherewill
ical elementsconnectedwith lines at all. In other
mustdecidewhatkind of diagramis appropriatefor
the given situation.The possibleresults,of which we show
someexamplesin figures 1 to 4, are as heterogeneous
as the
incomingdata.
~illustrator
&iesigner

Furniture Design
I,
I

I
I

I
I

1
I

I
I

Figure I: The diagram shows a number of artists, their
life spans, ati the art disciplines they practiced. A query
the user might have posed to verify, his hypothesis that
the beginning of the 20th centurysaw a specialization of
artists into commercial andflee artists.

1
advertising copyeditor

\

display designer
I
I

I
I

I
I

I
I

term

Figure 4: Art disciplines in the field of applied arts and
the narrower-termrelation among them.

I
I

1850 1875 1900 1925 1950 1975

0 Herbert Bayer
c1John Hartfield \I)Jan Bchichold
evolvedj?om

-narrower

I
I

I
I

1850 1875 1909 I925 1950 1975

Figure 2: lfthe user wants to know how the werent
projrssions in advertising emerged rhe focus of attention
is on art disciplines and their development rather &an on
persons. In this case, similar infdrmation might be
presented like this.

The choice of diagram dependson many factors, among
them the data to be presentedreflecting the user’s goal, the
culturalcontext,corporatestyle guides,the user’sperceptual
limitations and limitations of the display hardware.In the
present work we concentratedmainly on the data to be
presentedto deriveappropriatevisualizations.
This has two main reasons:One is that no other factor
is likely to changethat often and that drastically during
interaction: if the application is a single publication, then
cultural context, style guides and presentationlimitations
will be constantthroughoutthe entire usage,while the data
to be presentedwill changefrom one questionto the next.
The otherreasonis that data is the most determiningfactor.
While different style-guidesor presentationliitations typically lead to superficial variations such as more or fewer
colors,different choicesof colors, a different font etc., differentdatausuallyleadto completelydifferentdiagrams.
What a presentationsystem might know about the
user’s goalscan rangesfrom minimal information reflected
by the selectionof datato a detaileddescriptionof concrete
tasks.If we know enoughabout a specific task (e.g., “find
the earliestpaintingof a given set of paintings’*or “find all
paintingsby William Turner from the sameset”), we would
probably presentonly the answeras a list of items rather
than generatingdiagramsthat show the entire data set.’We
seethe benefit of diagramsin that they supporta variety of
infommtion-extractingtaskson the data.Among thosemight
be tasksthat the userwasnot awareof beforehandor that are
easierto performthanto specifyabstractly.
“Supporting a variety of tasks”meansfor us to offer
perceptual operations that correspond to logical ones
requiredby the tasks,therebyproviding “quick perceptual
’ While, iu car opiuiou, very specific kuowledge of the user’s tasks tends to
make visualization obsolete and very general knowledge of it is given
through the data set, information about the user’s goals on au intermediate
level (is the user more interested in certain data or aspectsof the data than in
others, is there a whole class of tasks he wants to perform etc.) would be a
valuable input for the generation of meaningful presentations. One example
of how this information can be exploited for visualization is given in section

Figure 3: art styles and their ~flerentiation.

3.2.3..

12

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

2) RfuncrrOn: W (R bipartiterelation) A
inferencesin place of more difficult logical inferences”
(VXEM~,~)~,ZEM~(XR~~XRZ
[Casner91, p.121.In our opinionhowever,specialattention
A y=z)) must be paid to -not suggisting perceptualoperationsthat
would make no sense on the data in question. What
distinguishesthe possibleoperationsfrom thosenot making
M2
R
Ml
senseis the logic of the data. When data is describedas (HerbertBayer,Walter
{ 1834,1845,1885, dateof-birth
being composed of binary relations, their logic can be Crane,El Lissitzky,William 1890,1900) a set of
captured by mathematical properties constraining their Morris, piet Zwart) a set of dates
connectivity

[Kamps

&

Reichenberger,

94b].

The

t-

I

iUtiSt.3

connectivity thus determineswhat operationsare possible.
Transitiverelations,for example,allow by deftition to draw
transitiveconclusionswhereasin linear ordersall elements
canbe pairwisecompared.
In this paper we describea systemthat basesits main
layout decisionson the logic of the datadescribedin terms
of relationsand their mathematicalproperties.We will first
define our notion of relationsand enumeratethe relational If Ml = lVI2,thenR is calleda relationin M (=M2) in which
propertieswe considerimportantfor our purpose.Then we casespecific relationalpropertiescan be i&ntifkd. These
will explain how these properties lead to layout decisions propertieswe useto describedataare shownbelow.
and how this approachrelates to the distinction between
3) R (ir)refexive : # (V x E M:(l)xRx)
expressiveness
ande$ectiveness [Ma&inlay 86al.
3: Theory

4) R (ujsymmetric: o* (‘I’ x,y E M: xRy S) (w )yRx)

3.1: Some basic concepts concerning
Relations

Mathematical
5) R rmitivc

w (V x,y,z E M: xFty A yRs + vRz)

Given two setsMl and M2, we definea binary relation R as
a subsetof the Cartesianproductof thesesets,that is, R C
Ml X M2. Binary relations can be characterizedusing
formal properties.The rich classificationof binary relations
obtained through the combination of relational properties can

be exploited to describe their formal semantics.In this
sectionwe presentand illustratethe set of formal properties
usedin our approach,and we discusshow theseproperties
are interrelated. Then, we derive a relation type taxonomy
that reflectsthis inter-relatedness.

The notation ,xRy‘ will be usedto indicate(x,y) E R,
for x E Ml, y E M2; we call (x,y) a relation pair. For each
relation R there always exists a cutlverse (inverse) relation
R’l C M2 X Ml definedby R-l:= ((y,x) I (x,y) E R}. We
can specifythe following relationalproperties:
1)Rbipatiite:~

(v XE Ml 3 y E M2:xRy)A
M23 XE Ml:xRy)

(VIE
.~
Crane,El L.issltzky,Wdham

6)Rlinecw:~

(V x,y E M:xRyV

R

M
(1834, 1845,1885,1890,1900)a
setof dates

yRx)

comes-after

painter) a setof

7) R acyclic : w R does not contain cycles

13

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

sufficient to explainthe rationalebehindour visualization
approach.

8) R free : # IRI = WI -1

M

I

R

3.2: Translation of the dak structure
means of expression

has-influenced
{Herbert Bayer, Walter Crane, El
Lissitzky, William Morris, Piet Zwart} a
set of artists
I

Basedon theserelationalproperties,it is possibleto define
some higher order characteristicsfor binary relations.A
relation R is called an irreflexive order if it is transitive,
asymmetric,and irreflexive. It is called an irreflexive tree
graphforms a tree.It is calleda
order if the corresponding
strict order if it is both an irreflexive tree orderand linear.
We distinguishbetweenstrict discreteand strict continuous
linearorders.
We canclassifybinaryrelationsbasedon theseproperties. One possibletaxonomyis shownin table 1. Note that
the taxonomyis not arbitrarysincerelationalpropertiesare
generallyinterdependent.
For example,the asymmetricand
transitive properties imply the acyclic property, but the
converseis not true. This meansthat order relationsare
specificcasesof acyclicrelationsaslinearorderrelationsare
specificcasesof orderrelationsetc.
Relation (unqualified)
-Symmetric Relation (symmetric)
-Acyclic Relation (acyclic)
-Tree Relation (tree)
-&reflexive Order Relation (irreflexive, transitive
asymmetric)
-1rreflexive Tree Order Relation @reflexive-order, tree)
-Strict Discrete Linear Order Relation (irreflexivetree-order, linear, discrete domain)
-Strict Continuous Linear Order Relation
(irreflexive-tree-order, linear, amt. domain)
-Bipartite Relation (bipartite)
-Unique Mapping (functional)

The goal of our approachis to generatepresentationsthat
suggest those and only those perceptual operations
corresponding
to meaningfullogical onesas determinedby
the mathematical
propertiesof the relations.In this section
we describehow to makethe informationaboutconnectivity
(which we have formalized in the previous section as
mathematical
properties)directlyperceivablein a diagram.
3.2.1: Expressiveness. In our approachto visualizationwe
also describediagramsin terms of relations. The basic
componentsof diagrams(e.g., figure 1) can be seenas
graphicalelementsjoined by graphicalrelations.The same
formalism used to describethe data relations is used to
describegraphicalrelations.This hasthe advantagethat we
can qualify graphicalrelationswith the samemathematical
propertiesusedto qualify the datarelations.Expressiveness
of the visualization is ensuredby choosinga graphical
relationthatmatchesthe datarelation’sproperties.
To explainour theory,we considera representative,
but
not complete,set of graphicalelementtypes such as rectangles,triangles,ellipsesand text elementsas the visual
placeholders
for dataobjects.They may have a set of attributessuchas position, color, length, height, radius, etc.
Different graphicalrelations,definedbetweensetsof
instancesof graphicalelementtypes,can thenbe employed
to specify connectivitybetweendataobjects.For example
the relationarrow may connectgraphicalelementsof arbitrary type to eachother. In a similar way we can use the
relationinclusion to realizea nestingof graphicalelements
thathavea two dimensional
extent.

Table I: relation type hierarchy

Notealsothat this setof relationtypesis not complete.Other
sensiblecombinationsof propertiesare possible.Thus, an
equivalence relation (symmetric, transitiveand reflexive)
could be used to describeclassificationresults.It is also
possibleto distinguishmore accuratelybetweendifferent
typesof functions,e.g., functionswith qualitativeor quantitative ranges,leading to different visualizations.Other
propertiesand combinationsare conceivable.However,all
thesedistinctionscan be describedin the samerelational
language.Therefore,they can be usedto extendthe set of
relation types, making the data descriptionricher. Nevertheless,the lim ited set of relationtypeswe havechosenis

14
Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

into graphical

Figure 5: Use of arrow and relative position for an
irrejkxive order, compared to the use of arrows alone

Togetherwith the arrow relation we may also define
constraintsusing other graphical relations to constrain
subsetsof connectedelements.For example,if we require
the arrow relationto be transitive,we may define relative
positionconstraints,suchas “rangeelementlies to the right
of domainelement”insteadof using arrow alone.Relative
position constraintsform linear graphical relations and
linearity implies transitivity (when elementb lies below
elementa and e lies belowb, elemente too will invariably
lie belowa). In termsof perceptualoperations:transitivity
revealswhetherthereis a path from elementa to elemente,
and the relative position relation betweenthe elements

makes the information easier to perceivebecauseall the
arrowspoint more or lessin the samedirection.
If we also requirethe arrow relation to be asymmetric
we have to ensurethe non-positionalconstraint“a is connectedto b with exactly one arrow.”Finally, we may also
requirethe arrow relation to be irreflexive. This can be realized by the constraintthat “no arrow must point to itself’.
Togetherwith the threeconstraintswe havejust defined,the
arrow relation becomesa graphicalorder relation and thus
can be usedto visualizearbitraryorderrelationsde-fmedon
the data,suchas the thesauralrelationsin figure 3.
From this discussionwe seethat the arrow relationcan
be configuredto reflect variousrelationalpropertiesand is
thereforewidely applicable.It can also be usedto represent
bipartite relationsor uniquemappings,tree ordersor linear
orderingsif the constraintsare appropriatelyformulated.All
data relation types mentionedhere can, however,also be
visualizedusingspecializedgraphicalrelations.
In contrastto the arrow relation,the inclusion relation
(seefigure 3) is inherentlya tree order.This makesit a very
specific graphicalrelation that can only be usedif the data
hastreeorderproperties.

n

3

Fl

4 q

Figure 6: Use of brightness(b) and use of positions(c) for
a linear order compared to the use of arrows(a)

The sameholds for graphicalcomparabilityrelations,
like above/below in figure 6(c) or brighter/darker than (b).
Unlessaccompaniedby arrowsor lines,they are linearorder
relations in which elements can always be compared
pairwise2.This trivial case of connectivity, where all
possiblepairs are relation pairs, does not even require to
indicateconnectivityby a dedicatedsymbollike a line segment.Instead,the connectivitymay be adequatelyvisualized
by an orderingof positionsin one dimensionor an ordering
of hue gradations,brightness,etc.
The graphicalrelationswe haveintroducedso far reprosent binary relations between sets of graphical elements.
However,it is alsopossible,in the caseof uniquemap-pings,
to use graphicalelements’attributesinsteadof representing
the datarelation in a binary graphicalform. This is possible
because attributes are uniquely assigned to graphical
elements, thereby reflecting the uniquenessof the data
2A more accurate notion of comparability distinguishes between reflexive
linear orders (x I; y) and irreflexive linear orders (x c y).

15

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

relation. Thus, the domain objects can be compared
perceptuallyaccordingto their attributes.We have applied
this techniquein figure 7 wherecolor (texturein b/w reproduction) is used to representthe functional relationship
betweendomainand rangeobjects.There,we visually compose the complex information oRu” into one proposition
qualifying object o. As a consequenceobject u will not
appearas an independentgraphicalelementon the screenbut
will instead lend its distinctive features to the graphical
elementrepresentingobjecto.
q
cflt
cl--m

Figure 7: Visualizing objects as attributes

The selectionof the attributetype, (i.e., distinctivefeatures),
depends on the relation that structures the range. For
instance,if we consideruniquemappingrelationswherethe
rangeis a set of non-related,that is, qualitativevalues(e.g.,
the professionsin figure l), the color attribute is a valid
visual representation.In the sameexampleswe represented
time as lengthsof the rectangles.Similarly, we canrepresent
other quantitative data, such as prices as lengths of
rectanglesor radii of circles since they are also linearly
orderedandcontinuous.
A similar attribution mechanismis evenpossible for
bipartiterelationsif we allow attributesto be se-valued. An
exampleis given in figures 1 and 2. Here, we allow a setof
small boxes (an attribute type which we have not listed
above)to sit on top of the time bars.We usethis set valued
graphicalattributeto representthe bipartiterelationsbetween
artistsandprofessions.
In table 2, we presentthe translationbetweenthe data
relation types, given in table 1, and the correspondinggraphical relations we have consideredso far. Note that the
arrow canbe usedin all casesexceptthe symmetricrelation.
From the table it becomesclear that severaldata relations
may competewith eachotherfor the samegraphicalrelation.
We have to take all this into account when assigning
graphicalrelationsto datarelations.
3.2.2: Effectiveness. It can be observedin the examples
from the last sectionthat the graphicalmeansof expression
differ in their effectivenessof communicatingthe properties
of the datarelations.To illustratethis, let us considerfigure
6. It seemsobviousthat the constraintson the positions(c)
visualizethe linear order property more effectively than do
the arrows (a). If we look at the comparisonsnecessaryto
determinethe positionof one elementin this linear orderor
to find its direct predecessor,it is apparentthat in (a) we
have to follow the line segmentsin order to extract that
informationwhereasin (c) this is clear at a glance.This and
other exampleslead to the assumption that specialized

relation type

graphical relations

rizathematicalproperties

arrow
directed
unqualifiedrelation
I line
I symmetric
I
I symmetricrelation
arrow
acyclic
acyclicrelation
arrow,line
treerelation
tree
irreflexiveorderrelation irreflexive,asymmetric,transitive
arrow+relativeposition,arrow
irreflexivetreeorder
irreflexive,asymmetrical,
transitive,is tree inclusion,arrow+relativeposition,arrow
strict discretelinearorder asymmetrical,
transitive,completely
equidistantpositions,brightness,saturation,
arrow
connected,
discretedomain
fixed distance,size,brightness,saturation,
strict continuouslinear asymmetrical,
transitive,completely
arrow
connected,
continuousdomain
order
attribute,arrow
bipartiterelation
bipartite
singleattribute,closeness,
arrow
uniquemapping
functional
Table 2: translation of data relations into graphical relations

graphicalrelationsfor which a certainrelationalpropertyis
inherent indicate that property more directly and more
effectively than the general relation arrow that
communicates the property only through associated
constraints.In addition, it seemsthat specializedrelations
reducethe numberof graphicalsymbolsneededto communicatea property.Althoughwe cannotprovethis generally,
associatingspecialized or characteristic with effective has
proven useful for the implementation of the AV E
visualizationsystem.
There is also another factor of effectivenessto be
considered:
If we usefigure6 againas anexample,thelinear
order seemsto be more effectively communicatedthrough
position than through brightnessalthoughone graphical
relationis as specializedas the other.It wouldbe desirableto
model this phenomenon
as a rankingof graphicalmeansof
expressionaccordingto their visual strengthbut herewe run
into similar problemsthat [Ma&inlay 86b] encounter& A
definitiverankingof graphicalmeansof expressionrequires
a theory of visual perceptionthat explainstheir role in a
numberof visual tasks- Mackinlay mentionsdistinction,
comparisonand selectivity,we would like to addgroupingas well as their interdependencies
and their influenceon the
overall appearance
of the display.Especiallyif we consider
the interdependencies
of the graphicalmeansof expression,
for example the influence of size of elementson their
perceivedbrightness,we arelookingfor nothinglessthanan
integrated theory of perceptualorganizationin general.
Perceptionliterature,e.g., [Sarkar& Boyer 931assuresus
that there is no such theory in sight, so any ranking of
graphicalmeansof expression
cauonly be an estimation.
However, we think that positioningrelationsplay a
specialrole amonggraphicalrelations,which might explain
the examplein figure 6. In contrastto all otherattributes,a
positioncan only be usedoncein a diagram.If we useonly
positioningrelations,we can still assignall otherattributes
16

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

the samevalue,for instanceall rectanglescanhavethe same
color, the samelength,etc. In contrastto that, positionsare
unique.This means that therecannotbe a commondefault
valuefor positionssuggesting
that the positionof an element
is, in a way, less optionaland more essentialto the object
than its other attributes.Furthermore,knowledge of the
positionsof objectsto be comparedis a prerequisitefor any
comparison.The position of an object seemsto be closely
relatedto its identity.
Finally, in addition to effectivenessconsiderations,
preferencefor certain graphical means of expressionis
probablyone of the most importantvehiclesfor creatinga
distinctivestyle.We expectapplicationdesigners,usingthis
presentation
engineas part of au interactivesystemthey are
designing,to havesomeinfluencehere.
3.2.3: Combining
Graphical
Relations. Effectiveness
becomesespecially important when graphical means of
expressionhave to be combinedto form a diagram.This
combinationis not trivial for variousreasons:
The useof a particulargraphicalrelationin a diagramis
not unlimited;most of them may only be usedonce,some
may be usedseveraltimes but none may be employedan
arbitrarynumberof times.
They can be mutually exclusive,aboveall when they
visualizeoverlappingsetsof objects.If, for example,some
of the objectsforming the rangeof a bipartiterelation are
also part of a tree order, a conflict may occur. While the
visualizationof the treeorderrequiresthe objectsto be displayedas graphicalelementsthat are positionedindependently and connectedwith lines, the preferredvisualization
of the bipartiterelationis to displayrangeelementsas attributesandnot as independent
graphicalelements.To prevent
or resolvethesevisualizationconflicts, we have to ensure
that the most importantdatarelationsare translatedinto the
strongestgraphicalmeansof expression.We proposethe

following threecriteria to determinethe most importantdata
relations:1) How many mplesdoesa relationhave,what is
its share of the entire data set? 2) How specific is it
accordingto the relation type hierarchyin table 1, i.e., how
well doesit organizeits shareof the dataset?3) Hasthe user
stateda particularinterestin this aspectof the data?
The decisionto use a particularset of graphicalmeans
of expressionis often not sufficient to determinea layout
completely.When relative positions,connectinglines (arrows) or inclusion have beenchosen,the final positionsof
the graphicalelementsrepresentingthe domainobjectsstill
have to be computed. This is performed by a geometric
layoutalgorithmdescribedin the next section.
This section describedthe theoreticalfoundationsof
our visualization strategy, including the mathematical
formalism and graphicalprimitives. In the next section,we
provide an outline of AVE’s processthat gives algorithmic
insight into the realizationof the theory. However,we will
describethe algorithm only on a rather abstractlevel. See
[Golovchinskyet al 951for implementationdetails.

4: Visualization Algorithm
The processstarts with a query that extracts parts of the
semanticnetworkthat haveto be visualized.This is followed
by threemain stages:analysis,constraintnetworkgeneration
and geometriclayout..
The analysisstarts with a categorizationin which the
different binary relations are identified and storedtogether
with their relation pairs. Each relation is typed a-priori by
one of the relation types that we have introducedin section
3.1. In order to obtain a maximum amountof information
about the given data, the type of the relation instanceis
refined if its data properties allow. Since the graphical
resourcesare limited and vary in effectiveness,the data
relations are ranked to reflect their individual importance.
The ranking is based on the number of tuples a relation
containsandon the relativerestrictivenessof relationtypes.
We use a network of constraintsas a mechanismto
detectand to resolveconflicts betweencompetinggraphical
relations.This network consistsof one graphicalelementfor
each semanticdomain object that needsto be visualized.
Which constraintsshouldbe appliedto which element(e.g.
elementa should lie above elementb or elementc should
specify the shadinghue of elementa) is determinedby a
resourceallocationprocess.The systemstartswith the preferred resourcecombinationfor the highest-rankedrelation,
then applies the most preferred combinationof the nextrankedrelation,and so on.
Once the constraintnetwork is calculated,appropriate
geometric coordinatesmust be assignedto all underconstrainednodes.To solve this problem,we describethe geometry of the diagram in terms of three different aesthetic
goals.First, when lines or arrowsrepresentconnectivity,the
spatialdistancebetweengraphicalelementsshouldmirror the
topologicaldistancebetweenthe respectivedomainobjects
in the network. Second,if relativepositionis usedas a graphical relation, the anglesof all arrowsthat are constrained

17

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

this way will be adjustedtowardsimaginaryvertical or horizontal lines, dependingon the direction of the constraints.
Finally, we considerinter-elementrepulsionas an aesthetic
goal. We have implementeda modified spring-modelalgorithm to computeobject positions. Existing spring-model
algorithms[e.g.,Eades84; Davidson& Hare189; Kamada&
Kawai 89; Fruchterman & Reingold 911 optimize the
geometric distances only. We have combined the four
optimization parametersinto an objective function that is
optimizedby a gradient-descent
algorithm [Luenberger731.

5: Future Work
5.1: Organization

of the Data

This article may createthe impressionthat all we haveto do
is to describeour dataas objectsand relationsbetweenthem
and can then translatethem straightforwardlyinto graphical
objects and graphicalrelations. Our work deviatesa little
from this strategy (and might have to deviate more in the
future) in that we do not take the relations and objects
alwaysquite as they exist in the database:One suchcaseis
the filtering of redundancies,where a relation is shownnot
by indicatingall pairs for which it holds, but the few pairs
for which its negationholds. If, for example,the artists in
figure 1 were all painters,we would not have to show this
information as one of the attribute values. Preferably,we
would put this informationinto the legendwhere insteadof
artistsandtheir disciplineswe would talk aboutpaintersand
their additionaldisciplines.
This suggeststhat a visualizationcannotbe effective,
when the underlyingfacts are not effectively expressedby
the given choice of objects and relations. Sometimesthe
samefactshaveto be expressedthroughdifferent objectsor
differentrelationsor higherconceptsto be visualizedwell.
Anotherexamplecould be a relation that is definedto
be acyclic and that consistsof only sourceand sink nodes.
This relation may be subjectto a type conversionfrom an
acyclic relation to a bipartite relation, in which the sources
becomethe domain and the sinks becomethe range. Still
anotherexamplecould be the valuesof two attributesthat
coincidein all cases- dueto chanceor becausethey arenot
independent- where we would tend to collapsethe two
attributesinto a singleattributewith more complexvalues.
The entire conceptof attributescan be seenas a higher
construct defined on top of the more basic concepts of
objectsandrelations.Our goal is to gatherthe eliminationof
redundancyand the formulation of somefacts as attributes
into a separatestepin the visualizationprocessthat searches
for structural regularities in the data and uses them to
determinethe most effective organizationof the data to be
visualized.Structuralregularitiesare not be limited to the
examplesmentionedhere;for a more detaileddiscussionsee
mps & Reichenberger
94a] and [Kosak941.
5.2: Adding Semantics

One of the objectives of this approach to information
visualizationhas beento reducethe dependenceon semantics in generatingvisual representations
of data.This makes
it easierto createan algebraof graphicalrules that may be

combinedto produceour diagrams.However,in somecases
our cultural stereotypesexhibit preferencesthat cannotbe
derived in principle from the data.For example,we tend to
associateblue color with low temperaturesand red color
with high ones;in somecaseswe expectnumericaldata to
increasefrom top to bottom, while in othersto decreasein
that direction,etc. We will haveto representthis knowledge
as part of the visualizationsystemin order to take this kind
of culturalcontextinto account.

6: Conclusion
We have presented a theoretical model for data-driven
visualization of semanticnetworks. Our model constructs
diagrams using primitive graphical meansof expression.
Thus, we avoid the strict categorizationof diagramsinto
different visualizationssuch as line diagramsor timelines.
The coreconceptsof the modelare 1) characterization
of the
data as binary relations together with their mathematical
properties,2) chamcterizationof graphicalmeansof expression in the same way, 3) mapping of data relations onto
graphicalrelationswith the sameproperties,which guaranteesexpressiveness
of the visualization.However,it doesnot
ensureeffectiveness.This dependson the different strengths
of the graphicalrelationsand their particularcombinationin
one diagram. We believe that this approachcan improve
diagram construction interaction and empower users to
communicatemore effectively.

7: References
Davidson, R. Harel, D. (1989) Drawing Graphs Nicely Using
Simulated Annealing, Technical Report CS89-13, Department of
Applied Mathematics and Computer Sciences, Weixman Institute
Of Science, Israel.
Casner, S. (1991) A Task-Analytic Approach to the Automated
Design of Graphic Presentations, in ACM Transactions on
Graphics, vol. 10, No. 2. pp. 111-151.
Eades, P. (1984) A Heuristic for Graph Drawing, Congressus
Numerantium, 42. pp. 149-160.
Fischer, D. H. and Rostek, L. (1994) SFK A Smalltalk Frame Kit.
Concepts and Use. Draft User Manual, GMD-IPSI. 206 pages.
Fruchterman, T. Reingold, E. (1991) Graph Drawing by ForceDirected Placement, in Software Practice and Experience, 21(11).
pp. 1129-1164.

18

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Golovchinsky, G., Kamps, T. and Reichenberger, K. (1995)
Subverting Structure: Data-driven Diagram Generation,
Visualization 95, Atlanta, Georgia.
Kamps, T. and Reichenberger, K. (1994a) Automatic Layout as an
Organization Process, Arbeitspapiere der GMD, Nr. 825, Sankt
Augustin.
Kamps, T. and Reichenberger, K. (1994b) Automatic Layout based
on Formal Semantics, in Cartarci, T. et. al.., (Eds.), Proc. of the
Workshop on Advanced Visual Interfaces, AVI ‘94, Bari, Italy. pp.
231-233.
Kamps, T. Reichenberger, K. (1995) A Dialogue Approach to
Graphical Information Access, in Schuler et al. @is.) Designing
User Interfaces for Hypermedia. Springer, Heidelberg. pp. 141155.
Kamamda, T. and Kawai, S. (1989) An Algorithm for General
Undirected Graphs, in Information Processing Letters 31. pp. 7-15.
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North Holland).
Kosak, C., Marks, J. and Shieber, S. (1994) Automating the Layout
of Network Diagrams with Specified Visual Organization, in IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Vol. 24, No. 3
Luenberger, D. (1973) Introduction To Linear and Nonlinear
Programming, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts.
Ma&inlay, J. (1986) Automating the Design of Graphical
Presentationsof Relational Information, in ACM Trans. on
Graphics, 5 (2). pp. 110-141.
Ma&inlay, J. (1986) Automatic Design of Graphical Presentations,
Ph.D. dissertation, Computer Science Dept., Stanford University,
Stanford.
Rostek, L., M&n, W. and Fischer, D. (1993) Weaving a web: the
structure and creation of an object network representing an
electronic reference work. Electronic Publishing 6 (4). pp. 495-505.
Rostek, L. and Mtihr, W. (1994) An Editor’s Workbench for an Art
History Reference Work. Technical Briefing in Proceedings of
ECHT ‘94. Edinburgh, Scotland. pp. 233-238.
Roth, S. F. and Hefley, W. E. (1993) Intelligent Multimedia
Presentation Systems: Research and Principles, in Mark Marbury
(Ed.) Intelligent Multimedia Interfaces, AAAI Press.
Sarkar, S., Boyer, K. L. (1993) Perceptual Organization in
Computer Vision: A Review and a Proposal for a Classificatory
Structure, in IEEE Trans. on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Vol.
23, No. 2. pp. 382-399.

