Visualizing

Case Study
Internet Resources

Nahum Gershonl, JoshuaLeVasseur2, Joel Winstead3,
JamesCroall4, Ari Pernicks, and William Ruh6
The MITRECCorporation
7525 Colshire Drive
McLean, VA 22102
tgershon@mitre.org, 2jlevasse@mitre.org, 3winstead@mitre.org, 4jcroall@mitre.org, 5apernick@mitre.org,
6war@mitre.org

Abstract
The goal of this work is to improve the ability of
people from all walks of life and interests to access,
search, and use the information distributed in Internet
resources. The process of interacting with information
resources starts with browsing, continues with digesting
and assimilating pieces of information, terminates with
generation of new information, and begins anew with
analysis of pre-existing and new information. Our
approach is user-centric- taking users’needs into account
by allowing them to interact with the information
contained in large arrays of documents.
The
visualization process is an integral part of the overall
process.
We have covered three related categories in this
methodology. The first one is browsing through the
World-Wide Web (WWW) hyperspace without becoming
lost, based on a visual representation of the hyperspace
hierarchical structure (hyperspace view). The second
category is overcoming the rigidity of the WWW by
allowing the user to construct interactively and visually a
personal hyperspace of information, linking the
documents according to the application or problem
domain, or to the user’s own perception, experience,
culture, or way of thinking. The third category includes
discovery and analysis of new information and
relationships in retrieved documents by aggregating
relevant information and representing it visually.
1.

Find and obtain useful information from distributed
information resources (e.g., libraries) as efficiently as
possible, and

l

Enhance the creative thinking of the user to better
solve hisiher current and future problems.

l

Ordinarily, users would like to interact with distributed
resourcesto find out:
l

l

l

Linking numerous computers dispersed around the
world through the Internet has created an exciting
universe of information. This revolutionary capability
has enabled us to explore this universe of distributed
information resources from our desktop computers. If
set up, managed,and presentedcorrectly, these distributed
information resources will enable us to:

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Where the interesting information is located (e.g., in
which documents);
Where the relevant pieces of information reside in the
documents. This step involves extracting and
assimilating interesting pieces of information and
creating new information from them; quite often, it
is not a simple process.
In spite of the engaging nature of the Internet
systems, we still have a long way to go before the use of
this information universe is easy and intuitive. While
interacting with information over the Internet, users feel
at times lost, confused, and overwhelmed (justifiably so).
To find required information or to browse through
information, users currently need to conduct frustrating
searches through arrays of (at times) debilitating menus
and “belligerent” computer systems. Some of the remote
sources are massive and once the user has the
information, he or she needs to browse through large
amounts of text, tables, and images, How can the user
know where the sources of the relevant information
reside, how to get them, and, once the sources are
accessed,how to get the relevant information from them?

Introduction

O-8186-7201-3/95$04.00 0 1995 IEEE

A topic of interest (it is not always clear to the user
in the beginning of a search);

WWW, the World Wide Web or simply the Web,
developed at CERN, Switzerland [T. Berners-Lee et al,
19941, and Hyper-G, developed at Graz University of
Technology [Andrews and Kappe, 19941,allow the user

122

See Color Plates, page 151.

This is a major problem. One solution is to provide
users with both a local and a global view of the
information space. These views should be represented
visually to promote quick perception and understanding
of the hierarchical structure of the hyperspaceand to help
the users quickly locate where they are in hyperspace,
i.e., to re-orient themselves.

to roam via menus and embedded links through
information spaces of documents or images. Engaging
browsers, such as the National Center for
Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) Mosaic (for the
WWW) [Schatz and Hardin, 19941and also Harmony (for
Hyper-G) have transformed the process of getting
information from Internet servers. However, some major
difficulties still remain.

We developed an enhancementof NCSA Mosaic that
allows the user to view the hyperspacedepicted as a visual
“tree” structure (see Figure 1). In addition to viewing,
users can “jump” from one document to another by
pointing and clicking the mouse without having to go
back resource by resource or “page by page.” Recently,
two additional approaches for visualizing hyperspace
structures were independently proposed wukherjea and
Foley, 1995, and Wood, et al, 19951. Both interesting
approachesfocus on how to make complicated hyperspace
structure more comprehensible by letting the user view
the hierarchy globally and in detail. The latter allows
restructuring the view by introducing physical repulsive
and attractive forces among the hierarchy elements.

To a large extent, users are not directly involved in
the development of the Internet and its capabilities. If
we do not involve the users in designing distributed
information resourcesand their interfaces, we will create
useless information systems. As long as there is a
human being sitting in the front of the screen, the
interface to Interenet information resources needs to be
user-centric, taking the user needs into account. Users
would like to interact with the information, preferably
forgetting that there is a computer separating them from
the information. A good human-computer interface
(HCI) is a must, but it is not enough.
Recent developments in visualization, interactive
computer graphics, and mass storage have created new
possibilities for information navigation, access, and
retrieval in which visualization and user interface (UI)
could play a central role. The question is how to exploit
the advancesin visualization and graphics technologies
and experiencewhile understandinghow the human mind
works in order to reduce the frustration, time, and cost of
using information dispersedover the Internet.

While browsing, users often would like to view the
names of documents and how they are linked to each
other without actually opening and reading each
document. Our enhancement allows the user to let the
hyperspace view grow automatically up to a specified
number of levels. After visually observing the
hyperspace structure and contents, the user could decide
to open and read none, some, or all the documents
represented on the “tree” or to save them in his/her own
personal space. In caseswhere changesto the content of
a document is an important piece of information, saving
Web documents allows the user to compare old and new
versions.

The work described in this paper is concerned with
improving the way users interact (visually and nonvisually) with information embedded in distributed
information resources. The process of interaction with
the information starts with browsing, continues with
digesting and assimilating pieces of information,
terminates with generation of new information, and
begins anew with analysis of pre-existing and new
information. The methods developed are for browsing
through hyperspace without becoming lost, overcoming
the rigidity of the WWW, and aggregating and
classifying relevant information. Moreover, in this
work, the visualization process does not stand alone, but
rather it is an integral part of the process of interacting
with the information.

3. Making the WWW Non-RigidBuilding One’s Own Information
Hyperspace
The rigid organization of hypetext documents often
makes it difficult to use information distributed over the
World-Wide Web. Creators of documents placed on the
Web link them to other documents. These links form a
rigid structure where no changesare allowed. Quite often,
these hyperlinks reflect the document creator’s own point
of view and current interests, or some arbitrary
considerations.

2. Hyperspace View:
Browsing
Through Hyperspace without Getting
Lost

Depending on the application, problem, personal way
of thinking and perception, experience, or culture, these
pieces of information could be related to each other in
various ways. For information resources to be effective
and to enhanceproblem solving and analysis, they should
allow each user to construct his or her own information
space with links and associations (among pieces of
information and whole documents and images) that fit the

Using current browsers to “surf” over the Internet,
users often traverse a multitude of documents via
hyperlinks. After opening a number of linked documents
on the WWW, users often do not know where they are in
the information spaceand do not remember how they got
there. In short, users feel lost or become disoriented.
123

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

personal problem, application, or ways of thinking and
perception.

1. Hyperspace View: A graphical view of the hyperspace emerging from a document depicted as a “tree”
structure. The user can “jump” from one document to another by pointing and clicking the mouse without having to go
back one by one.

Figure

documents that contain fragments of existing documents
and link them to other documents as he or she wishes.
With these enhancements,the user could create his or
her own version of the information space, thus
reflecting the current problem or his or her own
interests and view of the information.

Our enhancedversion of NCSA Mosaic enables the
user to modify visually and interactively the links
among the documents and images using a point-clickand-drag operation on the display of the hyperlink
hierarchical structure. This enhancement allows the
user to effectively generate new, personalized links and
to (visually) view the new and “old” information space
globally and locally (seeFigure 2). The new hyperlinks
are stored at the end of duplicates of the corresponding
documents and could be saved for future viewing and
sharing with other users. The user can add annotations
accompanyingthe new links.

4. Finding New Information
in
Retrieved DocumentsAggregating
Relevant Information
Once the user has retrieved the documents that are
related to his or her problem, he or she often needs to
analyze the different pieces of information and find out
new information by doing so. In many cases, the
amount of retrieved information is very large, which
makes access (getting the relevant pieces of
information) and analysis difficult. We have developed
a method and tool that could assist the user in

Another problematic aspect of current distributed
information systems such as the World-Wide Web is
that the smallest unit of information is a document (or
HTML “page”). Users often find that a paragraph, a
sentence,a word, or even a part of an image is a piece
of information relevant to their problem. Our enhanced
version of NCSA Mosaic allows the user to define new

124

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Figure 2. Making HyperspaceFlexible: The MITRE enhancementto NCSA Mosaic enables the user to interactively

modify the links among the documentsand images using a point-click-and-drag operation on the display of the hyperlink
hierarchical structure. The user can generatenew, personalized links and to view the new and “old” information space
globally and locally, The new hyperlinks are stored at the end of the documentsand could be savedfor future viewing and
sharing with other users.
performing these tasks based on the concept of
aggregatingrelevant information.

Users find it very difficult to locate the highest
correlations across a large table and to integrate and
make senseof them. For example, the correlations of 4
words to 4 other words in a document (a subset of the
full correlation table) could be representedby Table 1.

We illustrate this technique of aggregation to create
new information with word correlation. Documents are
automatically analyzed and the proximity of any pair of
words is calculated. Words are considered to be
correlated if they are separatedby no more than a (userdefined) number of other words.

The information analyst wishing to identify the high
hits of incidence needs to “fish” them individually from
the various table cells. This is a slow process and could
require the user to be very meticulous when the tables
are large.

The correlations among words in a document could
be represented by a table where the rows and the
columns are the list of words and each cell of the table
contains the number of positive correlations in the
document between two words in a pair. Such a table
could be very large and the high correlations

In scientific data, where the rows and columns are
numerical coordinates, they are naturally ordered by
increasing values of the coordinates. With words rather
than numbers representing the rows and columns in

are

generally scatteredthroughout all over the table.

tables of information, the order of the entities is
arbitrary and thus one could permute them to yield the
following representationdepicted in Table 2.

125

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Table 1. Correlations of 4 words to 4 other words in a document.

snacks

fat

smoking

sedentary

Table 2. Correlations of 4 words to 4 other words in a document after aggregation (the high incidences are aggregatedin
the upper left corner).
In this representation, the highest correlations are
aggregatedand it is easy to seewhich pairs of words are
highly correlated. The analyst can then investigate why
particular words are correlated and whether there is any
significance in real life.

any existing computer). The user can then zoom on the
interesting part of the aggregatedtable and observe the
words that are highly correlated. The development of
the visualization tools for representingunaggregatedand
aggregated correlation information was based on
extensions of AVS (Advanced Visualization System).
This tool is invoked from our enhanced Mosaic
interface. Examples of a typical aggregated table
generated from a document is given in Figure 3. This
rather large table contains clusters of aggregated
information. The users can now magnify these regions
and analyze them visually. A magnified view of some
of the clusters of aggregated information is given in
Figure 4. From this figure, the information analyst
can, for example, deduce from the color of the different
regions that the words “invitation” and “duchess” (red)
and also “sixteenth” and “dormouse”(yellow) are highly
correlated and consquently,ask himself/herself why.

In small tables it is almost straightforward to
permute the rows and columns and aggregate the high
hits. However, in a large table of a few thousand rows
and columns it is hard to do it manually. We have
implemented a fast algorithm1 that can aggregate
information in large tables of n dimensions and the
results are represented graphically on the computer
display for visual inspection and analysis (humans still
tend to perform pattern recognition faster and better than
1 The algorithm has been developedby Brian Dickens
and further refined by Joel Winstead.
126

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

Figure 3. Information representation after aggregation. The correlation of words (excluding simple articles and
propositions, such as “the,” “by,” and “and,“etc.) in a document was computed (by proximity) and the resulting table was
aggregated. The axes are the string of words in the document.

Figure 4. Aggregated information clusters magnified. The word coordinates are displayed allowing the user to find out
what words are correlatedin the analyzeddocument.

127

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

References

When the information is represented in 3-D, similar
analysis could be done using volume visualization.

Andrews, K. and F. Kappe, Soaring through Hyper
Space: A Snapshot of Hyper-G and its Harmony
Client, in Proc. of Eurographics Symposium of
muEtimedialHypermedia
in Open Distributed
Environments, Graz, Austria, W. Hezner and F. Kappe,
(editors), pages 181-191, Springer Verlag, June 1994.

In Conclusion
The use of computers and networks as information
resources is still a new concept involving new enabling
technologies and permitting new types of interactions
between humans and information resources (This is in
contrast with traditional human inteactions with
information contained in books). The situation has
similarities with the one prevailing when the movie
camera was invented. At that time, people tried to
imitate theater via a stationary camera. They later
discovered that these two media have different
characteristics and were able then to better use the
advantages of the new medium. Learning the new
medium of computers and networks as information
resourcesand further understandinghow humansprocess
and interact with information will enable us to provide
new methods for discovery and searching of resources,
enhancingcreativity and thinking.

Berners-Lee, T., R. Cailliau, A. Luotonen, H. F.
Nielsen, and A. Secret, The World-Wide Web,
Communications ACM, 37, No. 8, 76-82, 1994.
E.A. Fox (ed.), Source Book on Digital Libraries,
Version 1.O,December 6,1993.
Gershon, N.D., W.A. Ruh, J. LeVasseur, J. Winstead,
and A. Kleiboemer, Searching and Discovery of
Resources in Digital Libraries, in Advances in Digital
Libraries, Nabil A. Adam, Bharat K. Bhargava, Milton
Halem, and Yelena Yesha, Springer-Verlag, NY 1995,
in press.
Mukheriea, S., and J.D. Foley, Visualizing the Worldwide Web with the Navigational View Builder,
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 27, 1075
1087, 1995

The developments reported in this paper make use
of advances in visualization and interactive computer
graphics technologies as well as the understanding of
how humans search and process information. In this
work, the visualization process does not stand alone,
but rather is an integral part of the process of interacting
with the information. Advances along these lines could
improve the ability of people from all walks of life and
interests to access, search, and use the information
distributed in Internet resources. This will enable full
use of the Internet’s information universe from our
desktops.

Schatz, B.R, and J.B. Hardin, NCSA Mosaic and the
World-Wide Web: Global Hypermedia Protocols for the
Internet, Science, 265, 895901, 1994.
Wood, A., R. Beale, N. Drew, and R. Hendley,
HyperSpace: A World-Wide Web Visualizer and its
Implications for Collaborative Browsing and Software
Agents, submitted to HCI ‘95, UK.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to expresstheir appreciation
for the many exciting discussions with Brian Dickens
and for his work on the information aggregation
algorithm and for the creative advice on design and color
given to us by Elaine Mullen.

128

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

