Case Study

A WWW Viewpoint on Scientific Visualization:
An EPA Case Study for TechnoIogy Transfer
Theresa Marie Rhyne
Lockheed Martin
U.S. EPA Scientific Visualization Center

Abstract:

Web (WWW) information visualization scenario. This redefinition permits support for PC basedenvironmental information visualization and collaboration between EPA re-

This paper examines how to provide scientific visualization capabilities to environmental scientists, policy
analysts and decision makers with personal computers (PCs)
on their desktops. An approach for using the World Wide
Web (WWW) for disseminating knowledge on scientific
visualization andfor intelligent access to visualization capabilities on high petiormance (UNIX) workstations is outlined.

gionalofficesandstateenvironmental
protectionofficesvia
the Internet, WWW browsing tools have been successfully
evaluated on EPA agency LAN configurations and are already available and supported by the agency.
These tools, however, do not support the interactive visual display of technical or scientific data. For this
reason,wedistinquishbetween scientific visualization where
the user can interact with the data and information visualization wherethe usercanobtainonly pictorialdisplays.

Introduction:
TheUnitedStatesEnvironmentalProtectionAgency
(EPA) has recently begun to examine how to provide scientific visualization capabilities to environmental scientists,
policy analystsand decision makerswith personalcomputers
(PCs) running either Microsoft DOS or Windows. Here, we
outline an approach for using the WWW as a tool for
disseminating knowledge on scientific visualization and for
intelligent access to visualization capabilities on high performance (UNIX) workstations.
In general, scientific visualization software is a
niche market primarily basedin theUNIX workstation arena.
Usageof the software requires an understandingof computer
graphics techniques which the general user in the EPA
community might not have. In order for PC desktop visualization to succeed,the software tools for visual display and
Internet connectivity need to be in the token-ring Local Area
Network (LAN) and PC microcomputer arenas.
The typical desktop computer used within the EPA
community is a 386 machine running Microsoft Windows.
The majority of these PCs are not hardware configured to
support interactive scientific visualization. The economic
constraints associatedwith agency wide computer graphics
hardware and software upgrades force the obvious solution
of installing PC-basedscientific visualization software to be
very difficult to implement. There are also existing agency
wide LAN standardswhich the PC-basedvisualization software would need to be customized to accommodate.
For this reason, we consider, here, refocusing the
PC desktop visualization software issue into a World Wide

The U.S. EPA’s WorId Wide Web Efforts:
The U.S. EPA’s public World Wide Web server is
located at the National DataProcessing Division in Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina. The EPA home page links to
WWW based applications which have and are continuing to
be developed for environmental research, program and regional office efforts, (URL: http:/www.epa.gov). These
include applications pertaining to the Environmental Monitoring and AssessmentProgram (EMAP), the Gulf of Mexico Program Office, the Great Lakes Information Network,
the National EstuariesProgram and the Office of Air Quality
Planning and Standards(AIRS Executive). (http: //www.
epa.gov/docs/major.html)
A U.S.EPAScientificVisuaIizationCenterWWWbased application is under development and testing within
the EPA telecommunications infrastructure. This application includes: a) computer based instruction on applying
scientific visualization techniques to EPA data sets; b) procedures and utilities for converting data sets into formats
readable by scientific visualization software; c) guidelines
for preparing animations to be recorded onto videotape; d) a
listing of hardware platforms and software tools for doing
real time scientific visualization and desktop videoconferencing; e) tools for integrating visualizations with geographic information systemsand databaseenvironments and
I) other information pertaining to visualizing environmental
sciencesdata sets.
Design elements of this WWW application include
touch sensitive maps of the North American continent.
These maps reference environmental data according to U.S.
regional, stateand local groupings to support decision query

Author’s Address: Lockheed Martin, U.S. EPA Scientific Visualization
Center, 86 Alexander Drive, ResearchTriangle Park, North Carolina
27709, email: trhyne@vislab.epa.gov

O-8186-7201-3/95 $04.00 0 1995 IEEE

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

112

activities. Multiple formats for the display of environmental
data are under design. These include: a) agency standard
tables and charts for emission data; b) statistical plotting
capabilities; c) two-dimensional graphical displays registered against geographical elements like waterways and
roadways; and d) three-dimensional scientific visualizations
and animations. (http: //www.epa.gov/nep/index.html)

Special Considerations:

ber of links to information resources and disoriented while
navigating between the various remote file servers. One
potential solution to this dilemma is the incorporation of
intelligent or remote agent capabilities into browser programs. ( 0
An agent is an automated program that examines
the Internet on its operator’s behalf searching for specified
information. There are currently a few agents already existing which are called “web crawlers”. Using keyword-based
searches, web crawlers automatically search through the
Internet and index the information they find.
In the scientific visualization arena, a number of
research groups have begun to explore building intelligence
into visualization software. (2, 3) Initial evaluation and
testing of thesekinds of tools has begun at the U.S. EPA Scientific Visualization Center. With these concepts, an environmental researcher or policy analyst can prescribe a particular analysis task such as compare ozone concentrations
with power plant emissions for a given air pollution computational model scenario. The software system then automatically createsan appropriate visualization. The users of these
task-directed or rule based visualization software systems
specify their area of interest, describe the dam parameters,
and determine an analysisobjective. The intelligent software
tool will then suggestand describe visual representationsof
the data which might include contour plots, isosurfaces,
volume renderings, and animated vector representations.
Some of theseprototype systemshave explored developing WWW applications which provide an on-line catalog of visualization techniques. (2) This allows novice and
advancedusersto become familiar with computer generated
graphics techniques and to understand the capabilities of
intelligent visualization software. The linking of WWW
agent capabilities with rule-based visualization techniques
has the potential to enhance information visualization and
decision support activities. At EPA, theseintelligent visualization and browsing tools are intended to enhance already
existing efforts to build expert systems for environmental
assessmentand policy analysis. (4)

/

When examining the transfer of scientific visualization methodologies into the information visualization arena,
it is important to remember the viewpoint of general users.
Most usersaccessinginformation over the Internet arebrowsing and become impatient waiting for detailed graphics to
appear on their computer screens. So images that are kept
small, like postage stamp icons, are often the desired objective for designing WWW pages.
PC-basedworkstations, with no specializedgraphic
hardware, will not display volume renderings, transparency,
detailed color maps, and advanced three-dimensional computer graphics techniques with the same clarity as UNIXbased graphics (e.g. Silicon Graphics) workstations. Frequently, WWW based still image graphics are displayed in
GIF formats and not necessarily the file format originally
used for image generation (or rendering). For animation,
time series displays initially rendered on high-end UNIX
workstations often need to be converted and compressedinto
formats like JPEG and MPEG for PC-based display. These
WWW based graphics and animations might not be tightly
coupled to the computational or processed data used for
scientific visualization image creation. This poses challenges in checking data integrity and validity by scientists,
policy analysts, and decision makers on PC-based architectures.
Current technology assessmentefforts at the U.S.
EPA involve testing public domain PC-basedMPEG readers
that display environmental sciencesanimation sequences.
This assessmentincludes formulating guidelines for creating
visualization sequenceson high end (UNIX) workstations
that will be effectively displayed onPC-based architectures.
Techniques for linking WWW applications to large environmental sciencesdatabases,geographic information systems,
and computational models are also under evaluation.

Examining the Spatial and Geographic
Browsing Problem:
Many components of environmental information
visualization are geographically referenced. For comprehensive interpretation of geographically referenced information and its associated dam, there is a need for browser
programs (e.g. Mosaic) to be integrated with remotely distributed and networked spatial data bases (e.g. Geographic
Information Systems), computational modeling programs,
and scientific visualization tools. On PC- based amhitectures, accessto many of these met&computing resources is
feasible but real time interaction and graphical display might

Navigating and Connecting Information
Visualization:
A significant limitation of existing hypermedia
Internet tools, like Mosaic, is the inability to rapidly find and
quickly recall information resourcesof interest on the WWW.
Infrequent (and general) users of distributed hypermedia
systemscan easily become overwhelmed by the large num-

113

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

not be possible.
The U.S. EPA has begun to develop approachesfor
using Geographic Information Systems(GIS) serversfor the
batch processing of custom map and data requests in the
WWW environment. (5) The WWW acts as the user interface for submitting requestsfor creating information reports
and cutomized maps to a GIS server on the Internet. These
requestscan thus be initiated from PCs as well as any other
type of workstation which has accessto the WWW environment. (http://www.epa.gov/regionlO/www//siteinfo.html)
A few research teams are exploring building interface agents for browser programs which will be able to
examine non-textural data like digital maps, photographs,
and computer generated imagery. (6) For environmental
information, the basic concept is to augment browser programs with an intelligent “interface” agent that can learn
particular requirements and needsof environmental science,
policy analysis and decision making. On PC architectures,
the intelligent or mobile agent function is used to track the
execution of computational model programs, determine the
size and display requirements for large spatial data sets,
perform file conversion functions to support the graphical
display of computer generatedimages, and determine appropriate visualizations of the data. (7) The incorporation of
intelligent agentsinto browser programs provides the opportunity for the development of comprehensive integrated
environmental decision support systemsfor scientists, educators and the general public which accommodatenavigating
through the maze of me&computing resources. Some
commercial Internet browsing tools begin to address these
issues. (8)

that are incorporated into Internet browsing tools and scientific visualization software will aid in the building of comprehensive environmental sciences decision support systems.
These task directed decision support systems will allow
environmental researchers and policy analysts to specify
analysis requirements. The system will then automatically
construct appropriate visualizations which are linked to
geographic information databases.

Acknowledgments:
My colleagues, with Lockheed Martin, in Local
Area Networking , UNIX - Geographic Information Systems, and Personal Computer Support at the U.S. EPA’s National DataProcessing Division helped to define many of the
ideas presented here. They include Juli Kerr, Ann Ingram,
Don Block, John Jones, Chris Lamb and Keith Bosscawen.
SpecialthankstoCharlesPrattintheU.S.EPA’sOfficeofAir
Quality Planning and Standards,StephenFogarty in theU.S.
EPA’sNational DataProcessingDivision, and Dudley Bromley, Lockheed Martin Manager for Visualization.

References:
(1) D. Reicken, ed., special issue on “Intelligent Agents” Comm.
ACM, Vol. 37, No. 7, July 1994.
(2) M.P. Baker, ‘The KNOWVIS Project: An Experiment in
Automating Visualization,” Decision Support 2001 Cortf.
Proc., 1994 (in press).
(3) B. Rogowitz and L.Treinish, “An Architecture for RuleBased Visualization,” Proc. Visualization 93, IEEE CS Press,
Order No. 3940-02, Los Alamitos, Calif., 1993. pp. 236-243.

Conclusions and Recommendations:
Effective transfer of scientific visualization techniques to the PC-based desktop involves refocusing the
desktop visualization software issue into a WWW information visualization scenario. This redefinition allows for PC
based information visualization and collaboration between
remotely located sites via the Internet. The wide usage and
technical support of Internet browsing tools, like Mosaic, on
UNIX, Windows, and Macintosh platforms allows for implementation of the information visualization scenario for
researchers,policy analysts,decision makers and the general
public.
AU.S.EPAScientificVisualizationCenterWWWbased application is under development and testing within
the EPA telecommunications infrastructure. This tool educatesand preparesnovice and advancedusersin the application of scientific visualization techniques to environmental
sciences data sets. This first step will allow researchers,
policy analysts,and decision makers with PC architecturesto
become familiar with three dimensional visual representations of data. The future development of intelligent agents

(4) N. Chang, et. al. , “An Expert System for Regional Air
Quality Management”, Proc. 1994 Int’l Specialty Conf. Computing in Enviommental Mgmt.; Air 8z Waste Management Assoc.,
ResearchTriangle Park, North Carolina, pp. 133 - 144.
(5) D. Block, “Using Arc/Info as a GIS Server on the World
Wide Web”, Proc. of the 1995 Arc/Info Users Group Conf.,
(http://www.esri.com/resources/userconf/proc95/tol5O
p127.html).
(6) F. Hoke, “Research Initiative Aims to Bring the Digital
Library Closer to Reality,” The Scientist, January 9.1995, pp. 3 5.
(7) J. White, “Mobile agents make a network an open platform
for third-party developers”, under Hot Topics (R. Williams,
Editor), Computer, IEEE Computer Society, Vol. 27, No. 11,
November 1994, pp. 89 - 90.

(@The HOTJAVA Browser: A White Paper, (http://java.sun.com
/l.Oalpha3/doc/overview/hotjava/index.html), 1995.

114

Proceedings of the Proceedings on Information Visualization (INFOVIS '95)
0-8186-7201-3/95 $10.00 © 1995 IEEE

