Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2009
H.-C. Hege, I. Hotz, and T. Munzner
(Guest Editors)

Volume 28 (2009), Number 3

SDViz: A Context-Preserving Interactive Visualization
System for Technical Diagrams
Insoo Woo†1 SungYe Kim†1 Ross Maciejewski†1 David S. Ebert†1 Timothy D. Ropp†2 Krystal Thomas‡3
1 Electrical

and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, USA
Technology, Purdue University, USA
3 Air Force Research Laboratory, USA

2 Aviation

Abstract
When performing daily maintenance and repair tasks, technicians require access to a variety of technical diagrams. As technicians trace components and diagrams from page-to-page, within and across manuals, the contextual information of the components they are analyzing can easily be lost. To overcome these issues, we have
developed a Schematic Diagram Visualization System (SDViz) designed for maintaining and highlighting contextual information in technical documents, such as schematic and wiring diagrams. Our system incorporates
various features to aid in the navigation and diagnosis of faults, as well as maintaining contextual information
when tracing components/connections through multiple diagrams. System features include highlighting relationships between components and connectors, diagram annotation tools, the animation of flow through the system,
a novel contextual blending method, and a variety of traditional focus+context visualization techniques. We have
evaluated the usefulness of our system through a qualitative user study in which subjects utilized our system in
diagnosing faults during a standard aircraft maintenance exercise.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.6 [Computer Graphics]: Methodology and
Techniques—Interaction techniques I.3.8 [Computer Graphics]: Applications—

1. Introduction
In electronic/mechanical maintenance and repair tasks, 2D
technical documents, such as schematic and wiring diagrams, are used by technicians to guide their work. Typical tasks include component finding and circuit tracing in
which technicians hypothesize and test what components
along a circuit path are working. To facilitate these tasks,
maintenance workers often print a variety of documents to
annotate and highlight as they perform their analysis. Many
of these documents contain multi-page spreads of complex
wiring diagrams. Technicians will often need to find a component in a schematic diagram, search through the manual
for the related wiring diagram, and then trace paths through
the wiring diagram, while maintaining contextual information about where these wires and components may be in
† e-mail:{iwoo|inside|rmacieje|ebertd|tropp}@purdue.edu
‡ e-mail:Krystal.Thomas@wpafb.af.mil
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

relation to the schematic diagram. As such, tracing paths
from page-to-page and in-and-out of components can be tedious. Furthermore, the amount of documents needed can be
cumbersome, and maintaining contextual information when
switching between related diagrams is difficult. Meanwhile,
over the last decade, as technical documents have grown in
size, manufacturers have begun transferring them from the
printed pages to electronic files. Unfortunately, given that
many of these manuals consisted of multi-page fold-out diagrams, scrolling through pdfs and trying to maintain context
amongst various components is not a viable option.
In light of these issues and after performing cognitive task
analysis on a typical maintenance task, we have developed a
novel visualization system to aid technicians in their analysis of schematic and wiring diagrams for maintenance tasks.
Our system provides the following capabilities:
• Context preservation: preserving highlighting, working
status, switch status, and spatial information

944

I. Woo & S. Kim & R. Maciejewski & D. S. Ebert & T. D. Ropp & K. Thomas / SDViz

• Single diagram navigation: jumping to a connected
neighbor component, finding circuit breakers, overviewing a diagram
• Inter-diagram navigation: moving to the related diagram, transition by blending
• Highlighting: highlighting components and connections,
marking working status of components, changing switch
status
• Distortion viewing: magic lens, fisheye lens, relational
lens
• Animation: flow animation
• Searching: keyword searching, tree-viewing file explorer
• Zooming: zoom in and out, marquee zoom
In the following section, we describe our system design
and categorize the design principles.
2. System Design
Recent work by Barnard et al. [BRM06, BR06] noted that
individuals use technical documents differently and develop
their own mental models while interacting with systems.
This work noted the need for task-oriented and user-adapted
electronic technical documentation. Further, work by Heiser
[HTAH03, HPA∗ 04] detailed procedures on finding and instantiating design principles through cognitive experiments.
Based on ideas from these works, we have designed the SDViz system by consulting with aviation repair technicians in
order to develop an appropriate knowledge base of what user
needs should be met. A routine tabletop maintenance exercise, used for training, was performed by three technicians of
varying skill levels. A task analysis of the technicians’ tasks
was performed, and our system design was based on these
results.
Our system could be further enhanced through the application of graph-based visualization tools (e.g., Tulip
[Aub03]). A graph based framework for our system would
provide various manipulation tools based on the graph properties. However, unlike other information, there exist specific notations for schematic and wiring diagram drawings.
Furthermore, the details of components and connections between the components are often not consistent in technical
diagrams. Thus, it is difficult to apply graph visualization
techniques to schematic and wiring diagrams. Moreover, all
the information for system maintenance is system-oriented
and uses a hierarchical structure (e.g., system, subsystem,
and component) to organize various documents in relation
to each other. Technicians can search related diagrams using
the hierarchy of the component or document identifications
in the diagrams. As such, our work focuses on using this
hierarchical structure. We provide the user with appropriate
information, maintaining the layout and style of schematics
and the conventions in these diagrams. We have chosen not
to apply graph or network visualization techniques as many
technicians are not familiar with them. However, such techniques are valuable and could be applied in future systems.

For example, Van Ham [vH03] and Abello et al. [AvH04]
described visualization techniques using matrix representations providing multi-level zooming to efficiently abstract
information. Unfortunately, such matrix representation fails
to provide appropriate views for some tasks like diagram visualization for actual maintenance.
Other considerations in system design include the fact that
our system deals with legacy data (e.g., pdf, CGM (Computer Graphics Metafile) format diagrams, and paper manuals), and generating the appropriate data from these various legacy data is also an important issue. This issue again
leads us to choose a hierarchical tree structure (as opposed
to other graph or network visualization schemes) based on
SVG and XML specifications in order to store, as well as
represent technical diagrams. This also allows our system to
maintain the layout and style of diagrams without abstraction or rearrangement of components and links, and at the
same time, we can take various manipulations based on the
tree structure. Unfortunately, the data provided in the legacy
formats do not yield themselves to effective automatic analysis (they are lacking needed information). Moreover, we
cannot assume that a user would have all the necessary input
to enable effective analysis across the large set of schematics and wiring diagrams available. Instead, our system enables users to effectively analyze circuits in diagrams visualized and highlight important components, focusing on their
maintenance task at hand. Therefore, we focus only on the
practical system design and integration as well as a system
evaluation within the context of a realistic maintenance task.
2.1. Tabletop Exercise
The tabletop scenario consisted of a two fault error analysis design in which a lefthand side window heating unit in
a Boeing 737 is found to be inoperable. The two faults included a short in the wiring leading from the power supply to the window heater, and a bent pin in the P5-9 component. During the tabletop exercise, the technicians diagnosed the issues using printed manuals. When measurements
were needed (for example when a technician wanted to know
if component x had power) the exercise leader would provide that information as they proceeded through their steps.
As the technicians performed, they spoke outloud, detailing
their actions. Notes were taken about the technicians’ actions. Three technicians participated in this stage of knowledge gathering.
We noted that there were underlying actions taken by
all technicians. First, the technicians searched the maintenance manual (MM) and schematic diagram manual (SDM)
for keywords relating to the components under question.
Second, the technicians utilized the wiring diagram manual
(WDM) indexed from the keywords found in the MM and
SDM. In the WDM, technicians traced the path from the
window unit to the power source to determine what components may be contributing to the fault. While searching
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

I. Woo & S. Kim & R. Maciejewski & D. S. Ebert & T. D. Ropp & K. Thomas / SDViz

and identifying system components, subjects systematically
checked the wiring continuity beginning with the circuit
breaker, wire run, panel switch, and window connections,
spending most of their time using the SDM.
2.2. Design Principles
From the task analysis, we derived the system needs as follows:
•
•
•
•

Providing seamless visualization compared to legacy data
Allowing users to find what they want in multi-diagrams
Allowing users to highlight components and links
Following the flow of electricity from source to sink components
• Preserving component context between diagrams
• Enabling users to easily move back and forth among related diagrams
The most important observation from the task analysis
was that preserving context among related diagrams can
enormously help technicians find desired information providing a starting point when they refer to related diagrams.
Hence, we focus on preserving component context (e.g.,
highlighting, working status, switch status, and spatial information) in the visualization system for technical documents,
particularly, technical diagrams.
3. SDViz: A Schematic Diagram Visualization System
Based on the design principles developed in our knowledge
acquisition phase, we have developed a Schematic Diagram
Visualization System (SDViz) to aid technicians in the navigation/diagnosis of faults and the traversal of multiple linked
diagrams. Unlike general document visualization, we have
chosen not to map the technical documents into multivariate
space as such views are not familiar to technicians. Instead,
our system provides a seamless transition from paper manuals to the visualization realm by adding tools and features
that are intuitive to technicians and designed based on observations of technicians’ work. System features include highlighting relationships between components/connectors and
components/components, maintaining context between several related diagrams, animation of electrical flow through
the system, component/sub-component annotation (marking
a component working/not-working), and improving navigation and linking of diagrams through advanced blending and
other novel visualization techniques.
In comparison to related work, Li et al. [LAS04] proposed an interactive image-based exploded view diagrams
using 2D images. Further, Boose et al. [BSB03] migrated 2D
illustrated part drawings to Class IV Interactive Electronic
Technical Manual (IETM). In both work, technical diagram
visualization reuses the legacy documents in a raster format without recreating diagram data. By contrast, Setlur and
Chen [SC05] and Fredj et al. [FD06] used the 2D vector format in their technical document visualization systems. More
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

945

recently, the PDF Schematic Tracing [PST] system was developed as commercial plug-in software allowing users to
trace the connections in schematic diagrams in PDF format by highlighting the path components, and by providing hyperlinks between components and their descriptions.
The PDF Schematic Tracing has the most similar purpose
to our system in terms that it was developed to help maintenance personnel to look through many diagram manuals,
and it provides navigation in technical diagrams without any
modification of the layout and style of diagrams.
In our system, we use two data for each diagram; SVG
data converted from a legacy diagram, and the eXtensible
Markup Language (XML) [Ext] data containing semantic
information within the diagram. Hence, our system is intended to reuse legacy data (e.g., pdf, CGM, and paper diagram scanned as a bitmap) as well as to take advantage of 2D
vector graphics by using SVG format. As such, our system
builds on previous work, creating new techniques and providing a quantitative analysis of these techniques for technical document visualization. The following subsections will
describe the data representation for context preserving information systems and key features of our system.
3.1. Data Generation
To relate documents from different sources, a structured data
representation is required. Moreover, context preservation
during document navigation and investigation requires semantic information to identify the focus component, the contextual components, and the connections. Setlur and Chen
[SC05] identified, categorized and stored the characteristics
of each object in the XML based data files in order to enhance key objects by maintaining the objects’ size while
zooming out. A higher level graphical structure semantic
markup language (GraSSML) has been proposed to store the
structure and semantics of diagrams [FD06].
All diagrams used in our system follow specifications
such as IETM, SVG and SGML/XML, which enable the effective querying and displaying of diagrams along with providing resolution-independent visualization. Each diagram
is converted to SVG format for graphics information, and
then XML file is generated by our semantic editor, which is
a very simple tool developed as a part of our entire system
to authorize semantic information of a given technical diagram. This data generation step introduces the hierarchical
structure and semantics of components and connectors in a
diagram, and allows us to take advantage of searching information based on XML-tagged Document Instances (DI),
which forms the basis for our context-preservation work.
3.2. Preserving Contextual Information
While troubleshooting, technicians need to use multiple diagrams, requiring a contextual shift as they move from highlevel schematic diagrams to low-level wiring diagrams. For

946

I. Woo & S. Kim & R. Maciejewski & D. S. Ebert & T. D. Ropp & K. Thomas / SDViz

Figure 1: Contextual information preserved between a
schematic (left) and the related wiring (right) diagrams in
our system.
instance, any component in a schematic diagram may be the
cause of a system fault. A technician would begin their analysis by finding their component of interest and then loading
up a wiring diagram. Our system provides technicians with
tools that help maintain context when shifting between documents by maintaining spatial coherency between components, component annotation, and highlighting information
during a document shift. In the example of changing from
the high-level schematic diagram to the detailed schematic
diagram, preserving the contextual information of the component such as highlighting information, working status,
etc., provides users with a seamless transition. Moreover,
our system introduces a feature in which spatial information is maintained by blending the two documents gradually.
By blending, we are able to more effectively allow users to
perceive the related information between documents in comparison to switching back and forth between pages (although
that option exists as well in our system). Figure 1 shows how
contextual information is preserved between two related diagrams distorted with the rectangular fisheye lens. In Figure 1, the user’s interactions (component’s working status
and a user-selected focus component) with the schematic diagram are preserved and visible in the related wiring diagram maintaining contextual information.
3.3. Navigation
Single diagram navigation For navigating within a given
diagram, we consider common methods used in maintenance
and repair using technical diagrams. Since most components
are connected to other components through wire connections, we provide the capability to center any of the connected components by selecting the component’s name from
a popup menu. In many maintenance tasks dealing with large
diagrams, this jumping by selecting a component name can
be useful to navigate within a diagram without tracing wire
connections. Additionally, the quick identification of special components, such as circuit breakers, can be essential
in helping technicians find the fault while navigating in a
diagram. Hence, we have designed a method to find all components of a specified type that are connected to a focus

Figure 2: Finding circuit breakers (leftmost highlighted
component) connected to the focused component (rightmost
highlighted component).

component. For a graph representing the relationship of wire
connections between components generated with the connection information of a diagram, we apply a breadth first
search, and paths from the focused component to the circuit
breakers are displayed. For example, when a component has
been selected by a user, all wire connections and neighbor
components are highlighted on the backward path from the
focused component to the circuit breakers. Figure 2 shows
an example of using this feature for the focused component,
highlighting circuit breaker components at the leftmost end
on the highlighted wire connections.
Inter-diagram navigation In complex electrical and mechanical systems, most diagrams are inter-related to other
diagrams. For instance, each schematic diagram is associated with the related schematic and wiring diagrams. Hence,
moving to the related diagrams without explicitly searching will be essential for maintenance tasks. For such interdiagram navigation, preserving the contextual information
is indispensable because it enables users to keep their focus while switching diagrams. To preserve contextual information, all components are assigned an unique identifier so
that user interactions can be applied to all components in related diagrams. In maintaining highlighting information between diagrams, the schematic diagrams are often simpler
than wiring diagrams. Therefore, the parent component including any focused component in a wiring diagram may be
solely highlighted in a schematic diagram, or children components within the focused component in a schematic diagram may be highlighted together in a wiring diagram. In
those cases, the hierarchical information is used to find appropriate components in the related diagrams to apply the
changes by users’ interaction.
The speed of the diagram switching is another consideration of a visualization system for technical diagrams. We
propose Transition by blending, a method to show the related
diagram within the view of the current diagram by blending
the diagrams under user-controlled speed. Figure 3 shows
the example of procedures using the Transition by blending
for a focused component from a schematic to a wiring diagram. While diagrams are blended, the highlighting as well
as spatial context of a focused component are maintained
to provide a user with consistent contextual information. In
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

947

I. Woo & S. Kim & R. Maciejewski & D. S. Ebert & T. D. Ropp & K. Thomas / SDViz

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 3: Transition by blending from a schematic diagram to a related wiring diagram preserving spatial information of a
selected component. (a) Schematic diagram, (b) initial view of Transition by blending combined with our Relational lens, (c)
60% blending, and (d) final transition to the related wiring diagram.
Figure 3(b) and 3(c), the size of the focused component in a
schematic diagram is smaller than that of the component in
the related wiring diagram. Hence, the green rectangle is enlarged more and more while being blended with the wiring
diagram. The green rectangle in Figure 3(b) indicates our
Relational lens which we describe in subsection 3.5.
3.4. Highlighting
Highlighting enhances the information relevant to the user’s
task and immediately draws the user’s attention by using
colors or marks. We highlight the names of components,
the focused component, neighbor components connected to
the focused component, and wire connections between highlighted components in various colors and with marks indicating the status of a component. Figure 4 shows several
components and connections highlighted. The highlighting
of each component is blended with that of a parent component. For use in highlighting, the relationship between components can be generated from the connection information
in XML data, since each diagram includes XML data for the
semantic information. Unlike components, connections have
a directional property, such as a source or a sink. Hence, we
interpolate colors of the end points of each connection from
a source (red) to a sink (blue) to present the directional cue.
Annotations, placing comments on the diagrams which
are meaningful to users, are another method to highlight
diagrams. Marshall [Mar97] studied where students made
marks in their text book and defined the form and function of these annotations. The annotations were placed either within text or in marginal or blank space, and were
categorized into two categories: telegraphic (e.g., underlining, stars, and circles) and explicit one (e.g., brief notes
and short phrases). In the SDViz system, we support annotations by placing special marks (switch off/on, component working/not-working), which are then used to provide
a symbolic note when performing maintenance tasks across
multiple diagrams. These special marks are preserved in all
related diagrams as contextual information in our system by
managing each component’s unique identifier.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Figure 4: Highlighting components and connections in various colors (green: marked as working status, red: marked
as not-working status, cyan: locked focusing, purple: highlighted as a neighbor) and with different marks (switch
on/off, working/not-working status).
3.5. Distortion Viewing
Unlike general documents, distortion viewing for technical
diagrams is less preferred by maintenance personnel because it changes the structural view of contents within the
diagrams. Despite this limitation, a few distortion viewing
techniques can be effective for the visualization of relatively large diagrams on a computer display and can enhance a user’s area of interest within the context of a diagram. Furthermore, Baudisch et al. [BGBS02] showed
that focus+context visualization reduced the time to perform tasks by evaluating focus+context, overview+detail,
and pan+zoom interfaces for large detailed data. Hence,
we provide the magic lens and the rectangular fisheye
lens. The magic lens uses a fixed-size magnifying area occluding neighbor regions, whereas the rectangular fisheye
lens [Rau99,RJS01] distorts neighbor regions around a userdefined area providing contextual information unoccluded.
Our system also incorporates work by Gutwin [Gut02] in
which focus-targeting is improved by accounting for the
users’ activity (speed of mouse movements) to modulate the
rate of distortion while supporting navigation and inspection.
In addition, we propose the Relational lens that uses a
fixed-size lens defined by the boundary of a focused com-

948

I. Woo & S. Kim & R. Maciejewski & D. S. Ebert & T. D. Ropp & K. Thomas / SDViz

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 5: Relational lens applied to the focused component in (a) a schematic diagram and (c) a wiring diagram to see more
detail wiring information. (b) The wiring information shown through the Relational lens in a schematic diagram, and (d) more
detail wiring information shown through the Relational lens in a wiring diagram.
ponent. The main goal of the Relational lens is to display
information from related diagrams by overlaying the related information on a focused component while intrinsically preserving the spatial context. For example, the Relational lens overlays the detail view of the related wiring
diagram on a focused component within a schematic diagram or the overview of the related schematic diagram on a
focused component within a wiring diagram. Figure 5 shows
an example using the Relational lens on the schematic and
wiring diagrams to see more detailed wiring information of
a focused component. The outmost components highlighted
in Figure 5(a) and 5(c) show components to which the Relational lens is applied resulting in Figure 5(b) and 5(d),
respectively. The Relational lens is toggled by user interaction, and applied to the component focused by mouse over
or highlighted by double clicking. What users see through
the Relational lens is information for the same component
from a related diagram. It can be from any related SDM
(abstracted information) or WDM (detailed information). In
Figure 5(b) and 5(d), the green rectangles show the boundary of the Relational lens applied to a focused component in
SDM and WDM, respectively. The part of a diagram inside
each green rectangle is taken from a corresponding related
WDM. A similar concept, called semantic zooming, was introduced by Frisch et al. [FDB08] by visualizing overview
and details based on focus+context technique for a focused
node within a UML diagram. However, it differs from our
Relational lens in terms that our system visualizes the different level of details as well as all contextual information (i.e.,
highlighting, switch status, working/not-working status) occurred dynamically by user interaction. From our observations, the matching the different scales of the same component in related diagrams can result in a distorted aspect ratio,
confusing the users. Hence, the information from the related
diagram through the Relational lens is displayed at the same
scale as the current diagram. As shown in Figure 3, the Relational lens can also be used with the Transition by blending.

3.6. Flow Animation
Based on our task analysis, we found that most technicians
follow the flow of electricity during troubleshooting operations. Furthermore, work by Robertson et al. [RFF∗ 08]
has demonstrated the effectiveness of animation in illustrating data trends. As such, we allow users to view flow animations using a texture mapping technique on connections
to show system functions and flow. In technical diagrams,
sources and sinks can be identified as technicians usually
think. We had a senior student in Aviation Technology at
Purdue University identify sources, sinks, and flow directions in diagrams we used, before we generate XML data for
semantic information from the diagrams. Hence, our XML
data contains the information about sources and sinks resulting in the flow of electricity highlighted from the source
to sink component. The flow animation is affected by both
the switches and working status of components. Therefore,
flow animation can also be utilized as the method for single diagram navigation providing a dynamic visualization.
Figure 6 shows an example of our flow animation. The electricity flows from the selected component (leftmost highlighted component) to the components connected to the selected one. The upper flow of electricity is stopped, whereas
the lower flow passes through the switch due to the switch
status (upper switch is on, and lower switch is off).

Figure 6: Flow animation mapped with an arrow texture animated along the flow direction.

c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

I. Woo & S. Kim & R. Maciejewski & D. S. Ebert & T. D. Ropp & K. Thomas / SDViz

(a)

949

(b)

Figure 7: Results from the field study by 7 senior students in the school of Aviation Technology at Purdue University. (a)
Usability for each function, and (b) usefulness for each feature from the field study.
4. Qualitative Field Study
In order to evaluate the effectiveness of SDViz, a qualitative
field study was conducted with 10 college seniors from the
school of Aviation Technology at Purdue University.

and were also asked to write any other comments they had
about the system. Subjects also ranked the functions of SDViz based on their preference of use.
4.3. Qualitative Results

4.1. Scenario

Participants were given a pre-experiment questionnaire to
evaluate their relative background knowledge and experience as well as were classified into two groups. Subjects
in Group A used the full functionality of SDViz to perform
the diagnoses. They were provided with tutorial videos and
training prior to beginning. Furthermore, they could also
consult the SDViz user manual at any time during troubleshooting. Subjects in Group B were given a basic pdf
viewer with pan and zoom navigation controls to perform
the diagnoses. Training was provided for those subjects unfamiliar with pdf navigation.

Figure 7 shows the results from our field study by the 7 subjects in Group A. The horizontal axis lists each function of
our SDViz, and the vertical axis represents the number of
subjects. In Figure 7(a), most subjects who used SDViz for
the troubleshooting commented that most of functions were
“very easy” or “easy” to use for the usability of our SDViz. Particularly, all subjects chose “very easy” or “easy” for
the usability of the highlighting components, working status,
magic lens, and flow animation. For the Transition by Blending, subjects agreed that it provided efficient context preservation keeping their focus, but two of them also answered it
was “not easy” enough to use because they were not familiar with such an interface. Figure 7(b) shows the usefulness
evaluation results for each SDViz feature. All participants
who used SDViz for the troubleshooting agreed that highlighting, moving to the related diagram, and flow animation
features were “very useful” or “useful.” In addition, 6 among
7 subjects chose “very useful” or “useful” for the working
status and maintaining the highlighting features. Moreover,
some of them proposed that it would be useful to highlight
more than one component as focused components. Our analysis from consulting with repair technicians and our task
analysis revealed that distortion viewing, using the magic
lens and the fisheye lens, were not preferred by subjects. For
each distortion method, 2 among 7 subjects answered “not
useful.”

Upon completion of the scenario, subjects in Group A
were given a post-experiment questionnaire to collect qualitative feedback for each functional component of SDViz.
Subjects answered questions on the usability and usefulness
of the SDViz capabilities, ranking them either from “difficult” to “very easy” or from “not useful” to “very useful”

Although the purpose of the field study was to collect
qualitative feedback, we also observed the troubleshooting
time to complete the scenario for both groups. The participants who used a pdf viewer took 17-32 minutes to troubleshoot the component, spending most of their time finding
related diagrams between various manuals, whereas partic-

We reused the scenario performed in the knowledge acquisition phase. To reiterate, the scenario is that a window
heater was malfunctioning in a Boeing 737 aircraft. No voltage is indicated when the left side window control switch
is positioned to ON. No students in the field study participated in the knowledge acquisition phase, nor had they previously performed this task in their class. The subjects were
asked to troubleshoot the problem using relevant maintenance, schematic, and wiring diagram manuals. Again, when
measurements were needed, the exercise leader would provide this information.
4.2. Experimental Setup

c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

950

I. Woo & S. Kim & R. Maciejewski & D. S. Ebert & T. D. Ropp & K. Thomas / SDViz

ipants using the SDViz system took 9-15 minutes to troubleshoot, thereby decreasing the task time by 46-52%.
5. Conclusion and Future Work
In SDViz, we applied various visualization techniques such
as highlighting, locating a 2D viewpoint, distortion viewing,
blending for transition, and animating for the exploration of
technical diagrams in order to help users understand the diagrams as well as find the desired information effectively.
Furthermore, we conducted a field study by students in the
school of Aviation Technology at Purdue University to evaluate the capabilities of our system. Based on the results from
our field study, we believe that our system can provide maintenance personnel with an effective and efficient visualization tool for maintenance, repair, and training tasks.
There are several issues to be considered as future work.
First, we can consider improving the capability of interoperations between various units such as components, pages,
diagrams, subsystems and systems. Such interoperations can
help technicians understand the current trouble with a broad
point of view about an entire system and cooperate with
other technicians. Second, integration with multimedia data
like 3D models, Macromedia Flash files, and video clips will
make SDViz be more effective for maintenance tasks. Each
component or subsystem can be displayed with 3D models
providing users with a variety of interactive operations such
as interactive viewpoints, internal 3D views, and assembly
as well as on/off operations. Video clips can provide useful
information to describe how to work with each component
and subsystem. Third, more customized focus+context techniques need to be developed for dealing with the technical
diagrams containing various complexities. Finally, using a
touch screen device may also be considered to provide maintenance personnel with more intuitive interfaces.
6. Acknowledgement

[BR06] BARNARD Y., R EISS M.: User-centred innovation of
electronic documentation for maintenance. In Developments
in Human Factors in Transportation, Design and Evaluation
(2006), Shaker Publishing, pp. 129–142.
[BRM06] BARNARD Y., R EISS M., M AZOYER P.: Mental models of users of aircraft maintenance documentation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction in Aeronautics (2006), pp. 232–239.
[BSB03] B OOSE M., S HEMA D., BAUM L.: A scalable solution
for integrating illustrated parts drawings into a class iv interactive
electronic technical manual. vol. 1, pp. 309–313.
[Ext] [W3C:
Extensible
Markup
Language
(XML)]
http://www.w3.org/XML/ (accessed 8 March 2009).
[FD06] F REDJ Z. B., D UCE D. A.: Grassml: accessible smart
schematic diagrams for all. In W4A: Proceedings of the 2006
international cross-disciplinary workshop on Web accessibility
(W4A) (2006), ACM, pp. 57–60.
[FDB08] F RISCH M., DACHSELT R., B RÜCKMANN T.: Towards
seamless semantic zooming techniques for uml diagrams. In SoftVis ’08: Proceedings of the 4th ACM symposium on Software visuallization (New York, NY, USA, 2008), ACM, pp. 207–208.
[Gut02] G UTWIN C.: Improving focus targeting in interactive
fisheye views. In CHI ’02: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems (2002), ACM.
[HPA∗ 04] H EISER J., P HAN D., AGRAWALA M., T VERSKY B.,
H ANRAHAN P.: Identification and validation of cognitive design
principles for automated generation of assembly instructions. In
AVI ’04: Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced
visual interfaces (2004), ACM, pp. 311–319.
[HTAH03] H EISER J., T VERSKY B., AGRAWALA M., H ANRA HAN P.: Cognitive design principles for visualizations: Revealing and instantiating. In CogSci ’03: Proceedings of 25th annual
meeting of the cognitive science society (2003), pp. 545–550.
[LAS04] L I W., AGRAWALA M., S ALESIN D. H.: Interactive
Image-Based Exploded View Diagrams. Heidrich W., Balakrishnan R., (Eds.), vol. 62 of ACM International Conference Proceeding Series, Canadian Human-Computer Communications
Society, A K Peters, LTD.
[Mar97] M ARSHALL C. C.: Annotation: from paper books to the
digital library. In DL ’97: Proceedings of the second ACM international conference on Digital libraries (1997), ACM Press.

This work has been funded by the U.S. Air Force Research
Laboratory Human Effectiveness Directorate under Contract
FA8560-04-D-6546 and the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security Regional Visualization and Analytics Center of Excellence.

[PST] [PDF
Schematic
http://www.bcltechnologies.com/
March 2009).

References

[RFF∗ 08] ROBERTSON G., F ERNANDEZ R., F ISHER D., L EE
B., S TASKO J.: Effectiveness of animation in trend visualization. vol. 14, pp. 1325–1332.

[Aub03] AUBER D.: Tulip : A huge graph visualisation framework. In Graph Drawing Softwares, Mutzel P., Jünger M., (Eds.),
Mathematics and Visualization. Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[AvH04] A BELLO J., VAN H AM F.: Matrix zoom: A visual interface to semi-external graphs. In INFOVIS ’04: Proceedings of
the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (Washington,
DC, USA, 2004), IEEE Computer Society, pp. 183–190.
[BGBS02] BAUDISCH P., G OOD N., B ELLOTTI V., S CHRAED LEY P.: Keeping things in context: a comparative evaluation of
focus plus context screens, overviews, and zooming. In CHI ’02:
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems (2002), ACM Press, pp. 259–266.

Tracing]
(accessed 8

[Rau99] R AUSCHENBACH U.: The rectangular fish eye view as an
efficient method for the transmission and display of large images.
In ICIP ’99: Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing (1999), pp. 115–119.

[RJS01] R AUSCHENBACH U., J ESCHKE S., S CHUMANN H.:
General rectangular fisheye views for 2d graphics. vol. 24,
pp. 609–617.
[SC05] S ETLUR V., C HEN X.: Retargeting vector animation for
small displays. In MUM ’05: Proceedings of the 4th international
conference on Mobile and ubiquitous multimedia (2005), ACM.
[vH03] VAN H AM F.: Using multilevel call matrices in large software projects. In INFOVIS ’03: Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (Los Alamitos, CA, USA,
2003), IEEE Computer Society, pp. 227–232.

c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

