Volume 28 (2009), Number 2

EUROGRAPHICS 2009 / P. Dutré and M. Stamminger
(Guest Editors)

Genuinity Signatures:
Designing Signatures for Verifying 3D Object Genuinity
Daniel G. Aliaga

Mikhail J. Atallah

Department of Computer Science at Purdue University

ABSTRACT
3D computer graphics models and digitally-controlled manufacturing have come together to enable the design, visualization, simulation, and automated creation of complex 3D objects. In our work, we propose and implement a framework for
designing computer graphics objects and digitally manufacturing them such that no adversary can make imitations or counterfeit copies of the physical object, even if the adversary has a large number of original copies of the object, knowledge of the
original object design, and has manufacturing precision that is comparable to or superior to that of the legitimate creator of
the object. Our approach is to design and embed a signature on the surface of the object which acts as a certificate of genuinity of the object. The signature is detectable by a signature-reading device, based on methods in computer graphics and computer vision, which contains some of the secret information that was used when marking the physical object. Further, the
compromise of a signature-reading device by an adversary who is able to extract all its secrets, does not enable the adversary
to create counterfeit objects that fool other readers, thereby still enabling reliable copy detection. We implemented a prototype of our scheme end-to-end, including the production of the physical object and the genuinity-testing device.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3 [Computer Graphics], I.3.3 [Picture/Image Generation], I.3.7 [Three-dimensional Graphics and Realism], I.4.1 [Digitization and Image Capture].

1. Introduction
Our work provides algorithms for encoding into a digital
3D object information that enables determining genuinity of
a physical object after its automated manufacturing. In today’s technological world, many physical objects are manufactured using 3D computer graphics models and digitallycontrolled devices (e.g., milling machines, 3D printers, and
robotic arms). The manufactured objects can range from
inexpensive steel screws to costly and carefully designed
parts, for example, for engines and for medical instruments.
Our algorithms provide a way to encode a unique signature
into a computer-designed and fabricated object and a way to
decode the signature in order to verify object genuinity.
The digitization of the 3D design and manufacturing
process of objects enables creating intricate structures that
may have required a significant investment of time, infrastructure, and personnel. A growing worry amongst designers, manufacturers, and buyers of digitally-built parts is
knowing whether they have a genuine part fabricated by the
advertised company. While for simple objects a visual inspection might be sufficient to detect irregularities, this is
not the case for more complex objects or for verifying material composition, density, and product quality. Thus, imitations and “knock-offs” may float around the black market
and fall into unexpected hands. The replicas are designed to

c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

unknown specifications, which may lead to catastrophic
problems (e.g., failures in an engine). A recent manufacturing industry report [http://mema.org] called counterfeiting
“the crime of the century”. Even in 1997, the cost of counterfeit parts to the global automotive industry was already
$12 billion, and the numbers are up sharply since then.
The challenge is to encode information into the object
that cannot be reproduced by an adversary and to do so
without depending on the legitimate manufacturer having
technology superior to the adversary or on security-throughobscurity. The high-resolution etching of logos or serial
numbers is an option but can be imitated by an adversary
that develops equal or better technological ability than the
legitimate manufacturer -- a fact that can be true without the
legitimate manufacturer knowing so. An instance of security-through-obscurity would be in assuming the digital model itself or the location of unique markings on the object is
kept secret. However, if this information leaks out, security
is compromised and the adversary is able to make copies
indistinguishable from genuine objects.
Our main observation is that upon copying any physical
object, the adversary cannot obtain the exact same combination of manufacturing errors. For digital data, perfect copies
can be obtained; thus digital watermarking is a known
process for encoding ownership data into a digital object.
However, our problem is quite different from digital watermarking and investigates an under-explored area of research. For physical objects, copying is always an imperfect

Daniel G. Aliaga, Mikhail J. Atallah / Genuinity Signatures

438

a)

d)

c)

b)

e)

f)

Figure 1: Genuinity Signatures. We address the problem of detecting whether a physical object is genuine or is a counterfeit. (a, d) Using our algorithm, the user designs a unique “genuinity signature” and encodes it into a subset of a 3D
synthetic model. (b, e) The physical object is built using automated digital manufacturing. (c, f) An automated system
determines if the object is genuine or is an imitation (even if manufactured using higher accuracy than the genuine).
and noisy process. We interpret the change of manufacturing error as a change in the “signature” of the object. Thus,
we design a method to inject a small amount of additional
and carefully designed manufacturing error into a subset of
the object’s surface (that is inconsequential to its intended
use). During a verification process, we reliably discover
unexpected error and determine object genuinity.
Our approach creates a genuinity signature for an object
by using a 3D synthetic model of the object, a set of accuracy values for the manufacturing and verification processes,
and an arbitrarily-chosen object serial number. The serial
number and a private “master key” are used, for example, in
a cryptographically secure one-way hash (e.g., SHA-2) to
generate apparently random numbers for defining the genuinity signature. The signature is composed of a set of
random yet smoothly varying surface displacements that,
under user control, is applied to the signature’s footprint on
the object (i.e., a subset of or the entirety of the object’s
surface). The secret key assists in generating random numbers that determine both where and how the signature is
embedded, but reverse engineering the key is hard because
there are an exponential number of possibilities. Moreover,
even if the adversary was willing to exhaustively try all
possibilities, the adversary has no clear "success criterion"
to know when a correct guess has been made.
The displacements have been carefully designed so that
upon either re-instancing (i.e., making copies from scratch
using the original digital model) or replication (i.e., making
copies by digitally acquiring and then re-manufacturing the
object) the signature is distorted. To verify genuinity of an
object, our process acquires a high-resolution surface model
of the signature’s footprint on the object and uses statistical
tools to determine if the signature is still present. Further,
our signature is also designed to include some redundancy

so that very precise alignment of the captured footprint and
the synthetic signature is not necessary. Figure 1 shows the
process for an exemplary object.
Our algorithm does not rely upon the legitimate manufacturer having technology superior to the adversary nor on
storing secret information, except for the aforementioned
master key. In fact, in our work we assume that the entire
encoding/decoding algorithm and the digital model itself are
public knowledge. The master key can be specific to an
object or group of objects. Thus, even if the master key
becomes public knowledge, only that object or small group
of objects is compromised. Moreover, for verification only a
partial-key that decodes some of a particular signature is
needed. If this key becomes public, an adversary cannot
copy the entire affected object or objects.
In more detail, let’s consider the case of a genuine object
that can be manufactured with variance
> 0 and an adversary able to produce a similar object with a manufacturing variance
> 0. Given an operational tolerance , we
can assume
and
; but, we do not know if
≤
or vice versa. In our work, subsets of the object’s
. If
surface are intentionally displaced by up to
the object has been re-instanced or replicated, then the observed displacements and their distribution is different than
expected because either the desired displacements were
appeared unexpectedly. Even if
unknown or a variance
is smaller than
, the number of displacements can be
.
made larger so as to reliably detect a smaller
To demonstrate our method, we design several objects,
encode a signature, either digitally manufacture the object
using 3D printing facilities or using simulation, and then
capture and verify genuinity. Our main contributions are
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Daniel G. Aliaga, Mikhail J. Atallah / Genuinity Signatures

•
•

•

an approach enabling the detection of physical counterfeit objects created in today’s world of digital design and manufacturing,
a specific encoding method to “write” a unique signature into a physical 3D object without affecting the
object’s functionality, in the sense of not exceeding
an operational error tolerance, and
a general decoding method to “read” a signature
from a physical 3D object such that if the object has
been copied, even with higher accuracy than the
manufacturer’s technology, the signature cannot be
extracted. The reading process does not have to reconstruct the entire object, is not highly sensitive to
alignment, and does not need a priori calibration.

2. Related Work
Before the rampant digitization of the manufacturing
process, the authenticity of an object could be determined
by the presence of a unique set of marks at a particular (possibly inconspicuous) location, e.g., a special etching, a serial
number, etc. The digitization of manufacturing made many
of these schemes obsolete. In the past the adversary could
produce the same markings on the physical object while not
necessarily creating objects to the same specifications of
quality, shape, and material compositions as the original.
Today’s counterfeiters can often have the same manufacturing technology, or better, and without the original manufacturer even knowing it. Other approaches in use today consist
of attaching to the physical object an electronic device (e.g.,
RFID [RVW*07]) or a smartcard coupled with a holographic-watermarking scheme. While our method can be used
without such attached electronics (AEs), an adversary could
make copies of the AE device and attach each such copy to
a superior-quality counterfeit copy. Using our method in
coordination with AEs prevents such attacks because the AE
would no longer match the object to which it is attached.
A related effort is copy-evident technology and physical
watermarking for secure paper documents (e.g., [Vol*96]).
These approaches either use a printing resolution greater
than a typical paper copier to embed special markings onto a
document or embed special light absorption and reflection
material into the paper itself making a copied document
very evident. By visual inspection or by using a magnifying
glass the markings can be visually verified.
Watermarking has been extended to the digital domain
(e.g., [CGE*07, WLD*07]) and is concerned either with
robustness (e.g., [LDD*07, PYC*03]) or with fragility (e.g.,
[CHL*01, YY*99]) for ensuring the integrity of images and
other digital objects. These approaches have been designed
for digital data which can be created, read, and replicated
with zero error. In contrast, for physical objects there is an
error involved at each of the aforementioned steps. Although the second group of watermarking methods could be
adapted to our targeted problem, the schemes would fail our
requirement of selective robustness in the face of our own
manufacturing errors, and the inaccuracies of our verification tools. Traditional uses of fragile watermarking have not
had a counterfeiting adversary in mind. Their model of the
adversary was of one who wishes to modify the object without causing the disappearance of the fragile mark – it was
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

439

CreateGenuinitySignature(Key K)
Select signature footprint on object.
Define per-pixel displacements di
and variances vi.
Divide pixels into contiguous patches Ai.
Sort patches by their variances.
Define non-adjacent but equal-variance
groups Bk.
Subdivide model into small triangles and
perturb footprint using displacement map.
PerformGenuinityTest(Key K)
Acquire 3D model of signature footprint.
Align with synthetic model of displaced
surface geometry.
Compute value of the test statistic W
to determine genuinity.

Figure 2: Pseudocode Summary of Method.
really anti-tamper. But our adversary and has no interest in
tampering. Instead, they seek to produce a faithful reproduction of the object, mark, and all.
3. Genuinity Signatures
A genuinity signature is composed of a large set of samples organized by a two-level stratification which has been
designed to robustly detect physical imitations created via
re-instancing or replication (Figure 2). Each sample in the
signature stores both a surface displacement value and a
surface variance value. The former helps to create a signature with a unique configuration and the latter helps to
detect unwanted replication attacks. The organization into
strata provides additional structure that improves the sensitivity for detecting attacks yet can still maintain the appearance of a random signature. All sample values and stratification are determined using a secure key-based pseudorandom
number generator and randomly parameterized Perlin noise
[Per*02]. Perlin noise is employed in order to generate
smoothly changing displacement and variance values. The
smoothness and stratification also has the side-effect of
relaxing the alignment requirement between the synthetic
and captured signature thus making verification easier.
The large set of samples is beneficial to enabling an abundant number of unique signatures and to yielding the
precision needed to guard against an adversary with technology superior to that of the legitimate manufacturer. We
chose to use samples consisting of local displacements,
rather than global alterations (e.g., of volume, surface area,
or ratios of the sizes of different parts of the object), because
verification can be performed without reconstructing the
entire object. Furthermore, the size of the signature’s footprint on the object is proportional to the desired robustness
against attacks. Recovering a surface fragment of the object
visible from a single viewpoint is often sufficient.
Our method can be applied to any object as long as some
visible surface area can be manufactured with our specified
displacements. The absolute value of the errors is not important. Instead, the effectiveness of genuinity detection depends on the number and grouping of the displacements and
on the ratio between the accuracies of the legitimate’s and
adversary’s technology. Thus, our method can be used with
both low-end and high-end manufacturing technology.

Daniel G. Aliaga, Mikhail J. Atallah / Genuinity Signatures

440

3.1 Error Model
While not all fabrication processes can be used to generate a surface fragment with detailed displacements, we restrict fabrication of the subset of the object intended for the
signature to a suitable method. These processes are assumed
to be imperfect and are modeled by an unbiased normal
error distribution, and of a standard deviation that is prespecified or determined experimentally.
We define the genuine object’s manufacturing variance
and verification variance
as the square of a chosen
multiple of the standard deviation of the corresponding
and
for
process. Specifically,
some value of
0,
is the standard deviation of the
legitimate manufacturer’s technology,
is the standard
deviation of the verification technology (e.g., the 3D acquisition method). Thus, for
3 approximately 99% of the
of ideal. Further,
object will be manufactured within
by using variances (and not standard deviations), we can
. Also,
state that the total variance of the system is
the difference between the operational tolerance and
provides the freedom to introduce surface displacements.
The corresponding values for the adversary are defined as
fractions of the legitimate manufacturer’s:
1⁄β
and
1⁄
. We succinctly refer to the adversary
having technology times better than the legitimate creator.
3.2 Signature Samples
and variance
for each
To obtain the displacement
sample , we use Perlin noise parameterized by the secret
key (Figure 3a-b). The key is used to generate parameters
for Perlin noise and to generate the random numbers within
the procedure. Thus, sample
and
,
2
1
2
where
generates Perlin noise in the range [0,1],
is
the sample displacement magnitude, and is the desired
1, , both
sample variance value. For
and
and are stored in 2D arrays of size x .
Displacement and variance values are collectively used to
compute the amount by which to displace a surface fragment along the direction of the surface normals. To keep the
surface area of the signature within operational tolerance,
a)

the signature sample must satisfy
.
(2)
√
Uniqueness of the signature is accomplished by having
the displacement image be of non-trivial size (e.g., a
100x100 resolution displacement image already yields a
huge number of possible signatures). The smoothness of the
displacements and variances is implicitly obtained via Perlin
noise. We control the range of smoothness of the noise by
limiting the cloud density and cloud coverage values.
3.3 Signature Strata
We organize the samples into a two-level stratification:
a spatial stratum and a variance stratum (Figure 3c). The
spatial stratum defines patches where each patch contains
samples spatially adjacent to each other. The variance stratum
defines groups of patches such that the variance
value of each group is nearly constant but the variance
changes from group to group. Each stratum contains a reference to all signature samples. Signature can be compactly
written as
,
1,
1,
:
:
,
,

,…
,

(3)
,…

containing
patches of the form
in the spatial stratum
and
groups of the form
in the variance stratum. All
the elements of a particular
are spatially adjacent and all
the elements of a particular
have (almost) the same variance value stored in all contained samples.
Spatial Stratum
Re-instancing is guarded against by the use of the keybased displacement amounts. However, the spatial stratum
is helpful to reduce the need to precisely align the synthetic
version of the signature with the acquired signature during
verification and thus account for tangential errors in measuring and in manufacturing. Since both the displacement and
variance values are generated using a smooth noise function, the aforementioned patches provide some slack which
implies that the synthetic version of the signature does not
need to be perfectly aligned with the captured object. For
example, a bad alignment or unexpected tangential distortion (with respect to the reading device) might cause a small
subset of the samples of one patch to be compared against
c)

b)
signature footprint

,

displacement

displacement
Figure 3: Genuinity Signatures. a) User selects a signature footprint. b) Random but smooth per-pixel displacements
per pixel is calculated, yielding a total displacement of .
are computed. c) A smoothly-varying additional variance
Adjacent samples are joined into patches and spatially disjoint but of equal variance patches into groups .
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Daniel G. Aliaga, Mikhail J. Atallah / Genuinity Signatures

samples of an adjacent patch. While this is not desirable, the
use of smooth noise makes it such that the adjacent patch
has a different but similar value.
Variance Stratum
The variance stratum is useful to make verification more
sensitive to a change of the amount of variance as a result of
an attack. Changing the variance amongst the groups exacerbates the need to know the correct way to group the
patches (and samples). The likelihood of randomly grouping
patches and samples to yield the same particular set of variances is extremely small. For example, if a replication was
performed and all groups in the signature had no additional
variance added then all the copied object groups would
exhibit homogeneity of variance. While the variance is not
exactly equal to that of the legitimate creator’s manufacturing and verification processes (because of the additional
variance introduced by the adversary’s replication), the
homogeneity of all the variances makes it more difficult to
detect an overall change of the amount of variance. In contrast, by providing each group with a different additional
variance, homogeneity of variance is not obtainable unless
the correct grouping is known.
3.4 Creation Algorithm
We use a three-phase algorithm to generate the genuinity
signature and to apply it to an arbitrary object.
•
First, signature image size
and signature
strength values and are chosen (subject to inequality (2)) and then equations (1) produce displacement
values and variance values per image sample.
•
Second, the patches
of the spatial stratum are
created. They are determined by joining a contiguous
block of
samples in the signature image into a
single unit. This yields patches consisting of different
displacement values and, as will be computed in the
next step, a constant variance value. When
1,
each sample maps to a surface fragment on the object
consisting of many adjacent vertices. This yields
patches with a smooth change in the displacement value (e.g., using a bilinear or bicubic interpolation) and a
constant variance value. This setup relaxes even more
the need for accurate alignment during verification.
Since the number of samples can be made to be sufficient, this variant is usually more advantageous.
•
Third, the groups
of the variance stratum are selected. To form the groups, all patches are sorted by
their variance values and then divided into
groups
samples, where
each of approximately /
/
. To ensure spatially-near variances are similar, we compute a group’s variance
as the average
of the variances of all contained samples (rather than
randomly picking a group variance value), namely
∑

∑

∑

.

(4)

To map the signature to the object, the user selects the
signature footprint as a subset of the object’s surface and
then maps the signature image to the footprint. In our prototype, selection is done via a simple interactive process of
clicking-and-selecting on triangles. The selected triangles
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

441

are recursively subdivided such that no triangle edge is larger than
. The new triangulation is at the resolution of
the manufacturing process. As previously mentioned, the
mapping between signature image pixels and object vertices
does not need to be one-to-one. Rather, the signature image
resolution can be less than the resolution of the object triangulation in order to yield patches of samples of smoothlychanging displacement but constant variance value. While
several image-to-object mappings are possible, our prototype uses orthographic projection. Further, since the signature footprint is not necessarily rectangular, clipping may
occur when mapping the rectangular signature image to an
object; nevertheless, the loss of samples is not problematic
because the signature can be made suitably larger so that the
actual number of mapped samples is sufficient.
The total per-sample displacement, stored in the image, is
0,

(5)

where
,
returns a random value with a normal distrireturns the
bution of mean and standard deviation ,
index of the group containing . Given points in the signature footprint, object point
(
1, ) in general corresponds to fractional positions on the signature image. The
from
and along the surface normal
total displacement
is calculated by a bilinear equation of the surrounding
displacement values in the signature, e.g.
1
1
(6)
on the diswhere and are the fractional positions of
are the surrounding
placement image and ( , , ,
displacement values. The new model is composed of points
7 .
4. Genuinity Testing
To verify genuinity, we need a digital copy of the original
unmodified object model, the key (or the relevant part thereof), and the physical 3D object. Either the manufacturer or
a client can perform the verification. However, while the
digital object model and signature creation and verification
algorithms can be public, the key must be kept secure. In
addition, we desire genuinity testing to be fast, accurate, and
easy-to-use. These characteristics permit a widespread
process that can be encapsulated into a simple “reader”.
It is worth noting that because of the potentially large
number of groups, not all of the groups
are needed for
genuinity testing. Instead, a random subset of them suffices.
Thus, we can design the signature to have an excessive
number of groups such that only a subset of them is needed.
This redundancy yields two abilities: 1) the entire signature
does not have to be reconstructed for genuinity testing –
reducing the burden for the verification system, and 2) genuinity testing can be provided with only a "partial key",
which we define as a subset of the bits of the master key and
decodes only a subset of the groups and samples. This
yields added security because if the partial-key becomes
public, the object can still not be fully imitated because the
rest of the genuinity signature is not known.

442

Daniel G. Aliaga, Mikhail J. Atallah / Genuinity Signatures

4.1 Acquisition
To verify the genuinity of the signature, we need to capture the signature footprint. Since the displacements are
usually subtle, high-resolution acquisition is needed. However, we note that the macro-structure of the area to capture
is usually quite simple (e.g. planar or a smooth curved section). Thus, one suitable option is to use a photogeometric
capture approach. Namely, capture the general geometric
structure and then refine the details using a photometricbased reconstruction. Photometric-based approaches are
good at obtaining fine details but not so good for accurately
obtaining the global structure. Photogeometric approaches
have been successfully used before to obtain reconstructions
accurate up to a fraction of a millimeter. For example, the
Digital Hammurabi project [KSD*04] performed a 3D
scanning of cuneiform tablets at 0.025mm accuracy (1/1000
inches = 0.025mm). [NRD*05] used a geometric and a photometric setup to obtain high accuracies (between 0.01mm
and 0.1 mm). The recent examination of the Mona Lisa
done by NRC (Canada) used a custom 3D color-scanner of
0.06x0.06x0.01 mm resolution [BGM*07]. [AX*08] created
a self-calibrating approach that used projectors as both light
sources and virtual cameras yielding multi-viewpoint photogeometric reconstructions sampled at 0.05mm. These
example works show that reconstructions of sufficient quality are possible.
Photogeometric Capture
In our prototype, we created a “signature reader” similar
to the aforementioned photogeometric capture approaches.
Our particular system is based on [AX*08] in the sense of
being self-calibrating and combining both geometric and
photometric data, however our method is single-viewpoint
(like [NRD*05]). The surface fragment is placed approximately perpendicular to the optical axis of the camera and
thus can be reconstructed at the full resolution of the photometric method (i.e., that of the camera), which in our case
is about 10x times greater than that of the projectors (Figure
1f). We refer the reader to [AX*08] for more details.
Signature Alignment
The presence of sample patches and the smoothness of
the displacement value relax the need for very accurate
alignment between the physical object and the synthetic
version of the object (perturbed by ). As is typically the
case with single-viewpoint capture methods observing an
object head-on, the dominating error is in the distance measurements along the camera ray direction (and not errors in
the tangential directions). Thus, the local smoothness of the
signature displacements helps to diminish the effect of not
precisely aligning the synthetic object with the physical
object – a small tangential displacement results in only
small distance measurement changes. Moreover, this relaxation also compensates for small manufacturing errors tangential to the displacement direction.
In our prototype, the user interactively places the captured
surface fragment over its synthetic equivalent. Then, iterative-closest-point (ICP) is used to further refine the alignment [RL*01]. The fragment is resampled so that each point
on the fragment is the closest possible point to the cor-

responding point
on the synthetic model. Only the surface fragment corresponding to the signature needs to be
processed. Also, if the surface and signature are very different, ICP might fail. This is not problematic since that most
likely indicates object genuinity should be rejected.
4.2 Verification
The objective of the verification process is to ensure that the
signature is sufficiently intact so as to conclude the object is
genuine. We use statistical tests to yield a nearly continuous
probability value indicating object genuinity. First, we describe the use of a simple similarity of means test. This test
is straightforward and easy to implement but is not always
sensitive enough for replication attacks. Second, we describe a more sophisticated test that is able to robustly and
correctly reject a re-instanced or replicated object.
Similarity of Means Testing
Re-instancing can be detected with the use of a key-based
generation of displacements and a similarity of means statistical test. Since the key is kept secure, it is extremely unlikely that the adversary can recreate all the displacement values
of the signature. A re-instanced object will most likely have
a different signature and thus a simple similarity of means
test is sufficient. Using the synthetic model with the signature displacements applied, each synthetic point
is subtracted from the corresponding reconstructed object point
. The mean of the magnitude of these difference vectors
should be zero for all reconstructed points. A z-test or Student’s t-test can be used to check for a mean with a statistically significant difference from zero.
Group-based Sampling and Median-based Testing
In our verification tests, we use the stratification of the
samples and median-based testing to determine homogeneity of variance [Lom*07]. A replicated object will contain an
unexpected additional variance within the captured groups
that was introduced by the adversary. Re-instancing will
also cause the captured variance within each group
to be
different than the expected variance. Intuitively, we desire
two properties: 1) the variance of all samples in a group to
be the same and 2) the variance of each group to be
plus
. We express this by using a modified version of a
Brown-Forsythe test which checks for homogeneity of variance (i.e., homoscedasticity) using medians and variable
transformation. The use of medians, as opposed to means, is
known to be more robust to samples with an error distribution straying from perfect normalcy (e.g., a simple F-test is
rarely useful unless the distribution is perfectly normal).
We modify the Brown-Forsythe test so that it tests for
homogeneity of variance and for equality of that variance to
a desired variance. The signature samples of each group
mapped onto a genuine object are composed of a displacement , a group variance , and an additional (
variance introduced by the manufacturing and verification
processes. Once we account for the first two components,
on average the group should exhibit values with a variance
equal only to the third component. The magnitude of
only if we
changes from group to group and its value is
group the points correctly. Thus, obtaining a leftover vac 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Daniel G. Aliaga, Mikhail J. Atallah / Genuinity Signatures

riance of (
is only the case if the proper organization of the strata is known, the sample displacements are
known, and the only additional variance is (
.
Moreover, since we have a large number of groups, we can
robustly test if the variance is in fact (
).
If the test statistic exceeds a chosen threshold value, then
it indicates rejection (i.e., object is re-instanced or replicated). For this test, the transformed measurement variable
is
and
for group and element
:
). Then, we define the terms
= median(
, absolute difference with group median,
∑

, mean of group , and

, desired overall variance
where
is the number of elements in each group. These
terms are used in the test statistic
∑
∑ ∑

(8)

which if it exceeds
,
1,
means the homogeneity of variance fails with
1 and
degrees of
freedom and at a significance level ( is a function that
returns the upper critical value of an F-distribution). For
convenience, we swap the numerator and denominator of
equation (8) in order to make
1 at all times.
Mutual Verification
One potentially problematic situation is if both the legitimate manufacturer and the adversary attempt to include a
genuinity signature in the same object; who will be recognized as the genuine manufacturer? This situation is, however, not problematic with our approach. If manufacturer
acquires and copies the object from manufacturer and
produces a new object with their own genuinity signature,
then the new object will fail the genuinity test for manufacturer and succeed for that of manufacturer . This is the
desired and appropriate behavior.
5. Results and Discussion
We have used our algorithms to encode and verify genuinity signatures on several types of objects. First, to encode a signature our software system reads in a description
of a 3D model. A digital key is provided and used to generate the unique genuinity signature. Second, the newly
created model is either fabricated using a stereolithography
process or provided to a simulator. Our simulator enables us
to thoroughly explore the parameter space. Third, a reconstruction of an object is obtained and checked for the presence of the genuinity signature. Our prototype verification
system uses a Canon Rebel XTi 10 MP camera and three
Optoma EP910 DLP projectors of 1400x1050 pixels each.
In the following, we present results including several
graphs that analyze the behavior of the signature and its
verification in a given situation. The horizontal axis in all
graphs represents the number of groups used when designing the signature. The vertical axis represents the value of
the test statistic of equation (8). Each individual curve corresponds to either a particular size of the signature displacement image or to a particular verification scenario.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

443

Each datapoint is the averaged result of 10 repeated simulations of creating a signature image, perturbing it according
to the legitimate manufacturer’s and adversary’s relative
accuracies for manufacturing and verification, and performing a genuinity test. While arbitrarily more groups can be
used by increasing the total number of samples, our graphs
focus on the minimum number of samples and on the minimum (or maximum) number of groups needed for a given
sample size. Also, since our methods scale to any accuracy
level, we arbitrarily fix
1 and adjust other parameters.
The simplest interpretation of the numerical value of the
test statistic (y-value of the graphs) is that a value near 1
implies success of the genuinity test. Given the total number
of samples, the number of groups, and the test statistic value, we can compute the statistical significance level at
which the genuinity test will fail. This value varies with
each datapoint in the graphs and can be computed using
statistical tables or software equivalents. While we do report
it for some examples, usually a test statistic value near 2 or
greater strongly implies the object is not genuine.
We have analyzed in simulation the behavior of the signature and its verification for various parameter values. While
we have performed the simulations for a range of values, in
these representative results we assume that the operational
tolerance is about twice the manufacturing accuracy and
there is a 5:1 ratio between
and √ ; more precisely
1,
0.5,
0.25 and
0.0025 – these numbers guarantee the operational tolerance is not exceeded by
the signature displacements and manufacturing process.
Figure 4a shows the effectiveness of our method in recognizing a truly genuine object using several signature image
sizes. Once a sufficient number of groups are used (i.e.,
60), genuinity testing robustly succeeds in keeping the test
statistic near 1. Figure 4b shows the ability of our genuinity
test in discovering a re-instanced object. Using a 200x200
signature image or larger, yields sufficient samples to robustly detect the re-instanced object. The effectiveness of
the test increases as the number of groups reduces because
each group is assigned more samples resulting in a stronger
change of variance. However, the desire to have fewer
groups with more samples runs counter to the need for more
groups that is needed for verifying truly genuine objects.
For a signature image size of 200x200 about 60 to 100
groups yields a compromise between the two scenarios.
More groups can be used for larger signature image sizes.
The use of the signature variance helps make the test
more robust to attacks. Figures 4b-c report the test statistic
using a ratio of 5:1 and 1:5 between and √ . For all cases, a variance difference between groups improves the robustness of the tests but yields a less smooth signature that
is difficult to fabricate and to maintain undamaged.
Figures 4d-f show the behavior of our approach during
replication attempts for an adversary with
1,
10
(“10 times better technology”) and
100 (“100 times
better technology”). In these tests, the relative values of
, , , and
are not important – the value for , as
well as the image size and group count, dominate the behavior. For
1, a 50x50 displacement image is sufficient.
For
10, at least a 250x250 image is needed to robustly

Daniel G. Aliaga, Mikhail J. Atallah / Genuinity Signatures

444

Genuine

2
1.6
1.4

300
200
100

1.2
1

0
0

20

a)

40 60 80 100 120 140
Number of Groups

W

10

0

0
20

40

60
80
100
Number of Groups

120

20

140

15
10

250

6

2500

0

0
60
80
100
Number of Groups

120

140

20
f)

140

4
2

40

120

8

5
20

60
80
100
Number of Groups

Replicate 100:1

10
50
100
200
250

20

40

e)

Reinstance (var 5:1)

25

50
100
200
250

4
2

140

Replicate 10:1

6

5

b)

60
80 100 120
Number of Groups

8

W

W

15

40

10
50
100
200
250

20

W

20
d)

Reinstance (var 1:5)

25

c)

50
100
200
250

W

1.8
W

Replicate 1:1
50
100
200
250
2500

40

60
80
100
Number of Groups

120

140

Figure 4: Genuinity Testing Analysis. We show the behavior of our genuinity test for a) genuine objects, b-c) for reinstanced objects, and d-f) for replicated objects. The two reinstancing examples also show the benefit of having a variance component in the signature; b) show a ratio of 1:5 between m and √ and c) show a ratio of 5:1. The replication
attacks use an adversary with technology d) 1x, e) 10x, or f) 100x better than the legimate’s manufacturer.
reject such a replicated object. For
100, a larger signature displacement image of 2500x2500 is needed. In all
cases, using up to about 140 groups is possible. Hence, even
if the adversary has manufacturing and acquisition accuracy
100 times superior to the legitimate manufacturer, the replicated object can still be robustly identified.
In Figure 5, we summarize the behavior of our genuinity
signature and its verification in several “attacks” by an adversary. Figure 5a shows the behavior of the genuinity test
when using a signature displacement image of 250x250
samples and
10. Figure 5b shows give a similar report
but for
100 and using a signature displacement image
of 2500x2500 (note: the test-value for the re-instance attack
is very large, for convenience we divide it by 1000). In all
cases, our approach clearly discerns the genuine object.
Figure 1 (on the first page) shows a synthetic object, a fabricated object, and an acquired fragment used for genuinity

testing of a CAD object. Figure 1a and 1d show the 3D
computer model. The signature is visible on the bottom side.
Figure 1b and 1e are photographs of the fabricated physical
object. Figure 1c is the acquired surface fragment of the
signature. Since our genuinity detection is designed for
fragility upon copying (i.e., success is hard), our real-world
experiments test accurately recovering the signature at the
expected levels of error. The effects of re-instancing and
replicating an object can be accomplished, respectively, by
comparing the same captured object to a different signature
and by changing the variances of the signature.
The signature we design and verify uses a displacement
image of 35x35 samples and 100 groups. The square displacement image is mapped onto the object with only simple scaling and orthographic projection, thus only about
2/3’s of the samples are actually used. The object measures
102x100x45 mm. The accuracy of the stereolithography
fabrication device available to use can be set between 0.1
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Daniel G. Aliaga, Mikhail J. Atallah / Genuinity Signatures

Example A: 250x250

30

Genuine
Reinstance
Replicate 10:1

W

20
10
0
20
a)
30

W

20

40

60
80
100 120
Number of Groups

140

Example B: 2500x2500
Genuine
Reinstance/1000
Replicate 100:1

10
0
20
40
60
80
100 120 140
Number of Groups
b)
Figure 5: Example Attacks. a) Attempt of copying using
10 and a 250x250 signature displacement image. b)
Another set of attacks using
100 and a 2500x2500
signature displacement image.
mm and 0.2 mm (i.e., about 5/1000th to 8/1000th of an inch)
-- we used 0.1 mm. Our verification system is estimated to
have an accuracy of 0.5 mm; in this example, 99% of the
acquired fragment was at most 0.39 mm from ideal (thus
0.5 is reasonable). Our manufacturing and verification
variances are taken as
0.15 and
0.5 . For this
prototype, we satisfy
2 mm by using
1.0 mm and
0.75. The averaged test statistic value for genuine objects, re-instanced objects, and replicated objects (using
=10) is, respectively, 1.26, 3.57, and 2.16. In this signature, the upper critical F-value for the involved degrees of
freedom and at a 5% significance level is about 1.26. Thus,
the truly genuine object passes the test and the re-instanced
and replicated object are correctly rejected with only a 5%
chance of getting the classification wrong.
Figure 6 shows the relative effect of the signature parameters and . In this example, we assume we have 1 mm
of “space” for the signature displacements.
provides the
general shape of the signature (Figure 6a: high
and low
). provides variability between the groups (Figure 6b:
low
and high ). High variability between the groups

a)

b)

445

yields the most robust test, but the signature itself might be
hard to manufacture and/or fragile. Our choice is to use a
balance of the two parameters (Figures 6c-6d). In this small
footprint signature, the significance level is about 10% (e.g.,
the test may be wrong 10% of the time – this number can be
improved by further tuning the parameters).
In Figure 7, we demonstrate the flexibility of our method
by applying it to a previously scanned object rather than a
CAD object. The process for our method is identical and the
signature in fact looks very much like existing noise.
Figure 8 shows another experimental example. This object was fabricated with similar parameters as that in Figure
1 but using
2 and
0.2 mm (“standard stereolithography quality” of our supplier). The test statistic values
for genuine objects, re-instanced objects, and replicated
objects (using =10) is, respectively, 1.23, 2.75, and 1.63.
The acquired object’s was at most 0.47 mm from ideal.
We further validate our method by showing the effect on
the signature for replicated objects. Using the objects from
Figures 1 and 8, we re-manufacture the objects from the
acquired version (containing the signature). In Figure 9, we
show the difference (using a jet colormap) between corresponded points of the digital model with signature (i.e., no
errors) and scanned surface fragments. The difference
represents the error introduced by manufacturing and verification -- it should be relatively smooth and small. Figures
9a and 9c use the acquired signatures of the genuine objects
where test statistic =1.16 and =1.22, respectively. Figures 9b and 9d use the scanned signatures of the replicated
objects where =2.86 and =2.43, respectively -- thus the
objects are detected to be replicas. Further, Figures 9a and
9b are created using the same high-resolution manufacturing
technology; replica Figure 9d is created using highresolution manufacturing technology while the corresponding genuine object is created using the lower-quality standard-resolution process. Nevertheless, the replication
process introduces additional error that can be detected.
(Note: the straight-line artifacts of 9a and 9b are due to the
capture methods; the red-bands on the sides of 9c and 9d are
because that surface region is not part of the signature.)
6. Discussion and Future Work
We have presented a novel approach to encode data for
detecting object genuinity into the surface of physical objects. Our problem is quite different from digital watermarking where perfect copies can be made. In the physical world,
copying is a noisy process that we exploit to detect replication attempts, re-instancing attempts, or both. Our approach
encodes a signature into a digital 3D object which after

c)

d)

Figure 6: Signature Design. We show a CAD object with the signature at both end caps for
1
. a) Signature
with relatively high and low , b) signature with low and high and c-d) a balanced combination.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Daniel G. Aliaga, Mikhail J. Atallah / Genuinity Signatures

446

a)

a)

b)

c)

d)

b)

Figure 7: Scanned Object. a) Scanned object, no signature. b) Object with signature added (middle figure
highlights the signature footprint).
manufacturing is used to determine genuinity. Our work
provides a unique blend of computer graphics, information
security, and advanced manufacturing.
Our method does have some limitations and aspects that
need further refinement. First, our approach requires
“space” to place the signature. Such space might not exist
on all types of objects. Second, our error model is based on
an assumption of a near-normal error distribution. While we
explicitly use techniques to support deviations from normality, a severe departure will likely confuse verification.
Third, our technique requires approximate knowledge of the
variance of the manufacturing process and verification
process. A significant over (or under) estimation of these
quantities will also distort the verification procedure. While
the variance can be determined experimentally, we look to
more sophisticated statistical processing to support using
conservative estimates. To provide more robustness and to
support a wider range of object types and manufacturing
processes, a promising extension is to use other feature
spaces (e.g., color) and their combinations.
7. References
[AX*08] ALIAGA D., XU Y., “Photogeometric Structured Light: A
Self-Calibrating and Multi-Viewpoint Framework for Accurate
3D Modeling”, IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2008.
[BGM*07] BORGEAT L., GODIN G., MASSICOTTE P., POIRIER G.,
BLAIS F., BERALDIN J.A., “Visualizing and Analyzing the Mona
Lisa”, IEEE Computer Graphics & App., 27(6), 60-68, 2007.
[CGE*07] CORSINI M., GELASCA E.D., EBRAHIMI T., BARNI M.,
“Watermarked 3-D Mesh Quality Assessment," IEEE Trans. on
Multimedia, 9(2), 247-256, 2007.
[CHL*01] CHEN M., HE Y., LAGENDIJK R.L., “Error detection by
fragile watermarking”, Picture Coding Symp., 287-290, 2001.
[KSD*03] KUMAR S., SNYDER D., DUNCAN D., COHEN J., COOPER
J., "Digital Preservation of Ancient Cuneiform Tablets Using
3D-Scanning", 3-D Digital Imaging and Modeling, 2003.
[LDD*07] LAVOUE G., DENIS F., DUPONT F., "Subdivision Surface
Watermarking," Computers & Graphics, 32(3), 480-492, 2007.
[Lom*07] LOMAX R., An Introduction to Statistical Concepts,
Routledge, 472 pages, 2007.
[NRD*05] NEHAB D., RUSINKIEWICZ S., DAVIS J., RAMAMOORTHI
R., “Efficiently Combining Positions and Normals for Precise
3D Geometry”, ACM SIGGRAPH, TOG 24(3), 2005.
[Per*02] PERLIN K., “Improving Noise“, ACM Transactions on
Graphics, 21(3), 681-682.

Figure 8: Additional Example. a) Top view of original
3D synthetic model. b) Bottom view of original model. c)
View of model with encoded signature for
2 mm. d)
Acquired signature footprint.
[PYC*03] PENG X., YUB L., CAIB L., “Digital watermarking in 3D
space with a virtual-optics imaging modality”, Optics Communications, 226(1-6), 155-165, 2003.
[RL*01] RUSINKIEWICZ S., LEVOY M., “Efficient Variants of the
ICP Algorithm”, 3D Digital Imaging Modeling, 145-152, 2001.
[RVW*07] RIDA A., VYAS R., WU T., LI R., TENTZERIS M., “Development and Implementation of Novel UHF Paper-Based
RFID Designs for Anti-counterfeiting and Security Applications”, IEEE Int’l Workshop on Anti-counterfeiting, Security, &
Identification, 52-56, 2007.
[Vol*96] VOLPE H.R., “Printing method and copy-evident secure
document”, US Patent 5487567, January, 1996.
[WLD*07] WANG K., LAVOUE G., DENIS F., BASKURT A., “3D
Meshes Watermarking: Review and Attack-Centric Investigation”, Int’l Workshop on Information Hiding, 50-64, 2007.
[YY*99] YEO B.-L., YEUNG M.M., “Watermarking 3D Objects for
Verification”, IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications, 19(1),
36-45, 1999.

a)

b)b)

0.75mm

2.25mm

c)

d)

Figure 9: Replication Examples. Differences are
shown between digital model with signature and surface fragments (using jet-colormap). (a, c) Captured
signatures of genuine objects; (b, d) replicated objects.
c 2008 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2008 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

