Eurographics/ IEEE-VGTC Symposium on Visualization 2009
H.-C. Hege, I. Hotz, and T. Munzner
(Guest Editors)

Volume 28 (2009), Number 3

The Gödel Engine - An interactive approach to visualization
in general relativity
Frank Grave1,2 , Thomas Müller1 , Carsten Dachsbacher1 and Günter Wunner 2
1 Visualization
2 1.

Research Center, University of Stuttgart, Germany
Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Stuttgart, Gemany

Abstract
We present a methodical new approach to visualize the aspects of general relativity from a self-centered perspective. We focus on the visualization of the Gödel universe, which is an exact solution to Einstein’s field equations
of general relativity. This model provides astounding features such as the existence of an optical horizon and the
possibility of time travel. Although we know that our universe is not of Gödel type, we can – using this solution to
Einstein’s equations – visualize and understand the effects resulting from the theory of relativity, which itself has
been verified on the large scale in numerous experiments over the last century. We derive the analytical solution
to the geodesic equations of Gödel’s universe for special initial conditions. Along with programmable graphics
hardware we achieve a tremendous speedup for the visualization of general relativity. This enables us to interactively explore the physical aspects and optical effects of Gödel’s universe. We also demonstrate how the analytical
solution enables dynamic lighting with local illumination models. Our implementation is tailored for Gödel’s universe and five orders of magnitude faster than previous approaches. It can be adapted to manifolds for which an
analytical expression of the propagation of light is available.
Categories and Subject Descriptors (according to ACM CCS): I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-Dimensional
Graphics and Realism —J.2 [Physical Sciences and Engineering]: Physics—G.1.7 [Numerical Analysis]: Ordinary Differential Equations —Initial value problems

1. Introduction
Albert Einstein has revealed the curved nature of space and
time when he found the theory of general relativity. Kurt
Gödel’s universe is one of the most interesting exact solutions to Einstein’s equations. Despite its mathematical simplicity, due to the high symmetry of the underlying spacetime, it demonstrates the possibilities lying within the theory
of general relativity. Gödel’s model of an alternative universe
– only consisting of homogeneous dust, rotating around every point – describes a theoretically feasible spacetime, in
which time travel is possible beyond an optical horizon,
which itself represents a non-impenetrable physical barrier
for massive particles.
In this paper we visualize optical effects of general relativity from a first person’s point of view. This is done by
placing an observer in a specific general relativistic model
such as the Gödel universe. Our goal is to render an image
of the observer’s view in such spacetimes and allow for interc 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

active movement of objects, light sources, and the observer
camera. In this work, we focus on the geometrical appearance and local illumination of objects in Gödel’s universe
and neglect relativistic effects such as frequency shifts due
to relative motion. In prior implementations, the geodesic
equations which describe the propagation of light are integrated numerically to determine the curved rays on which
light travels. The resulting segments are then used for intersection calculations similar to standard raytracing for finding the direction from which a certain object is seen. This
procedure is very costly and the resulting images lack illumination as the incident light direction is indeterminable
due to the geodesics. The straightforward implementation of
an analytical solution to the geodesic equations to generate
these segments decreases rendering time drastically, but still
does not result in interactive frame rates.
Our approach avoids a numerical integration and directly
computes the locations where an object is visible. This re-

808

F. Grave, T. Müller, C. Dachsbacher and G. Wunner / The Gödel Engine

quires an analytical solution to the geodesic equations which
we derive for Gödel’s universe. We can interactively alter
the visualization parameters and discover effects which are
hardly possible to find with non-interactive methods. Exploiting the analytical solution it is also possible to apply
a local illumination model. We chose Gödel’s universe for
our visualization due to its elegant mathematical structure
and physical implications. Please note that recent solutions
to the geodesic equations of other spacetimes such as wormholes can be used as well.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In
Sect. 3 we provide a short outline of general relativity and
the basic physical properties of Gödel’s universe. We also
discuss the optical appearance of objects in Gödel’s universe
by investigating the characteristics of light rays. The method
and shortcomings of four-dimensional raytracing on curved
manifolds are discussed in Sect. 4. Next, our solution to the
geodesic equations for special initial conditions will be outlined and processed in Sect. 5.1 and 5.2. To enable arbitrary observer positions as well as local illumination models, we take the symmetries of Gödel’s universe into account
in Sect. 5.3. The implementation and applications of our approach are discussed in the last section.
2. Related work
Weiskopf [Wei01] visualized many visual properties of relativity using a four-dimensional extension to the raytracing
system RayVIS [Gro96]. Müller [Mü06] extended this idea
further when implementing a formulation of objects with respect to their local flat frame of reference. In recent years
several relativistic scenarios were implemented in interactive simulations utilizing modern graphics hardware. Like
the work of Savage et al. [SSM07] these implementations are
restricted to special relativistic scenarios where light paths
resemble straight lines. Müller [Mü08] has provided interactive visualizations of general relativistic wormholes using an
analytical solution, with limitations, however, such as ambient lighting. In our previous work [GB08] we introduced a
generic approach to visualizing various spacetimes faster by
means of a slow preprocessing step and an interactive postprocessing method to alter certain parameters of a scene. It
is, however, not possible to move objects unless another preprocessing step is done. Also, the concept of a noninteractive local illumination model exploiting the symmetries of
spacetime – in our case the Gödel universe as well – has
been introduced.
There exist numerous publications on the solution to
the geodesic equations of Gödel’s universe, most prominent being the work of Kundt [Kun56], Chandrasekhar
et. al. [CW61] and Novello et. al. [NST83]. Kajari et.
al. [KWSD04] found a very convenient set of coordinates,
in which Gödel’s universe reveals its properties more apparent. Also, the symmetries of Gödel’s universe were provided,
alongside a special solution to the geodesic equations. In

contrast to our solution, Kajari. et. al. restricts the solution to
the {t, r, ϕ}-subspace and therefore neglect the z-coordinate
of Gödel’s universe.
All visualizations of general relativity – interactive, semiinteractive or non-interactive – restrict themselves to visualize primitive objects such as spheres or cubes. Gu et.
al. [GGH02] provided an efficient way to store mesh data in
geometry images. This idea, as well as recent techniques in
programmable graphics hardware such as CUDA [NVI] and
the method of texture space lighting [BJ03], were adopted in
this work to enable rendering of arbitrary geometry.
3. Theory of general relativity and the Gödel universe
In this section we provide a brief introduction to the concepts
of general relativity and the Gödel universe. An in-depth discussion on relativity can be found in [Rin01,MTW73] while
details on the Gödel universe are illustrated in [KWSD04].
3.1. Basic characteristics of general relativity
Einstein found that the three spatial dimensions and time
itself cannot be described as separate entities but form a
four-dimensional spacetime continuum. From a mathematical point of view, these spacetimes are represented by fourdimensional pseudo-Riemannian manifolds, which are solutions to Einstein’s field equations. Einstein also discovered
that these manifolds are curved if masses are present in a particular spacetime. This curvature is implied in the line element ds2 = ∑3µ,ν=0 gµν (x)dxµ dxν , which characterizes any
spacetime in general relativity. Here gµν (x) is the metric tensor at the point x, and is the diagonal matrix diag(−1, 1, 1, 1),
if the underlying manifold is flat and cartesian coordinates
are used. For a given set of coordinates xµ there is a unique
metric tensor gµν (except for the algebraic sign). The line
element ds measures the spacetime distance between two infinitesimally neighboring events x and x + dx, where dxµ expresses the infinitesimal coordinate difference along the µaxis of the coordinate system. From this line element, many
physical features considered in general relativity can be extracted considering a particular spacetime. For example, using the Christoffel symbols the so called geodesic equations
x¨σ +

3

∑

Γσµν x˙µ x˙ν = 0

(1)

µ,ν=0

with the constraint gµν x˙ν x˙ν = κc2 can be derived. The differentiation x˙µ = ∂xµ /∂λ is with respect to the curve parameter λ. The four geodesic equations describe how photons
(κ = 0) or massive particles (κ = −1) propagate when they
are solely under the influence of gravitation. The affine curve
parameter λ is the proper time of the particle if κ = −1. For
photons the curve parameter has no physical meaning. The
geodesic equations are second-order differential equations,
they can be solved by formulating an initial-value problem
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

F. Grave, T. Müller, C. Dachsbacher and G. Wunner / The Gödel Engine

for a particular spacetime point xs and direction x˙ s . Unfortunately the geodesic equations are usually very hard to solve
analytically. However, for various spacetimes an analytical
solution was found.
3.2. Gödel’s solution
Kurt Gödel, who was a close friend of Albert Einstein, was
fascinated by general relativity. He soon discovered that this
theory does not necessitate a global time order and therefore
allows time travel. Gödel tried to find a solution to Einstein’s
field equations with this property [SF90] and succeeded in
discovering a world model later named after him. The line
element in Gödel’s universe [KWSD04] is
ds2 = −c2 dt 2 +

dr2
+ r2 1 − [r/(2a)]2 dϕ2
1 + [r/(2a)]2

2r2 c
+dz2 − √ dtdϕ ,
2a

(2)

with cylindrical coordinates {r, ϕ, z}, the time coordinate t,
the velocity of light c, the Gödel parameter a, and the convention g00 < 0. It can be shown [Gö49] that this solution describes a homogeneous, but rotating and therefore not
isotropic, universe. Due to the homogeneity of Gödel’s universe there is no gravitational redshift, only Doppler shift
due to relative motion arises. The mass distribution generating the curvature of Gödel’s universe consists of dust, which
is rigidly rotating around every point. The angular velocity
of this rotation is inversely proportional to the Gödel parameter a. This set of coordinates is very intuitive compared
to other formulations, such as [Gö49, Pfa81]. In the limit
a → ∞ this spacetime yields the nonrotating flat spacetime
of special relativity in cylindrical coordinates. Therefore, a
specific situation, e.g. a certain arrangement of objects, can
be designed in flat spacetime before introducing rotation
(a = a0 ) to this model.
It can be shown [Kun56, CW61] that time travel is in fact
possible in Gödel’s universe. A person – starting at the origin
and traveling beyond the Gödel horizon and back – can travel
into the past of an observer remaining located at the origin
of this coordinate system. This does not mean that the time
traveler himself gets younger as he travels into the past of the
resting observer. An older duplicate of the traveler returns to
the origin before the younger version of himself even leaves.
The philosophical consequences concerning causality are –
to say the least – severe, but this kind of travel is possible
within the Gödel universe. Furthermore, as this model is not
the only spacetime allowing time travel [Pfa81] it must be
concluded that time travel is an immanent characteristic of
general relativity.
As the Gödel universe is a valid solution to Einstein’s field
equations, it is a possible description of our universe. On
the other hand we know that the Gödel universe is no realistic description of our universe because the Gödel metric describes a rotating, not expanding universe, whereas our
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

809

universe is not rotating but expanding. Nevertheless, this solution demonstrates that time travel is in principle possible if
we only take general relativity into account. Most physicists
including Einstein himself stated that time travel should be
impossible due to the resulting severe causality violations,
but there is obviously no mechanism within the domain of
general relativity itself preventing time travels.

3.3. Optical appearance of Gödel’s universe
In Fig. 1, the curved paths of light rays starting at the origin
are depicted. The black geodesics and the rotational symmetry show that there exists a maximum radial distance which
photons reach if they have passed through the origin. This
Gödel horizon is a cylinder around the z-axis with radius
rG = 2a. It is the maximum distance that an object can reach
before it disappears for an observer located at the origin.
Consequently, the Gödel horizon is an optical horizon but
it can be shown that it is no physical barrier which objects
could not penetrate. Objects beyond the Gödel horizon are
simply not visible from the origin of this coordinate system.
If an object is located within the Gödel horizon it will be
visible at least twice as illustrated in Fig. 1: There exist two
possible paths for light to travel from an object to the observer located at the origin.

y

object

x

G¨
odel horizon

Figure 1: Geodesics in the xy-plane. Example geodesics
(black) and the rotational symmetry of the spacetime illustrate the existence of an optical horizon. An object (orange)
can be seen twice.

By pushing the object to a position with z = 0 within the
horizon, it will be visible infinitely often (Fig. 2): There
exists an infinite number of increasingly narrow helix-like
paths, which connect the object to the observer. Fig. 3 shows
an example rendering of a small object located above the xyplane and within the Gödel horizon. We denote a physical
entity within the Gödel universe an object and the multitude
of its visible appearances representations.

F. Grave, T. Müller, C. Dachsbacher and G. Wunner / The Gödel Engine

810
z
x

λ1

x

z

4.2. Shortcomings in 4D raytracing

,1

λ1,0
,0

λ0

1

λ 0,

y

y

Shortest possible light
paths.

Light paths winding once.

Figure 2: Light paths from a small object (orange) to an
observer located at the origin. An infinite number of possible
light paths exists with any number of windings. The variables
λi, j serve to distinguish the different geodesics and will be
properly introduced in Sect. 5.2.

There are two main problems in general relativistic raytracing. First, the numerical integration of geodesics on today’s
standard CPUs usually takes about ten milliseconds per ray.
The calculation of intersections between this ray and a single
object requires another millisecond. The amount of time for
rendering a large image of a complex scenery easily exceeds
a whole day even if a cluster is used. Second, if no analytical
solution is available, the relativistic rendering cannot integrate lighting computations. The inherent problem is that it
is basically impossible to connect two spacetime points with
curved rays using an initial value problem. Simply speaking,
we do not know the direction in which a secondary ray has
to start to reach the light source if this ray is bent arbitrarily.
For interactive visualizations we either need extraordinary
powerful clusters for integrating geodesics and intersection
computation or an analytical solution to the geodesic equations which we present in the following section.
5. The geodesics and symmetries of Gödel’s universe
5.1. Solution to the geodesic equation

Figure 3: Optical appearance of an infinitely often visible
sphere (only a finite number of representations shown) located within the Gödel horizon (z > 0).
4. Visualization of general relativity
4.1. From 3D raytracing to general relativistic 4D
raytracing
In classical 3D raytracing a primary ray is cast from the
camera into the scenery and intersections between the ray
and objects are calculated. Secondary rays are generated at
these intersection points which connect them to light sources
to apply local illumination models. All light contributions
are accumulated to determine the final color of a surface
point hit by a primary ray. To take the velocity of light into
account a fourth dimension has to be introduced into the
rendering process which stores the time that light needs to
travel and the information on when the camera or an object reaches a certain position. By implementing the Lorentztransformation [Rin01] between frames of reference in relative motion, effects of special relativity can be visualized.
In general relativity paths of light, as well as massive particles, are determined by the geodesic equations (Eq. 1) and
are generally curved. If no solution to these equations for a
particular spacetime is known they have to be integrated numerically using standard methods such as Runge-Kutta integrators. The resulting paths are approximated with linear
segments which can then be used to calculate intersections
between a primary ray originating from a camera and the objects in the scenery which can both be moving. A detailed
discussion on general relativistic raytracing can be found
in [Wei01, Mü06].

The analytical integration of the geodesic equations can be
an impossible or at best tedious task. However, due to the
large number of symmetries and the resulting constants of
motion we can solve the geodesic equations for the Gödel
universe. In this section, we present the solution to the
geodesic equations (Eq. 1) for special initial conditions. We
outline the solution – the full derivation in detail goes beyond the scope of this work. The Lagrangian formalism is
used to derive the solutions. For the mathematical details we
refer the interested reader to [MTW73].
The Lagrangian for photons
3

L(x, x˙ ) =

∑

!

gµν x˙µ x˙ν = 0

µ,ν=0

is independent of t, ϕ and z, because the metric tensor itself does not depend on these coordinates. From the EulerLagrange equations of motion
d ∂L
∂L
−
= 0,
dλ ∂x˙µ ∂xµ
we obtain three constants of motion for t, ϕ and z by applying
the Noether theorem
∂L
ki := i , where i = 0, 2, 3.
∂x˙
These constants of motion can then be used to decouple the
radial equation of motion (i = 1) from the other equations.
With this step we obtain four ordinary differential equations
where the time and the angular equation are coupled with the
radial equation. These equations can be considerably simplified when restricting the solution process to the special initial condition xs1 = rs = 0, where k2 vanishes and k0 only
contains the time direction.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

F. Grave, T. Müller, C. Dachsbacher and G. Wunner / The Gödel Engine

The radial equation can be solved, yielding the solution r(λ), which is inserted into the other equations. These
can then be integrated. All four integrals of the equations of motion can be found in standard integration tables,
e.g. [BSMM07]. The result of this derivation in geometrical
units (c = 1) is:
√
(3a)
t(λ) = k0 λ − 2 2a(g(λ) − f1/2 (λ)),


1 + k32
1 − k32

(3b)
sin
λ ,
r(λ) = 2a
2a
1 + k32
(3c)

ϕ(λ) = −g(λ) + f1/2 (λ) − f0 (λ) + ϕs ,

(3d)

z(λ) = k3 λ,

point x p . The radial equation in µ = 1 reads
1 + k32
λ
2a

sin

=




fq (λ) = π 



1 + k32

λ + q ,
2aπ

(4a)


√
k
2
0
g(λ) = arctan 
tan 
1 + k32


1 + k32
2a



λ . (4b)

The function ⌊x⌋ returns the largest integer smaller than x,
k0 is the negative time direction (e.g. +1 for light traced into
the past), and ϑ0 = arccos(k3 ) as well as ϕ0 are related to the
starting direction of the light particle as illustrated in Fig. 4.

2a

λ0,n =

1 + k32
2a

λ1,n =

1 + k32

ϑ0

=a
rc c

[+ha (k3 ) + nπ] ,

(6a)

[−ha (k3 ) + (n + 1)π] .

(6b)

y

Figure 4: The starting direction of the geodesic is formulated with respect to the angular coordinates ϑ and ϕ of a
spherical coordinate set.

5.2. Processing the solution of the geodesic equations
Fig. 4 shows the resulting geodesic reaching a certain point
(orange) for a given set of initial values. For a fast visualization technique the question has to be reversed: What are
the sets of initial conditions such that resulting geodesics
connect a given point to the origin? To find all geodesics
which connect the origin to an arbitrary static point x p =
(t p , r p , ϕ p , z p ) the equations
µ

xµ (λ) = x p

1 + k32
1 − k32

(7)

[+ha (k3 ) + nπ] =

zp
,
2a

(8a)

[−ha (k3 ) + (n + 1)π] =

zp
,
2a

(8b)

k3
1 + k32

cannot be solved analytically and thus these two equations
have to be handled numerically using, e.g., a regula falsi
method. However, the numerical effort is negligible compared to the numerical integration of geodesics.

os(
k

ϕ0

rp
2a

The first index in λi, j denotes whether the geodesic is on
the outbound part of the geodesic (i = 0) or on the incoming
part which has already reached the horizon (i = 1) within this
cycle. The second index j is the number of full cycles that the
geodesic has run through since starting from the origin. This
is the notation also used in Fig. 2. The unknown parameter
k3 is determined by Eq. 3d, in which Eqns. 6a and 6b are
inserted. Unfortunately, the resulting equations

1 + k32
3)

x

1 + k32
1 − k32

where

k3

z

rp
2a

and yields the solutions

ha (k3 ) = arcsin

with

811

(5)

have to be solved, where the left-hand side corresponds to
the analytical solution (Eq. 3) and the right-hand side is the
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Having obtained the solutions to these equations – a set
of parameters {k3 } for the different possible geodesics – we
know the vertical angles {ϑi, j } under which the object is visible using ϑ0 = arccos(k3 ) (Fig. 4). The horizontal angles
{ϕi, j } can be obtained using Eq. 3c and λi, j = 0. By this
calculation we find a set of initial conditions for geodesics
connecting a visible point to the origin. We can now calculate the directions in the three-dimensional subspace at the
observer’s position under which all representations of this
point can be seen. A correct occlusion of object’s instances is
achieved by considering the geodesics’ relative lengths given
by λi, j . The direction and final position of each representation is then given by


sin(ϑi, j ) cos(ϕi, j )
(9)
vi, j =  sin(ϑi, j ) sin(ϕi, j )  , xi, j = λi, j vi, j .
cos(ϑi, j )
The orange object in Fig. 4 can therefore be seen along the
direction of the green line. As a point is infinitely often visible we create a (finite) number of copies of it. Following this
procedure we generate a scene with multiple instances of

812

F. Grave, T. Müller, C. Dachsbacher and G. Wunner / The Gödel Engine

each object. If an object is partially beyond the Gödel horizon, the last visible vertices of the two representations {0, j}
and {1, j} on the same helix winding are contracted using a
stitching algorithm. Now this scene can be rendered using a
standard perspective camera.
In addition to an observer at the origin we can also place
a point light source there in order to illuminate the object.
The use of a local illumination model is then possible, because we can compute if and how the origin is connected to
an arbitrary point. The only difference is the time direction
in which the geodesics are traced. For calculating the position of an object geodesics are traced back into the past. The
illumination of an object requires geodesics propagating into
the future instead.
Using this derivation we can avoid an expensive numerical integration of geodesics and tedious intersection calculations. Note, however, that it is still not possible to obtain
visualizations for arbitrary positions of both observer and
point light. Although the analytical solution to arbitrary initial conditions exists, it can be shown that this solution is too
complex for an interactive visualization.

5.3. Using isometries to avoid rendering restrictions
Symmetries of a problem allow one to transform a given coordinate set to another more convenient set of coordinates
easily, in which the properties of the underlying model become clearer. For example consider the analysis of the characteristics of two particles rotating around each other due to
the influence of classical Newtonian gravity: A reasonable
choice is a rotating polar coordinate system with its origin
located at the center of mass. The idea of choosing an appropriate set of coordinates is also employed in computer
graphics when transforming camera or object positions.
This concept can be used in general relativity through isometries. An isometric transformation ξα is an infinitesimal coordinate transformation
x′α (η) = xα + ηξα (xβ )

However, for φ = ±π/2 the vector ζα points along the radial axis of the coordinate system making it a mere radial
translation dr. The resulting differential equation to Eq. 11
can easily be solved analytically in the same way. This can
be used for the following train of thoughts: Take an observer
position in the xy-plane and a collection of objects in the
Gödel universe. If the observer was located at the origin a
fast visualization of this scene is possible using the derivation of Sect. 5.2. Using a concatenation of isometric transformations it is possible to transform the whole scenery such
that the observer is located at the origin of the new coordinate system. Fig. 5 depicts the concatenation of two suitable
isometric transformations. First, the observer’s position (yellow) is rotated around the origin along the rotational Killing
vector field ξα1 onto the y-axis of the coordinate system. The
gray object is rotated by the same angle η1 . In a second step,
the observer’s location is transformed along the field −ξ3
to the origin. Again, the gray object is transformed with the
same curve parameter η3 . Note that the latter transformation
is not a solely radial translation if the transformed object is
located at an arbitrary position. The generalization of an arbitrary observer position with z = 0 is simple, because the
isometry ξα2 is a translation parallel to the z-axis. Following

η1

η1

η3

(10)

with η ≪ 1. By definition, the metric tensor remains unchanged under this transformation. In mathematical terms an
isometry is represented by a Killing vector field [MTW73].
It determines the directions in which the infinitesimal transformation has to be undertaken in order to retain the metric
and thus the physics of the spacetime described. To obtain a
finite isometric transformation Eq. 10 is differentiated with
respect to η to obtain the differential equation
dxα (η)
= ξα (xβ ).
dη

field: ξαa is a translation in time, ξαb a rotation around the zaxis, ξαc a translation along the z-axis, ξαd a translation along
ζα (r, ϕ), and ξαe along ζα (r, ϕ − π2 )). Being dependent on
both r and ϕ, ζα is given by


√r cos ϕ
 0 
2c
ζ


r 2
 a 1 + 2a
 ζ1 
sin ϕ 
1

=

.


 ζ2 
1 + [r/(2a)]2  a 1 + 2 r 2 cos ϕ 
r
2a
3
ζ
0

(11)

The solution to this equation resembles an isometric transformation along ξα (xβ ) for finite values of η. Gödel’s universe inherits five independent isometries [KWSD04] which
can be linearly combined to form another Killing vector

η3

rotation along ξα1 by angle η1

translation along −ξα3 by η3

Figure 5: Concatenation of isometric transformations. The
yellow object denotes an observer or a light source, the gray
object resembles an arbitrary visualized object.
these ideas it is also possible to apply arbitrary point light
sources. Instead of transforming the observer’s position to
the origin of the coordinate system the light source is moved.
Being able to connect origin and arbitrary spacetime points
it is directly possible to calculate whether or not a certain
position is illuminated.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

F. Grave, T. Müller, C. Dachsbacher and G. Wunner / The Gödel Engine

6. Implementation
Our implementation resembles the derivation presented in
Sec. 5. In Sec. 5.2 we discussed how to calculate the directions under which a single point in Gödel’s universe is
seen from the origin using the analytical solution derived in
Sec. 5.1. In a practical implementation which renders images
from triangle meshes these computations are carried out per
vertex to facilitate efficient triangle rendering. We first recapitulate the vertex transformation, followed by details on
the OpenGL and CUDA implementation. For the transformation only Eqns. 8 have to be solved numerically which is
achieved using the Illinois-method, a modified regula falsi
procedure, converging typically in less than ten iterations.
Eq. 9 then gives us the direction under which a surface point,
or vertex, is visible on the image plane.
To enable arbitrary observer positions we use the concept
of finite isometric transformations illustrated in Sec. 5.3. The
observer position is isometrically translated into the origin
and each vertex is transformed analogously (Fig. 5). A vertex is transformed numerically using a standard 4th-order
Runge-Kutta integrator, while the observer position is transformed using an easily obtainable special solution to Eq. 11.
Next, the view directions for each vertex are calculated using the special solution to the geodesic equations as recapitulated above. Since light travels from the objects to the
observer the primary rays – cast into the opposite direction
– travel into the past, i.e. k0 = +1 for Eqns. 3. The analytical solution also allows us to apply local illumination models. For this the light source is translated isometrically into
the origin and we then illuminate the vertices by finding the
geodesics reaching the surfaces; these geodesics propagate
into the future and here k0 = −1.
We assume objects to be small and solve the isometric
transport equation (Eq. 11) for the center point of an object
only. This is physically reasonable as objects are formulated
with respect to their local flat frame of reference located at
a certain point on the manifold, which has also been used as
the center point of the object [Mü06]. The numerical solution to the isometric transport equation is implemented on
the CPU as it is required only once per frame and object.

In our implementation we use geometry images as representation for our triangle meshes which we store in vertex
buffer objects (VBO). Note that geometry images exhibit an
implicit topology where 2 × 2 neighboring pixels form two
triangles. In addition to the geometry images storing vertex
positions and normals we create an additional VBO storing
illumination values per vertex. Since we carry out all computations on vertices stored in VBOs we opted for an implementation using CUDA [NVI]. The mesh VBOs containing
the input vertex positions, texture coordinates and normals of
the meshes are accessible in CUDA and remain unchanged
throughout the rendering passes.
Note that every object can be seen infinitely often in
Gödel’s universe. We account for this by rendering a finite
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

813

number of pairs of instances, e.g. the two top-most spheres
in Fig. 3, corresponding to occurrences seen under geodesics
with the same number of windings (see Fig. 2). The rendering of one pair consists of the following steps: First we
accumulate the contribution from all light sources into the
lighting VBOs by applying the respective isometric transformation and computing the direct illumination. Note that this
is very similar to texture space lighting techniques [BJ03].
Next we compute the solution to Eq. 8 for every vertex giving us the three-dimensional coordinate for display (Eq. 9).
Vertices may be located beyond the Gödel horizon resulting in triangles that have to be excluded from rendering.
Instead the pairwise instances have to be stitched together.
For this we mark vertices in the geometry images which belong to valid and invalid triangles at the same time. Texels in
the geometry images corresponding to these vertices are the
same for both instances and we weld the vertices together
by simply averaging their coordinates. As a result the two
instances smoothly fuse as shown in Fig. 3.
The output of the CUDA computation can be mapped
to float -arrays for the OpenGL pipeline by utilizing the
OpenGL -interoperability. One VBO contains the solution of
Eq. 8 for every vertex (possibly modified due to stitching),
and a second VBO stores the illumination of every vertex in
the geometry images. We render the image as seen from the
observer by using GLSL shaders and depth buffering to resolve occlusions. Correct depth sorting is achieved by using
λ as monotonic measure for relative distance (Eq. 9) while
using the same depth buffer across all passes.
7. Results
The direct comparison between a standard raytracing approach and our implementation reveals a drastic difference
in performance. A reference scene containing one object has
been rendered using both methods on a standard dual-core
desktop PC in a resolution of 1024x512 pixels. The raytracing approach to which we compare [Mü06] does not use
supersampling, thus we rendered the images from the Gödel
engine with no antialiasing or other image quality improving
methods. Also, the local illumination model was deactivated,
because no CPU implementation was available.
n
2
4
6

CPU A
41 s
79 s
113 s

CPU B
605 s
1105 s
1639 s

GPU
4.1 ms
7.8 ms
11.2 ms

speed-up ×105
0.9 to 1.5
0.9 to 1.4
0.9 to 1.5

In the table above, the first column denotes the number of
visualized representations. CPU A is a raytracing approach
which implements the analytical solution. CPU B also is
raytracing approach but uses a 4th order Runge-Kutta integration for the geodesic equations. We chose the integration parameters to match the image quality of our interactive approach. The GPU rendering time was measured on a
GeForce 8800 GTS. Although a GPU implementation of a

814

F. Grave, T. Müller, C. Dachsbacher and G. Wunner / The Gödel Engine

numerical integrator is possible, no better performance compared to the analytical approach is to be expected.
With an average performance gain of five orders of magnitude, our approach enables us to visualize effects such as
a local illumination model. We consider the correct angular dependency between reflected secondary ray and the direction under which the primary ray intersects the object.
With 16xMSAA and more complex objects and scenarios
the rendering time increases to non-interactive rates but still
remains under a second for a reasonable size of the scene.

Acknowledgements: The authors wish to thank Sebastian
Grottel, Christoph Müller, Katrin Bidmon, Michael Buser
and Tom Ertl for many fruitful discussions. We also thank
the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) for funding
this work (project number: 99015432).
References
[BJ03] B ORSHUKOV G., J.P.L EWIS: Realistic human face rendering for “The Matrix Reloaded”. International Conference
on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, ACM SIGGRAPH 2003 Sketches & Applications (2003).
[BSMM07] B RONSTEIN I., S EMENDJAJEW K., M USIOL G.,
M ÜHLIG H.: Handbook of Mathematics. Springer, 2007.
[CW61] C HANDRASEKHAR S., W RIGHT J. P.: The Geodesics in
Gödel’s Universe. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A (1961), 341–347.
[GB08] G RAVE F., B USER M.: Visiting the Gödel Universe.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 14,
6 (November/December 2008), 1563–1570.
[GGH02] G U X., G ORTLER S., H OPPE H.: Geometry images.
ACM SIGGRAPH 2002 Conference Proceedings (2002), 355–
361.

Figure 6: High quality image of multiply appearing objects
and a point light source (white) rendered in 730 ms.
8. Conclusion
We have achieved a performace leap of five magnitudes. This
enables us to discover astounding optical features of Gödel’s
universe. The accompanying video clearly reveals these effects: An object can disappear behind the Gödel horizon before being occluded by a higher order representation of another object. Another example is the quasistatically moving
point light source. Although it disappears behind the Gödel
horizon, its reflections can still be seen. These effects might
not have been discovered without an interactive approach.
To find such amazing features it is mandatory to be able
to “play” with visualization parameters and obtain the results as fast as possible. The extension of our idea to other
manifolds where analytical expressions on curved light rays
are available is possible, thus to supporting research in other
fields. Taking our application itself to a general audience can
improve their understanding of relativistic effects.
9. Future work
Our results reveal a tremendous speedup of five orders of
magnitude, but we strive to further increase rendering speed.
In our current method we consider static or slow moving objects. To be able to correctly visualize fast moving objects
we have to take the velocity of light into account. This is
also crucial when correctly visualizing time traveling objects
where it is important to know the exact time when a photon
perceived was emitted. An interactive implementation along
with shadow rendering and distance attenuation appears possible and is subject to future work.

[Gro96] G ROENE A.: Entwurf eines objektorientierten Visualisierungssystems auf der Basis von Raytracing. PhD thesis,
Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen, 1996.
[Gö49] G ÖDEL K.: An Example of a New Type of Cosmological
Solutions of Einstein’s Field Equations of Gravitation. Reviews
of Modern Physics 21, 3 (July 1949), 447–450.
[Kun56] K UNDT W.: Trägheitsbahnen in einem von Gödel
angegebenen kosmologischen Modell. Z. Phys. 145 (1956), 611–
620.
[KWSD04] K AJARI E., WALSER R., S CHLEICH W. P., D EL GADO A.: Sagnac Effect of Gödel’s Universe. Gen. Rel. Grav.,
36 (2004), 2289–2316.
[MTW73] M ISNER C. W., T HORNE K. S., W HEELER J. A.:
Gravitation. W. H. Freeman, 1973.
[Mü06] M ÜLLER T.: Visualisierung in der Allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie. PhD thesis, Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen,
2006.
[Mü08] M ÜLLER T.: Exact geometric optics in a Morris-Thorne
wormhole spacetime. Phys. Rev. D 77, 044043 (2008).
[NST83] N OVELLO M., S OARES I. D., T IOMNO J.: Geodesic
motion and confinement in Gödel’s universe. Phys. Rev. D 27, 4
(1983), 779–788.
[NVI] NVIDIA: CUDA Zone – The resource for cuda developers. Website. Available online at www.nvidia.com/cuda.
[Pfa81] P FARR J.: Time Travel in Gödel’s Space. Gen. Rel. Grav
13, 11 (1981), 1073–1091.
[Rin01] R INDLER W.: Relativity - Special, General and Cosmology. Oxford University Press, 2001.
[SF90] S OLOMON F EFERMAN E . A . (Ed.): A Remark about the
Relationship between Relativity Theory and Idealistic Philosophy, in Kurt Gödel: Collected Works, Vol. II. Oxford University
Press, 1990.
[SSM07] S AVAGE C. M., S EARLE A., M C C ALMAN L.: Real
Time Relativity: Exploratory learning of special relativity. Am. J.
Phys 75, 9 (Sept. 2007).
Visualization of Four-Dimensional
[Wei01] W EISKOPF D.:
Spacetimes. PhD thesis, Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen,
2001.
c 2009 The Author(s)
Journal compilation c 2009 The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

