Exploding the Frame: Designing for Wall-Size Computer
Displays
Ben Shedd
Princeton University and Shedd Productions, Inc.

Abstract
High-resolution wall-size digital displays
present significant new and different visual
space to show and see imagery. I have been
working with two wall-size digital displays at
Princeton University for five years and
directing and producing IMAX films for a
decade, and I have noted some unique design
considerations for creating effective visual
images when they are spread across entire
walls. I suggest these "frameless" screens where images are so large we need to look
around to see the entire field - need different
ways of thinking about image design and
visualization. Presenting such things as scale and detail take on new meaning when they can be
displayed life-size and not shown in the context of one or many small frames such as we see
everywhere.
These design ideas will be of use for pervasive computing, interface research and design, interactive
design, control design, representations of massive data sets, and creating effective displays of data for
research and education.

Keywords
Display walls, giant screens, wall-size displays, tiled displays, visual interface, graphic design, highresolution, visualization, interface design.

Bio
Ben Shedd is an Academy Award winning film and video
director/producer/writer of 29 films and videos, including four IMAX films.
Fourteen of his films have been about science and technology. Shedd was a
member of the original PBS Series NOVA production team at WGBH-TV
Boston and worked on the very first NOVA program 30 years ago.
Ben Shedd mixes his production work with university teaching and has held
Adjunct faculty positions at four universities and colleges. For the past five
years, Shedd has been part-time Senior Research Scholar and Lecturer in the
Department of Computer Science at Princeton University where he has been
researching and teaching about future media technologies with the wall-size
computer screens. This is the 25th anniversary year of the premiere of Ben's Academy Award winning
documentary short THE FLIGHT OF THE GOSSAMER CONDOR, about the invention of history's
first successful human-powered airplane.

Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization 2003 (INFOVIS’03)
0-7695-2055-3/03 $ 17.00 © 2003 IEEE

