VIML: Toward Future Video Visualization and Interaction
Prof. Jesse Jin, Chair of Information Technology
School of Design, Communication & I.T., The University of Newcastle
Callaghan NSW 2308, AUSTRALIA
Email: jesse.jin@newcastle.edu.au
There is an increasing demand for the interaction between users and video streams. One example is the digital
TV which will be popular in two years time. The advantage of digital TV is the interactivity it can do, not merely for
a good picture. Users have a need to bring up the menu/summary page and go to relevant video streams, or alter the
view in a special way. Another example is watching video in distance education scenario. There is a need to collect
feedback from users and restructure the video presentation based on different responses. Video contains rich
information. However, due to the organization of digital video streams, it is difficult to use hyperlinks similar to
HTML links in Web pages. Video does not have the same hierarchical structure and organization as text.
Video bits are meaningless by themselves. The interactive information is difficult to be built in and retrieved
from video data. There is also a synchronization problem of video and associated text. In streaming video over the
Internet, there is a visualization problem, ie, how to provide an efficient representation of the entire video stream.
There are few attempts to explore and standardize video interactions, which include Micorsoft SMIL, UC Berkeley
BIBS, IPMP in MPEG 4 and various descriptors in MPEG 7. This talk will discuss the current progress in video
visualization and interaction and present some novel ideas and directions in the area. In particular, we will discuss
video cataloguing and summarization, video streaming using semantic hierarchy, video play and interaction, video
interaction mark-up language (VIML) and software based special video effect and dynamic post-production of video
steams.
Bio-sketch_ Prof. Jesse Jin graduated with a B.E. from Jiao Tong University, an M.E. from CTU Shanghai,
China and a Ph.D. from University of Otago, New Zealand. He is the Chair Professor of IT in the School of Design,
Communication and IT, University of Newcastle. He also holds adjunct appointment in University of Sydney,
University of New South Wales and University of Technology Sydney. Prof. Jin is an international renowned expert
on multimedia technology and visual information retrieval and processing. He has published 225 articles and 14
books. He also has one patent and is in the process of filing 3 more patents. He established a spin-off company and
the company won the 1999 ATP Vice-Chancellor New Business Creation Award. He is a consultant of many
companies such as Motorola, Computer Associates, ScanWorld, Proteome Systems, HyperSoft, etc. He was a
visiting professor in MIT, UCLA, HKPU, Tsinghua University, Jilin University and China Academy of Sciences.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

