Design and Development of Large Collapsible PET Water Cooler Bottles

S.H. Masood, V. Satyanarayana and U. Erbulut
Faculty of Engineering & Industrial Sciences,
Swinburne University of Technology,
Hawthorn, Melbourne, Australia 3122
smasood@swin.edu.au

Abstract
The vast majority of 15-litre water cooler bottles
produced in the world today are made of blow moulded
polycarbonate (PC) plastic and are returnable /
refillable.
This paper presents the design and
development of a collapsible, recyclable 15-litre blow
moulded water cooler bottle made of PET plastic to
replace the traditional refillable type polycarbonate
bottle. The innovative bottle design geometry allows it to
be easily crushed after use, and also offers several
advantages in terms of light weight, stability and
environmental amiability.
The paper presents the
detailed process of design, analysis and optimisation
using the finite element analysis software considering
structural stability and crushing behaviour under various
orientations and loading conditions.

1. Introduction
Polycarbonate bottles popularly known as 15 litre
water cooler bottles are seen at every offices and
commercial activity centres now a days. In USA and
Europe, the overall market for traditional 5-gallon (19
litres) water cooler bottles is growing at double figure
rates [1]. Many leading bottle-manufacturing companies
choose polycarbonate (PC) as the common choice of
material for bulk packaging of drinking water. PC is an
amorphous engineering thermoplastic with excellent
balance of toughness, clarity and high-heat deflection
temperatures. Constructing 15-litre water bottles of
polycarbonate resin now constitutes one of the industry’s
largest and fastest-growing, blow- moulding applications.
Polycarbonate bottles are the only bottles that offer a
combination of the advantages of 65 to 130 trips per life
for refilling.

However, one of the main limitations of these PC
water cooler bottles is that they have to be collected on a
regular basis and taken back to refilling stations. This is
partly due to high cost of PC compared to other plastics
and the economics of existing production systems. The
process of refilling starts of mainly with cleaning the
bottle with caustic and chemicals, bleaching it and the
sterilizing the bottle and then the bottle is refilled and
brought back to customers. In addition to transportation
and processing costs, this process may have some serious
implications related to health and hygiene. Moreover,
there are other problems to be taken into account. Bottles,
after the final use most often find their way into the
landfill. Since these PC bottles cannot be crushed or
collapsed by normal load, there is a problem in collection
and transportation of these bottles, and storage before
progressing on to recycling or landfilling. This may well
add up to the final cost of the bottle.
The rapid growth of the 15-litre bottle market and the
high cost of bottle washing and disinfecting highlights the
need for more cost effective, efficient production systems
and the introduction of single trip, recyclable bottles. One
effective solution would be to design and develop a bottle
of an appropriate material and shape that can be easily
collapsed and crushed after its first use and disposed off
for recycling.
In recent years, large PET water cooler bottles
imitating the PC shape have been tried with limited
success in the returnable/refillable mode but they have not
become popular because PET’s temperature limitations do
not allow it to survive repeated hot washing, nor
prolonged storage outdoors or in trucks parked in heat of
the sun.
This paper presents the design and development of a
collapsible, disposable single trip 15 litre PET bottle with

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

innovative bottle geometry specifically suited for manual
crushing of the bottle after single use. Such single trip
bottles could be produced in-line at the bottling plant and
would eliminate the need for bottle washing and
disinfecting equipment, which is estimated to be the
highest cost of the filling line in traditional PC bottles.

Huang and Huang [8] have used FEM and artificial neural
network model for thickness optimisation of blow
moulded HDPE bottle of 810 ml volume. It appears that
very little work has been done on the optimum design and
development of large 15 litre water cooler bottles, which
requires specific design considerations for its shape for
collapsibility, lighter weight, and structural stability of
large water weight for one way recyclable application.

3. Water Bottle Design

Figure 1. A typical refillable PC Water Bottle (shaded
and wireframe models)

In the design of water bottles, many CAD softwares
are used. In particular, parametric CAD systems can
design general objects that represent a family of different
objects that share the same topological constraints but
have different geometry. Parametric design is becoming a
useful methodology for conceptual design, tolerance
analysis, and the efficient design of families of parts, the
representation of standard parts and features in libraries,
kinematic simulations and assemblies’ design.

2. Research and Development

Some of the factors affecting the design of the blowmoulded bottles are as follows:

Extensive research is presently being carried out in
many countries around the globe to effectively introduce
15-litre PET containers into the market and gradually
replace PC bottles. In 1999, Sterling Containers, a
company in the USA has produced the largest stretchblow moulded 5-gallon (18 litres) PET bottle for home
delivery [2]. PET is a felt to be a better choice by
designers when there are complex shapes to be
considered. It was observed that a company in the UK
was distributing PET bottles in an unusual triangular
shape [3]. Due to low cost, better aesthetic appearance
and savings in transport and handling, PET is being
preferred over PC. Also, areas where the collection and
recycling system is not so well organised, the latter too do
not live out the number of cycles. It has been estimated
that the market for 5-gallon water containers is increasing
at an annual rate of 20% to 25% and research has showed
that Europe alone will need 5 to 7 million units by the
year 2007 [4].

1. Exaggerated size relationships such as extremely
narrow or extremely wide tops, bottoms, or midpoints
should be avoided as they are difficult to blow.
2. Square or flat surfaces with sharp corners are
undesirable.
3. Wall thickness can vary considerably from side
panels to corners. Flat panels are not uniform and flat
shoulders offer little strength.
4. Blow moulded product should be designed with
generous radii corners and edges.
5. Fillets and rounds should be employed wherever
possible in corners, ribs and edges. Such parts should
possess more uniform wall thickness.
6. The entire bottle design should be as elastic as
possible so that impact energy can be absorbed.
7. The design can include aesthetic features that have
structural benefits. Decorative ribs, vertical or
circumferential, can rigidify a container.

Optimum designs of large plastic bottles, which are
collapsible and recyclable, call for advanced design
approaches. Reduction of weight and easily collapsibility
after use are desirable characteristics but must not be at
the cost of stability, strength and normal handling.
Several studies have been made to study the deformation
behaviour and material reduction in plastic bottles mostly
related to small to medium size bottles. Karalekas et. al.
[5] have carried out numerical and experimental
investigation of the deformation behaviour of PET plastic
bottles using ABAQUS finite element program with
bottles subject to columnar crush conditions. Van Dijk et.
al. [6] have investigated lateral deformation of round and
square sectioned PET bottles of 1 litre sizes for top load
testing and vacuum resistance testing. Oliveira et. al. [7]
have studied the effects of weight reduction on the
mechanical performance for PET bottles of 900 ml sizes.

Figure 1 shows a typical 15-litre Polycarbonate (PC)
bottle consisting of neck, shoulder, body with handle and
base. The bottle is approximately 250 mm in diameter and
465 mm long. The thickness is about 1.5 mm with bottom
portion being the thicker of about 2.0 mm. The PC bottle
as shown in Figure 1 weighs about 830 g.
The PC bottle normally has a neck diameter of 55 mm
approximately and forms an important potion of the bottle
because it has to withstand water pressure when placed
upside down on the water coolers. Next is the shoulder,
which takes a major portion of weight of a fully filled 15litre bottle when placed upside down on a cooler. The
shoulder is a critical portion of the bottle, which supports
the whole bottle upside down. The body of the bottle is
the one that contains the handle and ribs like features,
which provide toughness and rough texture providing

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

rigidity of the body. The bottom part of the bottle is the
base, which is really strong and slightly concave in shape
because the concave shape of the bottle acts as a shock
absorber and also improves impact strength. In order to
improve resistance to stress cracking agents, it is
important to have round bottom edges in the bottle.
For the design of the bottle, one of the most
commonly used software called DUCT5 is used, which
allows hundreds of shapes and templates for easy design
[9]. The bottle model is divided into three main parts;
namely the base, the body and the shoulder. Each part has
its own library. The design for each part is done
separately. For the design of bottle, the body has more
variations than the base and the shoulder. Hence, more
libraries are developed for the design of the body.
To prepare the bottle for manufacturing, an automatic
parting line generation programme is included. The
programme will split the bottle into half and orient it
properly for mould NC generation.

4. Design of Collapsible PET Bottles

important factor that has to be taken into account was that
the neck and the shoulder portions has to be of identical
dimensions as of the existing design of the PC bottle. The
dimensions recorded for modelling of proposed design is
as follows.
• The length of the body from base to the shoulder was
350 mm, similar to existing design.
• The length of the shoulder vertically was determined
to be 70 mm and it has to be maintained for proposed
design.
• The length of the neck being the critical part was 45
mm and it has to be maintained for proposed design to fit
the water coolers.
• The diameter of the body of the bottle was 250 mm in
which case the proposed design for round bottle has
similar diameter.
• Initially thickness of 0.5 mm for the entire bottle was
assigned and the bottle was modelled. The bottle with
different wall thickness to neck, shoulder and body cannot
be designed because the bottle has to be first stretched and
blowed sideways which means that the bottle should have
uniform thickness through out.

The aim of this research was to design an innovative
one-way recyclable, collapsible 15-litre PET bottle. This
means that after the first use, the bottle has to be simply
crushed and disposed. In conjunction with the objective,
there were several other requirements that have to be met,
such as optimum wall thickness, less weight, easily
collapsible, identical neck dimensions to existing ones
and finally the designed bottle should be produced by
injection stretch blow molding. Some of the challenges
faced were firstly, to have thickness of bottle enough to
withstand handling forces, stable enough to be placed on
the cooler and finally thin enough to be crushed.
Secondly, it was desired to have a reduced weight of the
bottle probably lesser than the existing PC bottle weight
of approximately 830 g.

The parametric modelling software Pro/Engineer was
used to design the bottle. Figure 2 shows the shaded CAD
model of the proposed collapsible PET bottle.

An attempt has been made to use new and innovative
concept in this work to design and optimize the 15-litre
PET water bottle. The main idea of design is generated
from the concept of bellows-style collapsible containers,
such as bottles and pumps that are foldable. The series of
bellows overlap and fold to retain their folded condition
without external assistance, thus providing a self-latching
feature. This latching is the result of bringing together
under self-pressure two adjacent conical sections of
unequal proportions and different angulations to the bottle
axis. One type of collapsible PET bottle, designed like a
bellows can be easily crushed into a compact size and sent
for recycling. Moreover, the bottle can be shipped in its
crushed state, thus greatly saving space and costs.

Figure 2. Model of the PET Bottle Design

For the design of the bottle, critical dimensions of the
existing PC bottle like the diameter of the neck, shoulder
and height of the bottle are recorded. Even thickness of
the bottle is noted down for reference. To incorporate the
above design concept into the geometry, the most

In Pro/Engineer system, first the entire bottle is
created as a solid using the Revolve option since the
bottle is of round shape. The required sketch is drawn
using the drawing tools and the sketch is revolved along
the centre line, which completes the full bottle profile.
All the sharp corners are rounded off to required radius
using the Round option, which gives the model of
rounded solid bottle. The round feature also provide the
designs with aesthetic looks and especially if the parts are
to be moulded. Then the solid bottle is made hollow using
the command “Shell” feature. The shelled bottle is thus
created to the required wall thickness. The difference
between the volumes of the solid bottle material and
shelled bottle material gave the volume occupied by the
water, which is 15 litres.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

5. Finite Element Analysis
Pro/Mechanica is powerful finite element analysis
software, which makes use of the geometric model
created by the Pro/Engineer system. The model type used
is the solid model. The required properties of Young’s
Modulus, Poisson’s ratio and density are entered. Then
the constraints on the solution are specified. In stress
analysis, these could be fixed points, points of specified
displacement, or points free to move in specified
directions only. The applied loads on the model are
specified (such as point loads, uniform edge loads,
pressure on surfaces, etc.). Once the model is defined, a
processor is setup that actually performs the solution to
the posed FEA problem. This starts with the automatic
creation of the finite element mesh from the geometric
model by a subprogram called AutoGEM, which creates
triangular and Quad Shell elements. The processor will
produce a summary file of output messages which can be
consulted if something goes wrong - for example, a model
that is not sufficiently constrained by boundary
conditions. Pro/Mechanica has very powerful graphics
capabilities to examine the results of the FEA - displaced
shape, stress distributions, mode shapes, etc. These
results must be reviewed critically. In the first instance,
the results should agree with the modeling intent. For
example, if an animated view of the deformation is
looked, it can be easily seen if the boundary constraints
have been implemented properly. The results should also
satisfy the intuition about the solution (stress
concentration around a hole, for example). If there is any
cause for concern, it may be advisable to revisit some
aspects of the model and perform the analysis again.

towards the neck of the bottle. For all the three positions,
the simulation results for this analysis were obtained and
are discussed in Section 6.

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 3. Load and Constraint conditions for PET
Bottle in (a) Upright, (b) Horizontal, (c) Inverted
Positions
For the top crushing analysis of the PET bottle, the
constraint was set to the base surface of the bottle and
load was set on the top surface of the bottle i.e., uniform
load on the neck and shoulder portion of the bottle acting
downwards towards the base of the bottle. The simulation
results for this analysis have are shown in Section 6.

For the new PET bottle design, appropriate shell
thickness was assigned for the sections of the bottle and
the following analyses were carried out:
1.

2.

Structural Stability Analysis in Upright,
Horizontal and Inverted Positions for water load
of 16 kg
Crushing Analysis

For the bottle in upright position, Figure 3 (a) shows
the constraint set to the bottom portion of the bottle and
load is set for the top and circum surface of the bottle i.e.,
uniform load on the body portion of the bottle acting
downwards towards the bottom of the bottle.
For the bottle in horizontal position, Figure 3 (b)
shows the constraint set to the bottle when it is lying
horizontally and load is set for the circum surface of the
bottle i.e., uniform load on the body portion of the bottle
acting downwards towards the other half of circum
surface of the bottle.
For the bottle in inverted position, Figure 3 (c) shows
the constraint set to the shoulder portion of the bottle and
load is set for the circum surface of the bottle i.e. uniform
load on the body portion of the bottle acting downwards

Figure 4. FE displacements (left) and stresses (right)
of the PET Bottle in Inverted Position

6. Results of Structural Analysis
The Figure 4 shows the pictorial representation of
“Single-Pass Adaptive” analysis for proposed PET Bottle
Design with a wall thickness of 2.0 mm in Inverted
position under water load of 16 kg. The maximum
displacement obtained is 0.892 mm, which is negligible
and the maximum stress developed is 6.46 MPa, which is
very less compared to the maximum allowable stress for
the PET of 48.3 MPa. This stress is mainly concentrated
on the rim of the bottle and has less significant effect on
the full bottle. This is mainly because the displacement is
from the bottom of the bottle (as shown when inverted on

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

6.1

Sensitivity Design Study

A sensitivity study is used to determine, for example,
which design variables will have the most effect on a
particular measure of performance of the design like the
maximum stress or total mass of the thickness of the
bottle. Here the total mass of the bottle, maximum
displacement and maximum von mises stress are analysed
by generating plots of graphs. The design parameter is
chosen as the thickness of the bottle, which is varied from
0.5 mm to 2.0 mm with an interval of 0.1 mm thickness.

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9

1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9

2

Thickness in mm
Upright

Horizontal

Inverted

Figure 6. Graphs of Maximum Stress Vs Thicknesses
for Proposed PET Bottle for three orientations

7. Crushing Load Analysis
The Quick check analysis is carried out to find out the
correctness of model under given constraints and loading
conditions. In Figure 7, it is clearly seen that the designed
bottle follows the pattern of collapsibility as seen in
bellows. The height of the bottle designed is about 450
mm from top to the bottom of the bottle and already it can
be seen that for a load of 45 kg, there is a displacement of
94.12 mm in height for the thickness of 1.5 mm. This
shows that as the load increases, the displacement also
increases thus crushing the bottle. It is important to note
that the load starts the crushing pattern of the bottle and
finally the crushed bottle ends up in any pattern but
should be flattened.

0.4
0.2
0
2

1.9

1.8

1.7

1.6

1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

Maximum Displacement in mm

Figure 5 shows the graph of maximum displacement
versus thickness for proposed PET bottle design in
different positions. The inverted position shows a curve of
high values of maximum displacement, the reason simply
being the design is based on the functionality of bellows
and the side walls pull the bottom portion of bottle
downwards (when bottle is inverted on cooler).

8
Maximum Stress in MPa

the water cooler), since the water pressure is vertically
downward, the sidewalls are pulled downward acting as a
bellow. Similar results were obtained for analysis of
bottle in upright and horizontal positions.

Thickness in mm
Upright

Horizontal

Inverted

Figure 5. Graphs of Maximum Displacement Vs
Thickness for Proposed PET Bottle Design for three
orientations
Figure 6 shows the graph of maximum stress versus
thickness for proposed PET bottle design in different
positions. The curve of inverted position shows high
values of maximum stress, but well below the maximum
allowable stress of 48.3 MPa. The curves of upright and
horizontal positions show that the stress induced is very
less and this shows that the bottle is safe during handling,
storage and transportation.
Considering the displacement developed and the stress
induced, the PET Bottle of thickness 1.5 mm to 2.0 mm
would be good enough to withstand the water load of 16
kg and also satisfy the requirement of manufacturing of
the PET Bottle by Injection Stretch Blow Moulding. The
weight of the PET bottle was calculated to be 630 g,
which is about three quarter of the existing PC bottle
weight of about 830 g.

Figure 7. Crushing Analysis of PET Bottle

8. Comparison of PET and PC Bottles
For comparison of results, the existing PC water bottle
shown in Figure 1 was also modelled on Pro/Engineer and
analysed using the Pro/Mechanica FE
system.
Manufacturing 15-litre PET bottles in a two step injection
blow moulding process offers significant advantages over
the extrusion-blow PC process. Stretch blow moulded
PET bottles have a sparkling clarity and more uniform
material distribution than can be achieved with extrusion
blow moulding. While 15-litre PET bottles can also be
designed for refillable applications, the greatest benefits
are realized by moving to one-way recyclable bottles.
Blowing recyclable bottles in-line with the filling
equipment results in a number of advantages, including:

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

• Elimination of bottle washing and disinfection
equipment.
• Reduction in storage space requirements.
• Better hygiene.
• Lower transportation costs
• Compact size of preforms
• Simplification of distribution logistics.
• Lighter bottles since they don’t need to survive
multiple trips.
• More flexibility in the filling process.
Table 1 Comparison of New 15 Litre PET Water
Bottle and 15 Litre PC Water Bottle
Criterion
Type of
Production
Type of
Processes
Collapsible
Weight
Price of
Material
Recycle
fraction
Cost of
Recycling
Market
opportunity
Drop testing
performance
Availability in
Colours
Refilling
Washing and
Cleaning

PET Bottle
Injection
Stretch Blow
moulding
Single step or
two steps
Yes
630 g

PC Bottle
Extrusion Blow
moulding

Lower

Higher

0.45

0.45

A$ 68/Kg
(Approx.)
Rising

A$75/Kg
(Approx.)
Stagnant

High

Less than PET

Light Blue,
Yellow, Pink,
Green
Not necessary
Not necessary

Light Blue

Multi steps
No
830 g

with the existing PC water bottle design of the same
capacity.

9. Conclusions
While this paper presents numerous aspects,
considerations, and suggestions for the design and
development of the 15-litre collapsible, recyclable PET
bottle for one-way applications to overcome the problems
with existing PC water cooler bottle, no guidebook,
publication or suggestion can provide the exact solution to
such problems. Trial-and-error is a must and if a few
suggestions in this paper are followed then
experimentation will quickly provide the desired results.
Here the objectives were to reduce the weight of the bottle
to cater for efficient material usage and be effective in
terms of collapsibility and lower costs. To satisfy these
objectives of the research, finite element structural
analysis was also conducted on the new design as well as
the existing design. From the results obtained, it could
well be seen that the proposed design satisfies all the
critical requirements of an economical and recyclable 15litre water cooler bottle.

References

Necessary
Necessary

Bottles produced in a two-step system also have better
closure seals because the neck finishes are formed during
injection and are not subject to subsequent reshaping. In
addition to the economic benefits, PET has better physical
properties than PC making it a better choice for bottle
manufacture. Compared to PC extrusion-blow, PET twostep injection-blow produces bottles with:
• Better dimensional stability
• Lower oxygen and CO2 permeability
• More consistent wall thickness distribution
• Better appearance
• Lower resin cost (45-50% less)
PET preform moulding equipment is also highly
flexible and can be easily re-tooled to meet changing
production demands. PC extrusion-blow equipment is
highly specialized and may have limited potential for
reconfiguration. Table 1 summarises the criteria, which
can be used to compare the new PET water bottle design

[1] Anonymous, The growth of the 5-gallon bottle,
PETplanet Insider, Online magazine, PETplanet
publisher GmbH, Germany, Issue 10, 2001,
www.petplanet.com
[2] “PET makes debut in 5-gallon water bottles”,
Plastics Technology, New York, May 1999, Vol. 45
(5), pp. 59.
[3] “Filling the big ones”, www.petpla.net/
[4] Matthew T. Defosse, “PET is low-cost alternative to
PC in 5-gal water containers”, Chemical Week
Publishing, L.L.C, Modern Plastics, 2000.
[5] D. Karalekas, D. Rapti, G. Papakaliatakis and E.
Tsartolia, “Numerical and experimental investigation
of the deformational behaviour of plastic
containers”, Packaging Technology and Sc., 14,
2001, pp 185-191.
[6] R. Van Dijk, J.C. Sterk, D. Sgorbani and F. Van
Keulen, “Lateral deformation of plastic bottles:
experiments,
simulations
and
prevention”,
Packaging Technology and Science, 11, 1998, pp 91117.
[7] L.M. de Oliveira, C. Sarantopoulos, M. Bordin, and
Y. Nakandakari, “Effects of weight reduction of
packaging material on the mechanical performance
of PET bottles for cooking oil”, Packaging
Technology and Science, 13, 2000, pp 169-176.
[8] Geng-Qun Huang and Han-Xiong Huang,
“Thickness optimisation of blow molded parts using
FEM/ANN/GA methods”, ANTEC 2005, SPE, USA,
pp 25-28.
>@ C.K. Chua and S.L. Lye, “Parametric modelling of
drinking bottles”, Integrated Manufacturing
Systems, Vol 9(2), 1998, pp. 99-108.

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics, Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV'06)
0-7695-2606-3/06 $20.00 © 2006

