Multimedia Information Systems in Education
Pat Jefferies and Fiaz Hussain,
De Montfort University
Department of Computer and Information Sciences,
Kents Hill Campus,
Hammerwood Gate,
Milton Keynes,
MK7 6HP,
England.
Email: pjefferi@dmu.ac.uk or fiaz@dmu.ac.uk

Abstract
Multimedia applications within the academic
environment can be varied and include such things as:
marketing of courses with an interactive prospectus;
providing general administrative information (student
handbooks, timetables, assignment schedules, module
content, etc.); facilitating co-operative working using
such things as computer conferencing or collaborative
whiteboards; and for the purposes of computerassisted-learning (CAL). In addition, multimedia can be
used as an end in itself through students employing the
embedded techniques in development of a spectrum of
products.
The main purpose of this paper is to explore the lessons
that might be learnt through the application of
information systems research to the field of multimedia
education. By adopting this approach, parallels might
be drawn between the two application areas to highlight
the convergence of underlying philosophies and
methods in order to inform good practice. The paper
aims to promote discussion of the various aspects
involved in multimedia systems development within an
educational environment.

Keywords:

Multimedia Technology, Educational
Applications, Information Systems

1.0 Introduction
In General Systems theory there are a number of
different classifications which may be used to
categorise systems. Such classifications include
closed/open (determined by the interaction or
otherwise of the system with its environment), and
deterministic/probabilistic, (determined by the
existence or absence of defined and predictable
stimulus-response pairings).
General systems
theory further defines ’open’ systems as being a set
of components (e.g. an organised collection of
people, machines, procedures, documents, data and
any other entities) that interact with each other as
well as with the environment to reach a predefined
goal. This particular theory is illustrated in Figure
1 below.

System boundary

Input

Output

Figure 1 depicts the
components for an ’Open’
System

Process - i.e. the
transformation

Control
flows
Feedforward

Control
Unit

Feedback

Environment

Thus, the model illustrated in Fig 1 may be seen, in
simple terms, to be based on the idea that all ’open’
systems operate within an environment and have a
boundary within which controlled processes act upon
identifiable inputs to produce required outputs.
Systems thinking also implies that there are a series of
inputs which can be direct or as a consequence of
environmental influence; whereas the outputs will be
determined by both the inputs and the processing
itself. The central transformation is also controlled
by an element of feed-forward and feedback which
are themselves dependent upon the particular system
under review. The above model, which depicts a
single feed-back loop system, has, however, been
found to be much too simplistic and deterministic a
view to adequately illustrate complex, adaptive
human systems which are perceived to consist of a
’web of non-linear feedback loops’ (Stacey [10]).
However, if we consider education as a specific
example of an ’open’, probabilistic system then this
may also be seen in terms of inputs, processes,
outputs and interaction with the environment. Inputs
to the system might be potential learners. The
educational process may be one of learning and
experiencing. Outputs will seemingly vary depending
upon the perspective taken. The environment in this
case is society in general and more particularly the
government, business and the family. The curriculum
or process itself is controlled by the academic
institution (tutors, managers, resources, etc) and
informed via the feed-forward and feedback loops
from the learners.
This paper therefore seeks to explore some of the
issues relating to the educational system in terms of
information systems thinking and the role of
multimedia as a facilitating technology. The paper

gives an introduction to the two systems (education
and information) and then discusses identified
similarities in approach to development of such
systems and the relevance of multimedia. Such
discussion is meant to stimulate further research into
some of the issues involved.

2.0 The Education System
The education system in the United Kingdom has
been evolving for a great deal of time and has, over
the years, been significantly influenced by the work
of a number of researchers and philosophers. At one
stage the influence of B F Skinner (Skinner [9]) and
other reductionist philosophers had a great deal of
impact upon education in as much as learning and
teaching took on a very structured, scientifically
oriented approach. For example "Bobbitt argued for
a scientific approach to planning school curricula by
systematic analysis of those human activities which
the curriculum was intended to develop.
The
activities to be focused on were those which made for
efficiency in living as a healthy, gainfully employed
citizen. Those activities, analysed in detail, would be
the intended outcomes of the curriculum", (Taylor &
Richards [12]). This, in simplistic terms, may be seen
to reflect a deterministic view of a ’closed’ system in
which specific outcomes may be defined for
appropriately developed processes to achieve.
Further work by the behaviourist philosophers such as
Basil Bernstein (Bernstein, [1]) added weight to such
approaches through the identification of what were
perceived to be desired, observable behaviours. Thus
much of the early influences upon education stemmed
from particular beliefs of what learners ought to learn
which were, in turn, based upon very subjective
ideals. It may also be seen that the perception that
education’s primary aim was to teach such ideals, led

to the ’objectivist’ or traditional model of learning.
Such a model is based on the notion that the goal of
learning is to understand, what is perceived to be, an
objective reality. In addition, following the work of
such behaviourists as Basil Bernstein, achievement of
such learning was also deemed to be measurable
through observable behaviour. This approach to
assessment could also be perceived in terms of the
simple, deterministic ’closed’ systems model where
learning is seen in simple stimulus-response terms
reflected in the objectivist model of learning.
However, latterly more liberal, divergent philosophies
have had an influence and contributed towards the
widespread adoption of a more student-centred
curriculum which takes account of the more cognitive
aspects of learning. Thus education may be seen as
an area that has been significantly influenced over
time by a number of ideologies which each
encapsulate the views of different groups who, in
turn, seek to impose their own views of the purpose
of education upon the system itself. For example,
"Scrimshaw distinguishes five major educational
ideologies: (a) ’progressivism’ which views education
as a means of meeting individual needs and
aspirations; (b) ’instrumentalism’ which stresses the
responsiveness of education to the requirements of
the
current
socio-economic
order;
(c)
’reconstructionism’ which conceives of education as
an important way of moving society in desired
directions; (d) ’classical humanism’ where education
serves the function of transmitting the cultural
heritage and (e) ’liberal humanism’ which
acknowledges the importance of the intellectual
disciplines for all pupils and seeks to help create a
vision of common educational experience, (Taylor &
Richards, [12]). If taking a ’Soft Systems’ approach,
(Checkland, [3]), in trying to conceptualise and
model the education system according to these
various ideologies it might be seen that we could
define a variety of ’Root definitions’ which reflected
each of these perspectives. Building upon each ’Root
definition’ we might then be able to define
appropriate inputs and outputs for meeting the given
objectives. This may, however, again fall into too
simplistic a trap in trying to define learning in terms
of single-loop feedback systems which reflect the
notions of single-loop, low-level, stimulus-response
learning reminiscent of classical conditioning and the
objectivist model.

3.0 Information Systems

Information Systems, in similar fashion to educational
systems, were originally subject to a very structured,
deterministic approach to development based on
scientific reductionism and this is largely evidenced
in such methodologies as Structured Systems
Analysis & Design Methodology (SSADM).
However, as with the area of education, researchers in
the information systems field have long been
advocating that account be taken of the more social
nature of such development activity. To this end they
have developed various other methodologies to take
account of this fact. Examples of these can be seen in
the work of Peter Checkland (Checkland, [3]) with
the Soft Systems Methodology approach and of Frank
Stowell & Daune West with their Client-Led Systems
Design (Stowell & West, [11]). Further work has
also been undertaken by Enid Mumford which
proposes an ethical approach to systems development
(Mumford, [6]). Enid Mumford also stresses the
importance of aspects such as participation within
systems development and quality of working life.
These are, of course, only a selection of
methodologies that incorporate recognition of the
importance of the users in the information systems
being developed. However, to take the Ethics
approach, it might be that this may provide an
appropriate framework for the development of
learning and teaching systems. For example, with the
emergent use of multimedia technology, education
may be viewed as a socio-technical system and as
such would, in Mumford’s view, need to be developed
with the participation of all of those involved. In this
way specific, individualised learning outcomes might
be specified. Appropriate assessment would then
need to be arranged and a divergence of pathways
towards achievement of these afforded to the learners.
However, the fundamental problem with the
education system is, it seems, the divergence of
opinion as to who or what the outcomes of the system
should be and consequently their requirements.
Perhaps this is where the application of systems
thinking may offer a way forward.

4.0 A Comparison of Systems
development
In comparing the two areas (education and
information systems) it may be argued that the
underlying philosophies and development of
Information Systems, have, to a large extent, mirrored
those that have been evident in education. For
example, initial methodologies in the field of both
educational and information systems began with very
deterministic, reductionist approaches. This has been
clearly evidenced in the structured approaches

adopted by both early SSADM in information
systems and teaching and learning methods, based on
the work by Skinner, (Skinner, [9]) and other
educational philosophies, in education. More
recently, however, it has become increasingly
acknowledged that whilst such structured methods
may offer a very logical, methodical, clearly defined
and scientifically supportable approach to both
educational and information systems development,
the products of such activity seldom meet the
requirements of the ’users’. Hence the almost weekly
reports in the computing news of system failures and
also the well documented reports of educational
failures which have led to the introduction of the
National Curriculum and other initiatives such as
those which are addressing the teaching of basic
literacy and numeracy.
However, in the area of information systems, analysts
and designers have, for some time now, been
attempting to develop methodologies which are not
based quite so firmly in the area of science. Soft
Systems
Methodology
has,
for
example,
recommended consideration of aspects of human
sociology in systems development as there has been a
recognition of the subjectivity of the human beings
necessarily involved.
Much of this can also be said of education. Early
attempts at education reflected the scientific,
reductionist approach to learning in which learning
was seen as simple or single-loop learning where
consequences of previous actions are used to amend
subsequent actions.
Later methodologies were,
however, beginning to take much more account of the
subjectivity of the learner in terms of both the
concepts of learning and of the constructive aspects
of knowledge itself. In information systems it has
also been perceived that learning is a complex
activity which involves more than one feedback loop.
A second loop is perceived to occur "when the
consequences of actions lead to a questioning of the
mental model, the underlying assumptions, that have
been driving the actions. That questioning may lead
to the amendment of the mental model, the reframing
of the problem or opportunity, before action is
amended." (Stacey, [10]). Complex learning is thus
perceived to involve both destruction and creation.
Such perceptions of learning may be seen to have led
to the more student-centred curriculum and models of
learning that have been prevalent in recent times.
Such models include the ’constructivist’ model of
learning (which is based on the individual making
their own constructs of reality), the ’co-operative’
model of learning (in which participation within a

group is critical to individuals achieving higher order
learning of critical thinking and creativity), the
’cognitive information processing’ model (which
facilitates learner managed learning), and the
’sociocultural’ model of learning (in which learners
form their own, unbiased version of understanding
that fits in with their own cultural and social
background) (Iran-Nejad, et al, [5]; O’Loughlin, [7]).
Each of these may be seen to fit in with the ’Soft
Systems’ view that all human systems are complex,
adaptive systems which may be subject to such
theories as complexity, chaos and self-organisation.
Complex systems are also perceived to be subject to
non-linear feedback loops which can be either
negative or positive which can, in turn, lead to
unexpected or counter-intuitive results.
Despite the fact that greater insights have been gained
in systems thinking current trends within education
are now seemingly deviating from the approach to
systems development. With the imposition of the
National curriculum into school education and other
initiatives related to, what could, perhaps, be termed,
’payment by results’ there seems to be encouragement
for a more convergent approach to learning and
teaching. This may then signal a return to, what
could be seen as, a very much more deterministic
approach to education from both the point of view of
the teacher as well as the learner. Much of this has
probably been encouraged through the increasing
pressure to get all students to achieve specific
learning outcomes by specific assessment points and
through the publication of league tables. Students, for
example, seem increasingly to perceive that education
is simply a matter of learning a series of facts in order
to jump the various ’hurdles’ of assessment rather than
development of the skills required for life-long
learning and social contribution.
Teachers may also feel constrained by the pressures
upon them to ensure that their students pass
assessments - league tables and funding requirements
are all likely to have exerted enormous pressures in
this regard. Obviously, it might be acknowledged
that there is a clear need to define specific learning
outcomes and to have these assessed. However,
many could argue that it would seem to constitute a
serious backward step if all of the pathways to
achieving such objectives were to return to the very
constrained, determined routes reminiscent of the
past.
This is, perhaps, where multimedia, and particularly
use of the Internet, as a teaching resource may be able
to facilitate a certain amount of ’tailorability’ of the

learning experience as such technology is concerned
with representing a mixed mode of information (text,
static images, sounds and video). The digital medium
also provides the potential of a more flexible
approach to learning than has hitherto been possible
in terms of interactivity and availability.and thus may
allow a divergence of approach yet a convergence of
achieved outcomes. For example, students could be
facilitated to asynchronously explore a variety of
approaches using multimedia resources in order to
achieve specified outcomes. Such students would,
therefore, be able to ’tailor’ their educational
experience to their own particular needs which would
very much accord with the views of the de-schoolers
such as Ivan Illich (Illich, [4]). Illich even states that
"the syntactic alternative to it" (i.e. traditional
education) "is an educational network or web for the
autonomous assembly of resources under the personal
control of each learner", (Illich, [4]). Thus the idea of
a learner managed/learner centred approach is not
new but the technology ought not, it would seem, be
used simply to ’package’ courses to be delivered on an
assembly-line basis but rather should be used to
facilitate access to resources traditionally unavailable
in the classroom and thus enhance the learning
experience.
The problem is, however, that there needs to be an
awareness that information technology is simply a
tool which facilitates an organisation that uses it to
achieve its strategic objectives and that the use of
technology is not an end in itself. For example
education needs to be wary of falling into the trap of
following the ’IT vision’ rather than the strategic
vision which has been the downfall of many business
organisations. One of the problems, however, is that
the rapidly advancing technology and the manifold
opportunities that it is beginning to afford
educationalists is extremely seductive. For example,
such ideas as learner managed learning, distance
learning, life-long learning facilitated by multimedia
information systems are gaining a great deal of
impetus and support. Much of this impetus is
stemming from a belief that technology can facilitate
learning at any time and at any place and that
enhanced learning experiences can be achieved with
potentially significant (long term) reductions in cost.
Such cost reductions are perceived to be possible
through the provision of ’virtual’ educational
institutions which are aimed to cater for the any time,
anywhere concept of learning.
However, regardless of whether or not savings in the
provision of traditional campus education can be
achieved, it would seem that the requirements of the

learner ought to be weighed against how well and in
what ways such multimedia information systems can
support educational objectives.
To a very large
extent such issues are, it seems, becoming secondary
in the ’race’ to harness the potential of the multimedia
technology which is far more accessible than would
have been thought possible a few years ago. For
example the recent initiative taken by the Dudley
Council (West Midlands, England) is costing £43
million. This 10-year deal is putting Dudley "at the
forefront of the government's efforts to connect the
nation's schools via a national grid for learning by
2002" (D Sabbagh, [8]). It is thought that such an
initiative will lead to many other councils following
the example of Dudley. As reported in the same
article "Bob Griffith, national secretary of local
government IT managers' association Socitm, said
'The government is placing a lot of emphasis on a
national grid. So interest in investing in educational
IT is growing in importance to our members'" (D
Sabbagh, [8]).
Thus there are increasingly very
powerful influences being brought to bear which will
almost certainly hasten the rush to implement the
technology. However, current evidence is showing
that the benefits that might be hoped for haven't really
been forthcoming and that the costs of producing
effective on-line learning materials are high. For
example numerous approaches have been taken to
develop materials but with limited success in
fulfilling the need for on-line learning resources.
(Carswell & Murphy, [2])
It is therefore of concern that there are many
questions which remain, to a large extent, unanswered
and yet the push for technological change is gathering
impetus at an ever increasing rate. Some example
questions which might be posed are as follows:
•
•
•
•

How might we guard against the seductiveness of
the IT vision?
How can technology help education achieve its
strategic objectives?
Have the various pedagogical, ethical and
sociological issues been addressed?
For example:
• Which paradigm of learning can be
supported by the technology?
• Can knowledge and learning be conveniently
packaged?
• What will the impact of a lack of
consultation with the learners, the teachers,
the parents and other interested parties have
post implementation?
• What will be the impact on the
learning/educational process?

•

•

What are the real benefits of using IT for
supporting learning - do we yet know what
these really are?
• What impact will computer-mediated
education have on society/business/family?
• Have issues such as language, age, gender
and culture been taken into account?
• Have the issues of privacy and security been
addressed?
What are the cost and technology issues and how
will this impact on implementation?

Until these and other concerns are thoroughly
researched, it seems appropriate to exercise restraint
in our acquiescence to the apparent technological
imperative and the attendant allocation of large
quantities of scarce resources.

2

Carswell, L & Murphy, M (1994) "Pragmatic
Methodology
for
Educational
Courseware
Development,
retrieved
May,
1999
from:
http://www.ulst.ac.uk/cticomp/carswell.html

3

Checkland, P.B. (1989) "Soft Systems Methodology"
in: Rational Analysis for a Problematic World (ed. J.
Rosenhead), Chichester: Wiley

4

Illich, I., (1974) "Deschooling Society", Open Forum

5

Iran-Nejad, A, McKeachie, W, Berliner, D.D., (1990)
"The Multisource Nature of Learning: An
Introduction". Review of Educational Research, 60
(4), pp 509-515

6

Mumford, E. (1996) "Ethical Tools for Ethical
Change", Macmillan

7

O’Loughlin, M., (1992) "Rethinking Science
Education: Beyond Piagetian Constructivisim Toward
a Sociocultural Model of Teaching and Learning".
Journal of Research in Science Teaching 29 (8), pp
791-820

8

Sabbagh, D. (1998), "UK Schools linked to national
grid", Computing magazine, 8 October 1998, pg 10

9

Skinner, B.F. (1954) "The science of learning and the
art of teaching" Harvard Educational Review

5.0 Conclusions and Further Work
It can therefore be concluded, from this initial work,
that further exploration needs to be undertaken into
how ’successful’ information systems can be
developed and how organisational learning is being
facilitated through the use of technology.
Comparisons may then be made which may result in
lessons
learned
from
information
systems
development being able to inform the field of
education.
There is, however, a great deal more research needed
into issues such as determining; what lessons can we
learn from current systems thinking that can inform
how we deploy the technology, if education is
perceived as being a socio-technical system can we
facilitate greater participation of learners in its
development through use of the technology?, who is
the ’client’ of the education system?; what are the
objectives of the educational system?; what
constitutes ’good’ learning and how this can be
achieved for all learners?; how may the new
technologies which facilitate multimedia be exploited
to maintain the divergence of opportunity whilst
retaining the divergence of achievement? All of these
and other issues are becoming increasingly important
in the field of education and it seems that there is
much work yet to be done to inform good practice.

7.0 References
1

Bernstein, B. (1977) "Class, Codes and Control,
Volume 3, Towards a theory of educational
transmissions. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul

10 Stacey, R.D. (1996) "Strategic Management &
Organisational Dynamics (2nd ed), Pitman Publishing
11 Stowell, F. & West, D. (1994) "Client-led Design",
McGraw-Hill
12 Taylor, P.H. & Richards, C.M. (1987) "An
Introduction to Curriculum Studies", Nfer-Nelson

