The Delaunay Constrained Triangulation :
The Delaunay Stable Algorithms
L. Rognant*, J.M. Chassery**, S. Goze*, J.G Planès*
(*)Alcatel Space Industries,
26 av. J.F. Champollion B.P. 1187
31037 Toulouse Cedex - FRANCE
tel: 33 (5) 34 35 69 50
Loic.Rognant@space.alcatel.fr
(**)TIMC/IMAG
(Institut d'Informatique et de Mathématiques appliquées de Grenoble)
Institut Albert Bonniot
Université Joseph Fourier - Grenoble
38706 La Tronche Cedex - FRANCE
Abstract
The Delaunay triangulation is well known for its
use in geometric design. A derived version of this
structure, the Delaunay constrained triangulation, takes
into account the triangular mesh problem in presence of
rectilinear constraints.
The Delaunay constrained triangulation is very
useful for CAD, topography and mapping and in finite
element analysis. This technique is still developing. We
present a taxonomy of this geometric structure. First we
describe the different tools used to introduce the
problem. Then we introduce the different approaches
highlighting various points of view of the problem.
We will focus on the Delaunay stable methods. A
Delaunay stable method preserves the Delaunay nature
of the constrained triangulation. Each method is detailed
by its algorithms, performances, and properties. For
instance we show how these methods approximate the
generalised Voronoï diagram of the configuration.
The Delaunay stable algorithms are used for 2.5D
DEM design. The aim of this work is to demonstrate that
the use of topographic constraints in a regular DEM
without adding new points preserves the terrain shape.
So the resulting DEM can be more easily interpreted
because its realism is preserved and the mesh still owns
all the Delaunay triangulation properties.

triangulation problem, we define tools to describe the
working area and the algorithm behaviour classification.
Then we expose the different approaches, from the basic
redefinition of the problem to full preserving methods.
Among them, the Delaunay stable methods are detailed
with the algorithmie description.
Finally, we use these stable algorithms to improve
and maintain at the lowest cost the DEM realism during
the resampling process.

2. The problem
The problem of the constrained triangulation is to
make appear a constraint graph described by constraint
edges. Each constraint edge is then a part of triangles.
We will use the Delaunay triangular structure. Let’s
define the constraint elements.
Definition 2.1 (The constraints field)
The constraint field Cont is the set of all the constraint
edges, having no intersections except with other vertices
or edges at their ends.

Keywords : Delaunay triangulation, Delaunay
constrained triangulation, surface model, Delaunay stable
algorithm, DEM application.
Figure 2.1 Example of data and Constraint field

1. Introduction
After the presentation of the Delaunay constrained

Definition 2.2 (Polygon triangulation)
The triangulation of a polygon is performed by

looking at its defining elements separately as constraint
edges.

the result of a Delaunay stable algorithm.

3. Delaunay triangulation under constraint
2.1 Tools and definitions
Definition 2.3 (Delaunay compliant edge)
A Delaunay compliant edge is an edge for which the
insertion of its extremities in the Delaunay triangulation
makes sure the appearance of the edge as a Delaunay
edge.
Definition 2.4 (The constraint tube)
The tube of a constraint edge e in the triangulation
T(s) is the set of triangles of T which are directly crossed
by the edge.
t u (e) = triangles t ∈ T t ∩ e ≠ ∅

{

}

This area is the limit of the direct triangulation
impact of the constraint incorporating methods. This
helps to keep the local aspect of the Delaunay
triangulation (Markovian behaviour).
Definition 2.5 (Exact verification of a constraint field)
A triangulation T verifies exactly a constraint field if
each element of Cont appears as element of the
triangulation..
So we can define a first class of incorporating
methods :
The constraint forcing method :
The principle of this method is to modify the direct
neighbourhood triangulation to avoid the constraint
crossing edges without modifying the constraint edge.

The principle is to redefine the building criterion of
the Delaunay triangulation. So, we define the constrained
empty circle criterion taking into account the graph of
visibility of the configuration. The constraint field is
exactly verified because the edge integrity is preserved.
Definition 3.1 (mutual visibility)
Two vertices Vi and Vj are mutually visible if no
constraint edge crosses their linking segment.
Definition 3.2 (Constraint empty circle criterion)
A triangle t(vi,vj,vk) of T respects the constraint
empty circle if and only if there is no other vertex v of T
such :
• v is contained in the circumscribed circle to t.
• v is not visible from the three vertices vi,vj,vk at the
same time.

Figure 3.1: The constraint empty circle criterion
(v2,v3 is a constraint edge)

Definition 2.6 (Poor verification of a constraint field)
A triangulation T verifies poorly a constraint field if
each element of Cont appears as it is or as a partition in
the triangulation.
This leads to the second class of incorporating
methods.
The constraint breaking method :
The constraint breaking principle is to transform the
constraint edge by partitioning it into Delaunay
compliant edges. The corresponding algorithms are
mainly Delaunay stable.

Definition 3.3 (The Delaunay triangulation under
constraint)
A triangulation is a Delaunay triangulation under
constraint if all the triangles respect the constrained
empty circle criteria.
So the defined triangulation contains the constraint
graph as part of itself. The constraint field is exactly
verified.
The Voronoï diagram is redefined too and it has
been proved that the duality between the constrained
Voronoï diagram and the Delaunay triangulation under
constraint still exists.

Definition 2.7(Delaunay stable incorporating method)
A constraint incorporating method in a Delaunay
triangulation is said to be stable if the resulting
triangulation is still a Delaunay triangulation.

Definition 3.4 (Constraint Euclidean distance)
If d(v,v') is the euclidean distance from v to v' the
constrained euclidean distance by the constraint field is
defined by:

Proposition 2.1 (Delaunay unstable method)
A constraint incorporating method in a Delaunay
triangulation is said to be Delaunay unstable if the result
is a triangulation respecting no longer the empty circle
criterion.

d C (v , v ’) if v and v ’are mutually visible
d Cont (v , v ’) =  ont
∞

2.2 Semantics
The difference between the stable and unstable
methods can be translated in their naming manner.
It has to be stressed that the Delaunay Constrained
Triangulation (DCT) is different from the Constrained
Delaunay Triangulation (CDT). The CDT are produced
by Delaunay unstable methods. On the contrary, DCT are

Definition 3.5 (Constrained Voronoï diagram)
The constrained Voronoï diagram of Cont is defined
as the set of the cVOR cells. The plan is partitioned into
constrained Voronoï cells where each area is defined by:


d cont (v , v i ) < ∞ and
cVOR(v i ) = v ∈ℜ 2

d cont (v , v i ) < d cont (v , v j ) ∀v j ∈V 



4. The unstable methods

First we compute the Delaunay triangulation of the
vertices and the constraint extremities. Then we
incorporate the missing constraint edges. The main
principle is to retriangulate the constraint edge’s tube
while preserving the edge integrity. So, the resulting
triangulation verifies exactly the constraint field but is no
more of Delaunay type.
Both sides of the edge are processed separately.
Lots oft methods are proposed using the same theorem
guaranteeing an existing solution to the problem.
Theorem 4.1(triangulation without internal points) [5]
For each area whose boundary is a simple non
crossed polygonal lines, there exists a triangulation
without internal points.
Algorithms are based on edge swapping on each
side of the constraint edge. Basic methods test every
solution while elegant methods swap the edges at
random, so exploiting the finite size of the problem to
converge to a solution.

Figure 4.1 The Delaunay unstable forcing method

5. The stable methods
The Delaunay stable methods are based on the
breaking method building new Delaunay compliant
edges. The resulting triangulation is Delaunay type but
verifies poorly the constraint field.

5.1 Densification
This method states that the constraint doesn’t appear
in the triangulation, because its sampling doesn’t fit the
neighbourhood. This method presented in [8] analyses
the constraint tube to compute an adapted sampling
distance to discretise the constraint edge.
Proposition 5.1 (Sampling distance)
Let d(v,e) be the distance between a tube vertex and
the constraint edge.
So, the best sampling distance for this set is :
P(e, T ) = 2 * min d (v i , e)
∀vi ∈t u ( e )

Theorem 5.1 (Edge incorporation by densification)
The partition of a constraint edge with the sampling
distance P(e,T) makes the edge Delaunay compliant.
Proof : The constraint edge doesn’t appear in the
triangulation because it doesn’t fulfill the empty circle
criterion . The new edges respect it because the circles,
whose diameter they are, contain no other vertices. So we
are sure that the partitioned edges are Delaunay
compliant. ❏

5.2 Dichotomy
this method uses the classic principle of splitting the
constraint edges until all the new edges are Delaunay
compliant.
Theorem 5.2 (Edge incorporation by dichotomy)
It always exists an edge partition by dichotomy
leading to Delaunay compliant edges.
Proof : the convergence is guaranteed by the
densification method. There is a step from which all the
edge sizes are below the densification distance which has
been defined previously. So they are Delaunay
compliant. ❏

5.3 The perpendicular projection
Each vertex of the tube is orthogonally projected on
the constraint edge.
Theorem 5.3 (Incorporation by orthogonal tube
projection)
The discretisation of a constraint edge by inserting
all the orthogonal projections of the tube vertices makes
it Delaunay compliant.
(short) Proof : The insertion of the orthogonal
projection on the constraint edge disturb the empty circle
criterion for the tube triangles. So, step by step, from the
start to the end of the constraint edge we split it into
Delaunay compliant edges.❏
Proposition 5.2 (Arc cost)
The cost of arcs for the incorporation of an edge with
the orthogonal projections is directly related to the edge
tube configuration.
cost = Card (t u (e)) + 1

5.4 The intersection incorporation
We split the constraint edge by inserting all the
intersections between the tube and its corresponding
constraint edge.
Theorem 5.4 (Tube-constraint intersections
incorporation)
The partition of a constraint edge by inserting all the
intersections between the edge and its tube triangulation
makes it Delaunay compliant.
Proof : Each intersecting edge belongs to two
Delaunay circles. So, inserting the intersection point
disturbs the Delaunay criterion and produces a Delaunay
compliant edge.❏
Proposition 5.3(Arcs cost)
The cost in arcs of inserting the tube-edge
intersection method depends on the tube configuration:
cost = Card (t u (e))

5.5 The impact on Voronoï diagram
Stable methods produce Delaunay triangulations. So
these DCT still have the Voronoï diagram as dual
diagram.

Delaunay stable methods)
The Voronoï diagram corresponding to the
triangulation made by Delaunay stable methods is a
punctual approximation of the generalised Voronoï
diagram of the configuration.

5.6 Performance analysis
The performance analysis is conducted in two ways.
First we use subjective criteria to compare the methods.
Then we evaluate quantitatively the gains over ten
different configurations.

Figure 5.1 Impact of the densification method on the
Voronoï diagram

In Figure 5.1, we notice the trace of the new
Voronoï diagram after incorporation over the original
one. Its typical shape shows the approximation of the
generalised Voronoï diagram corresponding to the
constraint edge. The quality of the approximation
depends on the partition distance (Theorem 5.5).
We present the required principles to define the
generalised Voronoï diagram. So we can check the link
between the DCT related Voronoï diagram and the
generalised Voronoï diagram.
Definition 5.1 ( Objects )
Points, open segments and open polygons are
considered as simple elements. An object is a set of
simple elements.

Definition 5.3 (Certitude of an incorporation method)
the method certitude evaluates how this method
progresses at each step toward the solution : i.e. the
appearance of the constraint in the Delaunay
triangulation.
The densification is a reliable method but it costs a
lot. The orthogonal projection or intersection insertion
methods are also reliable and improve the arcs cost
because it is directly related to the tube configuration.
The dichotomy method offers the lowest cost of arcs but
we can not predict the final cost.
Certitude
Arcs cost
Method
Densification
+
Orthogonal
+
+/Intersections
+
+/Dichotomy
+
Table 1 : Certitude/Cost

Method
densification
dichotomy
orthogonal projection
intersections

Definition 5.2 (Generalised Voronoï diagram)
The generalised Voronoï diagram is the nearest
neighbourhood cell partition of a set of objects.

Arcs Cost
ƒ(distance(tu(e),e)
= Card(tu(e))+1
= Card(tu(e))

Table 2 : Bound of the arcs cost for the Delaunay
stable methods

The following table shows the average cost of new
arcs computed over ten different configuration.
Gain

Figure 5.2 : Sample of the generalised Voronoï
diagram for a polygon interior.

The "classic" Voronoï diagram is called the
punctual Voronoï diagram dealing with vertices. In
Figure 5.2 we can see that the generalised Voronoï
diagram is made of arcs and parabola sections.
Theorem 5.5 (Convergence of the punctual diagram
to the generalised Voronoï diagram)[1]
Let S be a set of objects and S(h) be a discretisation
of S. The punctual Voronoï diagram of S(h) converges to
the generalised Voronoï diagram of S when the
discretisation step decreases to 0.
Theorem 5.6 (The Voronoï diagram associated to the

Method

nb arcs

dens.

ortho.

dens.

104,00

ortho.

33,60

67,69%

inters.

32,60

68,65%

2,98%

dicho.

23,80

77,12%

29,17%

inters.

-209,52% -219,02%
-3,07%

dicho.
-336,97%
-41,18%
-36,97%

26,99%

Tableau 1: Average arcs gains over 10 various
configurations

5.7 Example
We present the behaviour of the different Delaunay
stable algorithms on the same configuration. In the
following figure we have:
1. The original configuration.
2. The Densification method.
3. The dichotomy method.

4. The orthogonal projection method.
5. The intersection method.

river).
A topographic link doesn't costs anything because
the information needed along the edge for its
incorporation is interpolated from the height of its
extremities.

6.3 Application

1)

2)

3)

4)

5)

Figure 5.3

The bold line in the first vignette outlines the constraint
edge tube boundary. Figure 5.1 is the associated Voronoï
diagram to this configuration for the densification
method.

6. Application for DEM
6.1 The DEM design
Rippa in [7] shows that the Delaunay triangulation
minimises the flexion energy of the mesh. So the
Delaunay triangulation provides the best approximating
surface reconstruction. This property is very useful for
terrain surface from a set of scattered data. Moreover, the
duality of the Delaunay triangulation with the Voronoï
diagram offers a lot of new perspectives for exploiting
the DEM For instance in [8], the Voronoï cells are used
to extend the ground roughness measured at different
points. So the 2D Delaunay triangulation is used to build
a 2.5D surface.
Those properties lead us to look for a constrained
Delaunay triangulation preserving its nature and so its
properties. So we used the developed algorithms to
design the DEM and improve its realism.
The constraints lines describe topographic lines
(ridges, valleys) which help to sketch the final DEM

6.2 The resampling problem
The problem of regular DEM is that their sampling
method misses topographic features whose size is below
the sampling rate distance. We want to improve those
DEM by using a triangular Design and incorporating the
missed topographic constraints before resampling.
Definition 6.1 (topographic link)
A topographic link is a constraint edge linking two
points which belong to the same terrain feature and are
mutually visible (for instance two points in the same

In this example we take a regular mesh over the
terrain. Its sampling rate has missed the valley. So when
resampling is performed to a better scale, the valley is no
longer seen. It is quite a problem for hydrologic
computation or when piloting a vehicle.
Figure 8.1 presents the three strategies we
developed to improve the DEM realism. The first one is
the classic method resampling the grid to make another
grid. The second adds topographic links and in the last
we correct (move) a few points before adding
topographic links.
The Figure 8.2 shows the results of these strategies.
We can verify the appearance of the main valley whereas
the secondary valley is still missing. In the best method
both valleys are well described for a very low cost
(1.25% of the whole DEM points are modified).

7. Conclusion and outlooks
We have shown that we have the choice between
different philosophies for constraining the Delaunay
triangulation. This is summarised in Table 3 .
We have especially described Delaunay stable
methods which preserve the Delaunay nature of the
resulting triangulation and keep the duality with the
Voronoï diagram. The cost of these methods can be
evaluated and bounded.
So we are no more limited by the design algorithm
to exploit the mesh information.
We have presented a practical application for the
DEM resampling. It shows that for a very low cost the
Delaunay constrained triangulation can improve the
DEM realism and preserves it along the resampling
process.

8. References
[1] Bertin E., Diagrammes de Voronoï 2D et 3D:
application en analyse d'images, Ph.D thesis, TIMC IMAG, Université Joseph Fourier - Grenoble 1, pp.
163, 1994
[2] Chew L. P., "Constrained Delaunay Triangulations"
Algorithmica, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 97-108, 1989
[3] De Floriani L., Falcidieno B., and Pienovi C.,
"Delaunay-based representation of surfaces defined over
arbitrarily shaped domains" Computer vision, graphics
and image processing, vol. 32, pp. 127-140, 1985
[4] Edelsbrunner , H., "Algorithms in combinatorial
geometry" Springer Verlag, 1988
[5] George P. L. and Borouchaki H., "Triangulation de
Delaunay et maillage - application aux éléments finis"
Hermès, 1997
[6] Preparata F.P. and Shamos M.I., "Computational
geometry - An introduction" Springer Verlag, 1985

thesis, DEA de mathématiques appliquées, TIMCIMAG-Université Joseph Fourier de Grenoble, pp. 86,
24 1994

[7] Rippa S., "Minimal roughness of the Delaunay
triangulation" Computer Geometric Design, vol. 7, pp.
489-497, 1990
[8] Rognant L., Modélisation et risques naturels, M. S.

Figure 8.1 The different strategies for DEM resampling

Figure 8.2 The result of the resampling process using different strategies
Triangulation

Dual diagram

Name

Delaunay Nature

Punctual Delaunay Triangulation

Elements

o

Verification of
Cont
-

punctual Voronoï

Delaunay Triangulation under constraint

n

exact

constrained Voronoï

points, arcs

-

-

-

generalised Voronoï

points, arcs, polygons

constrained Delaunay Triangulation
(unstable) - CDT
Delaunay constrained Triangulation
(stable) - DCT

n

exact

-

points, arcs

o

poor

punctual approximation of the
generalised Voronoï diagram

points, arcs

points

Table 3 Summary of the different approaches of the constrained Delaunay

