SIMULATED SITE VISITS
A 4D multimedia database for the study of architectural construction.

Clare Newton
Faculty of Architecture, Building & Planning
University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Victoria, 3205
Australia
c.newton@architecture.unimelb.edu.au
Abstract
Architectural designs are translated into buildings using the
documentation language. Gaps invariably exist between
what is documented and what is built. Once a building is
complete, its construction is largely concealed and it
becomes difficult to compare the drawn details with the built
details. This difficulty is compounded by the abstract nature
of traditional architectsÕ orthographic drawings.
A multimedia relational database titled ÔSimulated Site
VisitsÕ (SSV), developed by Clare Newton and Jonathan
Finkelstein at the University of Melbourne, records the
process of constructing buildings. The structure and layout
of SSV facilitates comparisons across media and helps to
shift the focus onto the connections and gaps between a
building and its representation.

realized form. Just as language translation can result in
shifts and development of meaning, so can translations
between media. By studying its representation, the object
may take on new meaning and visa versa. The
documentation process and its relationship to construction
warrants further research

2. The SSV program
Simulated Site Visits is an Oracle relational database
designed to be deliverable over the Internet. Resources such
as photographs, Quicktime movies, drawings and computer
models are stored with date, time and location information
so viewers can visit and tour through building construction
sites.

The development of SSV has been funded because of its
potential as a teaching aid for architecture and building
students. This paper will outline teaching implications of
this form of multimedia intertwined with a discussion of the
research potential.

1. Background
Simulated Site Visits has been developed within rapidly
changing architecture and construction industries. Architects
and builders are exploiting new forms of representation and
communication made possible with computer and internet
developments. At the same time, the construction industry
is in a state of flux as new light weight materials and new
construction methods become available.
Robin Evans argued that architects have to assume there
is a uniform space between the drawing and the building
through which meaning can glide unchanged. He called this
a Ôsuspension of critical disbelief (which) is necessary in
order for architects to perform their task at allÕ (1997, p154).
There is another possibility: a form of reverberation may be
perceived between architecture as idea, and architecture in its

(fig1) Simulated site visits
A challenge in the design of SSV has been to ensure
viewers can find information without getting lost in time or
space. Simulated Site Visits uses virtual reality VRML
models for orienting the viewer along with a time scale
which dates the site visit.

(fig2)

Interface Screen

3. The interface screen
Note the time scale in the lower left of the screen in
Figure 2. Icons floating within the VRML model indicate
the resources available for that site visit date. The viewer
can click on the icon and the database will search for and
display the detail or photograph indicated.
The navigational screen (Fig 2) contains five areas. On
the right is a display window where VRML models have
icons showing where photographs, detail drawings and other
resources like Quicktime movies are located. Above this is a
short description. On the left, above the time scale, is a list
of resources which controls what is displayed in the preview

window in the top left of the screen. The ÔPlaceÕ button
locates the resource from the preview window to the larger
window. Alternatively, the ÔShow MeÕ button directs the
VRML to rotate to the same view as the resource.
Resources are grouped according to site visit dates.

4. The use of SSV for teaching
Extra funding has been received to further refine the
graphics and structure of SSV. Part of the programming
brief for this second stage is to allow records to be linked
with back and next arrows. This is useful for building
construction procedures such the installation of a window or
the placing of pre-cast concrete panels.
This second stage of development of Simulated Site
Visits is focussed on the needs of students learning about
changing construction techniques. These developments are

being funded with both Commonwealth Government and
University grants. They have been loosely gathered together
under the title of ÔPathways into a MazeÕ.
Students need to understand the first principles of
construction within the context of a changing industry. One
of the best ways for students to learn about current
construction techniques is by visiting construction sites but
there is a Catch 22. Unless students have some basic site
skills, building sites are confusing and intimidating. Even
second and third year students are reluctant to ask building
supervisors questions for fear of appearing ignorant.
The analogy of a Street Directory is a useful way to
understand how the Pathways program relates to the city of
SSV with its network of information in which students need
skills to avoid becoming lost. Pathways into a Maze
consists of Signposted Pathways to direct students; Spot the
Difference tasks to study the links and gaps between contract
documents and their built form; Scavenger Hunts to develop
studentsÕ skills in using a search aid and a Street Directory
to assist with navigation. The story board illustrated in
Figure 4 illustrates these ideas.
The teaching strategies of critical observation followed
by creative imitation help students to undertake the
transition from knowledge of first principles as presented in
lecture to applied knowledge. Pathways allows students to
critically observe the transformation of working drawings
into building. When they attempt to document their own
designs, they have access to precedents which they can
creatively imitate.
Pathways into a Maze is designed to enable students to
make sense of the activities on sites and to develop their
knowledge and skills of observation so they can undertake
independent site visits. Pathways in conjunction with SSV
will give students access to information about the
construction industry which is not readily available from
any other source.

5. Learning outcomes
SSV allows more open ended exploration by students;
access to current and complex case studies rather than
idealized construction environments; supplementation of
existing studio learning with tutors as mentors and a review
of information at each studentÕs own pace and access to
information when the need it.
It is intended that SSV will be largely stocked with
work by students which will be entered into a holding pen
for authorization by a staff member. Students, in an
assignment shared between construction and computing
subjects, have been developing 3D computer models from
architectsÕ working drawings. Layers are allocated according
to the order in which elements are installed. This enables

short movies to be developed in which details are
constructed or layers peeled from completed buildings.

(fig3)
Computer model
architecture student

by

a

3 rd

year

6. Evaluation and limitations
SSV works well on local networks but slower
international networks are less ideal. The aim was for the
Oracle database to be Internet deliverable to a world wide
audience. Until networks are faster we will develop CD
based options to partially overcome this problem.
Development of the database has proved more difficult and
expensive than anticipated. The search tool which was
intended to be a part of the 1997 Stage One is only now
being developed as part of Stage Two because of budget
limitations. The difficulties of orienting the viewer in large
scale construction environments have not been fully
resolved.

The use of computer models drawn by students from
architectsÕ working drawings with layers to represent time,
is a rich addition to the site photographs which was not
entirely anticipated in 1997.

7. Exploring gaps
In architecture, what you see is often different to what
you get. The Schroder house appears to be concrete but is a
hybrid layered construction (Ford 1990). Mies van der Rohe
used steel representations of structure over concrete framed
buildings. Our perception of a building is often at odds
with the construction reality, particularly as changes in the
construction industry result in more lightweight and layered
construction techniques. Once a building is completed its
construction process is, to a large extent, lost except for the
memory contained within the contract documentation set.
It is within the context of these ambiguities of
representation and our lost construction knowledge, that we
have developed Simulated Site Visits. SSV records the
translation processes which occur between architectural
documentation drawings and their built form.
Construction detailing is part of the design process.
Because students have not experienced their ideas being
built, it is sometimes difficult for them to comprehend the
shifts in meaning that can develop as architects grapple with

(fig 4)

Storyboard for Pathways into a Maze

the pragmatic constraints of building within an environment
of regulations, budget, client expectations and construction
considerations.
There is an understandable desire for architects to reduce
the gaps which exist between a building and how it is
represented in the construction documents. Differences are,
of course, likely to result in cost variations. But there is
another, more positive possibility. Just as language
translation can result in shifts and development of meaning,
so can translations between media. By studying its
drawings, an object does take on new meaning and visa
versa. Architects can celebrate the shifts in meaning which
exist between built forms and their representations.
Drawings are translated into buildings via the
construction process but the complex and messy
construction process is normally concealed once a building
is complete. Some architects design remnants of the
construction process into buildings revealing to the
occupants the construction complexity.
For students, a surprising paradox exists between
architectural drawings and construction. Refined and
minimalist details are typically more expensive and difficult
to build even though they use less materials than details
which contain a hierarchy of layers. Structurally expressive
buildings which appear lean are often more difficult to build
than layered architecture with applied cladding.

8. Conclusion
The development of SSV was funded as a teaching aid
for architecture and building students learning about
construction. It allows students to view photographs of
buildings under construction and compare them with
drawings. SSV provides a computer environment in
which students can undertake archaeological digs through

REFERENCES

lost construction environments. Layers can be peeled
from buildings to show the hidden structure behind.
By studying the translation of drawings into
buildings, the documentation and construction processes
can be understood as not simply dull instrumental phases
but as vital components of the design process which have
scope for further exploration.

[7]

Finkestein, Jonathan, Ô4D multimedia datascapes:
The
SSV
programÕ,
in
Banissi,
E.,
Khowsrowshahi, F. & Sarfraz, M. 1998 IEEE
Conference on Information Visualisation, IEEE
Computer Society, Los Almitos, Claifornia, 1988.

[1]

Blau, Eve & Kaufmann, Edward, Architecture and
its image : four centuries of architectural
representation, MIT Press, Mass., 1989.

[2]

Bolton, Richard, The Contest of Meaning: critical
histories of photography, MIT Press, Mass.,
1989.

[8]

Ford, Edward R., The details of modern
architecture, Vols 1 & 2, MIT Press, Mass.,
1990<1996>

[3]

Earnshaw, R. A., M. A. Gigante et al., eds. Virtual
reality systems, Academic Press, London, 1993.

[9]

Mitchell, William J., The Logic of Architecture:
Design, computation and cognition, MIT Press,
London, 1990

[4]

Evans, Robin, Translations from drawing t o
building and other essays, London : Architectural
Association, 1997.

[10]

Porter, Tom, The ArchitectÕs Eye, Visualisation
and depiction in space of architecture, E & FN
Spoon, London, 1997.

[5]

Evans, Robin, The projective cast : architecture
and its three geometries, Cambridge, Mass., MIT
Press, c1995.

[11]

Sekula, Alan, ÔThe Body and the ArchiveÕ, The
Contest of Meaning, edited by Richard Bolton,
MIT Press, Mass., 1989

[6]

Fausch, Deborah, ÔTowards ÒAn architecture of our
timeÓÕ in Fausch, D., Singley, P., El-Khoury, R.,
& Efrat, Z., eds. Architecture in Fashion, Princeton
Architectural Press, New York, 1994.

[12]

Wexelblat, A., ed. Virtual reality: applications and
explorations, Academic Publishers Professional,
Boston.

