Data and Metadata for Finding and Reminding
James Gheel and Terry Anderson
School of Computing and Mathematics
University of Ulster, Jordanstown
Newtownabbey, Co. Antrim
Northern Ireland
jf.gheel@ulst.ac.uk; tj.anderson@ulst.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper discusses the benefits of using document
metadata that exists as part of the document and which is
also generated by its use, to assist users in retrieving the
document and remembering what it contains. By
extracting valuable descriptive information from a
document, and analysing what a user does, such as the
files they open, when they are used and for how long, a
repository of information can be built up to help users
with the tasks of finding and reminding. Since such a vast
quantity of raw metadata can be acquired, visualisation
is needed to elicit meaning from it.

Keywords: Metadata, visualisation, user activity,
information navigation.

1. Introduction
In the service sector, productivity has not changed
significantly in the last 15 years [2]. Many reasons are
given, such as the extra time devoted to presentation
quality, but the time spent searching for paper-based
documents remains stubbornly high. New and improved
ways of finding relevant information are vitally important
so that we can organise and make sense of documents and
information [18].
Research efforts, however, are still focused strongly on
searching for information which is largely unknown to
the user, Internet search engines being the most obvious
example. Vital though finding new information is, often
the key requirement is relocating documents and
imperfectly remembered fragments of text or images. To
the information worker, the task is to recall key
documents and facts, assess their relevance, martial ideas,

and summarise/synthesise key concepts usually from a
comparatively small set of documents previously visited.
This paper reviews first how people remember and
relocate documents and their contents. Then conventional
physical and computer-based approaches are described
and discussed, particularly to their support for our
cognitive processes. Emerging approaches using various
kinds of metadata are then considered. This allows the
requirements for more effective strategies for finding and
reminding technology [5] to be identified.

2. Strategies for remembering and relocating
documents
How do we remember documents for retrieval?
If we have misplaced some physical object in the real
world, we retrace our steps to try and relocate it. The
things that are prominent in our memory are locations,
the time of day, and other people and activities we were
involved with, aside from the obvious physical
characteristics of the object in question [9]. Similarly, a
memory trace may relate a document to others we were
using at the same time or with those of a similar topic of
which we are aware [10]. The size and type of an
electronic document are examples of other metadata that
assist us in retrieving an association from long-term
memory.
Traditional storage methods for physical documents have
relied on filing cabinets and folders assisted by a reliable
indexing mechanism created by the person storing the
documents [8]. At a basic level, individual documents are
typically arranged in alphabetical or chronological order,
and grouped according to their function or domain. This
simple but highly effective metaphor has been translated
into electronic form. However, as more users amass large

sets of online documents, it is becoming increasingly
evident that this approach does not scale well. Just as it
would be impossible to efficiently retrieve from
thousands of files in hundreds of physical storage
cabinets, it is similarly problematic on a computer where
the physical element is also missing. We remember parts
of a document and certain keywords; although this is
often not discriminating enough to narrow a search to
produce an acceptably small and manageable selection
set. No matter if a document name has 8 characters or 50,
it is still difficult to remember a document by its name
and relate it to what we were working on.
In addition to remembering a document by keywords,
section topics and various other important textual facets,
our iconic memory paints a visual portrait of the
document or parts of it [11]. For example, if a document
contains images, these may be remembered more readily
than parts of the text. If it contains a unique or unusual
layout including a particular arrangement of typefaces
and colour, this may be what is remembered the most.

Approaches to the problem
Books have withstood the test of time. The simple
approach of information laid out in sections facilitated by
contents and an index has become second nature for us to
use. The benefits of a book’s physical attributes are well
known, enabling us to scan and browse pages with ease.
A major drawback with something so physical and rigid
is that there is usually only one sequential way to access
the information. It is with no surprise that attempts have
been made to mimic the representation of books in an
electronic format [14]. The translation of information
from printed material to an electronic format of any kind
has left behind some important indicators for finding and
reminding. The size of a book and the size of the text it
contains reflect the amount of information it holds. The
visible wear and tear shows how much a book has been
used and may depict its popularity and usefulness.
Emanating from Vannevar Bush’s prophetic insight into
this problem [3], embedded hypertext links provide
access to a given topic and allow more general topics to
be broken down and navigated. The links are easily
recognisable in a document by their colour, font and
underlining. Connected topics form a sequence of links
that can be mentally reformed if required at a later stage,
assisted by the size of link, textual reference, position in
document and page, and connection between previous
and subsequent links.

Traditional office productivity software such as word
processors, spreadsheet applications and presentation
tools contain a list of the most recently accessed files,
retrievable from the application’s file menu. This is based
on the principle that the file most likely to be required is
one of the most recently used. It is also evident in Web
browser history mechanisms, but is considered to be of
limited value since neither usage patterns or multiple
browsing sessions are taken into account [16]. Other
applications such as graphics packages make use of a
function known as ‘memory buttons’ [17], where the
current state of an image or document under modification
can be saved as an iconic representation. If the user
wishes to return to a previous state, clicking on the
graphical memory button will bring up the previous stage
of development.
Modern information visualisation methods such as focus
and context techniques enable a large quantity of related
information to be interactively arranged in a small area.
The hyperbolic browser [4] typically employs a ‘fish
bowl’ method to distribute information that is structured
hierarchically, for example files and folders, so that an
item of interest (in focus) is shown with related items in
the visual periphery (context). Designed for information
that is hierarchical in nature, it is inapplicable for the
increasing quantity of unstructured information available
from disjoint sources over the Internet. Similarly, cone
trees [12] rely on hierarchical structures for their
operation. As a three-dimensional technique, an effective
use of visual space is possible although some peripheral
information is always obscured by information in the
foreground.
WebBook and Web Forager create a 3-dimensional
document-centric workspace [14]. The WebBook brings
together collections of documents from the Web into an
interactive 3d book and allows rapid interaction of
objects at a higher level of aggregation than pages.
Scaling of text is possible on the pages of the book, and
the book can be exploded out to view all pages
simultaneously using the Document Lens [13] focus and
context method. The Web Forager provides access to
multiple WebBook entities and has three main levels: the
focus place, where a book is being directly accessed and
manipulated; an immediate memory space, where pages
and books are placed when in use but not immediately;
and a tertiary place, where multiple books or pages can be
placed for more long-term storage.
The reasoning behind both the WebBook and Web
Forager is that users tend to interact repeatedly with small
clusters of information, following the principle ‘locality

of reference’. There is little to suggest that a Web Book is
less capable than any other visualisation system in
providing access to information over a long period of
time, and can grow accordingly when extra pages are
introduced. It is uncertain though if Web Forager is as
scalable when the number of Web Books becomes large,
and whether the 3-dimensional workspace metaphor can
cope when overloaded, to provide easy access to
information.
Dynamic queries [1] can assist the retrieval of any type of
information, even if it is not of a hierarchical nature.
Mainly for filtering purposes, they possess the ability to
reduce the subset of large document stores using multiple
non-related fields. The granularity of the search and
refining process is in the control of the user. Document
keywords for example could be used as query fields,
allowing documents on particular topics to be displayed
and document patterns to be detected.

images, text size, font and section topics may help us
remember the information in the long term. Externally,
the size, shape, colour and title of the book help us to find
it amongst a group of books in a bookcase. The primary
goal of dynamic queries is to find information and exploit
patterns, with little provision for reminding. The user of
the query typically uses characteristics of the data and
associated quantitative factors to narrow down a search.
The mode of use in Lifestreams revolves around a time
ordering of documents to assist both finding and
reminding. Other metadata types in Lifestreams are used
to create substreams, perform searches and summarise
streams. The remainder of this section considers the
metadata types from the examples already mentioned,
and suggests additional types and examples of metadata
primarily in the context of Web documents. This leads to
a typology of metadata for digital documents.

A document metadata typology
A Lifestream is a time-ordered stream of documents [7].
The tail of the stream contains documents from the past,
while moving away from the tail and toward the present,
the stream contains more recent documents such as
papers in progress or the latest electronic mail received.
Pictures, documents, voice mail, even applications may
be stored in between. The head of the stream may be set
to contain tasks that the user is required to perform in the
future. Substreams can be derived from the main stream
based on specific tasks and continue to collect new
documents added to the Lifestream.
Locating information in a Lifestream is facilitated by the
time-structured organisation of documents. Short-lived
and working information is typically in the ‘present’ part
of the stream. This is very similar to a location-based
approach where the user returns to a common area to
locate files. Users can quickly escape information
overload by working in a substream that removes such
interruptions or narrows their focus to the task at hand.
They can quickly search for archived information through
substreaming, or set up organisation categories by letting
substreams persist. Reminding is an integral part of
Lifestreams and is built into the semantics of the model.
Users create documents in the future that alert them by
arriving in the present.

3. A typology of metadata for digital
documents
The techniques mentioned in the previous section make
use of different types of metadata in varying quantities.
Books for example have two levels. Internally, the

Documents contain metadata in addition to raw
information. It is important to identify what constitutes
metadata in a document and to further classify it, so that
it can be properly utilised and effective visualisations can
be created. A document on the Web, for example,
contains much metadata both visible to the user when
reading the document, and also by way of embedded tags
that are not intended to be read directly as content.
Furthermore, metadata exists that isn’t immediately
evident from the actual document contents.
Examples of visible metadata are the document’s title,
subject and section headings. These provide a direct
representation of the document’s topic and domain.
Within the document, the author may include his name,
company, keywords and an expiry date for reference
purposes, all of which are not immediately visible. These
metadata fields are also typically created by the author(s)
of the document and can be considered as manually
determined. In addition, the document has a location at
which it is stored and can be retrieved from (a URL if on
the Internet), size, security information, a number of
images and a number of links. This can be considered as
automatically generated metadata.
If a user of the Internet retrieves a document for viewing,
a history of the usage of that document exists and forms
valuable metadata in this respect. Such examples would
be the number of times the document has been accessed
and the date and time of the last access. If it has been
accessed through a search engine, it may have been given
a rating of relevance. Again these are automatically

Manually Determined

Automatically Generated

Intrinsic

Title, Author, Keywords, Annotations,
Category, Company name, Expiry date

URL, Size, No. of images, Set of
contained images, No. of links, Creation
date

Extrinsic

Citation, Comments, Highlighting

No. of accesses, Date/Time of last
access, Visualisation of document in
content, No. of local revisions, Date of
last update

Table 1: A typology of metadata for digital documents

generated items of metadata. Should the user then make
changes, or add extra comments to the document locally,
these will form examples of manually determined
metadata.
This leads to a further important distinction of metadata.
In the first instance, metadata exists at the time of the
document’s creation by the author, i.e. intrinsic
metadata that belongs as part of the document implicitly.
In the second illustration, through usage and potential
local modifications and additions, after a period of time
extrinsic metadata is created that doesn’t directly
originate from the document. This has been summarised
in table 1.
The intrinsic metadata are static elements, and never
change unless the author specifically modifies the
document to create a new version. Correspondingly,
automatically generated extrinsic metadata is dynamic,
and changes as the document is used and updated locally
by a user. Manually determined extrinsic metadata
contains a mixture of both static and dynamic types.

Metadata standards
The above-mentioned typology reflects metadata from
the perspective of a user’s actions and needs but has also
drawn on other metadata classifications and frameworks.
The Dublin Core Metadata Element Set is a simple 15element classification developed to facilitate discovery of
electronic resources. It is intended to be usable by noncataloguers as well as by those with experience with
formal resource description models. Most of the 15
elements have commonly understood semantics that
represent what might be described as roughly equivalent
to a catalogue card for electronic resources.

The classification presented by Boll et al. [15] is useful in
that it covers various types of media other than text-only
documents and takes into consideration those actions that
may be performed to find and access the multimedia
information. The classification is based on the following
groupings: content-independent metadata, content
dependent metadata, direct content-based metadata,
content descriptive metadata, domain-independent
metadata and domain-specific metadata. In practice, we
have found this organisation difficult to use when placing
metadata elements in the different categories.

Visually representing metadata
From the classification in Table 1, it becomes easier to
understand what metadata is associated with a document
and the various levels at which it exists. The result of this
is a framework that can underpin visualisation
techniques, dedicated to the perceptual characteristics of
users during the management of electronic documents. It
is the information personalisation for users that is
important, as it is the user who seeks the information,
retrieves the files and makes modifications. Therefore,
appropriate visualisations need to reflect users’ actions
and intentions using existing and generated document
metadata.
The authors have already experimented with web
document formats in respect of metadata compilation and
presentation. HTML and XML provide different degrees
of metadata storage, the latter having a metadata
description framework as part of its specification. With
greater acceptance of XML in the future, the possibility
of automatic conversion of HTML to XML, and the use
of XML as a standard document format, the benefits of
XML [6] should ensure that visualisations have the
necessary supply of information required to make them
effective.

One such example of a visualisation based on metadata
would be an iconic representation of a file, as shown in
Figure 1. The metadata is encoded into a suitable format
for display on a pixel by pixel scale. Depending on the
colour depth and appropriate legends or indicators, a
combination of metadata elements can be incorporated
into an individual icon, depicted as time-based
histograms for document access and usage, bar charts for
image and URL quantities, and pixellated scatter plots for
keyword occurrences.

Figure 1. An example file icon based on
metadata

4. Summary and conclusion
This paper has discussed document metadata and its
implications for finding and reminding. Using
information contained in a document that represents its
purpose, origin, applicability and content, and also
metadata generated by its use, visualisations can be
formed to help information workers remember documents
and their contents for effective use and retrieval.
We have discussed how users currently manipulate
documents and information, and remember it for future
use and retrieval from both a physical and electronic
perspective. A typology for metadata was then presented,
categorising metadata elements such as author, expiry
date, size, URL, comments, time of last access and no. of
accesses into four distinct categories: the metadata is
either manually determined or automatically generated,
either of which can be intrinsic or extrinsic to the
document. This classification provides a framework on
which suitable visualisations can be built for documents
and information, to assist the complex and time
consuming tasks of finding and reminding.

[2]

Landauer, Thomas K., “The Trouble With Computers
: Usefulness, Usability, and Productivity”, MIT
Press, 1996

[3]

Bush, V., “As We May Think”, The Atlantic Monthly,
July 1945, Volume 176, No. 1, pp 101-108.

[4]

Lamping, John, Rao, Ramana and Pirolli, Peter, “A
Focus+Context Technique Based on Hyperbolic
Geometry for Visualising Large Hierarchies”,
Proceedings of the ACM CHI ’95 Conference: Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 401 - 408. 1995.

[5]

Fertig, S., Freeman, E. and Gelernter, D., “Finding
and Reminding Reconsidered”, SIGCHI Bulletin, Vol.
28, No. 1, January 1996.

[6]

Bosak, J., “XML, Java, and the future of the Web”,
Sun Microsystems, Available from:
http://sunsite.unc.edu/pub/suninfo/standards/xml/why/xmlapps.htm

[7]

Freeman, E. and Fertig, S., “Lifestreams: Organizing
your Electronic Life”, AAAI Fall Symposium: AI
Applications in Knowledge Navigation and Retrieval,
November 1995, Cambridge, MA.

[8]

Norman, Donald A., “Things that make us smart:
defending human attributes in the age of the
machine”, 1993, Addison-Wesley

[9]

Lamming, M., Brown, P., Carter, K., Eldridge, M.,
Flynn, M., Louie, G., Robinson, P. and Sellen, A.,
“The Design of a Human Memory Prosthesis”, The
Computer Journal, Vol. 37, No. 3, 1994, pp. 153-163

[10]

Baddeley, Alan, “Human Memory: Theory and
Practice”, Psychology Press, 1997.

[11]

Nickerson, R. S., “Short-term memory for complex
meaningful visualisations: A demonstration of
capacity”, Canadian Journal of Psychology, Vol. 19,
1965, pp 1550-160

[12]

Robertson, G.G., S.K. Card, and J.D. Mackinlay,
“Information visualization using 3D interactive
animation”, Communications of the ACM, Vol. 36,
No. 4, April 1993, pp 57-71

[13]

Robertson, G.G. and J.D. Mackinlay, “The Document
Lens”, UIST ’93, ACM Conference on User Interface
Software and Technology, 1993, pp. 101-108

[14]

Card, S. K., Robertson, G. G., York, W., “The
WebBook and the Web Forager: An Information
Workspace for the World-Wide Web”, Proceedings of
the ACM conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, ACM: Vancouver, 1996, pp. 111-117

[15]

Boll, S., Klas, W. and Sheth, A., “Overview on Using
Metadata to Manage Multimedia Data”, in Sheth and
Klas, eds., Multimedia Data Management – using

References
[1]

Shneiderman, Ben, “Dynamic Queries for Visual
Information Seeking”, IEEE Software, pp. 70-77,
November 1994.

metadata to integrate and apply digital media,
McGraw-Hill 1998.
[16]

Tauscher, L. and Greenberg, S., “How people revisit
web pages: empirical findings and implications for
the design of history systems”, International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies, 47, 1997, pp. 97-137

[17]

Tognazzini, B., “Tog on software design”, AddisonWesley, 1995

[18]

Card, S. K., “Visualizing Retrieved Information: A
Survey”, CG & A, Vol. 16, No. 2, March 1996.

