The Web as a Visual Design Medium
Dr. Rivka Oxman and Dr. Amnon Shabo
Faculty of Architecture and T.P.
Technion, Haifa, 3200, Israel.
e-mail: arrro01@technion.techunix.ac.il

ABSTRACT
One of the main problems of the web is its
dominant textual characteristics. Since the
natural way designers express their design
ideas is in graphical form, accessing
graphical information is a key issue. Since
most of the design documents which are
created today are products of CAD
programs, our current research emphasis is
upon indexing and retrieval of CAD
documents on the WEB. In this paper we
present an approach for the utility and
accessibility
of
CAD-based
design
information. An approach for the use of
CAD documents as a form of distributed
case-based design resource on the web is
proposed. Possibilities for employing casebased CAD as a theoretical foundation for
building large design resource bases on the
Web are presented.

Introduction

Despite the fact that the advancement of
Web technology has contributed to a strong
medium which assists the designer

particularly in the areas of information
exchange and communication, it cannot yet
be said to provide a design medium.
From a design point of view, the Web can
currently be classified into three types of
media.
a. The Web as an information medium
In its most common function, the Web is
employed as an information medium,
providing
connectivity
to,
and
representation of, information sources.
Some common applications of design
information systems are applications in
product development, design resources etc.
Two. The web as a communication
medium

Web
applications
which
facilitate
communication
among
individuals,
members of distributed groups and teams
exchanging information about design
enhance the function of the Web as a
communication medium. This facility is
based on the use of Web tools for
exchanging text, graphics, animation, or for
running communications software in
distributed computers. These types of
applications have been employed in
distributed design environments in which
the members of the team located at different
locations employed Internet technology as a
medium to support communication and
collaboration through sharing files.
c. The web as a social medium
As a result of enhancing communication
between team members in distributed
environments, the Web may now also be
considered as a social medium. Designers
can now meet in distributed and virtual
environments and share their ideas and
comments in real-time discussions. The
content of design is built up by the team
itself through the exploitation of tools such
as interactive bulletin boards, discussion
sessions,
exchanges
of
graphical
representations, collaboration protocols and
personal images. These have contributed to
interesting applications in various fields
such as virtual design; virtual design
studios; synchronic and asynchronic
collaborative design, etc (Mitchell, 1995;
Schmitt, 1988, Woo and Sasada, 1998).
This class of medium involves intense
information
processing,
immediate

feedback and communicating knowledge in
a simulation of face to face encounter.
Though these types of functionality through
the Internet have rendered communication
and distributed collaborations more
effective, they have not resulted in
fundamental changes in the way we actually
do design. If one of the inherent
characteristics of this new medium is the
large volume of information which is
available, how can we optimise the utility
for design of Web-based information and
how can we improve the accessibility of
this information? With respect to these
questions, we propose an approach to the
use of CAD Case-Bases as a form of
distributed design resource, and present
certain of the possibilities for employing
case-based CAD as a theoretical foundation
for building large design resource bases in
the Web. Furthermore, we exploit casebased technology as a basis for indexing
and storage of design cases in a form which
enhances the accessibility of design
information.

2. Web - based design : accessing
visual information
Vis-a-vis design information systems one of
the main problems of the web is its
dominant textual characteristics. The web
does not yet support a graphical, or visual,
environment the same way it supports a
hypertextual environment for navigation
and browsing. Since the natural way
designers express their design ideas is in
graphical form, accessing graphical
information is a key issue. Therefor we
should first consider the graphical

properties of design information. What are
its dominant graphical forms, how can they
be represented, indexed, accessed and
manipulated in the web? Since most of the
design documents which are created today
are products of CAD programs, our current
research emphasis is upon these factors in
distributed CAD documents.
CAD case-bases potentially provide a
promising combination of CAD graphical
files and case-based technology. Casebased reasoning has been adopted as a
paradigm for design since it addresses
various of the classical problems of
knowledge representation, indexing and
search. Current research and applications of
web-technologies, systems for browsing,
searching and sharing textual and graphical
information share a high level of overlap
with these key theoretical issues in casebased reasoning. The affinity of the web as
a resource base and its relationship with
case-based design has opened up
possibilities of a new scale of design
resource development. The web already
functions as a large case-based system. Our
work attempts to exploit these conditions
by proposing a new format for design case
representation which may be valid for the
intrinsic characteristics of the web.

3. Distributed CAD Resources on
the Web
We describe on-going research and
development work on a CAD-based design
case representation system that can provide
a designer with relevant designs from a
CAD-based design resource system in the
web. The utility will work within a system

which is based in the Internet and includes
the following three modules: a repository of
design
cases
(including
CAD
representations of cases), a Java designer’s
utility running on the client side, and a
CAD program for local use.
In the following three sections we describe
this system. In the first section we discuss
certain issues related to the case-based
factors; in the second section we discuss
issues related to the CAD representation of
cases, and finally, we present an integrative
approach employing these as an integral
system for a CAD case repository as a webbased design resource.
3.1 Representation in a design case-base
In prior research we have developed an
approach to design case representation
which is based on the theory of case-based
reasoning (Kolodner, 1993). This approach
to design case representation is intended to
enhance the user’s ability to efficiently
search, access and exploit prior relevant
designs. In this work (Oxman, 1994, 1997),
we have attempted to identify the unique
knowledge of design cases and have
proposed a formalization of that
knowledge. The representational formalism
termed
ICF
(Issue-Concept-Form)
represents chunks of case knowledge of
design cases, and provides explicit linkages
between the issues of a design problem, a
particular solution concept and a related
form description. As a representational
formalism ICF was particularly suited to
modelling designs. Furthermore, this
formalism enhances textual search through
semantic nets of issues and concepts in
design domains. In order to assist in search

and navigation among multiple cases in
different locations on the web the ICF
formalism has been implemented and
enabled the sharing of design knowledge
across the Web as well as the collaborative
construction of “open design Web
resources” which share this formalism.
If we define a case to be the entire design,
then we have quite complex cases.
However, if we define a case to be a
particular component of a design, we then
have designs represented by clusters of
case components. In fact, we propose to
take a layered case representation approach.
On the one hand, we provide complete
descriptions of the whole design, as well as
descriptions of its separate components.
The similarity measurement process can
therefor be twofold: similarity processes at
the component level are the basis for
defining similarity at the complete case
level.
These basic concepts are currently being
realised in a CAD-based utility which uses
the multi-layered design case model.
Currently this model has three layers: the
project layer which is an integrative layer
providing a total representation and giving
a cohesive framework to all documents
related to a project; the drawing layer with
graphical CAD representation of the entire
design, and the component (ICF) layer with
graphical CAD and textural representation
of separate components of the drawing
layer. In this lowest layer, we have
proposed to make use of the ICF formalism
and to expand it in order to integrate it with
CAD drawings. Similarity measurements
will take into account the similarity degree
in each layer and will make use of a

semantic network based on the ICF
formalism.
At the highest, or project level, we can
conceive of web-based project banks based
upon CAD representation, but also
supporting the ideational content of the
component level. Thus we can underlay the
graphical
content
of
the
CAD
representation by the ideational content of
issues and concepts. Using this formalism, a
design case can be described by different
issues of the design rationale which were
addressed during its design. The project
bank can also include the alternative
representations which form part of the
design history of the development of the
design.
3.2 The CAD module
The model described in the previous
section is based on the incorporation of
CAD drawings within a design case
representation. The design case is
represented both by its graphical and its
textural content. With respect to the
graphical representation, we propose to use
the internal representation of the drawings
created by CAD programs. In order to
accommodate the structure of our threelayered
model,
we
are
currently
experimenting with CAD programs which
have a component model for representing
drawings. A component model is a model
where each drawing consists of components
and each component is a customisable
object with a rich set of attributes from
geometric attributes through functional
attributes.

3.3 Integrating the modules into an
Internet system
It is quite difficult for a single designer to
store his/her own case base and, even in a
large architect’s office, the diversity of
cases is limited. Therefore, it appears to be
logical to use the Internet as the medium for
interchanging cases and constructing case
bases around the globe. The Java
programming language will be used as the
main vehicle for integrating the CAD
program with a utility that makes use of the
multi-layered case base. The effective
performance of any CBR system depends
much on the richness of the case base, the
richness of each case, and more
importantly, the diversity and number of
cases. The way this could be done is as
follows. The utility we are developing is a
Java Applet running either within a CAD
program such as MicroStation/J or in a
Web browser such as Netscape. However,
the case-bases with the actual repository of
cases could be either local or on the
Internet. When the utility starts a search for
similar designs, it looks first into a local
case-base (if any), and then proceeds to
other case-bases on the net. In a crawling
algorithm, the utility is looking for cases
that satisfy a requirement for similarity
beyond a certain threshold. The utility can
access other case-bases only if it has the
right privileges. Each designer or a
designers' site develops their own case-base
and can decide whether it is world- wide
readable or perhaps restricted to certain
users who certify the use of their case-base
in exchange.
A central site, could hold an updated index
of case-bases so that each running utility

could know where the available case-bases
are located. The priority of search and the
creditability of different sites will be
defined by each user. A user can decide, for
example, to direct the utility to look for
similar cases in various sites according to a
certain priority, since the user attributes
credit to these sites only and is not
interested in other sites

4. Conclusions
The significance of new web technologies
for the design potential of inter-activity
with distributed CAD resources appears to
be a major issue for the next generation of
design resources in the web. How to use the
Web as a design medium, and how to
actually
realise
distributed
design
environments appear to us to be questions
of great relevance. Solution for these issues
can be based upon a case-based approach.
We have described our work on the
formalization of design case representations
which integrates CAD representations with
textural content. The future of web-based
design repositories depends upon their
utility. We have proposed that such design
repositories must successfully integrate
CAD representations with the information
and data which underlies those drawings.
This is, in fact, a general problem in CAD.
The success of a web-based design resource
will depend also on the power of the
representational system. It is this
combination of factors (graphical-textural
interaction;
powerful
design
representational systems) which can attract
the collaboration of others. In the open
system of the web, collaboration by

emulation may be a way to large cooperative design resource bases.
Acknowledgments
The theoretical research and experimental
implementations was supported by the
German DFG grant. It was also supported
by the Technion research fund. This paper
is a modified version of a paper submitted
to an ICED - 99 workshop on web-based
design in Munich.

References
1. Rodger P. (ed) (1988) AID Workshop
on Distributed Web-Based AI Design
Tools, Lisbon, Portugal
2. Kolodner, J. (1993). Case Based
Reasoning.
Morgan
Kaufmann
Publishers, San Mateo, CA, .
3. Mitchell, W. (1995)“The Global Design
Studio”, in CAAD Futures 95, (eds.
Milton and Robert T. ) Singapore
4. Oxman Rivka E. (1994). “Precedents in
Design: a Computational Model for the
Organization of Precedent Knowledge”
Design Studies, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 141
- 157
5. Oxman Rivka E. (1997). Shared Design
Web-Space. International Journal of
Design Computing.
6. Oxman Rivka E and Shabo A. (1999)
Enabling the WEb as a design medium,
in a workshop on web-based design in
an
International
Conference
on
Engineering Design, ICED 99
7. Schmitt, G. (1988), Design and
Construction as Computer-Augmented

Intelligence Processes, in CAADRIA’98
Third
International
on
CAAD
Education, (eds T. Sasada, S.
Yamaguchi, M. Morozumi, A. Kaga, R.
Homma) Japan

