Supporting the Life-Cycle of Multimedia and Visualization
Using Distributed Performance Support Systems
Dr N. Bouchlaghem
Loughborough University
N.M.Bouchlaghem@lboro.ac.uk

Dr N.Beacham
Loughborough University
N.Beacham@lboro.ac.uk

Abstract
UK Higher Education Institutions have invested
significantly in the implementation of multimedia and
visualization material in teaching, learning and
assessment of civil and building engineering - with
mixed results. This paper focuses on the use and life
cycle of digital imagery and visualization material,
which is embedded within multimedia teaching aids to
improve student understanding. It describes ways in
which these materials are developed and used in the
civil and building engineering curriculum and, in
particular, how distributed performance support
systems can be applied to make more effective use of
digital imagery and visualization material. Following
this, the paper then describes how a distributed
performance support system approach to education is
being adopted at Loughborough University as part of
the CAL-Visual project. After highlighting the main
aims and objectives of the project, the paper concludes
by discussing some of the issues encountered during
the design and implementation of a distributed
performance support system.

1. Introduction
In the construction sector, students learning about
construction technology need to visualize materials and
components and have an appreciation of the total
constructional form of a building. The traditional
lecturing environment cannot replace the benefits to be
gained from access to construction sites and completed
buildings. However, such traditional approaches are
characterized by problems of cost, safety, availability
of and access to a variety of suitable construction sites,
and time. Such is the importance of using images to
support and enhance students’ understanding of
building design and construction that this issue has
been recognized by accrediting bodies as an important

Mr W.Sher
Loughborough University
W.D.Sher@lboro.ac.uk

part of the learning process. The Chartered Institute of
Building (CIOB) also actively supports initiatives that
promote such methods.
In order to address the problems highlighted
above, many educational organizations have turned to
C&IT, and in particular multimedia, computer-based
learning (CBL), computer-assisted assessment (CAA)
with the intention of introducing some of the
experiences gained from construction sites into the
classroom. Amongst the many methods in which visual
material (in the form of multimedia) have been utilized
to better educate civil engineering students, have been
discussed by Aminmansour [1], Echeverry [2],
Chinowsky [3], Riley and Pace [4] and Finkelstein [5].
Many CBL packages tend to be complete and
autonomous pieces of course material containing clear
learning objectives and used to support or supplant
lectures. In contrast, multimedia teaching aids are
small, discrete tools used to help tutors convey
complex material within lectures, such as the form
cycle for self-climbing form system described by Riley
and Pace [1].
Riley and Pace [1] advocate the use of multimedia
teaching aids by arguing that, ‘once they are
developed, they have the potential to decrease the
preparation time and classroom time needed to
effectively convey course material to students’.
Furthermore, these teaching aids can be used to form
the foundations of a CBL and CAA package. In doing
so, using teaching aids in this way can also reduce the
time and cost of developing CBL and CAA packages.
Unlike CBL and CAA packages, which tend to
dictate how a course will be implemented and
delivered, multimedia teaching aids do not contain
rigid learning objectives. Teaching aids not only allow
tutors to embed them into their course without having
to adapt the course’s structure, but also use
conventional computer tools and techniques familiar to
tutors to create and deliver them. For example, many
tutors create their presentations using Microsoft

PowerPoint. PowerPoint is particularly effective at
creating teaching aids, because it is easy to embed
various forms of digital visual material. Furthermore,
because the use of MTAs is an evolutionary approach
to traditional teaching and learning, resistance to
change is reduced.
Barker [6] has also investigated the development
and delivery of multimedia teaching aids using an
’electronic course delivery’ approach to present course
material. A fundamental difference in this case is that
Barker [6] describes a methodology for creating,
organizing and delivering these multimedia teaching
aids from two perspectives: a staff perspective and a
student perspective.
An important part of this
methodology has been the development of a distributed
performance support system to facilitate the creating,
organizing and delivery of multimedia teaching aids.
Distributed performance support systems and their
ability to facilitate the implementation and use of visual
material in MTAs by staff and students are discussed in
detail in the following section.

2. What is a DPSS?
In their day to day activities, civil engineering
tutors and students, are often required to perform a
wide range of different tasks and jobs. These tasks vary
quite considerably in their complexity. The successful
execution of many of the more complex tasks often
requires the use of some sort of tool, aiding facility or
performance support system (PSS). The basic rationale
underlying the use of a PSS is that individuals or
groups of people (working together on a common
project) are provided with appropriate tools and
techniques to support the tasks that they have to
perform. According to Barker and Hudson [7], four
major objectives of a performance support system are:
(1) to achieve increases in productivity; (2) to improve
the overall quality of task/job execution; (3) to improve
the overall quality of the environments in which people
work; and (4), from a human perspective, to reduce the
complexity of the processes involved in executing a
task.
Simple examples of performance support tools
include: a typewriter, a telephone, a bicycle and an
automobile. Increasingly, computer-based resources
are being used to implement performance support
systems. An electronic performance support system
(EPSS) is therefore a facility which uses various types
of computer technology to realize each of the four
previously listed objectives within a given working
environment or problem solving domain. Software
packages such as word-processing systems and

spreadsheets provide a good example of computerbased performance support systems.
Naturally, a fundamental requirement of an EPSS
is that it should increase users’ on-the-job performance
within a given task domain. This usually involves
improving skill levels, reducing task complexity and/or
providing appropriate training. These requirements can
be achieved in two basic ways. First, through the
provision of ‘automation aids’; and, second, by
providing various mechanisms to support ‘on-the-job’,
‘just-in-time’ (JIT) training which will enable users of
any given system to ‘learn as they do’.
Many of the early developments in EPSS have
been described by Gery [8], McGraw [9], Varnadoe
and Barron [10], Raybould [11], Banerji [12] and
Barker [13]. Currently, there are two important
directions of development for EPSS facilities. First, the
creation of integrated toolsets that are able to meet the
performance support needs of particular application
domains (Barker and Hudson, [7]; Hudson, [14]); and
second, a growing requirement to facilitate group
working at a distance through the incorporation of
network technology and the principles of distributed
computing environments (Beacham, [15]; Barker,
Richards, Banerji, [16]). Indeed, the advent of relatively
low-cost network technologies and the widespread
availability of facilities such as the Internet and the
World Wide Web has meant that performance support
systems can now become highly distributed in nature that is, different components can reside (or be
replicated) at, and be accessed from, different
geographical locations.
As far as this paper is concerned, we therefore
regard a distributed performance support system as an
integrated and globally accessible collection of
electronic aids, tools and data that can be used (as and
when required) at particular points of need (within a
workgroup or an organization) in order to improve
human performance within a given task domain.

3. An electronic course delivery approach
The main method of delivering teaching and
learning materials within many university organizations
is through lectures and tutorials. Although more
technological methods of teaching and learning have
been implemented, one evolutionary approach as
already mention above is electronic course delivery.
Both Banerji [12] and Barker [6] have highlighted the
benefits of using electronic course delivery within the
School of Computing and Mathematics, at the
University of Teesside. Electronic course delivery is
based on two basic perspectives: lecturer and student.

The relationship between these is illustrated in figure
1.

To improve access to the components, this model
has to be mapped onto a suitable organizational

Conventional Slides

K

Lecturer

Group Access

Student
Group

Staff PSS

Electronic Slides
Lecture Process

Teaching
Resources

Augmentation

Course
Database

Network
Access

K

Student
Learning
Resources

K

Student

Individual Access

Publication
on
CD-ROM

Book/Library Metaphor

Student PSS

K

Student

Figure 1. A performance support system for staff and students
The lecturer’s perspective involves the creation of
both traditional and electronic slides. These slides can
be created: (a) totally from new; (b) by changing
existing slides; or (c) by copying extracts from existing
slides. Once a sequence of electronic slides has been
created a lecturer can print them onto overhead
transparencies, or publish them on a CD-ROM or
network. Further augmentation can be embedded in
order to improve the slide’s ability to transfer
knowledge.
The students’ perspective involves accessing
learning materials and associated learning resources.
This can be done in three ways: (1) through the
delivery of lectures; (2) using a computer network; and
(3) by means of a CD-ROM. Unlike the traditional
model specified by Banerji [12], this revised model
highlights the need for students to augment their own
material (electronic and non-electronic) to the course
database - for example through the use of a discussion
group. This allows tutors to monitor the progress of
important issues which have arisen in a discussion
group and to be able to include quotations from them in
a future sequence of electronic slides (Irving, Higgins
and Safayeni, [17]).

structure. In order for a distributed performance
support system to be realized, it has to be mapped onto
an intranet/Internet structure, similar to that illustrated
in figure 2.
Because of a DPSS's future importance as a tool
for facilitating 'learning-by-doing', and sharing teaching
and learning material, the remainder of this paper
describes and discusses the evolution and future
potential utility of distributed performance support
systems within civil and building engineering. The
design and construction of a distributed performance
support facility as part of the project CAL-Visual is
described and an outline is given of some the ways in
which we are intending to use it. An attempt is
currently being made to measure the potential utility of
the system from the perspective of supporting its endusers’ use of MTAs, CBL and CAA packages.

4. DPSS within CAL-Visual
CAL-Visual is a research project being undertaken
by a consortium of universities within the UK to
investigate how experiences on a construction site can
be brought into the classroom using computer-based

imagery and visualization materials. The project is
part of the Teaching and Learning Technology
Programme (TLTP) initiative funded by Higher
Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE).

tools the person is using. Third, the overall system
needs to be accessible, portable, inexpensive, platformindependent and able to facilitate sharing of visual
resources, 'on-the-job' support and 'just-in-time'

Database
Server A

Recordable
CD Unit

Database
Server B

Local Area Network
Pen Pad
System
Notebook
PC
Portable
PC

Lecture Theatres

University Library

Resource Centres

Electronic Lectures

Access Stations

Access Stations

Remote Access

Home
Organisation

Interactive
Workstation

Hostel

(Barker and Banerji, 1995)

Figure 2. Internet/intranet structure underlying a DPSS
The CAL-Visual project’s main aim is to
implement the use of computer imagery to support the
teaching, learning and assessment of subject areas
where visualization of objects and processes play an
important role. As already mentioned above images are
usually readily available in slide or paper form and
used in an uncoordinated manner. This project is
developing a digital based framework for an efficient
use of existing and new imagery to aid teaching and
learning technology, hence offering time and cost
benefits to the process.
The rationale for using a DPSS approach to CALVisual is threefold. First, the aims of the project
highlight the need for an integrated repository of
digital, visual material which is cross referenced and
can be used to embed visual resources within external
teaching and learning aids - similar to the ECD
approach described above. Second, the framework
specified to accommodate existing visual materials,
tools, learning resources and pedagogic methods needs
to provide access to resources, such as support aids that
give assistance to tutors who wish to embed visual
material into a presentation, regardless of the specific

training.
In order to realize the development of the DPSS,
an infrastructure similar to that shown in figure 2 has
been used. For the purpose of evaluation the CBL and
CAA modules are to be made available on the
department's intranet and the MTAs are to be published
on CD-ROM in order to contend with the bandwidth
requirements. The design and implementation of the
DPSS within the CAL-Visual project is described in
the following section.

4.1. Design and implementation of CAL-Visual
Since choosing to develop a DPSS, we have
created the framework for organizing digital, visual
material, as shown in figure 3. This repository of
visual material has formed the foundations upon which
to create a searchable resource (in the form of a webbased database), three integrated CBL modules, a CAA
module and the development of a suite of electronic
lectures containing MTAs. Furthermore, it is proposed
to include 'on-the-job' support and 'just-in-time' training

for tutors who require assistance embedding such
visual material within their electronic lectures. A
detailed description of the design and implementation
of the framework, database and additional system
components is given in this section.

Classification
Index
• CI SfB

illustrate building defects and simulate how such
defects are caused. Finally, the framework assists
students in visualizing graphical information from the
perspective of various topics, such as building material,
defects, technology, design and production.

Generic
Keyword
Index

User-defined
Keyword
Index

Image Keywords
Image
ImageKeywords
Keywords
•Subject
•Subject
•Subject
•Topic
•Topic
•Topic
•Material
•Material
•Material
•Process
•Process
•Process
•Technology
•Technology
•Technology
•Organisation
•Organisation
•Organisation

Image
Templates

ID

Meta-data

Image Item
Image Item
•Picture
Image Item
•Picture
•Animation
•Picture
•Animation
•Video
•Animation
•Video
•Video

Database
•Web-based
•CDROM-based

Interface
Interface
Interface
Figure 3. CAL-Visual framework
The framework assists in students’ understanding
of complex concepts by providing graphical material
which can be used to illustrate: objects, materials,
activities, processes, relationships, principles and
guidelines. In the case of using this framework within
the building and construction curriculum, the
framework helps students to visualize different types of
building materials, construction activities and
processes undertaken on site. It can be used to

4.2. Detailed framework description
The framework development (shown in figure 3)
began by investigating a number of classifications
systems for the indexing of visual material. It was then
decided to use a keyword system based on the CI SfB
classification augmented with user-defined keywords to
form a generic index. Each set of keywords associated

with a visual object is to be augmented with
administrative information to form the meta-data. A
number of indexes have also been created using the
visual material and meta-data which arrange the visual
material into a number of key subjects. The entering of
meta-data is discussed later in this section.
This framework is also used as the foundation for
the design and implementation of a web-based database
which is to store the visual material and its meta-data.
Once the meta-data and visual material is entered into a
web-based database the database can be automatically

4.3. System components
The system contains a number of integrated
components (figure 4) in order to provide staff and
students with different pathways in which to access the
visual material. Starting with the underlying webbased database, a retrieval system is the main form of
access to the visual material. In doing so, the retrieval
system provides two methods of browsing the database.
The first is in the form of an Internet hybrid search
engine and the second is in the form of a virtual reality

Database

Images
Templates
Meta-data

Retrieval System
HTML
Java/Javascript

Prototype

Search Engine

VR

HTML
Form

Plug-in

Interface
Browser
Figure 4. System components
published along with its indexes. In order to publish
the database as a web site, on the Internet, intranet or
CDROM (using the infrastructure given in figure 2),
each image will be stored in an HTML page template.
Once the database is published as a web site, staff and
students can use a number of DPSS components to
access the visual material through an integrated user
interface.

environment. Both of these pathways are accessible
through a standard web browser. Each of these
components is described in detail below, beginning
with the design of the database.

4.4. Database design
One of the project’s objectives is to produce a set
of CD-ROMs that contains platform-independent

visual information. The rationale for publishing the
database in a web-based form on CD-ROM was to
produce a product that is maintenance free and able to
be transported to a server-based configuration if

The actual solution has involved using a
combination of the options given above. A Microsoft
Access database has been created in order to facilitate
the entering of meta-data and publishing the

Database

Retrieval System

Materials

Technology

Low Rise
Building
Performance

High Rise
Building
Defects

Production
Figure 5. Virtual reality environment
required. This flexibility will also enable the database
to be adaptable to the needs of both end-users and
institutions.

Fields
Image ID
Title
Author/Owner
Date Created
Processes/
Description
Keywords

Image Type

information in the form of a web site. A retrieval
system has then been developed using Web-based
technologies. There is due to the issue of retrieving

Table 1. Fields for marking up visual material
Description
Format
Reference number (see left of images)
[ImgXXXX.jpg]
Summary of image
[String]
Creator or holder of image
[Surname, Initials.]
Date when image taken or put in database
[dd/mm/yyyy]
Detail description of image including any
[String]
processes being performed
A list of comma delimited words and phases [keyword, keyword,
etc.]
describing materials, labour, technology,
defects, components, tools, systems, plant,
manufacture and so on.
Text, Drawing, Graphic, Photo, Animation,
[Type 1, Type 2, etc.]
Simulation, Emulation

Example
Img0001.jpg
An outer wall
Beacham, N.
01/01/1998
Building a wall
wall, bricks,
cement, window,
window ledge
Drawing, Photo

this web-based information, regardless of whether it
exists on a CD-ROM or a server.

4.5. The virtual reality environment
Although the textual user interface is considered to
be the main access point for searching for visual
material, the other form of access will be through a
number of virtual reality models. Each model will
form a navigational aid and will be developed as an
alternative interface for the retrieval of images from the
database. These models will represent a type of
building through which the user can navigate and
access the information in the database (figure 5).

system to search the database for particular images
based upon some form of criteria. For consistency, the
marking up of each image is based on the fields shown
in table 1. Table 1 lists a number of fields that should
accompany each image before they can be entered into
the database. The table also acts as a support aid to
help end-users mark up images. The table describes
each of the fields and the format the field is to take.
Following this is an example showing how an image of
an outer wall could be marked up. For efficiency a
Microsoft Access form has been produced for entering
this information (figure 6).
A comprehensive list of keywords relating to the
CI SFB classification (mentioned above) is used to
describe each image. This list of keywords is also

Figure 6. A typical screen display showing prompts for marking up images

4.6. Marking up images
Before any image can be entered into the database
and accessed through the retrieval system, each image
must be described in a textual form (otherwise known
as marking up). This will allow the hybrid retrieval

displayed in the Access form along side the input fields
and used by end-users as a reference aid. Whenever a
keyword is used to identify part of an image, which is
not in the index, it is also added to the list. To
accompany this list there will be a need for a tool and
support aid which can help end-users mark-up their
images.

As well as the keywords field, each image will
have five other fields: image ID, title, date entered,
author/owner, copyright details and process/description
(table 1). Each of these additional fields will be used
for the purpose of managing and publishing the
resources.
They will also be displayed as a
complementary aid when end-users are searching for
specific materials.
Finally, it was decided to physically storing the
actual images within a single directory. This would
make finding the retrieval system’s task of finding
specific images easier – as long as they were identified
within the database - and make a the web-based
database easier to develop, publish and maintain.

5. Conclusion
The paper discussed the potential of using
distributed performance support systems as a tool for
facilitating the development, and organization of
Multimedia Teaching Aids and, in particular,
delivering them using electronic course delivery and
electronic open-access student information service.
Based upon the principles of Distributed
Performance
Support
Systems
and
their
implementation into mainstream education, the paper
discusses the rationale for using such systems to
facilitate the implementation of computer based
visualization in the teaching of construction
technology. Following this the design and
implementation of a DPSS based methodology within
the CAL Visual project is presented. The project is
nearing the completion of the design and
implementation phase, the final stage of the work will
include a detailed evaluation to measure the
effectiveness of embedding visual material within a
construction technology curriculum using the CAL
Visual system.

6. References
[1] Aminmansour, A., (1996). Utilizing Information
Technologies to better Educate Engineers of Tomorrow,
Computing in Civil Engineering, Proceedings of the Third
Congress held in conjunction with A/E/C Systems ’96, June
17-19, 1996, Anaheim, California, 965-971, Editors: Jorge
Vanegas and Paul Chinowsky, Published by the ASCE (New
York).
[2] Echeverry, D., (1996). Multimedia-based Instruction of
Building Construction, Computing in Civil Engineering,
Proceedings of the Third Congress held in conjunction with
A/E/C Systems ’96, June 17-19, 1996, Anaheim, California,

972-977, Editors: Jorge Vanegas and Paul Chinowsky,
Published by the ASCE (New York).
[3] Chinowsky, P.S., (1997). Introducing Multimedia Cases
into Construction Education, Computing in Civil
Engineering, Proceedings of the Fourth Congress held in
conjunction with A/E/C Systems ’97, June 16-18, 1997,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 122-128, Editors: Teresa M.
Adams, Published by the ASCE (New York).
[4] Riley, D. and Pace, C., (1997). Improving Teaching
Efficiency with Multimedia Teaching Aids, Computing in
Civil Engineering, Proceedings of the Fourth Congress held
in conjunction with A/E/C Systems ’97, June 16-18, 1997,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 129-135, Editors: Teresa M.
Adams, Published by the ASCE (New York).
[5] Finkelstein, J., (1998). 3D Multimedia Datascapes: The
SSV Program, In the proceedings of the International
Conference on Information Visualisation, July 29-31, 1998,
London, UK, 280-285.
[6] Barker, P.G., (1996). Living Books and Dynamic
Electronic Libraries, Electronic Library, 14(6), 491-502,
December.
[7] Barker, P.G. and Hudson, S.R.G., (1998). An Evolving
Model for Multimedia Performance Support Systems, 60-73,
Trends in Communication: Part 4 Interface Technology Enhancing the Quality of Life, edited by H. van Oostendorp
and A.G. Arnold, Boom Publishers, The Netherlands.
[8] Gery, G.J., (1991). Electronic Performance Support
Systems - How and Why to Remake the Workplace Through
the Strategic Application of Technology, Weingarten
Publications, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
[9] McGraw, K.L., (1994). Performance Support Systems:
Integrating AI, Hypermedia and CBT to Enhance User
Performance, Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education,
5(1), 3-26.
[10] Varnadoe, S. and Barron, A., (1994). Designing
Electronic Performance Support Systems, Journal of
Interactive Instruction Development, 6(3), 12-17.
[11] Raybould, B., (1995). Performance Support
Engineering: An Emerging Development Methodology for
Enabling
Organisational
Learning,
Performance
Improvement Quarterly, Special Issue on Electronic
Performance Support Systems, 8(1), 7-22.
[12] Banerji, A.K., (1995). Designing Electronic
Performance Support Systems, PhD Thesis, HCI Laboratory,
University of Teesside, UK.
[13] Barker, P.G., (1995). Emerging Principles of
Performance Support, Online Information, 14(1), 407-416.

[14] Hudson, S.R.G., (1998). Multimedia Performance
Support Systems, Draft PhD Thesis, School of Computing
and Mathematics, University of Teesside, Middlesbrough,
UK.

[16] Barker, P.G., Richards, S. and Banerji, A., (1994).
Intelligent Approaches to Performance Support, ALT-J Journal of the Association of Learning Technology, 2(1) 6369.

[15] Beacham, N.A., (1998). Distributed Performance
Support Systems, PhD Thesis, Interactive Systems Research
Group, Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory, School of
Computing and Mathematics, University of Teesside,
Middlesbrough, UK.

[17] Irving, R.H., Higgins, C.A. and Safayeni, F.R., (1986).
Computerised performance monitoring systems: use and
abuse, Communications of the ACM, 29(8), 794-801.

