Multi-user VRML Environment for Teaching VRML:
Immersive Collaborative Learning
Vladimir Geroimenko and Mike Phillips
School of Computing, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth, Devon PL4
8AA, UK
vladg@soc.plym.ac.uk
mikep@soc.plym.ac.uk
Abstract
VRML-based environments can be used very
effectively for teaching a variety of online courses. This
paper describes the development of an Internet-based
collaborative learning environment in which VRML is
not only the means but also the subject of teaching. Such
a VRML environment is designed to assist and support
employees of the ’New Media’ industries enrolled on
short courses run by the Interactive Media Group in the
School of Computing, University of Plymouth.
This paper focuses on some key issues in the design
of the VRML teaching environment and using it for realtime and on-demand course delivery. One of the most
interesting issues is the experience of learning and
teaching VRML while being within a VRML world. Such
an immersive method of learning provides students with
unique experiences and significantly increases the
efficiency of the learning process.

1: Introduction
Distributed Virtual Environments can be used very
effectively for teaching a variety of online courses and
for supporting collaborative work [1, 2]. The main goal
of our project was and is the development of an Internetbased collaborative learning environment in which
VRML is not only the means but also the subject of
teaching. Such a VRML environment is designed to
assist and support employees of the ’New Media’
industries (including; digital TV, Interactive Media
developers,
electronic
publishing,
Information
Architects, etc) enrolled on short courses run by the
Interactive Media Group in the School of Computing,
University of Plymouth. The project will ultimately

deliver a number of on-line VRML spaces/places and
software tools that will allow participants to
collaboratively create their own ’haptic’ learning subenvironments within the overall architecture of the
project.

2: The architecture of the virtual
environment
This learning environment is a Web Site made up of
pages which consist of the following three frames: a
VRML browser frame for navigating through 3D virtual
environments,
a
chat
frame
for
text-based
communication and a reference frame for representing
VRML specifications and codes. Currently, we are
developing three slightly different prototypes of the
multi-user collaborative environment based on VNet,
Sony and Blaxxun software.
These software are
different in terms of the quality of rendering, the
availability of cross-platform versions, the richness of
communication and navigation such as pre-programmed
avatar gestures or text-to-speech chat window options,
and so on. It is very difficult to say at this moment,
which of the above versions will be preferred by
students. Therefore, we have decided to make a usability
test after all the working prototypes will be completed to
choose the most appropriate version on the base of reallife practice.
The ’hub’ of the OnLine Multi-user Learning
Environment is inspired by and based on Bentham’s
architecture for the Panopticon. Jeremy Bentham’s
(1748-1832) ’Panopticon; or the Inspection House’ (circa
1791, see [5]) was never build to serve its intended
function. Within this virtual environment the ’fluid

architecture’ of the ’Panopticon’ becomes the perfect form
to support a social learning interaction where the
surveyors co-operatively survey themselves. At each
level or module or the structure, each ’cell’ in this
Panopticon is a gateway to another ’place’ where work
can be done. Each layer of the building houses a module.
Access to the modules is provided through the ’Core’
which runs up through the centre of the ’building’. Here
participants can register for a particular module, and
have access to that layer of the building.

The pedagogical effectiveness of using the VRML
environment depends on the extent to which the contents
of the 3D environment and the 2D reference frame are
mutually supplementary. That is, they must help
students to understand each other’s material represented
through contrasting forms.

From the pedagogical and also technological point of
view, there are two distinguishing areas within the 3D
environment. The first area is a chain of spaces in which
a variety of VRML nodes, scripts and other elements are
represented and also grouped according to the similarity
of their content into several tutorials. In other words,
this space a unique 3D version of the VRML
specifications where students can learn the basics of the
language as well as they can come back to this session
any time for reference. The second space offers
opportunities for students to present their own VRML
objects and environments. This part of the virtual world
is highly changeable offering a flexible environment with
significant creative potential.

This 3D online environment may be used in three
ways. A teacher can use the environment to deliver realtime lectures and workshops that are, in terms of teacherstudent communication, very similar to standard sessions
in real-life classrooms. Secondly, a group of students
can meet in this environment, without a teacher, to learn
VRML together and to discuss some VRML related
questions. Thirdly, any student can use this environment
to teach himself or herself VRML.

3: 3D and 2D representation of the contents
The 3D representation of the VRML specification is
one of the most difficult issues. It is quite obvious that
there are no simple ways of translating this document
from 2D format into 3D. Firstly, it is hardly possible to
create a complete 3D version of the VRML specification
because of a great deal of its logical and other "nonspatial" details. Secondly, a 3D space has its own logic.
Therefore, to represent the VRML content adequately,
one needs to create 3D objects, environments, animations
and other spatial structures. It is impossible to do this just
by coping the structure and logic of the appropriate text
of the VRML specifications.
Of course, it depends on the logical complicity of the
part of the VRML specification being converted into a
3D form. For example, the standard VRML building
blocks, such as primitive shapes (box, cone, cylinder and
sphere), are very easy to represent both in the 3D
environment and in the 2D reference frame. To create a
3D model that would show how a specific type of
sensors, interpolators or lights works is a more difficult
task. This task is complicated mostly from a pedagogical
(not technological) point of view: how to present 2D
content in a 3D way that would show the essence of the
subject matter in a clear visual form.

4: Immersive collaborative learning

Navigating through the virtual environment, students
can experience most of the VRML nodes and samples as
virtual objects and interact with them. For example, a
group of students (represented by their avatars) can
gather around a red cube, click on it to see its behaviour
(rotation and changing colour), learn the appropriate
VRML codes in the frame nearby and then discuss this
sample with the teacher and/or each other.
In order to make our environment accessible from
any ordinary computer, we have created it as Web-Based
Desktop Virtual Reality. Of course, the sense of
immersion in Desktop VR is not as strong that offered by
head-mounted displays, but nevertheless it exists in a
limited form [3, 4]. Students can feel themselves as part
of a virtual environment (the sense of "being there")
because of their active behaviour within the
environment. When one navigates through the virtual
space, to interact with virtual objects and to
communicate with the avatars of other participants using
familiar ’real world’ processes (i.e. worrying constantly
about your position in the space and synchronising your
action with other people) a specific sense of immersion is
developed. Our research shows that by being within the
same world as interactive VRML objects, students are
able to learn VRML materials much quicker and deeper
than in a non-virtual learning situation.

5: Conclusions
We have found that the use of a specially created VRML
environment to teach the VRML specifications provides

students with the unique experience of immersive
collaborative learning and significantly increases the
efficiency of the learning process. The main problems
connected with designing and creating such an
environment are locating appropriate ’architectural’ forms
of space and representing information in a hybrid 3D/2D
form.

6: References
[1] Frécon, E. and Nöu, A. Building distributed virtual
environments to support collaborative work. VRST ’98.
Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Virtual reality software
and technology 1998, pp. 105-113.

[2] Neal, L. Virtual Classrooms and Communities. GROUP
’97. Proceedings of the international ACM SIGGROUP
conference on Supporting group work: the integration
challenge, 1997, pp. 81 - 90.
[3] Robertson, G., Czerwinski, M. & van Dantzich, M.
Immersion in Desktop Virtual Reality. UIST ’97. Proceedings
of the 10th annual ACM symposium on User interface software
and technology, 1997, pp. 11-19.
[4] Steinke, G. Preparing Students to Communicate in a Virtual
Environment. SIGCPR ’97. Proceedings of the 1997
conference on Computer personnel research, p. 249.
[5] Bentham, J., Works, ed. Browning, IV, 1834 (The Bentham
Collection University College London).

