Visualization of Economic Input-Output Data
Octavia Juarez Espinosa, Chris Hendrickson Ph.D., James H. Garrett Jr. Ph.D.
Civil and Environmental Engineering Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
Abstract

following four matrices: make matrix, use matrix, total
requirements and direct requirements matrix.
This research contributes a new way of resolving this
problem by doing visualization of input-output data.The
visualization was created as part of an interface for users
doing disaggregation of input-output data. Disaggregation
is the breaking of an industrial sector into two or more
rows and columns in each matrix. In order to perform this
operation, users need to manipulate the make and use
tables to regenerate the total requirements data. A visual
presentation of the data matrix might improve the navigation and the understanding of the input-output data.
The design of the graphics and interaction techniques
was based on the task analysis of users.
The input-output data is explained in more detail in the
following sections.

In this paper, visual techniques used to present economic input-output data are described. These techniques
were created because the size of the data matrices and the
screen limitations complicate data navigation. These techniques allow users to ask questions about detailed and
global information. The techniques were designed based
on the user tasks.
The graphic techniques are combined with direct
manipulation techniques to improve the ease and efficiency with which users interact with the system. The software prototype uses I992 US economic data.

1. Introduction

2. Input-Output Data

For many users, it is difficult to perform analysis of
data used to support economic input-output analysis. This
is particularly true for users who are not familiar with this
data.
Both the size of the matrices and the limitations of the
screen size used to display the information complicate the
users ability to navigate the data set from the complete
view to detailed information. This results in users using
the input-output data without analyzing the data in detail.
The quality of input-output analysis could be better if a
user were more familiar with the data being used.
Input-output is a framework developed by Leontief in
the late 1930’s [2]. The purpose of input-output analysis is
to study the interdependencies between industries in one
regional economy. It is also used as an underlying model
in some forms of environmental life-cycle assessment
(LCA) PI.
Input-Output data includes sets of matrices which can
not be displayed completely on the computer screen. Only
matrix regions can be displayed on the screen.
Current interfaces for the input-output data use only
text to display the information. The user interaction with
the data is minimal. For example, a user can extract a row
or a column of a matrix. Input-output data consists of the

The information contained in an input-output analysis
includes flows of products from producers to consumers
which are stored in matrices. The goods produced are outputs (sales) and the goods consumed are inputs (purchases) [2].
Data and models are available for many regions and
most countries, at levels of detail from 20 to 500 sectors.
Matrices are used because the input-output model consists of a set of n equations and n unknowns. An example
with two elements will be used in this section to explain
the model.
The set of equations has the following form:
(X, = Zll +z*2 + Y,)

While elements zl, and z21 (column 1) represent the
purchases made in sector 1, elements z,, and z,~ (row 1)
represent the sales of sector 1 to other sectors. X, represents the total output for sector 1 and Y, represents the
final demand for sector 1. The matrix that describes the
sectors transactions consists of sellers represented by rows
and buyers represented by the columns.

496
O-7695-0210-5/99 $10.00 0 1999 IEEE

(1)

(X2 = =21 + 222 + Y,)

The direct requirements matrix is computed based on
the use matrix and the total output. The matrix coefficients
are computed using equation (3).

The system of equations presented in (1) needs to be
augmented with rows representing the value added, consisting of employee compensation, government services,
interest payments, and land. The same system represented
in (1) is augmented with extra columns representing the
final demand that consists of household purchases, government purchases, private purchases, and sales abroad or
exports.

au = zij/X

(3)

Where z,/ is the quantity of commodity i used by
industryj, X, is the vector industry total output, and a,, is
the dollar value of commodity i needed to produce a dollar
of industry j.
The total requirements matrix contains the direct and
indirect interactions between industrial sectors and is
equal to (I- A))’ .

3. The User Tasks
Common tasks performed by users when using inputoutput data are described in this section. The tasks include
questions about the following three levels of information:
elementary level, intermediate level, and overall level. The
elementary level deals with the matrix cells, the intermediate level works with information subsets such as rows and
columns, and the overall level deals with the whole matrix.
Figure 1: Direct and indirect suppliers to the steel industry
3.1. Looking for the interaction of two sectors
Equation (2) represents the relation between the total
output represented by X and the final demand represented
by Y. I is the identity matrix which contains l’s in the
diagonal and O’s out of the diagonal, and A is the direct
coefficient matrix that represents the interaction between
industrial sectors.

To find the coefficient of interaction of two economic
sectors, the user looks in the total requirements, direct
requirements, or use matrices.
A user looks for a sector name in the rows and a sector
name in the columns to obtain the coefficient in the intersection.

X = (I-A)-’ . Y

3.2. Labeling a data point

To obtain the total requirements matrix, represented by
(I- A)-’ , the use matrix, the make matrix, and the direct
requirements matrix are used. These matrices are
described in the following paragraphs.
Figure 1 shows a section of the supply chain of the
steel industry. The first level in the chain consists of the
direct suppliers. The matrix of direct coefficients (A ) only
contains values for the first level of suppliers. The following chain levels are included in the total requirements
matrix. The sectors in the levels higher than 1 are the indirect suppliers of a product.
The use matrix represents the interindustry activity and
describes the commodity inputs to an industrial production
process. This matrix includes the value added rows and the
final demand columns.
The make matrix describes the commodities produced
by industries. However, this matrix does not consider the
interaction between industries.

In this task, a user selects a point in the matrix to
obtain the coefficient value. The two sectors that interact
in that cell are obtained from the row and column labels.
This is the inverse task to the previous one.
3.3. Magnifying a matrix area
In this task, a user wants to see in detail a region
because he/she has identified an interesting pattern. To do
that, a user changes the ranges and the scales used to plot
the data.

3.4. Comparing two industries based on the
commodities produced
In the make matrix, a user wants to create a comparative chart with the commodities produced for two indus-

497

4.1. Use Matrix

tries. To create the chart, a user gets the two industries
data from the matrix, sorts them, and creates the chart.

This use matrix for the US has 491 rows and 538 columns [3]. Figure 3 shows the use matrix that contains the
interactions between industries. It is larger than the other
matrices because it includes extra rows consisting of
wages and salaries as well as profits. This matrix also
includes extra columns for final demand, consisting of
households, government, and others.

3.5. Comparing two sectors based on the coefficient values
Users want to compare two industrial sectors in the use
matrix or in the total requirements matrix. The sectors
compared are selected and displayed to see the similarities
and differences between them.

3.6. Looking for patterns in the matrix
Users search for patterns of interaction between sectors. For example, in the total requirements matrix, the
diagonal is a pattern with values larger than one.

3.7. Modifying values and recomputing the
total requirements matrix
Users sometimes want to change values in some cells
of the use and make tables to see the effects in the direct
and total requirements.

3.8. Geographic visualization of economic
activity
A user wants to see where the economic activity takes
place. This information completes the picture captured by
the input-output data.

Figure 2: Visualization framework

4. Visualization Techniques

This matrix has 498 rows and 498 columns and represents information about commodities produced in 1992 by
US industries [3].
Figure 4 shows that the diagonal has the highest values. Elements in the diagonal are primary products. The
elements out of the diagonal represent secondary products.
Figure 3 enables the user to see that an industry produces
more than one commodity. However, only one of the commodities is considered to be a primary product.

4.2. Make Matrix

The matrices are completely displayed in a window
using a pixel for each cell. By screen limitations, the information is encoded with color instead of writing the text for
each cell.
While the matrix rendered is displayed in a window,
regions of the matrix can be rendered in another window.
The values in the visualized matrix are divided into
five categories. A color is assigned to each cell based on
its category.
Figure 2 shows the total requirements matrix. The
larger window contains the matrix while the window in the
bottom contains detailed information. The left window
defines the data to be visualized.
The numbers to the right of the matrix represent the
ranges of values in the matrix. Users can update the values.
The detailed window, shown in Figure 2, displays an
area of 7 by 7 cells with a label for the sector code.

4.3. Total Requirements Matrix
The total requirements matrix is shown in Figure 2.
This matrix represents the interaction between industrial
sectors. The total requirements matrix represents direct
and indirect interactions.
Figure 2 shows patterns consisting of horizontal lines
in the bottom of the matrix. These lines represent patterns
of the sales of industrial sectors. The diagonal members
are the highest values. Users can change the color map to
see other patterns.

498

4.4. Direct Requirements Matrix
The direct requirements matrix is obtained from the
use and make matrices.
The values are lower than the values in the total
requirements matrix because the matrix values only
include direct components.
Patterns similar to those observed in Figure 2 are
observed in the direct requirements matrix.
-.

4.5. Geographic Visualization
The economic data for 1992 includes geographic information [4].
An input-output estimation can be rendered in a map
showing the economic impacts as can be seen Figure 5.
The data is rendered at the state level and the information
is presented for each industrial sector. Figure 5 maps the
total value of shipments for one industrial sector.

0

Figure 3: Geographic View of the data

Finding a Point in the Matrix. A user can search for a
specific point in the matrix. To search for the point, a user
types the names of two industrial sectors and the system
displays the point with its neighbors labeled in the detail
window.

5. Interaction Operations
Viewing the Coefficients for a Row or Column. A user
can view the coefficients of an economic sector.
Figure 6 shows a chart with the coefficients of the
matrix TOW. Also a user can compare two TOWS or two columns by creating several charts. While Figure 6 shows the
total requirements coefficients for steel, Figure 7 represents the direct requirements coefficients. These two
charts allows to see the difference between direct and total
requirements.

The software prototype to visualize and manipulate
these matrices provides operations to interact with the system. There are operations to interact with matrices and
maps. Users modify the visualization by using the operations to better understand the encoded information.

5.1. Matrix Operations
The matrix operations allow users to ask questions at
different levels of detail. These operations consist of
changing the color map, labeling cells in the detail window, finding a point in the matrix, viewing the coefficients
for a row or column, and reading a cell value.

Reading a Cell Value. A user is able to read the exact
value of a cell displayed on the detail window. To display
the names and the values attached to a particular cell, a
user selects the cell rendered in the detail window. Then
the information is displayed in a dialog box.

Changing the Color Map. This operation allows users to
ask questions about patterns in the matrix.
Some of the user choices consist of:
. select a different set of colors and different ranges for
every category, and
. select only some of the range categories.

5.2. Map Operations
Maps are generated based on the value of the industrial
sector the user wants to visualize. In addition, a user can
move the map and zoom in particular regions. Also a user
can move the map to focus attention on a very specific
area.
The map operations consist of changing the industrial
sector and viewing the state information.

Labeling Cells in the Detail Window. It is not practical
to label every cell in the matrix view because the screen
size limits the number of labels displayed. To view the
labels, users select a cell to display on the detail window.

Changing the Industrial Sector. The map can be
modified by changing the name of the industrial sector to
be displayed.

499

Use M atrix 1992

7969.000000
2000.000000
1000.000000
20.000000
-4000.000000

Figure 4: Use Matrix

Make

M atrix 1992

n 8092.000000
n 100.000000
n 15.000000
n 3.000000
-2642.000000

Figure 5: Make Matrix

500

l

l

Edit values in the matrix. Users modify values on the
make and use tables and then recompute the direct and
total requirements matrices.
Visualize effects after the disaggregation of industrial
sectors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Carnegie Mellon’s Green Design Industrial
Consortium for the support received for this research.
We also thank the Department of Energy, Office of
Energy research, EPA cooperative Agreement #
CR825188-01-2 NSF/EPA Grant # BES-9873582 for the
support received for this research.
We thank Julia Gardner Deems for her comments.

Figure 6: Total requirements coefficients for Blast Furnaces and
Steel Mills

I. References

Viewing the State Information. The state information
can be displayed by clicking on the right polygon.

[‘I

6. Conclusions and Future Research
v-1

The visualization techniques used in this research were
created based on user tasks and data characteristics. These
techniques allow naive and experienced users to navigate
through the data. While naive users can learn about inputoutput data by just using the mouse and selecting areas on
the screen, experienced users can perform detailed analysis.

[31
[41
[51

Figure 7: Direct requirements coefficients for Blast Furnaces and
Steel Mills

The geographic view complements the input-output
information and gives information about states that are
directly impacted by the production of a product.
In the near future, usability testing will be conducted
with users to refine the techniques used to visualize the
input-output data.
These visualization techniques will be used as an interface for input-output data disaggregation. The main tasks
to be performed with this interface consist of:

501

Hendrickson, C., S. Joshi and L.B. Lave, “Economic
Input-Output Models for Environmental Life Cycle
Analysis,” Environmental Science & Technology, April,
1998.
Miller, R., Blair, P. “Input-Output Analysis: Foundations
and Extensions,” Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1985.
U.S. Department of Commerce, “1992 Benchmark I-O
Six-Digit,” Bureau of Economic Analysis, 1998.
U.S. Department of Commerce, “1992 Economic Census
CD-ROM,” CD-EC92-1 J, 1998.
Bertin, J. “Graphics and Graphic Information Processing,” Walter de Gruyter, 1981.

