Charny G (1987), Comprehention of non linear text: The role of
discourse cues and reading stratergies: in Proceedings of the first
ACM Conference in Hypertext, 109-119, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina.
Davies G, Maurer H, Preece J (1991), Presentation metaphors for
a very large Hypermedia systems, in Journal of Microcomputer
applications, 14, 105-106.
Dercyke A,Smith C, Hemery L.(1995), Metaphors and
Interactions in virtual environments for open and distance
education, in Proceedings of ED-Media 95 Maurer H (ed), 181186, AACE, Graz.
Dieberger A (1994), Spatial User interface metaphors in
Hypermedia Systems, in (Workshop) Proceedings of the European
Conference on Hypermedia Technology, Edinburgh, Scotland, 1-4.
Gentner D (1982), Are scientific analogies metaphors? in
Metaphor: Problems and Perspective, Mialll DS (Ed), (pp 106133), Harvester Press, Brighton, Sussex, England
Glowella U (1995), Metaphors for Hypermedia interfaces, in
Designing user Interfaces for Hypermedia 1, 55-57.
Gordon.S, Gustavel J, Moore J, Hanky J (1989), The Effects of
Hypertext on reader knowledge representation, in Proceedings of
Human Factor Society 32nd Annual Meeting., 296 – 300.
Hammond N, Allison L (1988), Travel around a learning support
environment: Rambling. Orienteering or Touring, in Proceedings
of CHI 88, 269 – 273.
Hutchinson E (1989) Metaphors For interface Design, in The
structure of Multimodel Dialogue, Taylor MM et al. (eds),
Amsterdam: North Holland, 1989, 11-28.
Jacobs G (1992), Hypermedia and discovery based Learning:
Historical perspective, in British Journal of Educational
Technology, Vol 23, 113-121
Lakoff and Johnson (1980), Metaphors we live by, University of
Chicago press.
Laurillard D (1995), Multimedia and the changing experience of
the learner, in British Journal of Education Technology 26, 179 –
189.

Marcus A (1997), Metaphor Design in User Interfaces: How to
manage expectation, Surprise, Comprehension, and Delight
Effectively, in Proceedings of CHI 97, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
Monk A, Walsh P, Dix A (1988), A comparison of hypertext,
scrolling and folding as mechanism for program browsing, in
People and computers, Cambridge University Press.
Nadeau D (1996), User Interface metaphor in virtual reality using
RML, in Behaviour Research methods, Instruments and
Computers 28, 170-173.
Norman K (1994), Navigating educational space with
Hypercourseware, in Hypermedia 6, 35-39.
Schawn S (1996), Communicating and learning in 'Virtual
Seminars': The use of spatial metaphors in interface Design,
German Institute for research on Distance Education, Electronic
Publication.
Smilowitz (1998), Do Metaphors Make Web Browsers Easier to
Use? Claris Corporation, Santa Clara, California, UAS, Research
publication. Electronic Publication.
Thurin M (1991), What’s ELIZA doing in the Chinese room? Incoherent Hyperdocuments- and how to avoid them, in
Proceedings of the 3rd ACM conference on Hypertext (Hypertext
91), 161-177.
Tomek I, Khan S, Muldner T, Nasser M, and Novak G (1991),
Hypermedia Introduction and Survey, in Journal of
Microcomputer Applications 14, 63-103.
Vannen K (1993), SHARE ME: Metaphor Based Authorial Tool
for Multimedia, in Proceedings of HCI 93, Springer-Verlag,
Vienna, Sept 1993.
Vannen K and Diesberger J (1995), Metaphor based user
interfaces for hyperspace: Designing user interfaces for
Hypermedia, in Hypermedia, 1, 68-77.
VanDijk TA, Kintsch W (1983), Strategies of Discourse
Comprehension,
Academic
Press,
Orlando.

pyramid, simulating the effect of building a pyramid, and so
on could be organised in the 'pyramid gallery'.
Spatial metaphors could, in addition, enhance and
facilitate navigation. Users intuitively identify navigation
patterns in buildings, cities and landscapes. Furthermore,
some characteristics of buildings and other places indicate
their importance, purpose, and accessibility and these can
help users decide which places they should visit to
accomplish their goals (Schawn 1996). For example,
important places are typically located at the centre of their
site within direct reach of anywhere on the site. Specific
architectural features allow further inferences to be made
concerning purpose and functionality so that, for example,
cafeterias look different from libraries. Such features can
also indicate accessibility so that open doors or lit windows
might, for example, indicate that they may currently be
visited or accessed. Arrows, landmarks, different coloured
areas, and sign-posting could all enhance and facilitate
navigation. For example, a colour code could be used to
differentiate the various areas of civilisations, pyramids,
and mummies. Other metaphors such as maps, guides,
guided tours and fish-eye views could also be used to
facilitate navigation.

5: Objectives of the Research
The main focus of the current research in the VLE
group at LMU is an empirical approach to identify the
potential of metaphors as a mechanism to control and
organise the association of information in large and
complex hypermedia systems. Of initial interest is how
effectively the single organising theme of composite
metaphors helps users to obtain a rapid overview of the
system functionalities and how successfully it helps prevent
them becoming lost. Other avenues being explored include
the extent to which spatial metaphors are able to group,
organise and control information in a multidimensional
hypermedia system, the extent which they can provide
coherence to the hypermedia structure, and the extent to
which they facilitate the user in building mental models so
that they may easily switch between their different
functional parts and accomplish their tasks.
The research will attempt to find out whether it is
possible for architectural features within spatial metaphors
to enhance and facilitate navigation by making it easy for
users to identify their importance, purpose and accessibility,
thereby allowing them more successfully to accomplish
their goals. Given that cluttering the interface with
irrelevant or non-functional visual details in order to
achieve a greater sense of 'realism' can confuse users and

lead to errors (Dercyke et al 1995), a pertinent practical
research question concerns the nature of the optimal
mapping, as well as what type and styles of maps, guides,
guided tours and other navigational metaphors could be
used to facilitate and enhance navigation. A more
psychological aspect of the investigation will hope to
reveal the limitations of human perception that might
cause metaphors to fail.
Questionnaires and interviews will be used to assess
the ease to which users obtain a rapid overview of the
system and its functionality, the effectiveness of spatial
metaphors to organise information in terms of the users
building suitable mental models, the success with which
users identify the purpose, importance and accessibility
from architecturally different buildings and rooms, and the
effectiveness of maps, guides and guided tours.

6: Conclusions
Although it is believed that metaphors hold great
potential value to teaching, there is little, if any, empirical
research demonstrating the claimed benefits of metaphors
and the usability of metaphor types such as the composite
metaphor and the spatial metaphor (Smilowitz 1998,
Drieberg 1994, Marcus 1997, Schawn 1995, Boyce 1996).
More research is therefore needed in these areas, and
the intent of this research at LMU is to investigate
different metaphors in terms of their effectiveness and
efficiency in overcoming the issues related to cognitive
overloading and navigational overhead. The prototype
interfaces to be built involving a number of spatial and
composite metaphors will be evaluated against a nonmetaphorical environment with respect to their
effectiveness in overcoming the problems associated with
cognitive overloading and navigational overhead. It is
anticipated that important guidance on the use and the
generation of appropriate metaphors will result which will
then be of direct value in building more useful and
effective hypermedia learning systems in the future.

References
Boyce, D (1996), Spatial Metaphors in user interfaces,
University of Wales Research Electronic Publication.
Carol J, Thomas JC (1982), Metaphors and the Cognitive
representation of computing systems, in IEE transaction on
systems, man and Cybernetics, SMC 12, 107-115.
Carol J, Mack R, Kellogg J (1988), Interface metaphors and user
interface design, in Handbook of Human ComputerInteraction,
ed Hallender M, Elsvier publishers, Holland, 67-85.

Through their use of a single organising theme
composite metaphors give a rapid overview of the system
functionality. On the other hand, spatial metaphors,
through the use of virtual buildings, rooms, cities, and
landscapes can make structure more explicit, provide
coherence and facilitate navigation. Maps and other spatial
representations may additionally be used to reveal spatial
structure and thus can facilitate navigation; guides and
guided tours are particularly aimed at achieving the latter.
Other metaphors, such as games, books, simulations, desks,
and television are characterised by Marcus (1997) as visualverbal communication and may be derived and used
according to the needs of the tasks when the system is
developed.
4.4.1: Composite metaphors
Composite metaphors are based on a single organising
theme such as 'The world of Travel' or the 'Land of ancient
Egypt'. The main purpose of the composite metaphor is to
indicate to the user the type of metaphors used. Composite
metaphors integrate well with other metaphors in terms of
relating to the same source domain so that users do not
become confused (Davies et al 1991, Drieberg 1994). A
composite metaphor will provide an appropriate umbrella
for other metaphors to be included; it should also allow for
decomposition and better organisation of complex
information. It is hypothesised within this research study
that composite metaphors have the potential to present the
user with a rapid overview of system functionality and of
what they can expect when they interact with such systems.
For example, the study of ancient Egypt could make
use of the composite metaphor with a single organising
theme 'Museum of Ancient Egypt'. Users will then
intuitively know to expect, for example, other familiar
metaphors such as buildings and rooms, and know that the
information about the civilisation, pyramids, and mummies
is likely to be organised in the different rooms, floors or
buildings as in a traditional museum. They will also expect
to find maps, guides, and other navigational aids that can
give the user an overall picture as to the content of the
information available. The composite metaphor therefore
embraces and integrates other metaphors according to the
needs of the application and associated tasks. Other
metaphors such as games, simulations, video-clips, books,
and guides could also be included in the composite
metaphor to enhance coherence, facilitate navigation, and
further the discovery process. Equally, alternative
composite metaphors such as cities and landscapes might

instead be chosen dependant on the particular needs of the
application.
4.4.2: Spatial Metaphors
Spatial metaphors essentially try to make use of
humans' abilities to use spatial environments to organise
information and human skills in navigating such spaces
(Dieberger 1994, Schawn 1996). In this way complex
multimedia information may become more familiar when
presented as a building, room, book, city or a landscape.
(Vannen 1993, Vannen and Diesberger 1995, Schawn
1996). It is hypothesised that spatial metaphors seem to
have the potential to enhance coherence in hypermedia
systems by visually laying out information and organising
related information in groups or hierarchies.
Spatial metaphors can be classified into two basic
types, namely those depicting large-scale spatial areas and
those showing small-scale areas (Schawn 1996). The
large-scale area metaphor utilises the concept of a larger
geographical site comprising a number of distinguishable
places with different functionalities. Examples are a
campus (with lecture halls, cafeterias, and libraries) or
shopping mall (with different rooms for different
functions, entrance halls, and so on). In the 'real world' the
topography of large-scale areas primarily serves the
function of providing convenient transitions between the
different locations of the site. Similarly, the purpose of
large-scale metaphors in interface design is to visualise the
complex structure of hypermedia applications and to allow
the user to switch easily between their different functional
parts. The visual specification of their topological
relationships allows the user to determine where they
actually are, where the different places of the site are
located and how they may be reached (Drieberg 1994,
Schawn 1996). Similarly, a small-scale spatial metaphor
could be used to carry out a certain specific function, such
as the earlier example of 'opening a door' in a Rooms
metaphor causing the user to transit to another area of the
domain (Schawn 1996)
Interaction within these metaphors follows the modes
of interaction in their originating environments (Vannen
1993). In the previous example of the Ancient Egypt
museum composite metaphor, a film or a video clip about
the development of different civilisations could be shown
in a one room ('cinema') whilst another room ('studio')
could display photographs; a third ('lecture theatre') could
host a presentation by a human expert. Similarly, different
activities related to pyramids such as walking through a

familiar or unfamiliar domain. Appropriate metaphors built
into the user interface may help the user rapidly to adopt a
correct mental model of how the system works. (Nadeau
1996, Glowella 1995).

4.1: The Nature and Role of Metaphors
Metaphors are the fundamental concepts, terms and
images by which and through which information is easily
recognised and understood (Marcus 1997). Linguists assert
that the way we think, what we experience, and what we do
everyday frequently make recourse to metaphors (Lakoff
and Johnson 1980). Often in communicating events and
concepts lengthy descriptions and probably technical jargon
are required. This often poses a problem to a novice user
who does not understand such technical jargon. The use of
metaphors may, therefore, help to overcome such problems
through its ability to provide descriptions by reference to
something with which the hearer is familiar.
Metaphors are very powerful devices for
communicating even a complex, structured set of properties
in shorthand that is easily understood. For example, if a
person describes their job as a prison they communicate all
properties of the superordinate category (prison) such as
confining, unpleasant, difficult to escape from, and so on.
The metaphor is more efficient and more precise than
listing all the properties exhaustively, especially as the
latter is rarely achievable. This becomes readily apparent in
the sciences where it is quite common to use metaphors for
conceptualising abstract concepts in terms of the
apprehensible (Gentler, 1982). Metaphors are also
commonly used to help users to construct an appropriate
cognitive representation of computing systems in general
(Carol and Thomas 1982) and user interfaces in particular
(Carol, Mack and Kellogg 1988).
Some well-known examples of user interface
metaphors are the Desktop metaphor common on Windows
systems, the Book metaphor in which users see an open
book on the screen with a table of contents and pages to
turn showing how much of the book has been used, Guided
Tours which enable students to 'take a bus’ for a guided
tour through the information space, and Rooms where
'opening a door' may exit the program or transport the user
to a new area. Some other metaphors are Library, Map,
Whiteboard or Chalkboard, and the physical World.

4.2: The Mechanics of Metaphors
As previously pointed out, metaphors can allow the
knowledge in one already familiar domain to become
directly applicable to another domain and encourage the

user rapidly to adopt a correct mental model of how the
system works. The inherent structure possessed by any the
metaphor will transfer across and impose structure and
landmarks on the hypermedia application domain. This
may be supplemented by dynamic guidance that can
dynamically guide a user to the information available in
nodes that are not directly linked to the active node. It may
be also used to enhance and facilitate the navigational
tasks of searching, browsing and orientation. Indeed, a
variety of metaphorical tools might be used for this
purpose. Tools such as guided tours, narrated tours,
guides, fisheye views, trails, and mirrors might all enhance
and facilitate navigational tasks (Davies et al 1991). For
example, guided tours could allow the user to catch a
virtual bus and be given a tour around the information
space (Hammond and Allison 1988). The 'guided
discovery' approach is a valued tool in learning since it
offers freedom to the learner whilst providing controlled
guidance (Laurillard 1995); a judicial choice of metaphors
may help a hypermedia system to be used in such an
approach.

4.3: Application of Metaphors
There are different kinds of metaphors with different
cognitive and conceptual properties (Stanford 1997). The
use of metaphors in a particular application depends on
their role within that application – for example, to make
structure explicit, give a rapid overview, support
navigation or support organisation (Drieberg 1994). For
example, understanding a computer system of any
complexity can be characterised as layers of different
metaphors ranging from silicon gates and electrons to
those that are used by the user at the interface (Hutchinson
1989). However, further research is needed to explore
further the potential of diverse metaphors, their impact on
communication and means of evaluating their
effectiveness (Marcus 1997). It is unlikely in most
applications that any single metaphor will be suitable for
the whole system and for all users engaged in a wide
variety of tasks (Davies et al 1991). Different metaphors
may cover several, partly overlapping aspects of an
information system such as presentation, structure and
interactivity (Vannen 1993). It is important therefore in
seeking to choose or generate appropriate metaphors for
use firstly to recognise and identify the possible metaphor
types.

4.4: Metaphor Types

On the other hand, however, hypermedia may often
seem to users to be richer and more dynamic than expected
(Norman 1994, and because of complex spatial
relationships between these nodes, designers of hypermedia
systems are faced with problems of cognitive overloading
and navigational overhead (Tomek et al 1991, Davies et al
1991, Subramaniam and Tauf 1993). Cognitive overloading
is encountered by users interacting with hypermedia
applications due to the sheer quantity and association of
information in such systems. Furthermore, users can
become lost in a wealth of information, and also disoriented
and unable to build mental models of the information space,
thereby giving rise to navigational overhead that is partly
attributable to cognitive overloading but also due arises out
of the use of complex navigational patterns. The main
causes of navigational overhead and cognitive overload
have been variously identified as disorientation, inability to
judge the amount of available information and the structure
of that information, difficulty in locating the desired
information, inability to retrace the path to a known region
of the hyperspace, and general tendency to lose sense of
position in the information space.

3: Issues in Hypermedia Design
The problems of cognitive overloading and
navigational overhead have raised a number of issues in the
development of hypermedia systems. Research is now
beginning to focus on possible mechanisms for organising
and controlling the complex association of information in a
hypermedia system as well as enhancing and facilitating the
navigational functions of searching and browsing. This in
turn should then bring a greater coherence to hypermedia
structure, allowing users to obtain information more easily
without becoming lost, and facilitating their ability to build
mental models of the system.

3.1: Cognitive Overloading
One of the causes of cognitive overloading is the
inability of the user to obtain a rapid and intuitive
understanding of the system functionality (Tomek et al
1991, Vannen 1993), leaving them confused as to the
content and structure of information available. Empirical
studies have shown that a reader’s ability to understand and
remember information depends on the degree of coherence
of the reading matter; in analagous fashion, it is expected
that coherence in hypermedia systems may reduce cognitive
overloading. In psycholinguistics coherence is not regarded
as an isolated text feature, but as the result of a cognitive

construction process (Van Djik & Kintsch 1983). A
document is deemed coherent if a reader can derive a
mental model from it that corresponds to facts and
relations in a related world. This construction process is
facilitated when the document is set out in a well-defined
structure and provides rhetorical cues reflecting these
structural properties (Thurin 1991). Since users of an
educational environment frequently need to explore
concepts, it is important that they should be able to build a
mental model from what is presented to them. This in turn
depends on presenting a coherent structure them user in
the first place. All this should, it is argued, be striven for in
an educational hypermedia system.

3.2: Navigational Overhead
Another issue that directly affects the construction of
mental model is related to the limited capacity of human
information processing. Every extra effort required in the
course of processing a document reduces the mental
resources available for comprehension. Thus, all additional
activities create an extra workload that the user has to cope
with. In hypermedia, these additional activities mainly
concern the user's navigation, so users should be able
readily to interact and navigate the information space.
Navigational overhead arises from the process of
interacting with the information, whether searching or
browsing for what is required, whilst lacking an overview
of the links and the nodes that are not directly linked to the
active node (Tomek et al 1991, Charny 1987, Gordon et al
1989). This causes difficulty in locating the desired
information, or retracing to a known region of the
hyperspace. Empirical research shows that these additional
activities may create navigational overhead by interrupting
the train of thought (Gordon et al 1989, Monk, Walsh and
Dix 1988, Subramaniam and Tauf 1993). It follows that
navigation in an educational environment should be made
as straightforward and require as little effort as possible in
order to minimise this overhead.

4: The Metaphor as a Possible Organising
Device
It is the contention of this paper that metaphors may
provide a suitable means of addressing the issues of
cognitive overloading and navigational overhead.
Metaphors are seen as analogical models of entities and
experiences existing outside the domain to which they are
applied. Through them, knowledge in one already familiar
domain becomes directly applicable to another, less

Visual Metaphors to Enhance Hypermedia
Senaka Perera

Dave Hobbs

David Moore

d.perera@lmu.ac.uk

d.hobbs@lmu.ac.uk

d.moore@lmu.ac.uk

Virtual Learning Environments Group, Leeds Metropolitan University, UK

Abstract
This paper argues that whilst hypermedia systems
potentially have a major role to play in education there is
the danger that they tend to engender cognitive and
navigational overhead in their users, which in turn detracts
from their educational value. A potentially valuable means
of ameliorating this difficulty is to use metaphors to aid the
user as they interact with the system. The value of
metaphors in overcoming the problems of cognitive
overloading and navigational overhead is discussed and an
experimental study proposed to investigate the design and
deployment of suitable metaphors in this context.

1: Introduction
Hypermedia applications provide a non-sequential and
flexible means of accessing information through navigation
and exploration (Tomek et al 1991, Davies et al 1991).
This linking capability makes hypermedia very powerful in
terms of its ability to organise, store and present large
amounts of complex information. Although there are many
advantages in the use of hypermedia systems as described
below, there also exist issues of cognitive overloading and
navigational overhead for users interacting with such
systems. This paper explores these issues in detail and
proposes the use of metaphors as a possible mechanism to
overcome them.

2: Educational Hypermedia Systems
The underlying structure of hypermedia provides for
storage of information in atomic nodes in the form of
different multimedia elements such as text, graphics,
animation, audio and video, thereby allowing a
multidimensional association of information (Davies et al
1991). The nodes are typically interconnected in a
semantic network and each node’s information is made
available to the user via one or more links. A hypermedia
application may initially be presented to the user in such a
way that the user is shown a simple overview of the
system before being able to drill down to more detail and
greater complexity.
From an educational standpoint the principal
attraction of hypermedia is that it lends itself naturally to
non-sequential education since it encourages the free
association apparently favoured by human thought.
Hypermedia potentially provides both an object and a
process of education (Norman 1994) - it provides the
object in that it contains at the node level the content
information to be presented to the student; it provides the
process in that it also contains the dynamic links that lead
from one node to another. Technology-based teaching
based on hypermedia principles can now incorporate video
clips, voice annotations attached to reference text, and
digitised video (Marcus 1997, Jacobs 1992). It also affords
the user the ability to interact with information in a nonsequential way, the user selecting their own path and
navigating it at their own pace, acquiring knowledge by
discovery and exploration (Norman 1994, Jacobs 1992).

